NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE BOATS THAT DID NOT SAIL:
ASSET PRICE VOLATILITY AND MARKET EFFICIENCY IN A NATURAL EXPERIMENT
Peter Koudijs
Working Paper 18831
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18831
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

This paper is based on the first chapter of my dissertation. I thank Hans-Joachim Voth (advisor), and
Fernando Broner and Jaume Ventura (committee members) for their advice and support. I thank Karine
van der Beek, Harry Garretsen, Will Goetzmann, Benjamin Golez, Jakub Jurek, Floor Koudijs, Hanno
Lustig, Larry Neal, Andrej Ukhov, Nico Voigtländer, Jan de Vries, Jan Luiten van Zanden, two anonymous
referees, and Bruno Biais (Editor) for their detailed comments and suggestions. Many thanks to seminar
participants at Cambridge (EurHiStock), Chicago-Booth, Columbia, Evanston (EHA meetings), Geneva
(EHES meetings), Northwestern, Nottingham (EHS meetings), NYU- Stern, Princeton, Stanford, Tilburg,
UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UCLA-Anderson, UPenn-Wharton, UPF- CREI, Utrecht, and Warwick for
their feedback. Daphne Acoca, Sid Basu, Michelle Lee, Sophia Paliza, Hannah Rusk, Anne Tran, and
Tony Wang provided excellent research assistance. Any errors are my own. This project was financed
by the Spanish Ministry of Education and Stanford GSB. The views expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Peter Koudijs. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The boats that did not sail: Asset Price Volatility and Market Efficiency in a Natural Experiment
Peter Koudijs
NBER Working Paper No. 18831
February 2013, Revised October 2015
JEL No. G14,N2
ABSTRACT
What explains short-term fluctuations of stock prices? This paper exploits a natural experiment from
the 18th century in which information flows were regularly interrupted for exogenous reasons. English
shares were traded on the Amsterdam exchange and news came in on sailboats that were often delayed
because of adverse weather conditions. The paper documents that prices responded strongly to boat
arrivals, but there was considerable volatility in the absence of news. The evidence suggests that this
was largely the result of the revelation of (long-lived) private information and the (transitory) impact
of uninformed liquidity trades on intermediaries' risk premia.
Peter Koudijs
Stanford Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
koudijs@stanford.edu

A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18831

What drives the short-run volatility of stock returns? Prices move signi…cantly on a day-today basis and it is often unclear why. An extensive literature, going back to Schwert (1981,
1989), Roll (1984a, 1988), French and Roll (1986), and Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (1989),
o¤ers two possible explanations: (1) the arrival of public news and (2) the impact of the
trading process, which can capture privately informed trading, liquidity trades or shifts in
investor sentiment.
Distinguishing between these two explanations, however, is not straightforward. Trading
and the arrival of news usually go together. Moreover, news arrives continuously to the
market and modern textual analysis notwithstanding it is often unclear what information
a news item actually contains. It is therefore di¢ cult to identify price movements that are
unrelated to the arrival of new information, let alone what such price changes re‡ect.
The purpose of this paper is to shed more light on what drives short-term asset price
movements. Speci…cally, it uses a natural experiment where information ‡ows are easily
observable and where, for exogenous reasons, the market is starved from news for days in a
row. The paper aims to (1) identify how much markets move in the presence and absence
of news and (2) to explain asset price movements that are unrelated to the arrival of new
information.
The natural experiment is provided by the Amsterdam market for English securities in the
18th century. At that time, a number of English securities were traded on the Amsterdam
exchange. While the main market for these stocks was in London, Dutch investors held
between 20% and 30% of English securities (Bowen (1989), Wright (1999)). This gave rise
to active trade in Amsterdam. Importantly, for the periods under study (1771 to 1777
and 1783 to 1787) virtually all relevant information about these securities originated in the
1

British capital. This information was transmitted to Amsterdam through o¢ cial mail packet
boats that departed twice a week. These were sailing ships, and adverse weather conditions
(especially Eastern winds) led to frequent delays and in turn news blackouts in Amsterdam
that could last for multiple days. This exogenous variation in the ‡ow of information makes
it possible to study stock returns in the absence of news. At the same time, …nancial markets
had long been established and functioned in a way similar to today.
I …rst document that the Amsterdam market reacted to the arrival of boats from London
as one would expect. Prices in Amsterdam responded strongly right after the arrival of news.
The variance of stock returns was signi…cantly higher when boats from England arrived. At
the same time, volatility in the absence of boats was signi…cant: the ratio of the “no-boat”
versus “boat”return variance was between 0.40 and 0.58.
Next, I decompose these asset price movements into their constituent parts. Two factors
can explain almost all of the volatility unrelated to the arrival of public news. The …rst is
private information. English packet boats brought in not only public information, but also
private signals in the form of trading orders from England. The evidence suggests that these
trading orders were spread out over time and a¤ected returns on both days with and days
without the arrival of packet boats. As a result, prices in Amsterdam and London moved
(slowly) in the same direction, even when there was no direct information sharing. The
covariance of returns in London after the departure of a boat and returns in Amsterdam
after its arrival provides a measure of the importance of private information.
The second factor that can help explain the volatility not related to the arrival of public
news is local liquidity shocks. The evidence suggests that, just as today, liquidity in the
market was …nite and uninformed trades had (transitory) price impact. This is identi…ed
2

through the covariance of returns within the Amsterdam market.
The estimates indicate that public news explains more than 50% of the return variance
on days ships arrived in Amsterdam and around 40% of the overall return variance. Private
information explains about 25% and 35% of volatility on days with and without boats,
respectively. Liquidity shocks explain up to 30% of the overall return variance for most
securities. The exception is the British East India Company, for which liquidity seems
to have been particularly good. A large fraction of returns remains unexplained for this
security, speci…cally on no-boat days. This may be an indirect result of the presence of
private information. Due to the arrival of private signals from London, adverse selection
costs may have been particularly high after the arrival of boats, leading uninformed agents to
concentrate their liquidity trades in periods without any boat arrivals (Admati and P‡eiderer
(1988)). It is impossible, however, to di¤erentiate this possibility from other explanations
that emphasize the importance of sentiment shocks or the divergence of beliefs during periods
without recent information from England.
This paper is related to an extensive literature quantifying the impact of news on stock
price volatility. Early studies such as Berry and Howe (1994), Mitchell and Mulherin (1994),
Andersen, Bollerslev and Cai (2000), and Kalev et al. 2004) generally …nd a weak relation
between the arrival of news and stock market volatility.1 Recent contributions using textual
analysis to identify the impact of di¤erent types of news such as Antweiler and Frank (2006),
Demers and Vega (2006), Tetlock (2007), Tetlock, Saar-Tsechansky and Macskassy (2008),
Gri¢ n, Hirschey and Kelly (2010), Davis, Piger and Sedor (2012), and Boudoukh et al.
(2013) …nd greater explanatory power of news. Studies that analyze weather-sensitive assets,

3

for which it is easier to measure information ‡ows and identify causality, …nd an important
role for public information (Roll (1984a), Fleming, Kirby and Ostdiek (2006), Boudoukh et
al. (2007)). Nevertheless, an important fraction of volatility remains unexplained, especially
“out of season.” Related to this point, Yermack (2014) shows that stocks are less volatile
when CEOs are on vacation and news announcements are delayed.
This paper is also related to a literature that examines periods during which information
arrives as usual but markets are closed (French and Roll (1986), Barclay, Litzenberger and
Warner (1990), Ito and Lin (1992), Ito, Lyons and Melvin 1998)). These studies …nd that
return variance is surprisingly low when trade is restricted. This result suggests that the
arrival of news itself is relatively unimportant and that trading activity (capturing privately
informed trading, liquidity trades or something else) explains the majority of returns.
In addition, this paper is related to studies on cross-listings, speci…cally papers that
examine how the price of a foreign security is a¤ected when its home market is open or
closed. Security prices are more volatile when the home market is open. Nevertheless, a
large share of price discovery takes place outside these hours (Harvey and Huang (1991),
Forster and George (1995), Werner and Kleidon (1996)). It is unclear whether this is driven
by public news originating in the host market or whether this is caused by the trading
process.
Relative to this literature, the current paper’s main contribution lies in the identi…cation
of news ‡ows. In Amsterdam, when no boats arrived, there was no public news from London,
and thus no new material public information on English securities. To the best of my
knowledge, this paper is the …rst to analyze a market that continues to operate while public
information ‡ows are shut down. This setting provides a unique opportunity to identify
4

the importance of public news, especially since the ‡ow of information (in the form of boat
arrivals) is directly observable. In most existing studies it is di¢ cult to know whether all
relevant sources of public news have been identi…ed.
It is important to acknowledge that the current paper’s setting also has a potential
drawback: the mail packet boats could have transmitted more than just public news and
private information. In particular, boats conveyed information about London stock prices
that, in addition to fundamental information, may have re‡ected liquidity (or sentiment)
shocks. These boats also carried English trading orders that were possibly motivated by the
same nonfundamental reasons. Similar to informed trades, these could have been spread out
over time. I test extensively for these alternatives and …nd no evidence that they played an
important role. Most importantly, prices in Amsterdam do not appear to have responded to
transitory shocks in London.
This paper is also related to a literature that uses historical settings to study asset price
volatility (for example Elmendorf, Hirshfeld, and Weil (1996), Silber (2005), Brown, Mulherin, and Weidenmier (2008), particularly studies of the 18th century securities markets in
Amsterdam and London.2 In seminal work, Neal (1987, 1990) documents that the Amsterdam and London markets were well integrated. Neal relies on daily data for London, but on
price data with a frequency of two observations a month for Amsterdam (originally collected
by Van Dillen (1931)). Dempster, Wells, and Wills (2000) use Neal’s data set to provide
more evidence on the integration of the Amsterdam and London capital markets. Harrison
(1998) studies the properties of returns in London and Amsterdam (again using Neal’s data)
and …nds that both the shape of the return distributions and the autocorrelation patterns
are very similar to those of modern markets. Finally, Koudijs (2014) uses the same historical
5

setting to test the Kyle (1985) model of strategic insider trading, and …nds strong evidence in
favor of this model. Relative to the above literature on …nancial markets in the 18th century,
this paper is the …rst (1) to employ data on the arrival of packet boats to measure information ‡ows, and (2) to use Amsterdam price data at a relatively high frequency (that is, three
observations a week). Furthermore, this paper goes beyond market integration and general
characteristics of the return process to identify the deeper sources of asset price volatility.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section I provides historical background and summary
statistics. Section II presents two examples of the paper’s approach. Section III evaluates
whether all relevant information originated in England, and whether packet boats conveyed
material information as opposed to transitory shocks to liquidity of sentiment. In Section IV
I present baseline estimates of the return variance in periods with and without the arrival
of a boat. I then discuss potential explanations for volatility in the absence of news, in
particular private information and local liquidity shocks, and quantify their impact. Section
V concludes. Additional information and results are presented in the online Appendix.3

I.

Data and Historical Background

In this section I …rst describe the Amsterdam market itself: how developed was it, and
to what extent can it serve as a useful comparison for markets today? Next, I summarize
how news was transmitted between London and Amsterdam. Third, I discuss the assets that
were traded and the price data that are available. Finally, I provide a number of descriptive
statistics.

6

A. Market Structure
Amsterdam and London were the most important securities markets in the 18th century.
The Dutch started to invest in English securities in the early 1700s (Wilson (1941)), as
doing so provided a good opportunity to diversify domestic portfolios at relatively low cost.4
Unlike today’s Anglodutch “Siamese twins,” the English securities traded on both sides of
the North Sea were identical. The historical record indicates that there was active trade
in English securities on the Amsterdam exchange (Van Dillen (1931), Van Nierop (1931),
Wilson (1941)). Although volume data are unavailable for the period, some inferences can
be made about the size of the market for English stocks in Amsterdam. Bowen (1989) and
Wright (1999) show that during the 1770s around one-third of the shares of British companies
were in the hands of Dutch investors. During the 1780s this fell to around one-…fth.
The Amsterdam market was organized in a way similar to today. Trade took place in
a centralized location. Around noon two o¢ cial trading hours were held in the entrance
hall of the Exchange building (Spooner (1983), Hoes (1986)).5 There were no o¢ cial market
makers. Trade was based on limit orders; a group of approximately 40 o¢ cial brokers (and
an unknown number of uno¢ cial brokers) convened to execute as many of their principals’
orders as possible. Regulation prohibited these brokers from trading on their own account
(Smith (1919), Van Nierop (1931)). At the end of the afternoon, a committee of so-called
sworn brokers reported the going price of the day (Smith (1919), p. 109). Investors used
this information to monitor their brokers ex post (Polak (1924), Hoes (1986)).
Apart from spot trade, a large fraction of trading activity was related to futures and
options. Derivatives were introduced in the 17th century and their use and trade was fully

7

institutionalized (Petram (2011)). Futures were actively used for shorting.6 Every three
months, future and option positions were cleared during periods of “rescontre” (Van Dillen
(1931)). There were no formal margin requirements and the market was mainly based on
reputation.
Similar to today, there was a developed market for margin loans. This system had been
developed in the early 17th century (Gelderblom and Jonker (2004)) and was actively used
in the 18th century to fund (spot) positions in the English securities (Smith (1919); Wilson
(1941)). These margin loans usually ran for six months and had margin requirements. The
legal terms of the contracts are broadly similar to today (Koudijs and Voth (2014)).
The historical evidence suggests that the sophistication of market participants was considerable. Temin and Voth (2004) document investor strategies during the South Sea bubble
of 1720 that were very similar to those observed during the recent tech bubble. Frehen, Goetzmann and Rouwenhorst (2013) suggest that in 1720, market participants were perfectly able
to di¤erentiate between systematic and idiosyncratic risk.

B. News Flows
How did news from England reach Amsterdam? Since 1660, England and the Dutch
Republic had been connected through a system of sailing ships between Harwich (England)
and Hellevoetsluis (Dutch Republic), an important harbor close to Rotterdam. These packet
boats were speci…cally designed for the route and ensured a swift and regular ‡ow of information between the two countries. Since Amsterdam did not have a direct connection with
the North Sea (boats had to sail past the island Texel), this was the fastest way information
from London could reach Amsterdam (Hemmeon (1912), Stitt Dibden (1965), Ten Brink
8

(1969)).7
The packet boats were scheduled to leave Harwich on Wednesdays and Saturdays. The
median sailing time was two days (including the day of departure). It took additional time
to carry the news over land. Roads were particularly bad and rivers had to be crossed by
ferry. Even though the news was carried on horseback, transport from London to Harwich
and from Hellevoetsluis to Amsterdam added two days to the total travel time, making a
total of four days (including the day of departure). Section I of the Internet Appendix has
more details.
The packet ships often encountered adverse winds and as a result news could be signi…cantly delayed for days, sometimes even weeks. Around a third of the crossings from
England to Holland were delayed. During such periods of bad weather no news could be
transmitted across the North Sea. Indeed, the Tatler, an English newspaper of the time,
noted that there could be a news blackout in London “when a West wind blows [...], keeping
news on the other side of the Channel” (quoted in Dale (2004), p. 17). The same was true
for Amsterdam when the wind was blowing from the east.
The packet boat system was the main channel through which news from England reached
investors in Amsterdam. The Dutch newspapers of the time all relied on the packet boat
service to receive news from England. All articles with new information from London can be
traced to the arrival of a speci…c packet boat. During periods of particularly bad weather,
news from England would arrive in Amsterdam through the harbor of Ostend in today’s
Belgium, which had a regular packet boat service with Dover in England. This occurred
nine times during the sample periods. The Dutch newspapers meticulously reported these
episodes, which allows me to take them into account in the empirical analysis.
9

The packet boat system was also the main channel for private letters. This is borne out
by the English correspondence from Hope & Co. during the sample periods. One of the
biggest Dutch banking houses of the period, Hope had strong connections in England and
was active in the stock market. All correspondence with their English counterparties took
place through the packet boat system (see Section I in the Internet Appendix for details).
Thus, important individuals received (public) news at the same time as the market as a
whole. Even Nathan Rothschild, who famously was the …rst in London to receive news
about the outcome of the Battle of Waterloo in 1815, received this information only a few
hours before the general public (Dale (2004), p. 17).8
What was the content of the news transmitted from London to Amsterdam? Investors
in Amsterdam received all public information available to English investors, as each packet
boat brought newspapers and other newsletters that contained information about recent
developments in London, including the most recent security prices. The packet boats also
brought private letters from London correspondents.9

C. Data, Sample Period, Sources, and Descriptive Statistics
I examine all English securities cross-listed in London and Amsterdam for which frequent
price data are available for the Dutch market. This includes three stocks and two government
debt issues: the British East India Company (EIC), the Bank of England (BoE), the South
Sea Company (SSC), and 3% and 4% annuities. The three companies were involved in a
number of business activities. The EIC was a trading company that held large possessions
in India. The company’s prospects were determined by conditions in the East and political
developments in England (Sutherland (1952)). Both the BoE, which wasn’t a central bank
10

yet, and the SSC helped …nance the British government debt.10 The BoE also provided
large-scale credit to the EIC and discounted commercial bills (Clapham (1944)).
I focus on two periods: September 1771 to December 1777, and September 1783 to
March 1787. These periods represent the intersection of two sets: (1) periods for which
all relevant information is available in the historical sources, and (2) periods of peace on
the European continent, with an absence of severe …nancial crises. The latter consideration
ensures that important information about the English stocks originated in England – an
important condition for the clean identi…cation of news arrival. The starting point of the …rst
period, September 1771, is determined by data limitations. This period ends in December
1777, a few months before tensions between England and France increased, leading to a
declaration of war in March 1778.11 In 1780 war also broke out between the Dutch Republic
and England.12 The second sample period starts in September 1783, right after the signing of
an o¢ cial peace treaty between France and England and a preliminary peace treaty between
England and the Dutch Republic. This sample period ends in March 1787. Domestic tensions
in the Netherlands increased in April 1787 (on April 24 there was a dramatic change in city
government in Amsterdam), eventually leading to domestic con‡ict in May 1787 and an
intervention by the Prussian army in September 1787.
Amsterdam price data are hand-collected for the entire period between September 1771
and March 1787 and come from the Amsterdamsche Courant, and where necessary are supplemented by information from the Opregte Haerlemsche Courant). For each stock, these
data contain three observations per week (Monday, Wednesday and Friday). London price
data, available at a daily frequency for the EIC, BoE, and 3% annuities, come from Neal
(1990), and necessary are supplemented with data from Rogers (1902).13 In both Amsterdam
11

and London, prices are reported in Pound Sterling (normalized as a percentage of the nominal or par value). Returns are adjusted for dividend or coupon payments. Information on
dividends comes from Clapham (1944) and Bowen (2007), and information about ex-dividend
and ex-coupon dates comes from Rogers (1902) and the Amsterdamsche Courant.
London prices refer to spot transactions. By the second half of the 18th century, a
signi…cant fraction of trade in the English stocks in Amsterdam was concentrated in the
futures market (Van Dillen (1931)). As a result, all available price data for the Amsterdam
market refer to futures prices. To facilitate comparison between London and Amsterdam, I
convert all Amsterdam future prices into spot prices, using a …xed cost-to-carry rate. See
Section I of the Internet Appendix for details. A future contract had four possible expiration
dates: February 15, May 15, August 15, and November 15. The newspaper reported prices
for the future contract ending on the nearest date. This means that the maturity of a
future contract was never longer than three months. It is unlikely that ‡uctuations in the
short-term interest rate contributed signi…cantly to the volatility of returns. For example,
an instantaneous increase in the cost-to-carry rate of 100 bps would lead to a log return of
0.05% (0.10%) on a future contract with a median (maximum) maturity of 1.5 (3) months –
this is at the 6th (21st ) percentile of the distribution of absolute EIC returns meaning that
94% (79%) of returns were larger in size. Furthermore, results in Section V.B of the Internet
Appendix indicate that price changes of futures with a longer time to maturity (for which
changes in the cost-to-carry rate should be more important) were not more volatile.
Data about boat arrivals in the Dutch Republic come from the Rotterdamsche Courant
(see Section I of the Internet Appendix). The sailing schedule allowed for two boat crossings
a week. Arrival data in England were hand collected from several English newspapers:
12

General Evening Post, Lloyd’s Evening Post, Lloyd’s Lists, London Chronicle, and Middlesex
Journal. Due to the time-intensive nature of this part of the data collection process, I only
collected this information for the two periods of interest.
Table I reports descriptive statistics for the Amsterdam market. Panel A provides information on returns between 1771 to 1787, both inclusive and exclusive of the war period
between 1778 and 1783. There are three prices a week for the Amsterdam market (Monday, Wednesday, and Friday). I calculate percentage log returns over two-day (Monday-toWednesday and Wednesday-to-Friday) or three-day periods (Friday-to-Monday), indexed by
subscript t, using

S
= 100 log (pt =pt 1 ).14 The results show that the return variance
pAM
t

between 1771 and 1777 and 1783 and 1787 is considerably lower than during the 1771 to
1787 period as a whole. The di¤erence is statistically signi…cant and re‡ects the fact that
security prices were highly volatile during the war period. The exception is the EIC, for
which the di¤erence between return variances is relatively small. For comparison, Panel B
provides information for the entire 1723 to 1794 period, for which Amsterdam security prices
are available roughly every two weeks (Van Dillen (1931)). In particular, Panel B reports
the variance in two-week returns for 1771 to 1777 and 1783 to 1787, and the full period. The
results suggest that the two sample periods are largely representative of the 18th century as
a whole.15 For the BoE and 3% annuities, the return variance is roughly the same. For the
EIC, the return variance is somewhat higher during the sample periods.
[Table I about here]
Panel C focuses on the boat arrival data. These data can be divided in subperiods based
on the arrival of boats. During the two sample periods, there were 681 such between-boat
periods, more than half of which were long enough that, in addition to a price observation
13

re‡ecting an incoming boat, there was also a price observation that did not re‡ect the
arrival of English news. The median length of a between-boat period is three days, but the
distribution has a fat right tail. The 95th percentile is seven days and the maximum is 21
days. The maximum number of price observations per period is eight.

II.

Examples

Figure 1 illustrates the paper’s approach with two concrete examples. Panel A illustrates
how public information was transmitted. On November 18, 1783, English Prime Minister Fox
declared that the British East India Company’s (EIC) …nances were in a “deplorable state”
(Sutherland (1952), p. 375)16 and the company’s stock price in London fell dramatically
from 136 to 120. The vertical/diagonal black lines in the …gure indicate how and when the
packet boats transmitted this news to Amsterdam. In the days following the decline on the
English exchange, weather conditions were unfavorable and the packet boat could not cross
the North Sea. As a result, prices in Amsterdam did not adjust. After wind conditions
improved, a packet boat reached the Dutch Republic on November 28, 10 days after Fox
gave his speech. Prices in Amsterdam fell sharply in response.
[Figure 1 about here]
Panel B illustrates the importance of private signals and factors unrelated to new information. During the winter of 1775 to 1776 weather conditions were particularly unfavorable,
and thus news from England reached Amsterdam with long intervals. This period fell in the
middle of the American Revolution, and on December 27 an envoy arrived in London with
secret dispatches from the Revolutionaries, report of which reached Amsterdam on January
2. Over the subsequent two weeks there was a news blackout in Amsterdam due to especially
14

strong eastern winds.17 When, on January 15, the English news (dated January 4) …nally
arrived, it only contained rumors: the contents of the American dispatches had not been
disclosed yet. At the same time, the London EIC stock price had increased from 165.75 to
167.75. Interestingly, the EIC price in Amsterdam had gone up as well during the blackout.
Later, it turned out that the American dispatches contained a serious peace proposal –potentially good news for the EIC. It is possible that privately informed agents traded on this
information in both markets, causing prices to go up. The …gure suggests that such private
information was not incorporated into prices right away.
After January 4, prices in London fell in response to the news that the English were
not prepared to accept the American terms for peace. Then, on January 11, the London
EIC price rose from 166.5 to 168.5 for no apparent reason. When Amsterdam learned of
this on January 23, the market only partially responded. In the subsequent blackout period
that lasted more than two weeks, the Amsterdam EIC price fell from 167.25 to 166.75,
only to recover to its previous level after the arrival of English news on February 7. The
factors driving these price movements were probably unrelated to information and may have
re‡ected liquidity shocks or changes in sentiment.

III.

Validation Experiment

Before turning to the paper’s main results, in this section I discuss the historical setting
in greater detail. First, I take a closer look at the direction of news ‡ows. I examine
whether relevant information about the English securities originated in England. Next, I
provide evidence that the packet boats carried material information that moved stock prices.
The results suggests that the transmission of transitory liquidity shocks was less important.
15

Finally, I provide suggestive evidence that trading volume on no-boat days was considerable.

A. Direction of News
The identi…cation strategy of this paper relies on the assumption that relevant information about the English stocks originated in England. While I focus on two sample periods
for which this is likely the case, ultimately whether this assumption is correct is an empirical
question. To shed light on this question, I …rst analyze the ‡ow of information between
London and Amsterdam using a simple econometric framework that takes into account variation in communication lags and the discrete arrival of the packet boats. Figure 2 illustrates
this approach. As noted above, log returns in Amsterdam are calculated over two- or threeday periods that are indexed by t. Those returns re‡ect either the arrival of a packet boat
S;boat
S;no
( pAM
) or no arrival of a boat ( pAM
t
t+d

boat

). There can be multiple “no-boat” re-

turns between the arrival of two ships; this is indicated by d. Table I shows that there are
at most seven no-boat returns per between-boat period and thus d 2 [1; 7]. With the arrival
of a boat, market participants in Amsterdam observed the change in the London price since
the last boat departure, which captures (possibly among other things) all new information
that reached the London market during this between-boat period. This price change is given
by

D
pLN
s 1 , where s stands for a speci…c period between two boat departures. London re-

turns,

D
pLN
, are calculated over the same two- or three-day periods.
t

D;boat
pLN
re‡ects
t

the arrival of a boat from Amsterdam, and the Amsterdam return transmitted by this boat
is given by

S
pAM
s 1 .

[Figure 2 about here]

16

Following the above return de…nitions, I estimate

where the coe¢ cients

1

S;boat
pAM
=
t

0

+

1

D
pLN
s 1 +

S
pAM
s 2 + ut

D;boat
pLN
=
t

0

+

1

S
pAM
s 1 +

D
pLN
s 2 + vt ,

and

1

capture the response of Amsterdam and London, respectively,

to price changes in the other market between boat departures. These price changes also
respond to past returns from the other market. To reduce attenuation bias, I include these
past returns in the regressions; with a slight abuse of notation these are denoted by
and

S
pAM
s 2

D
pLN
s 2 .

Table II presents the results. Since detailed London price data are available only for the
EIC, BoE and 3% annuities, results are available only for these three securities. The table
shows that London price changes had strong explanatory power for prices in Amsterdam.
There is some evidence for an e¤ect in the other direction as well, but the R2 s are virtually
zero, and the coe¢ cients are seven to eight times smaller and only borderline statistically
signi…cant (for the BoE, the coe¢ cient is insigni…cant altogether). These results con…rm that,
at least for the paper’s speci…c sample periods, most relevant new information originated in
London.
[Table II about here]
Next, I perform a similar analysis using a vector error correction model (VECM). The
advantage of a VECM is that it explicitly takes into account that Amsterdam and London
prices were co-integrated. The disadvantage of this approach is that one cannot account
for the variation in lag lengths and the discrete arrival of boats. Details on the estimation
17

and impulse response functions are presented in Section II of the Internet Appendix. The
results again show that innovations in prices in London have strong predictive power for
Amsterdam returns, not the other way around. Since the VECM estimates do not rely on
actual boat arrivals, I can also perform this analysis for the period of international con‡ict
between January 1778 and August 1783, during which time information on boat arrivals is
not available. Not surprisingly, for this period there is strong evidence that price changes
in Amsterdam had an important e¤ect on prices in London. The results are summarized
in Table III in the form of Hasbrouck (1995) information shares. During the two sample
periods characterized by peace, between 92% and 99% of relevant information originated in
London. For the intermediate period characterized by international con‡ict, this drops to
between 58% and 77 %. This result highlights the importance of restricting the paper’s main
analysis to the 1771 to 1777 and 1783 to 1787 periods.
[Table III about here]
I also test whether returns on English securities in Amsterdam are related to ‡uctuations
in the price of Dutch securities. Changes in general economic conditions in the Netherlands, such as movements in the interest rate, should have a¤ected both Dutch and English
securities. Table IV presents results from the regression

ptAM S;no

boat

=

0

+

1

AM S t + ut ,

where AM S is a vector of percentage log returns on three Dutch securities: VOC (Dutch
East India Company), WIC (Dutch West Indies Company) and bank money. Two di¤erent currencies circulated in Amsterdam: cash and bank money, which represented current
18

accounts at the Bank of Amsterdam (Quinn and Roberds (2007)). Fluctuations in the exchange rate between these two “types”of money might convey information about aggregate
risk aversion, investment opportunities, and the availability of liquidity.18 . I estimate the
equation above for days without boat arrivals. The results show that there is virtually no
correlation between English and Dutch assets on days without news. Returns on VOC stock
have some predictive power, but the coe¢ cients are small and statistically insigni…cant. An
exception is the BoE, for which the (economically small) coe¢ cient is marginally statistically signi…cant. The corresponding R2 s are close to zero. These results con…rm that general
economic conditions in the Netherlands had limited impact on the pricing of the English
securities.
[Table IV about here]
In Sections III.A and III.B of the Internet Appendix I examine whether relevant news
from England could have arrived through other channels, speci…cally, other types of ships or
carrier pigeons. The evidence suggests that these channels did not play an important role.
In Section III.C of the Internet Appendix I investigate whether relevant news could have
originated in a third place, like France, the U.S., or the East Indies. The results suggest
that news from Paris played only a limited role, and that relevant information from the U.S.
and the East Indies reached London, before being transmitted to Amsterdam. In Section
IV of the Internet Appendix I use an instrumental variables approach to examine whether
the arrival of news might have been endogenous to developments in the stock market (or
economic conditions in general). The evidence suggests that this is not the case.

19

B. Boat Arrivals and News
To what degree did the arrival of a packet boat result in the transmission of actual
news? Following Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (1989) and Fair (2002), in Section V.C of
the Internet Appendix I analyze the 25 largest returns on EIC stock and the 3% annuities
(as a representative of the other four government related securities).19 In both cases, 22
of the 25 largest returns occurred following the arrival of a packet boat. For the EIC,
the arrival of a boat coincided with the transmission of relevant information in 20 cases.
This information contained news about, for example, signi…cant events in India or decisions
in Parliament a¤ecting the company. For the 3% annuities a boat arrival resulted in the
transmission of material information in 21 of the 22 cases, re‡ecting news about the national
debt, developments in the U.S. revolutionary war, or the situation in Ireland. For the largest
returns, the most important drivers of the variance estimates, there seems to be a close link
between the arrival of a boat and the transmission of relevant information.
Next, I examine the general relation between the return variance and speci…c news content. As there were no formal disclosure requirements, it is impossible to isolate events such
as earnings announcements. In addition, no press specialized in publicly traded companies.
The only English security frequently mentioned in the Dutch newspapers was the EIC. I test
whether the Amsterdam stock price moved more when the EIC was mentioned in the press.
In addition, I interact the mentioning of the EIC with three sets of keywords that were potentially relevant for the company: (1) …nancial terms such as “dividends”or “capital,”(2)
geographic locations or relevant persons in the East Indies, and (3) references to the Cape
(of Good Hope) Colony, as ships arriving from India would dock at the Cape to allow the

20

crew to recover and a regular news service with England transmitted the most recent news
brought in by these ships.
Note that the quality of the printed copy is not good enough to apply machine reading
techniques to the full text of the news articles. However, one Dutch newspaper, the Leydse
Courant, capitalized keywords during the 1771 to 1778 period to signal the topics covered,
and it is feasible to impute those by hand. To verify that the capitalization of keywords in the
Leydse Courant does not re‡ect something other than the actual topics covered, I include
a fourth category of words that signal (stale) background information rather than breaking news (words such as “declarations” or “proclamations”). Section V.C of the Internet
Appendix provides more details on the di¤erent news categories.
Table V presents the results. Column (1) shows that a reference to the EIC is associated
with higher return volatility, especially if it is mentioned more than once.20 In the 28
instances in which the EIC was mentioned at least twice, the return variance was more than
three times higher than the benchmark. As a comparison, this is at the 75th percentile of
news to no-news ratios estimated for modern securities (Boudoukh et al. (2013)). Financial
terminology and references to the Cape are associated with return variance that is about
2.5 times higher than the benchmark, although only the former is statistically signi…cant.
There is no relation with the mentioning of the East Indies. Words signaling background
information are associated with signi…cantly lower volatility. It is likely that, due to space
limitations, this information was published only when there was no other news …t to print.
The adjusted R2 of the regression is 0.05. This is about as high as what Gri¢ n, Hirschey,
and Kelly (2010) …nd for developed countries using modern data.
In columns (2) to (6) I interact the di¤erent news components with the EIC news dummies
21

to unpack the e¤ects. Column (2) shows that if an article uses …nancial terminology and
contains more than one reference to the EIC, the return variance increases substantially.
This e¤ect, though (borderline) statistically insigni…cant and based on a limited number of
observations, almost fully explains the predictive power of the …nancial terminology dummy
and one-third of the EIC (>1) dummy. Column (3) indicates that the interaction with
the India dummy is not associated with higher volatility. Column (4) shows that there is a
large and statistically signi…cant interaction e¤ect between the EIC (>1) and Cape dummies
(again based on a limited number of observations). This fully explains the predictive power
of the Cape dummy and about a third of the e¤ect of the EIC (>1) dummy. Column
(5) shows that references to the EIC are not associated with higher volatility if they are
accompanied by background stories. The speci…cation in Column (6) includes all interaction
terms together and has an adjusted R2 of 0.11 (0.08 if estimated on absolute rather than
squared returns). In sum, I …nd a statistically signi…cant relation between the arrival of
certain types of news and EIC returns.
[Table V about here]

C. Boat Arrivals and Transitory Shocks
The above results con…rm that the packet boats transmitted relevant information about
the English securities. It is of course possible that in addition to this news, the boats
also transmitted English trading orders that a¤ected volatility in Amsterdam. Suppose, for
instance, that a party in London wanted to sell (or buy) for uninformed liquidity reasons.21
Suppose further that this trade had a (transitory) price impact (Grossman and Miller (1988)).
Then it is possible that the London agent executed part of his orders in Amsterdam, or that
22

the price impact he caused in London was transmitted to Amsterdam through arbitrage.
I evaluate the impact of English liquidity shocks in two ways. First, I test whether Dutch
liquidity shocks a¤ect prices in England. The Dutch held between 20% and 30% of the English securities, and unless arbitrage worked in a dramatically di¤erent way, Dutch liquidity
shocks should have a¤ected prices in England in a similar way. To test this conjecture, I
compute the variance of security returns in London on days with or without boat arrivals
from Amsterdam. The results, reported in Secion V.D of the Internet Appendix, show no
signi…cant di¤erence. If anything, volatility is lower on days with news from Amsterdam.
Second, I use the fact liquidity shocks are transitory and revert over time (Hendershott
and Seasholes (2007), Du¢ e (2010), Tetlock (2010), Nagel (2012)). If liquidity shocks were
transmitted from London to Amsterdam (having a transitory price impact in both markets)
we would expect London returns to predict subsequent reversals in Amsterdam. To test this
conjecture, I run the following regression:

S
pAM
t+T =

where

0

+

1

D
pLN
s 1 + "t ,

D
pLN
s 1 is the London return observed in Amsterdam at time t, and

S
pAM
t+T is the

subsequent Amsterdam return over period T , where T ranges from two or three days to four
weeks (estimates for longer horizons yield similar conclusions). This period excludes the
immediate response to news from London (see Figure 2). Tables VI to VIII, Panels B report
the results. Note that the results are restricted to the EIC, BoE and 3% annuities, the only
securities for which frequent price data in London are available. None of these three stocks
exhibit (negative) predictability across markets over any of the time horizons considered.
23

This suggests that liquidity shocks (or any other sort of transitory price changes) were not
transmitted from London to Amsterdam.
The above statistical tests may have limited power. It is ex ante unclear over what horizon
returns should revert and the slow execution of liquidity trades could lead to momentum in
the short run, attenuating the reversal estimates. For comparison, Panels A and C of Tables
VI to VIII present estimates of predictability within the Amsterdam and London markets.
For the BoE and 3% annuities, there is evidence of within-market reversals for up to one
week. This result suggests that the tests for reversals have reasonable power. The reversal
estimates are surprisingly similar in magnitude to modern estimates (Tetlock (2010), Table
1 reports a coe¢ cient of around

0:10). There is no evidence of reversal in EIC returns.

[Tables VI to VIII about here]
These …ndings seem inconsistent: if it was possible to arbitrage between markets, why
did liquidity shocks only have an impact in the home market? The answer lies in the fact
that, due to communication delays, arbitrage was imperfect. It took at least seven days (the
duration of a round trip) to complete an arbitrage operation. If liquidity shocks a¤ecting
one market were expected to revert within this period (as suggested by the results in Tables
VI to VIII), they should not have a¤ected the other market. Moreover, arbitrage was risky
as prices could change signi…cantly within a week. To illustrate these points, in Section V.E
of the Internet Appendix I examine the distributions of price di¤erences between London
and Amsterdam. The results indicate that price di¤erences narrowed after the arrival of a
boat (more mass around zero) but remained signi…cant. In summary, although it is possible
that English (uninformed) order ‡ow occasionally a¤ected returns in Amsterdam after the
arrival of a boat, the empirical results indicate that in general the e¤ect was small.
24

D. Transaction Data
It is possible that investors in Amsterdam traded signi…cantly less on days without news.
This would imply that liquidity was signi…cantly lower on days without news and that
minor order ‡ow imbalances could have led to large price reactions. While volume data for
this period are not available to test this conjecture, detailed information is available for a
small sample of transactions in the Amsterdam market, roughly equally divided between
EIC, BoE and SSC stock and the 3% annuities.22 Of the 32 total transactions, only four
transactions, or 12:5%, took place on days with news (9% when value weighted). The average
transaction size of

$1; 500 translates into $150; 000 in today’s money. On average, news

from London reached Amsterdam two times a week. If market participants were indi¤erent
between trading on days with or without news, we would expect that on average 28:6% of
transactions would take place on days with news. This means that there seems to have
been a tendency to trade on days without news. The di¤erence between these percentages is
signi…cant, with a p-value of 0:028 (based on a binomial distribution and a one-sided test).

IV.

Explaining Volatility in The Absence of News

A. Baseline Estimates
The results in Table II reveal that Amsterdam responded very strongly to returns in
London after the arrival of a boat. How big was the impact of these boat arrivals on the
volatility of English security returns in Amsterdam? In Section V.F of the Internet Appendix
I present the kernel densities of boat and no-boat returns for the …ve English securities.23
The …gures clearly show that returns are more volatile after the arrival of new information.
25

The distribution of news returns has considerably more mass in the tails.
Table IX presents the …rst four moments of the return distributions for periods with
(Bt = 1) and without (Bt = 0) a boat arrival. Importantly, the variance of returns is higher
after the arrival of a boat. This results holds for all …ve securities. In addition, the fraction
of zero returns is signi…cantly higher during no-boat periods. The ratio of return variances
var

S;no
pAM
t+d

boat

=var

S;boat
pAM
, is between 0:40 and 0:58 (depending on the security)
t

and is statistically signi…cantly di¤erent from one.24 Average returns are considerably higher
during periods with a boat arrival, especially for the EIC. This result is consistent with boat
returns being more volatile and thus more risky. The di¤erence in returns is not statistically
signi…cant, however.
[Table IX about here]
The volatility of returns in the absence of boats did not depend on whether a no-boat
period was expected. On average there were two boat crossings a week and three price
observations. This means that many no-boat periods were expected. Results in Section
III.A of the Internet Appendix indicate that volatility was no di¤erent if the absence of a
boat was not anticipated.25 In Section V.G of the Internet Appendix, I examine whether
returns in the absence of boats were more volatile if the most recent news from London was
relatively old. This could potentially re‡ect aversion to ambiguity. This is not the case.
Average returns did not di¤er signi…cantly.

B. Roadmap
What can explain the volatility in the absence of news? The remainder of this section
discusses three possible explanations: delayed response to public news, privately informed
26

trading, and local liquidity shocks. Before turning to the tests, I brie‡y discuss how these
di¤erent alternatives can be identi…ed.
To test for the delayed response to public news, I examine the time series properties of
returns in Amsterdam.26 A slow response to news is usually associated with initial underreaction, followed by return continuation or momentum (Hong and Stein (1999)). Private
information is identi…ed by the covariance of returns in Amsterdam with contemporaneous
(but as-of-yet unreported) price changes in London after the departure of a boat. Similar to
the example in Figure 1, Panel B, the idea is that private information caused Amsterdam
and London prices to (slowly) move in the same direction, even when there was no direct
information sharing. Finally, I use the covariance of returns within Amsterdam to identify
the (transitory) impact of local liquidity shocks.
This section also introduces a simple framework to quantify the e¤ect of these di¤erent
factors on the volatility of stock returns. I analyze both days with and without the arrival of
boats. In this decomposition the immediate response to public news on news days, measured
by the covariance between returns in London before the departure of a boat and price changes
in Amsterdam after its arrival, plays an important role. Table X provides a brief overview
of the (potentially) relevant factors. Public news, private information, and local liquidity
shocks can explain virtually all variation in security returns for all but the EIC, for which a
large fraction of no-boat returns remains unexplained. To investigate this further, I take a
closer look at the patterns of return reversals.
[Table X about here]

27

C. Slow Response to Public News
It is not straightforward to identify a slow response to news through return continuation.
In the presence of liquidity shocks returns, will also have a tendency to revert. Simple
autocorrelation coe¢ cients aggregate the two e¤ects, potentially cancelling them out. A
solution to this problem is to di¤erentiate between the continuation (or reversal) of past
London and Amsterdam returns, where the former approximates news shocks and the latter
picks up liquidity shocks. More speci…cally, I conduct the following test. For all returns
in Amsterdam I determine whether a boat arrived from London during the previous period
(Bt

1

= 0; 1). For the cases in which Bt

S
pAM
=
t

where

0

+

1

1

= 1, I estimate

S;boat
pAM
+
t 1

2

D
pLN
s 2 + "t if Bt

S
can re‡ect the arrival of a boat or not,
pAM
t

return over period t

1, and

1

(1)

= 1,

S;boat
pAM
is the Amsterdam news
t 1

D
pLN
s 2 (with a slight abuse of notation) is the London news

return observed in Amsterdam during the preceding period. The coe¢ cient

1

measures

reversals of news returns in Amsterdam. A slow response to news from London implies that
2

> 0.27
Table XI presents the regression results. Because London price data only cover the EIC,

BoE, and 3% annuities, the results are restricted to these three securities. I …nd no evidence
of momentum as

2

is close to zero for all three securities. In contrast, and consistent with

results in Tables VII and VIII, I do …nd evidence of reversals for the BoE and 3% annuities.
[Table XI about here]

28

D. Private Information
In addition to public news, private information might have been important as well. Research on current markets indicates that informed trading plays an important role (see for
example Hasbrouck (1991), Easley, Kiefer, and O’Hara (1997). Anecdotal evidence suggests
that the 18th century was no di¤erent. English insiders used the London and the Amsterdam
markets to bene…t from their private signals. In addition to public news, the packet boats
transmitted private letters. London insiders would communicate private information to their
agents in Amsterdam and these agents would trade on the information. The historical record
is rife with examples of informed trading (Sutherland (1952), p. 206-208, 228; Van Nierop
(1931), p. 68, Koudijs (2014)). It is likely that such trades set into motion a process of price
discovery that a¤ected prices both after the arrival of a boat and during subsequent periods
without boats. For example, if insiders traded strategically, it would have taken considerable time before prices re‡ected a certain piece of information (Kyle (1985); see Glosten and
Milgrom (1985) for an alternative setup). This could explain some of the return volatility in
Amsterdam on the days no boats arrived from England.
I test this possibility in the following way. Suppose that, after the arrival of private
signals, the insiders’agents in Amsterdam slowly traded on their information. This would
S;boat
have a¤ected prices both after the arrival of a boat ( pAM
) and during subsequent not
S;no
boat periods ( pAM
t+d

boat

). At the same time, the private information also a¤ected the

D
contemporaneous (but as-of-yet unreported) price change in London ( pLN
). That is, the
s

private signal was slowly incorporated into prices there as well (Figure 2). The co-movement
between returns in Amsterdam after the arrival of a boat and price changes in London after

29

the departure of that boat should therefore re‡ect the revelation of private information. It is
important to note that this measure of private information excludes the revelation of shortlived private signals that immediately a¤ected London prices –from the perspective of the
Amsterdam investor, such signals are part of the public news transmitted by packet boats.
Table XII presents estimates of the regressions

S;boat
pAM
=
t
AM S;no
pt+d

boat

=

0

+

1

D
+
pLN
s

0

+

1

D
+ vt
pLN
s

2

D
pLN
s 1 + ut

for the three securities for which security prices in both Amsterdam and London are available.
S;boat
Columns (1) to (3) present the estimates for the Amsterdam boat returns ( pAM
), while
t
S;no
Columns (4) to (6) present the estimates for the no-boat returns ( pAM
t+d

boat

). For all

three securities, there is a signi…cant correlation between the returns.
[Table XII about here]
It is unlikely that these results are driven by the (slow) execution of English liquidity
trades in the two markets. As before, it is natural to assume that liquidity trades have
transitory price impact. If the London agent, who receives the liquidity shock, splits his
trades across London and Amsterdam, we would expect to see reversals across markets. In
particular, London returns

D
pLN
that re‡ect this liquidity shock should negatively predict
s

future price changes in Amsterdam that capture the reversal of this shock. The results in
Tables VI to VIII do not support this conjecture.
These results support the idea that an important part of the return variance is driven

30

by private information. The presence of informed trading also a¤ects the estimates of the
importance of public information. I quantify the impact of public and private information
using a simple framework. The intuition can be formalized as follows. London price changes
between the departures of two boats are given

D
pLN
=
s

where
s

s

+ "s + u s ,

s

and "s are public and private signals revealed in London over period s. Innovation

is unknown to all parties at the beginning of period s and is revealed to the public during

the course of the period. Innovation "s is privately observed by an insider at the beginning
of s. For simplicity, I assume that "s is fully revealed to the public by the end of s.28 Public
and private signals

s

and "s are assumed to be independent and iid. Innovation us is a

residual. Throughout, I assume that all innovations are normally distributed.
Returns in Amsterdam after the arrival of a boat can be expressed as

S;boat
pAM
= et +
t

The variable

t

0 t

+ vt .

is a noisy version of private information "s . The insider’s agent in Amsterdam

trades on the private information he has received from London and, by assumption, his
trades are not fully informative. Instead, he generates a signal
cov("s ; t ) =

2
"

and

2
t

>

2
".

The term

0 t

t;

without loss of generality

captures the response in Amsterdam to this

noisy revelation of private information. The Amsterdam news return also responds to public
information et , which consists of public signal

s 1

31

and that part of private signal "s

1

not yet

incorporated into Amsterdam prices during the previous period. Innovation vt is a residual.
Amsterdam no-boat returns aren given by

AM S;no
pt+d

boat

=

d t+d

(2)

+ vt+d

for d 2 [1; 7]. The insider’s agent keeps trading on the private signal. This trading generates
an additional signal

t+d ;

again without loss of generalitym cov("s ;

For simplicity I assume that the di¤erent signals t ;

t+1 ; :::are

t+d )

=

2
"

and

2
t+d

>

2
".

iid.29 Finally, vt+d is a residual.

It follows from the projection theorem that

db =

cov("s ; t+d )
=
var( t+d )

2
"

(3)

2
t+d

for db 2 [0; 7]. Using this expression, it is straightforward to show that
var

S;boat
pAM
=
t

2
e

|{z}

S;boat
D
cov ( pAM
; pLN
t
s 1 )

var

S;no
pAM
t+d

boat

=

2

d "
|{z}

S;no
cov ( pAM
t+d

2

+

boat

0 "
|{z}

+

2
vt

(4)

S;boat
D
cov ( pAM
; pLN
)
s
t

+

2
vt+d

(5)

D
; pLN
)
s

Equations (4) and (5) imply that the covariances between Amsterdam and London identify
the importance of public and private information shocks for the overall return variance.
Table XIV below presents the results. I …nd that public information explains between 47%
and 56% of the variance of boat returns. Private information accounts for between 15%
and 39% of the variance of boat returns and between 27% and 39% of the no-boat return
variance.
32

E. Trading Costs
It is possible that the volatility of returns in Amsterdam in the absence of boats was
driven by trading costs. Speci…cally, if market makers face order-handling costs or have
limited risk bearing capacity, trades have an impact on prices (see O’Hara (1997) and Biais,
Glosten, and Spatt (2005) for overviews). This could drive the return volatility in the absence
of news.

E.1. Order-Handling Costs
I …rst consider order-handling costs. The Amsterdam market operated through limit
orders and the Amsterdamsche Courant reported the going price of the day. In theory, the
reported price should not re‡ect these direct transaction costs. Nevertheless, it is possible
that there were de facto market makers who charged a bid-ask spread to cover order-handling
costs. During certain days the market might have cleared at either the bid or the ask. This
would have led to a bid-ask bounce that could have contributed signi…cantly to the volatility
of security returns. To analyze this, I estimate a Roll (1984b) model, where order-handling
costs c are given by
c=

p

cov( pt ; pt 1 ),

The return variance that can be attributed to these trading costs is given by var( pt ) = 2c2 .
Table XIII presents the results for both boat and no-boat periods. The underlying
assumption is that transaction costs do not depend whether a boat arrives. For comparison,
the table also presents the o¢ cial brokers’fees; they are very close to the Roll measures. For
the EIC, the …rst-order autocovariance is positive and the Roll measure cannot be calculated.
33

I therefore estimated the Roll model using a Bayesian approach advocated by Hasbrouck
(2009) that can handle a positive autocovariance. This yields a Roll measure of c = 0:047
with an implied variance of 0:004. I apply Hasbrouck’s approach to the other four securities
as well. Without exception, the Bayesian approach leads to lower Roll measures (and lower
implied variances) for these securities. For comparison, transaction costs on the NYSE
between 1993 and 2005 were approximately twice as large as the (raw) Roll measures in the
1770s and 1780s (Hasbrouck (2009), Table 2).30
[Table XIII about here]

E.2. Inventory Costs
The Roll model abstracts from other sources of transaction costs such as inventory costs,
where intermediaries have to be compensated for taking a position in the asset (because of
risk aversion or inventory management). This could be especially relevant in the limit order
setting of the 18th century. If, for example, there are many transactions on one side of the
market, trades will take place deeper in the limit order book, which a¤ects all transaction
prices during the trading day. Consider the following stylized setup. There is a competitive
group of intermediaries that sets prices according to

pt = f t

It ,

(6)

where ft is the log fundamental value of the security with ft = ft
intermediaries’total inventory in the asset. The parameter

34

1

+ ut and It is the

captures market makers’risk-

bearing capacity. Returns are given by

pt = ut + qt ,

(7)

where qt is either a buy or sell order. In practical terms, this setting di¤ers from the Roll
(1984b) model if it takes time for intermediaries to o¤-load their inventory. In that case,
the initial price impact of qt will dissipate slowly and the autocovariance of returns will be
negative at longer lag lengths. The results in Tables VI to VIII provide evidence of negative
autocorrelations for up to one week.
To analyze the impact on returns, I simulate a simple inventory cost model. Following
Garman (1976) and Ho and Stoll (1981), I assume that orders arrive following

qt =

1 with probability
1 with probability 1

t

,
t

where
t

= min max

1
+ (ft
2

1

pt 1 ); 1 ; 0 :

(8)

In other words, the probability of a buy or sell order depends on the log-di¤erence between
the asset’s fundamental value and the market price during the previous period. If the asset
is undervalued, it is more likely that a buy order will hit the market and, as a result, prices
will rise. This process generates negative autocorrelation in the order ‡ow and the return
series: a buy order today will drive up prices, making a sell order tomorrow more likely. The
parameter

captures how fast the market responds to mispricing. A low value implies a

longer time before prices move back to fundamentals, leading to negative autocovariances at
35

longer lag lengths. Section V.H of the Internet Appendix illustrates this with two examples,
where

= 1=2 and

2 f1=4; 3=4g.

I simulate price paths of 10,000 observations for di¤erent values of

and , and compare

the implied autocovariances cov( pt ; pt l ) over di¤erent lag lengths with the actual ones
in the data, again using both boat and no-boat returns (the …rst 1,000 observations for
each simulated price series are dropped). Lag lengths can vary between one and 12 periods,
l 2 [1; 12], where each lag represents two or three days. The longest lag is equivalent to a
period of four weeks. Table XIII presents, for each individual security, the values of

and

for which the mean squared error is minimized. Section V.H of the Internet Appendix
presents the actual and model-simulated autocovariances for these parameter estimates. For
the EIC, there is no evidence of a negative autocovariance at the …rst two lags, and

=0

provides the best description of the data. For the SSC, the autocovariance of returns is only
negative at a lag length of one, consistent with a relatively large value for . For the BoE
and the two annuities autocovariances are negative at the …rst three lag lengths, and

has

a relatively small value.
Table XIII above presents estimates of the return variance that this process generates.
These estimates, which are based on the simulated return series, are somewhat higher than
those of the Roll model. As a cross-validation I check these numbers against the (limited)
transaction data available. Of the 32 individual transactions that I could be identify, nine
took place in the absence of boat arrivals, on days for which prices were listed (Mondays,
Wednesdays, and Fridays), and for future contracts with the same maturity as those reported
in the newspaper. For these nine transactions, the mean squared di¤erence between the
transaction and the reported price is 0.079. This estimate is in the same ballpark as the
36

inventory cost model’s implied variance.

F. Summing Up
Table XIV summarizes the contributions of the di¤erent factors that drive security returns. On days with a boat arrival, between 47% and 56% of the return variance can be
attributed to the arrival of public information. Private information is also of key importance, explaining about 39% of returns for the EIC, while it explains between 13% and 20%
of returns for the BoE and 3% annuities respectively. Trading costs are estimated to be zero
for the EIC, while they account for between 22% and 25% of the return variance for the BoE
and 3% annuities. For days without a boat, private information accounts for between 26%
and 39% of the return variance. Trading costs are again estimated to be zero for the EIC
and account for between 38% and 54% of the return variance for the other two securities.
Overall, public news accounts for between 36% and 42%, private information for between
17 and 39%, and trading costs for between 0% and 32% of the total return variance. Taken
together, these estimates explain between 82% and 92% of overall price movements.
[Table XIV about here]
There is one case with a relatively poor …t. For EIC returns on days without a boat,
more than 60% of the return variance is left unexplained. To investigate this …nding further,
Table XV presents more detailed information about the EIC’s one-period autocovariance.

37

In particular, the table reports results of the following regressions:

S
pAM
=
t

0

+

1

S
pAM
t 1 +

S
pAM
=
t

0

+

1

S
pAM
t 1 +

+

4

S
pAM
t 1

Bt

1

2

2

S
pAM
t 1
S
pAM
t 1

Bt +

Bt
Bt

5 Bt 1

+

1

1

3 Bt 1

+

+

3

6 Bt

+

(9)

+ ut

S
pAM
t 1
7 Bt 1

Bt

(10)

Bt + vt ,

where Bt 2 f0; 1g indicates whether new information reached Amsterdam in period t. These
regressions test whether return reversals di¤ered if the previous and/or current period featured the arrival of a boat. To facilitate interpretation, Table XV sums up the di¤erent
interaction coe¢ cients to calculate the total return reversal for each di¤erent scenario. Column (1) presents the estimates of equation (9), where boat and no-boat returns are allowed
to revert di¤erently (Bt

1

= 0; 1). Columns (2) and (3) present the estimates of equation

(10), where reversals coe¢ cients are also allowed to be di¤erent depending on whether the
current period features the arrival of a boat or not (Bt = 0; 1).
Table VI provides no evidence of negative autocovariance for the EIC. In Table XV, I …nd
that there are reversals, but only of no-boat returns (Bt

1

= 0), and only on on news days

(Bt = 1). For comparison, the table also presents estimates for the BoE and 3% annuities.
For the latter, return reversals are also important for no-boat returns, although returns tend
to revert equally strong regardless of whether a boat just arrived. For the BoE, no di¤erences
in reversals are visible.
[Table XV about here]
The unexplained volatility of EIC stock on no-boat days may be due to liquidity trades
and adverse selection costs. The analysis of Section E. suggests that trading costs in EIC
38

stock were practically zero. These calculations yield incorrect results if liquidity trades were
mainly concentrated in periods without a boat arrival. It is possible that due to the presence
of privately informed agents, uninformed traders concentrated their trades in periods without
a boat arrival (Admati and P‡eiderer (1988)). According to Table XIV, 39% of the EIC
return variance on news days was driven by private information. This is signi…cantly more
than for the other securities. In addition, Table XII suggests that privately informed trading
in EIC stock was approximately twice as important on boat days than on no-boat days.
This would have led to additional adverse selection costs on days boats arrived, in which
case uniformed agents may have decided to cluster their trades in no-boat periods. The
price impact of these liquidity trades would have reversed only after the arrival of the next
boat, when uncertainty was resolved, decreasing the risk premium charged by intermediaries.
This interpretation is consistent with the limited trading data available: each of the 11
transactions in EIC stock took place on no-boat days, which is statistically di¤erent (with a
p-value of 0.025) from a random allocation of trades over days with or without a boat arrival
(based on a one-sided binomial test).
Alternatively, the unexplained volatility of EIC stock on no-boat days could be the result
of sentiment shocks, rumors, or di¤erences of opinion. Under this interpretation, beliefs
would have converged after the arrival of news from England, leading to return reversals.
Since the EIC was by far the most volatile stock of the period, it is possible that sentiment
shocks were most important for this security (Baker and Wurgler (2006); Tetlock (2007)). It
is impossible to di¤erentiate between these two interpretations. The transaction evidence is
not conclusive, since di¤erences in beliefs are generally also associated with higher trading
volume (Harris and Raviv (1993)).
39

V.

Conclusion

What are the roles of public news, private information, liquidity trades, and sentiment
shocks in explaining the short-term volatility of stock returns? It is di¢ cult to answer this
question in today’s world of around-the-clock news coverage and instant, long-distance data
exchange. In particular, with news arriving all the time, it is di¢ cult to separate the impact
of news arrival from the trading process.
The key contribution of this paper lies in the identi…cation of news ‡ows. I examine the
trade of English securities in 18th century Amsterdam. Communication between England
and the Dutch Republic relied on sailboats. This makes it possible to precisely reconstruct
the arrival of news and study stock price movements in the absence of news. Moreover,
interruptions in information ‡ows were exogenous as delays in boat arrival were the result
of adverse winds and other weather conditions, and the arrival of news was unrelated to
developments in the stock market or general economic and political events.
At the same time, Amsterdam and London, the markets in question, were already quite
developed in the 18th century. For instance, they share many important features of modern
stock markets: a centralized exchange, trade in derivatives (with the ability to short), and a
well-developed system of margin loans to …nance positions. Harrison (1998) further argues
that the return process has changed little over time, leading him to conclude that 18th
century markets were not so di¤erent from the 1990s. The current paper’s estimates of
trading costs and return reversals are also surprisingly similar to modern …gures (compare
Hasbrouck (2009) and Tetlock (2010)). The fact that communication technology itself was
less developed at the time is not particularly relevant. What matters is how markets respond
40

to information, not how that information arrives to the market.31
The results indicate that the arrival of public information was important: the variance of
returns in Amsterdam was signi…cantly higher after the arrival of boats. Public news explains
about 40% of the overall volatility in Amsterdam. At the same time, price movements in
the absence of boats were considerable. The results suggest that the no boat return variance
can be almost fully explained by private information and liquidity shocks (in approximately
the same proportions). The exception is the EIC – returns in the absence of boat arrivals
remain largely unexplained for this security. It is possible that, due to adverse selection
costs, uninformed agents concentrated their liquidity trades in periods between boat arrivals,
leading to additional volatility. Alternatively, investor sentiment may have shifted during
periods when no new objective information was available.

41

REFERENCES
Admati, Anat R., and Paul P‡eiderer, 1988, A theory of intraday patterns: Volume and price
variability, Review of Financial Studies 1, 3-40.
Andersen, Torben G., and Tim Bollerslev, 1998, Deutsche Mark-Dollar volatility: Intraday activity
patterns, macroeconomic announcements, and longer run dependencies, Journal of Finance
53, 219-265.
Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, and Jun Cai, 2000, Intraday and interday volatility in the
Japanese stock market, Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money
10, 107-130.
Antweiler, Werner, and Murray Z. Frank, 2006, Do U.S. stock markets typically overreact to corporate news stories? Working paper, University of Minnesota.
Bai, Jennie, Thomas Philippon, and Alexi Savov, 2013, Have …nancial markets become more informative? NBER Working paper, 19728.
Baker, Malcolm, and Je¤rey Wurgler, 2006, Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock returns, Journal of Finance 61, 1645-1680.
Barclay, Michael J., Robert H. Litzenberger, and Jerold B. Warner, 1990, Private information,
trading volume, and stock-return variances, Review of Financial Studies 3, 233-253.
Balduzzi, Pierluigi, Edwin J. Elton, and T. Clifton Green, 2001, Economic news and bond prices:
Evidence from the U.S. Treasury market, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
36, 523-543.
Berry, Thomas D., and Keith M. Howe, 1994, Public information arrival, Journal of Finance 49,
1331-1346.

42

Biais, Bruno, Larry Glosten, and Chester Spatt, 2005, Market microstructure: A survey of microfoundations, empirical results, and policy implications, Journal of Financial Markets 8,
217-264.
Biais, Bruno, and Richard C. Green, 2007, The microstructure of the bond market in the 20th century,
IDEI working paper, 482.
Bollerslev, Tim, Jun Cai, and Frank M. Song, 2000, Intraday periodicity, long memory volatility,
and macroeconomic announcement e¤ects in the U.S. Treasury bond market, Journal of
Empirical Finance 7, 37-55.
Boos, Dennis D., and Cavell Brownie, 2004, Comparing variances and other measures of dispersion,
Statistical Science 19, 571-578.
Boudoukh, Jacob, Matthew Richardson, YuQing Je¤ Shen, and Robert F. Whitelaw, 2007, Do
asset prices re‡ect fundamentals? Freshly squeezed evidence from the OJ market, Journal
of Financial Economics 83, 397-412.
Boudoukh, Jacob, Ronen Feldman, Shimon Kogan, and Matthew Richardson, 2013, Which news
moves stock prices? A textual analysis, NBER Working paper, 18725.
Bowen, Huw V., 1989, Investment and empire in the later eighteenth century: East India stockholding, 1756-1791, The Economic History Review 42, 186-206.
Bowen, Huw V., 2007, The East India Company: Trade and Domestic Financial Statistics, 17551838, UK Data Archive.
Brown, William O., J. Harold Mulherin, and Marc D. Weidenmier, 2008, Competing with the NY
stock exchange, Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, 1679-1719.
Clapham, John, 1944, The Bank of England: A History (Cambridge University Press).
Cutler, David M., James M. Poterba, and Lawrence H. Summers, 1989, What moves stock prices,

43

Journal of Portfolio Management 15, 56-63.
Dale, Richard, 2004, The First Crash: Lessons from the South Sea Bubble (Princeton University
Press).
Davis, Angela K., Jeremy M. Piger, and Lisa M. Sedor, 2012, Beyond the numbers: Measuring the
information content of earnings press release language, Contemporary Accounting Research
29, 845-868
DeGennaro, Ramon P., and Ronald E. Shrieves, 1997, Public information releases, private information arrival and volatility in the foreign exchange market, Journal of Empirical Finance
4, 295-315.
DellaVigna, Stefano, and Joshua M. Pollet, 2009, Investor inattention and Friday earnings announcements, Journal of Finance 64, 709-749.
Demers, Elizabeth, and Clara Vega, 2006, Soft information in earnings announcements: News or
noise?, Working paper, INSEAD
Dempster, Greg, John M. Wells, and Douglas T. Wills, 2000, A common-features analysis of Amsterdam and London …nancial markets during the eighteenth century, Economic Inquiry 38,
19-33.
Du¢ e, Darrell, 2010, Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital, Journal of Finance 65, 12371267.
Easley, David, Nicholas M. Kiefer, and Maureen O’Hara, 1997, One day in the life of a very common
stock, Review of Financial Studies 10, 805-835.
Ederington, Louis H., and Jae Ha Lee, 1993, How markets process information: News releases and
volatility, Journal of Finance 48, 1161-1191.
Elmendorf, Douglas, Mary Hirshfeld, and David Weil, 1996, The e¤ect of news on bond prices:

44

Evidence from the United Kingdom 1900-1920, Review of Economics and Statistics 78,
341-344.
Evans, Martin D.D., and Richard K. Lyons, 2008, How is macro news transmitted to exchange
rates? Journal of Financial Economics 88, 26-50.
Fair, Ray C., 2002, Events that shook the market, The Journal of Business 75, 713-731.
Ferguson, Niall, 1998, The House of Rothschild: Volume 1: Money’s Prophets: 1798-1848 (Penguin,
London).
Fleming, Je¤, Chris Kirby, and Barbara Ostdiek, 2006, Information, trading, and volatility: Evidence from weather-sensitive markets, Journal of Finance 61, 2899-2930.
Fleming, Michael J., and Eli M. Remolona, 1999, Price formation and liquidity in the U.S. treasury
market: The response to public information, Journal of Finance 54, 1901-1915.
Frehen, Rik GP, William N. Goetzmann, and K. Geert Rouwenhorst, 2013, New evidence on the
…rst …nancial bubble, Journal of Financial Economics 108, 585-607.
Forster, Margaret M., and Thomas J. George, 1995, Trading hours, information ‡ow, and international cross-listing, International Review of Financial Analysis 4, 19-34.
French, Kenneth R., and Richard Roll, 1986, Stock return variances: The arrival of information
and the reaction of traders, Journal of Financial Economics 17, 5-26.
Garbade, Kenneth D., and William L. Silber, 1978, Technology, communication and the performance of …nancial markets: 1840-1975, Journal of Finance 33, 819-832.
Garman, Mark B., 1976, Market microstructure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 257-275.
Gelderblom, Oscar, and Joost Jonker, 2004, Completing a …nancial revolution: The …nance of the
Dutch East India trade and the rise of the Amsterdam capital market, 1595-1612, Journal
of Economic History 64, 641-672.

45

Glosten, Lawrence R., and Paul R. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist
market with heterogeneously informed traders, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 71-100.
Gri¢ n, John M., Nicholas Hirschey, and Patrick J. Kelly, 2010, How important is the …nancial
press in global markets?, Working paper, London Business School.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Merton H. Miller, 1988, Liquidity and market structure, Journal of
Finance 43, 617-633.
Harris, Milton, and Artur Raviv, 1993, Di¤erences of opinion make a horse race, Review of Financial
Studies 6, 473-506.
Harrison, Paul, 1998, Similarities in the distribution of stock market price changes between the
eighteenth and twentieth centuries Journal of Business 71, 55-79.
Harvey, Campbell R., and Roger D. Huang, 1991, Volatility in the foreign currency futures market,
Review of Financial Studies 4, 543-569.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 1991, Measuring the information content of stock trades, Journal of Finance 46,
197-207.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 1995, One security, many markets: Determining the contributions to price discovery, Journal of Finance 50, 1175-1199.
Hasbrouck, Joel, 2009, Trading costs and returns for U.S. equities: Estimating e¤ective costs from
daily data, Journal of Finance 64, 1445-1477.
Hashimoto, Yuko, and Takatoshi Ito, 2010, E¤ects of Japanese Macroeconomic Announcements
on the Dollar/Yen Exchange Rate: High-Resolution Picture, Journal of the Japanese and
International Economies 24, 334-354.
Hemmeon, J.C., 1912, The History of the British Post O¢ ce (Harvard University Press, Cambridge).

46

Hendershott, Terrence, and Mark S. Seasholes, 2007, Market maker inventories and stock prices,
American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 97, 210-214.
Ho, Thomas, and Hans R. Stoll, 1981, Optimal dealer pricing under transactions and return uncertainty, Journal of Financial Economics 9, 47-73.
Hoag, Christopher, 2006, The Atlantic telegraph cable and capital market information ‡ows, Journal of Economic History 66, 342-365.
Hoes, H.J., 1986, Voorgeschiedenis en ontstaan van het Financiële dagblad, Economisch-Historisch
Jaarboek 49, 1-20.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C. Stein, 1999, A uni…ed theory of underreaction, momentum trading,
and overreaction in asset markets, Journal of Finance 54, 2143-2184.
Hong, Harrison, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2007, Disagreement and stock market, Journal of Economic
Perspectives 21, 109-128.
Huberman, Gur, and Tomer Regev, 2001, Contagious speculation and a cure for cancer: A nonevent
that made stock prices soar, Journal of Finance 56, 387-396.
Ito, Takatoshi, and Wen-Ling Lin, 1992, Lunch break and intraday volatility of stock returns: An
hourly data analysis of Tokyo and New York stock markets, Economics Letters 39, 86-90.
Ito, Takatoshi, Richard K. Lyons, and Michael T. Melvin, 1998, Is there private information in the
FX market? The Tokyo experiment, Journal of Finance 53, 1111-1130.
Kalev, Petko S., Wai-Man Liu, Peter K. Pham, and Elvis Jarnecic, 2004, Public information arrival
and volatility of intraday stock returns, Journal of Banking and Finance 28, 1441-1467.
Koninklijk Nederlands Metereologisch Instituut (KNMI)
Koudijs, Peter, 2014, Those who know most: Insider trading in 18th century Amsterdam, Journal
of Political Economy, forthcoming.

47

Koudijs, Peter and Hand-Joachim Voth, 2014, Leverage and beliefs: personal experience and risk
taking in margin lending, NBER 19957
Kyle, Albert S., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315-1335.
Levi, Wendell M., 1977, The Pigeon (Levi Publishing Co., Sumter).
Melvin, Michael, and Xixi Yin, 2000, Public information arrival, exchange rate volatility, and quote
frequency, Economic Journal 110, 644-661.
Mitchell, Mark L., and J. Harold Mulherin, 1994, The impact of public information on the stock
market, Journal of Finance 49, 923-950.
Nagel, Stefan, 2012, Evaporating liquidity, Review of Financial Studies 25, 2005-2039.
Neal, Larry, 1987, The integration and e¢ ciency of the London and Amsterdam stock markets in
the eighteenth century, Journal of Economic History 47, 97-115.
Neal, Larry, 1990, The Rise of Financial Capitalism (Cambridge University Press).
O’Hara, Maureen, 1997, Market Microstructure Theory (Blackwell, Cambridge)
Petram, Lodewijk O., 2011, The world’s …rst stock exchange: how the Amsterdam market for Dutch
East India Company shares became a modern securities market, 1602-1700, Dissertation.
Polak, N.J., 1924, Het nooteeringsvraagstuk aan de Amsterdamsche e¤ectenbeurs in de eertse helft
der negentiende eeuw, Economisch-Historisch Jaarboek 10, 198-218.
Quinn, Stephen, and William Roberds, 2007, The Bank of Amsterdam and the leap to central bank
money, American Economic Review 97, 262-265.
Rogers, James E. Th., 1902, Agriculture and Prices in England Vol. 7 (Clarendon Press, Oxford).
Roll, Richard, 1984a, Orange juice and weather, American Economic Review 75, 861-880.
Roll, Richard, 1984b, A simple implicit measure of the e¤ective bid–ask spread in an e¢ cient
market, Journal of Finance 39, 1127-1139.

48

Roll, Richard, 1988, R2, Journal of Finance 43, 541-566.
Schwert, G. William, 1981, The adjustment of stock prices to information about in‡ation, Journal
of Finance 36, 15-29.
Schwert, G. William, 1989, Why does stock market volatility change over time? Journal of Finance
44, 1115-1153.
Silber, William, 2005, What happened to liquidity when World War I shut the NYSE? Journal of
Financial Economics 78, 685-701.
Smith, M.F.J., 1919, Tijd-a¤ aires in e¤ ecten aan de Amsterdamsche beurs (Martinus Nijho¤, The
Hague).
Spooner, Frank, 1983, Risks at Sea. Amsterdam Insurance and Maritime Europe (Cambridge
University Press).
Stitt Dibden, W.G., 1965, Four Hundred Years of Anglo-Dutch Mail (Postal History Society, London).
Sutherland, Lucy, 1952, The East India Company in Eighteenth-Century Politics (Oxford University Press).
Sylla, Richard, Jack W. Wilson, and Robert E. Wright, 2006, Integration of transatlantic capital
markets, 1790-1845, Review of Finance 10, 613-644.
Temin, Peter, and Hans-Joachim Voth, 2004, Riding the South Sea Bubble, American Economic
Review 94, 1654-1668.
Ten Brink, E.A.B.J., 1969, De geschiedenis van het postvervoer (Fibula, Bussum).
Tetlock, Paul C., 2007, Giving content to investor sentiment: The role of media in the stock market,
Journal of Finance 62, 1139-1168.
Tetlock, Paul C., Mayta L. Saar-Tsechansky, and Sofus Macskassy, 2008, More than words: Quan-

49

tifying language to measure …rms’fundamentals, Journal of Finance 63, 1437-1467.
Tetlock, Paul C., 2010, Does Public Financial News Resolve Asymmetric Information?, Review of
Financial Studies 23, 3520-3557.
Van Dillen, J.G., 1931, E¤ectenkoersen aan de Amsterdamsche Beurs 1723-1794, Economisch Historisch Jaarboek 17, 1-34.
Van Nierop, L., 1931, Brieven van den Amsterdamschen makelaar Robert Hennebo aan den Haarlemschen zijdereder Simon Bevel over Engelschen Fondsen (1735-1736), Economisch Historisch Jaarboek 17, 35-67.
Werner, Ingrid M., and Allan William Kleidon, 1996, UK and US trading of British cross-listed
stocks: An intraday analysis of market integration, Review of Financial Studies 9, 619-664.
Wilson, Charles, 1941, Anglo-Dutch Commerce & Finance in the Eighteenth Century (Cambridge
University Press).
Wright, John F., 1999, British government borrowing in wartime, 1750-1815, Economic History
Review 52, 355-361.
Yermack, David, 2014, Tailspotting: Identifying and pro…ting from CEO vacation trips, Journal of
Financial Economics 113, 252-269.

50

Figures and Tables

Figure 1: Examples. The …gure presents examples of news transmission and price movements for EIC
stock. Vertical/ diagonal lines indicate the ‡ow of news between London and Amsterdam, solid lines
indicate the most recent news transmission, dashed lines indicate stale news, and squares indicate actual
prices –dashed lines intrapolate between price observations. Prices recorded on days with a boat arrival
re‡ect the information transmitted by that boat. Prices in both London and Amsterdam are spot prices.

51

Figure 2: Structure of return data. This …gure illustrates the structure of the return data. i; j 2
fLN D; AM Sg, with i 6= j, t indexes returns over two or three days (Monday-to-Wednesday, Wednesdayto-Friday, or Friday-to-Monday), s indexes periods in the other market between two subsequent boat
departures. pj;boat
re‡ects the arrival of a boat that transmits between-boat return pis 1 . If the period
t
between the arrival of two boats is long enough, there will be returns that take place in the absence of a
boat
boat arrival, pj;no
. There are at most seven no-boat returns per period; d 2 [1; 7] (see Table I). pis 1
t+d
is the contemporaneous return in the other market. pjt 1 is the preceding return in the own market, which
may or may not re‡ect the arrival of a boat.

52

Table I

Descriptive Statistics
Panel A presents descriptive statistics for Amsterdam security returns for the two sample periods (1771 to
1777 and 1783 to 1787) as well as the entire 1771 to 1787 period. Two- or three-day log percentage returns
are calculated as log(pt =pt 1 ). panel B provides descriptive statistics for Amsterdam security returns for
non-overlapping two-week periods, based on the data collected by Van Dillen (1931). The table includes a
Brown-Forsythe test statistic on the equality of di¤erent return variances. Panel C summarizes betweenboat periods for the two sample periods. Periods involving a no-boat return are long enough that there is
at least one price change in the absence of news. ***, **, * denote statistical signi…cance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% level, respectively.
Panel A: Return information 1771 to 1787 (two- or three-day returns)
EIC
SSC
BoE
3% ann.
4% ann.
September 1771 to December 1777 and September 1783 to March 1787 (the two sample periods)
Mean
0.056
0.031
0.032
0.042
0.033
Variance
0.528
0.264
0.188
0.330
0.237
N (total)
1162
1162
1162
1162
1162
N (news returns)
681
681
681
681
681
N (no-news returns)
481
481
481
481
481
September 1771 to March 1787 (the two sample periods and the intermediate war period)
Mean
0.051
0.034
0.040
0.035
Variance
0.618
0.443
0.292
0.523
N (total)
1900
1900
1900
1900
B-F statistic on equality return variance (12.4)*** (51.9)*** (52.8)*** (63.8)***

0.044
0.396
1767
(79.4)***

Panel B: Return information 1723 to 1794 (non-overlapping two-week returns)
September 1771 to December 1777 and September 1783 to March 1787 ( the two sample periods)
Mean
0.079
-0.003
0.019
N/A
Variance
5.173
1.920
2.448
N
133
133
133
November 1723 to December 1794 (the full period for which data are available, with gaps)
Mean
0.037
0.047
0.007
N/A
Variance
3.876
2.236
2.534
N
957
957
957
B-F statistic on equality return variance (4.24)**
(0.039)
(0.046)
Panel C: Between-boat periods (September 1771 to December 1777 and September 1783 to March 1787)
Number of between-boat periods
681
Those involving a no-boat return
383

Length between boat periods (days)
Number of price observations per period

min
1
0

5th perc.
2
1

53

median
3
2

95th perc.
7
3

max
21
8

Table II

Response to News, Amsterdam and London
This table presents estimates of the response of news returns in Amsterdam (AMS) and London (LND)
D;boat
S;boat
AM S
D
pLN
=
to returns observed in the other market: pAM
= 0 + 1 pLN
t
t
s 1 + 2 ps 2 + ut and
AM S;boat
LN D;boat
AM S
LN D
pt
and pt
re‡ect the arrival of a boat from the other
0 + 1 ps 1 + 2 ps 2 + vt .
market and are calculated as percentage log returns over two- or three-day periods. Returns observed
D
S
D
in the other market, pLN
pAM
pLN
s 1 and
s 1 , are de…ned as price changes between boat departures.
s 2
AM S
and ps 2 are past London and Amsterdam returns. Robust bootstrapped (1000 replications) standard
errors are reported in parentheses. Sample periods: September 1771 to December 1777 and September 17
to March 1787. ***, **, * denote statistical signi…cance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
AMS (response to LND)
LND (response to AMS)
AM S;boat
D;boat
pt
pLN
t
EIC
BoE
3% ann.
EIC
BoE
3% ann.
Observed LND return
0:380
0:425
0:483
LN D
(0:041)
(0:058)
(0:074)
( ps 1 )
Past AMS return
S
( pAM
s 2 )

0:021
(0:038)

0:004
(0:003)

0:040
(0:038)

Observed AMS return
S
( pAM
s 1 )

0:056
(0:033)

0:053
(0:038)

0:064
(0:033)

Past LND return
D
( pLN
s 2 )

0:026
(0:035)

0:068
(0:052)

0:056
(0:036)

0:006
(0:032)
636
0:00

0:019
(0:019)
629
0:00

0:016
(0:017)
756
0:01

Constant
N
Adj. R2

0:054
(0:030)
594
0:21

0:018
(0:015)
602
0:26

0:037
(0:021)
621
0:24

54

Table III

Hasbrouck Information Shares
This table reports Hasbrouck information shares based on VECM models that use prices in Amsterdam
and London three days a week (Monday, Wednesday, and Friday). The VECM models are estimated using
…ve lags; each lag represents two or three days. The reported information shares are for di¤erent Cholesky
orderings (either London or Amsterdam …rst) and the simple mean of the two. Panel A presents results
for the two sample periods that are characterized by peace. Panel B presents results for the intermediate
period of international con‡ict.
Panel A: September 1771 to December 1777 and September 1783 to March 1787
Ordering
LND …rst
AMS …rst
Midpoint
EIC
0.998
0.867
0.933
BoE
0.992
0.854
0.923
3% Ann.
0.999
0.973
0.986
Obs.
1498
Panel B: January 1778 to August 1783
0.799
0.552
0.730
0.424
0.864
0.647
834

EIC
BoE
3% Ann.
Obs.

0.676
0.577
0.756

Table IV

Correlation Between English and Dutch Security Returns in Amsterdam
This tables presents regressions of English security returns on Dutch security returns in Amsterdam.
Returns are for periods without news from London only. VOC: Dutch East India Company; WIC: Dutch
West Indies Company; and Bank money (agio): return on deposit money at the Bank of Amsterdam
relative to cash. Percentage log returns are calculated over two- or three-day periods. Sample periods:
September 1771 to December 1777 and September 1783 to March 1787. ** denotes statistical signi…cance
at the 5% level.
S;no boat
pAM
t+d
EIC
SSC
BoE
3% Ann.
4% Ann
AM S;no news
pt
VOC
0:078
0:061
0:078
0:033
0:061
(0:057)
(0:043)
(0:039)
(0:045)
(0:041)

Constant
N
R2

WIC

0:031
(0:024)

0:001
(0:021)

0:005
(0:018)

0:006
(0:023)

0:005
(0:024)

Bank money (agio)

0:290
(0:326)

0:171
(0:284)

0:021
(0:222)

0:137
(0:269)

0:071
(0:321)

0:013
(0:024)
426
0:01

0:015
(0:020)
426
0:01

0:003
(0:017)
426
0:02

0:002
(0:021)
426
0:00

0:014
(0:018)
426
0:01

55

Table V

The impact of Di¤erent News Categories on EIC Returns
This table presents regression results relating squared Amsterdam EIC news returns to the publication of
relevant capitalized words in articles with news from England published in the Leydse Courant between
September 1771 and December 1777. EIC : East India Company; Finance: …nancial terminology (excludes
“stocks”); India: reference to regions, towns, and/or persons in the British East Indies; Cape: references
to the Cape (of Good Hope Colony); Background: words signalling background information (Section V.B
of the Internet Appendix provides further details). News related to the EIC is captured by two dummy
variables: EIC (1) takes a value of one if the EIC is mentioned once in an article. EIC (>1) takes a value of
one if the EIC is mentioned at least twice. The other news variables are also included as dummies, where a
dummy takes a value of one if a speci…c category is referenced at least once. The “Obs.”column indicates
for how many observations a certain (combination of) dummy(ies) is turned on. Robust bootstrapped (1000
replications) standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical signi…cance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
S;boat 2
( pAM
)
t
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Obs.
EIC (1)
-0.023
0.029
-0.022
0.077
0.015
0.095
101
(0.183)
(0.186)
(0.202)
(0.184)
(0.225)
(0.241)
EIC (>1)
1.487
1.063
1.462
1.040
1.701
1.434
28
(0.843)*
(0.802)
(0.961)
(0.838)
(0.927)*
(1.151)
Finance
1.133
0.152
1.128
0.115
1.088
0.122
15
(0.659)*
(0.501)
(0.724)
(0.398)
(0.669)
(0.482)
India
-0.243
-0.349
-0.292
-0.485
-0.277
-0.334
32
(0.260)
(0.238)
(0.145)** (0.215)**
(0.274)
(0.142)**
Cape
0.916
0.162
0.907
-0.449
0.878
-0.457
11
(0.915)
(0.591)
(0.944)
(0.131)***
(0.886)
(0.119)***
Background
-0.388
-0.348
-0.386
-0.346
-0.297
-0.257
98
(0.130)*** (0.120)*** (0.126)*** (0.123)*** (0.145)**
(0.142)*
EIC (1)*
0.151
0.156
5
Finance
(0.922)
(0.910)
EIC (>1)*
5.355
-1.176
3
Finance
(3.537)
(1.234)
EIC (1)*India
0.038
-0.029
18
(0.270)
(0.276)
EIC (>1)*India
0.190
-1.141
5
(1.717)
(1.439)
EIC (1)*Cape
-0.322
-0.311
3
(0.212)
(0.251)
EIC (>1)*Cape
9.181
10.480
2
(1.720)***
(1.494)***
EIC (1)*
-0.166
-0.250
16
Background
(0.266)
(0.252)
EIC (>1)*
-1.806
-1.612
3
Background
(0.941)*
(1.164)
Constant
0.665
0.689
0.667
0.702
0.649
0.681
(0.102)*** (0.099)*** (0.103)*** (0.100)*** (0.107)*** (0.102)***
Obs.
512
512
512
512
512
512
2
Adj. R
0.051
0.077
0.047
0.111
0.051
0.106
2
Adj. R using
0.045
0.063
0.041
0.083
0.046
0.077
AM S;boat
j pt
j
56

Table VI

Predictive Regressions - EIC
This table presents results on whether, and over what horizons, returns revert. Panel A examines reversals
S
S
AM S
+ ut , where pAM
within the Amsterdam market: pAM
0 + 1 pt
t+T is the Amsterdam return
t+T =
AM S
is the usual Amsterdam twofrom t to T , and T lies between two or three days and four weeks. pt
AM S
D
or three-day return. Panel B focuses on reversals across markets: pt+T = 0 + 1 pLN
s 1 + vt for Bt = 1,
S
D
where pAM
pLN
s 1 is the London
t+T is de…ned as before, Bt = 1 indicates that a boat arrived in t, and
AM S
return observed during that period. See Figure 2 for more details. Note that pt+T does not capture
the Amsterdam response to the news from London. Panel C examines return reversals within the London
D
D
D
LN D
is the two- or three-day return in London and pLN
+ wt where pLN
market: pLN
t
t+T
t+T = 0 + 1 pt
is the return in London between t and T . Robust bootstrapped (1000 replications) standard errors are
presented in parentheses. ***, **, and * denote statistical signi…cance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
S
Panel A: Future Amsterdam EIC Returns ( pAM
t+T )
2/3 days 4/5 days
1 week
2 weeks
3 weeks
4 weeks
Current Amsterdam EIC
0.009
0.006
0.005
0.035
0.039
0.088
AM S
returns ( pt
)
(0.034)
(0.052)
(0.056)
(0.072)
(0.092)
(0.0103)
Constant
0.032
0.063
0.092
0.172
0.253
0.339
(0.018)* (0.026)* (0.032)*** (0.046)*** (0.058)*** (0.068)***
N
1540
1535
1530
1515
1500
1485
Adj. R2
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

London news EIC
D
returns ( pLN
s 1 )
Constant
N
Adj. R2

Current London EIC
D
returns ( pLN
)
t
Constant
N
Adj. R2

S
Panel B: Future Amsterdam EIC Returns ( pAM
t+T )
0.042
0.032
0.084
0.055
0.072
0.176
(0.043)
(0.060)
(0.060)
(0.077)
(0.103)
(0.115)
-0.015
0.003
0.057
0.124
0.153
0.209
(0.028)
(0.039)
(0.048)
(0.067)*
(0.087)*
(0.102)**
737
736
735
731
724
722
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.020
(0.046)
0.027
(0.023)
1167
0.00

D
Panel C: Future London EIC Returns ( pLN
t+T )
-0.011
0.025
0.042
0.063
0.146
(0.062)
(0.081)
(0.082)
(0.099)
(0.104)
0.042
0.053
0.106
0.157
0.199
(0.032)
(0.039)
(0.055)*
(0.067)** (0.077)***
1302
1322
1335
1336
1336
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

57

Table VII

Predictive Regressions - BoE
See Table VI for details.

S
Panel (1): Future Amsterdam BoE Returns ( pAM
t+T )
2/3 days
4/5 days
1 week
2 weeks
3 weeks
4 weeks
Current Amsterdam BoE
-0.049
-0.086
-0.049
0.009
0.032
0.154
S
returns ( pAM
)
(0.036)
(0.044)**
(0.054)
(0.077)
(0.096)
(0.118)
t
Constant
0.027
0.056
0.079
0.155
0.233
0.315
(0.012)** (0.016)*** (0.020)*** (0.028)*** (0.036)*** (0.043)***
N
1540
1535
1530
1515
1500
1485
2
Adj. R
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

London news BoE
D
returns ( pLN
s 1 )
Constant
N
Adj. R2

Current London BoE
D
returns ( pLN
)
t
Constant
N
Adj. R2

S
Panel (2): Future Amsterdam BoE Returns ( pAM
t+T )
0.018
0.099
0.091
0.206
0.211
0.355
(0.057)
(0.078)
(0.081)
(0.103)**
(0.130)
(0.157)**
0.029
0.059
0.072
0.145
0.254
0.316
(0.017)* (0.023)*** (0.028)*** (0.039)*** (0.051)*** (0.059)***
707
707
705
699
692
689
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
D
Panel (3): Future London BoE Returns ( pLN
t+T )
-0.049
-0.106
-0.038
0.049
0.086
0.207
(0.045)
(0.054)**
(0.069)
(0.087)
(0.106)
(0.118)
0.029
0.054
0.081
0.165
0.235
0.311
(0.014)** (0.018)*** (0.021)*** (0.030)*** (0.038)*** (0.045)***
1156
1319
1339
1344
1344
1344
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

58

Table VIII

Predictive Regressions - 3 % annuities
See Table VI for details.

Current Amsterdam 3%
S
Ann. returns ( pAM
)
t
Constant
N
Adj. R2

D
returns ( pLN
s 1 )
Constant

N
Adj. R2

Current London 3% Ann.
D
returns ( pLN
)
t
Constant
N
Adj. R2

S
Panel (1): Future Amsterdam 3% Ann. returns ( pAM
t+T )
2/3 days
4/5 days
1 week
2 weeks
3 weeks
4 weeks
-0.125
-0.189
-0.197
-0.164
-0.152
0.020
(0.035)*** (0.049)*** (0.062)*** (0.080)*
(0.100)
(0.121)
0.033
0.064
0.093
0.169
0.251
0.332
(0.015)** (0.020)*** (0.023)*** (0.032)*** (0.039)*** (0.046)***
1540
1535
1530
1515
1500
1485
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.00
S
Panel (2): Future Amsterdam 3% Ann. returns ( pAM
t+T )
(0.048)
(0.056)*
(0.078)
(0.093)**
(0.117)* (0.135)***
0.006
0.040
0.067
0.139
0.245
0.311
(0.019)
(0.025)
(0.029)** (0.040)*** (0.050)*** (0.058)***
865
864
860
852
842
838
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.03
D
Panel (3): Future London 3% Ann. returns ( pLN
t+T )
-0.031
-0.083
-0.059
0.035
0.064
0.191
(0.039)
(0.052)
(0.068)
(0.099)
(0.113)
(0.125)
0.026
0.056
0.075
0.151
0.233
0.315
(0.013)** (0.018)*** (0.022)*** (0.031)*** (0.039)*** (0.046)***
1516
1537
1539
1539
1539
1539
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

59

Table IX

Benchmark Results
This tables presents descriptive statistics for Amsterdam percentage log returns over two- or three-day
periods (denoted t) with or without a boat arrival (Bt = 1 or Bt = 0). Sample periods: September 1771
to December 1777 and September 1783 to March 1787. The equality of the variance of boat and no-boat
returns is tested using a Brown-Forsythe (B-F) test (H0 : ratio = 1). *** Indicates statistical signi…cance
at the 1% level.
S
pAM
t
EIC
SSC
BoE
3% ann.
4% ann.
Mean
Boat (Bt = 1)
0:084
0:037
0:043
0:062
0:041
No-boat (Bt = 0)
0:018
0:023
0:017
0:012
0:022
(t-statistic)
(1:526)
(0:456)
(1:032)
(1:350)
(0:635)
Variance

Boat (Bt = 1)
No-boat (Bt = 0)
(B-F statistic)

0:703
0:279
(42:3)

Skewness

Boat (Bt = 1)
No-boat (Bt = 0)

0:189
0:030

Kurtosis

Boat (Bt = 1)
No-boat (Bt = 0)

% zero

Obs.

S;no
var( pAM
t+d

var(

0:229
0:131
(24:8)

0:425
0:194
(22:9)

0:030
0:649

0:169
0:523

0:441
0:135

0:505
1:371

7:52
8:68

8:52
7:88

7:99
10:95

11:38
8:22

10:40
10:87

Boat (Bt = 1)
No-boat (Bt = 0)

13:5
27:0

38:0
54:7

22:8
38:3

29:5
41:0

50:6
65:3

Boat (Bt = 1)
No-boat (Bt = 0)

681
481

681
481

681
481

681
481

680
481

0:397

0:550

0:575

0:457

0:499

boat

S;boat
pAM
t

)

)

0:325
0:179
(20:8)

60

0:299
0:150
(30:4)

Table X

Summary of Potential Explanations for Price Movements in Amsterdam
This table summarizes the potential factors in‡uencing stock prices in Amsterdam during periods with and
without boat arrivals, making a distinction between factors originating in London or Amsterdam. “Y/N”:
explanation relevant (yes/no) according to empirical evidence. The table reports that there is no evidence
that liquidity or sentiment shocks from London a¤ected prices in Amsterdam. This statement is based on
the assumption that potential liquidity and sentiments shocks should, noticeably, revert at some time in
the future.
Explanation:
Mechanism:
Boat returns
No-boat returns
Public news
from London
Announcements
Y
N
from Amsterdam
“”
N
N
Private information from London
Trading activity
Y
Y
from Amsterdam
“”
N
N
Liquidity shocks
from London
“”
N
N
from Amsterdam
“”
Y (except EIC) Y (except EIC?)
Sentiment shocks
from London
“”
N
N
from Amsterdam
“”
N
N (except EIC?)

Table XI

Momentum
This table presents estimates for
S
pAM
=
t

0

+

1

S;boat
pAM
+
t 1

2

D
pLN
s 2 + "t for Bt

1

= 1,

S
where Bt 1 = 1 indicates that a boat arrived in period t 1, pAM
is the current Amsterdam return, which
t
S;boat
can take place in the presence or absence of a boat, pAM
is
the previous period’s Amsterdam boat
t 1
LN D
return, and ps 2 is the London news return observed in the previous period. 1 measures the reversal
of Amsterdam returns, and 2 measures the continuation of London news returns. Robust bootstrapped
(1000 replications) standard errors are reported in parentheses. * indicates statistical signi…cance at the
10% level.
S
Current Amsterdam return: pAM
t
EIC
BoE
3% ann.
Amsterdam news return, previous period
0.059
-0.055
-0.081
AM S;news
(Nt 1 = 1): pt 1
(0.053)
(0.064)
(0.057)

London news return, observed in previous
D
period (Nt 1 = 1): pLN
s 2

-0.003
(0.042)

-0.038
(0.064)

-0.007
(0.065)

Constant

0.009
(0.029)
623
0.00

0.032
(0.017)*
634
0.01

0.031
(0.020)
655
0.01

N
Adj. R2

61

Table XII

Private Information: News and No-News Returns
This table presents estimates of the impact of private information on security returns in Amsterdam on
S;boat
D
D
+ 2 pLN
days with and without a boat arrival: pAM
= 0 + 1 pLN
t
s 1 + ut for Bt = 1 and
s
S;noboat
D
D
pAM
+ vt for Bt = 0. Returns are de…ned in Figure 2. London returns pLN
= 0 + 1 pLN
s
s
t+d
are de…ned as the price change after the departure of a boat (up to the departure of the next boat) and
capture contemporaneous (but as-of-yet) unreported returns. For comparison, the table reports the impact
D
of pLN
s 1 , the return in London before the departure of a boat, capturing the impact of the arrival of
public news. Robust bootstrapped (1000 replications) standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***
and ** denote statistical signi…cance at the 1% and 5% level, respectively.
Amsterdam boat returns
Amsterdam no-boat returns
AM S;boat
S;no boat
( pt
)
( pAM
)
t+d
EIC
BoE
3% ann.
EIC
BoE
3% ann.
London post-departure
0.233
0.138
0.147
0.138
0.168
0.132
D
returns ( pLN
)
(0.042)***
(0.050)***
(0.067)**
(0.034)***
(0.043)***
(0.052)***
s
London pre-departure
D
returns ( pLN
s 1 )
Constant
N
Adj. R2

0.373
0.405
0.503
(0.042)*** (0.054)*** (0.070)***
0.045
(0.028)
622
0.286

0.025
(0.017)
640
0.250

0.033
(0.022)
669
0.261

62

0.006
-0.024
467
0.053

0.003
-0.016
465
0.066

0.006
0.020
479
0.033

Table XIII

Trading Costs
This tables presents estimates of trading costs. Panel A refers to order handling consts. The “fees”indicate
o¢ cial broker’s fees. Fees were 0.125% of a security’s nominal or par value. To arrive at the fees presented
here, the “nominal” fee is multiplied bypthe average security price. Estimates of Roll’s (1984b) "raw"
cov( pt ; pt 1 ). For the EIC, the raw Roll measure cannot be
trading cost measure are given by c =
calculated since the …rst-order autocovariance is positive. The panel therefore also presents estimates using
Hasbrouck’s (2009) Bayesian estimation. The implied variance is given by var( pt ) = 2c2 . Panel (B) refers
to inventory costs and estimates are based on the simple model presented in the main text: pt = ft +
qt , where qt = f1; 1g with probability f t ; 1
pt 1 ); 1] ; 0g.
t g, where t = min fmax [1=2 + (ft 1
Estimates of and are based on minimizing the mean squared error of the empirical and model-implied
autocovariances (up to 12 lags; four weeks). Section V.F in the Internet Appendix provides a graphical
presentation of the …t of the data and the parameters that minimize the mean squared error. The implied
variance is calculated from the simulated return series.
EIC
SSC
BoE
3% ann.
4% ann.
Panel A: Order Handling Costs
Fees (%)
0.078
0.142
0.090
0.159
0.142
Roll measure (raw) (%)
0.196
0.122
0.225
0.192
Implied variance
0
0.066
0.048
0.100
0.082
Roll measure (Hasbrouck) (%)
0.047
0.101
0.054
0.111
0.099
Implied variance
0.004
0.020
0.006
0.025
0.020

Implied variance

Panel B: Inventory Costs
0
0.263
0.222
0
3.111
1.899
0
0.069
0.049

63

0.323
2.869
0.105

0.283
1.455
0.080

Table XIV

Summary Results
This table presents results of a simple variance decomposition. The impact of public and private information
D
D
and pLN
is identi…ed through the covariances with London pre- and post-departure returns, pLN
s 1 :
s
var
var

S;news
pAM
= cov
t
S;no
pAM
t+d

news

= cov

S;news
D
+ cov
pAM
; pLN
t
s 1
AM S;no
pt+d

news

D
; pLN
+
s

S;news
D
+
pAM
; pLN
t
s

2
wt ;

and

2
wt+d

(see Section IV.D for details). The impact of trading costs is identi…ed through simulations of a simple
inventory cost model. See Section IV.E and Table XIII for details.
EIC
BoE
3% ann.
S
AM S
AM S
) % total
) % total var( pAM
) % total var( pt
var( pt
t
Boat returns
0.703
0.229
0.425
Attributed to:
Public news
0.380
54.0%
0.129
56.4%
0.202
47.5%
Private information
0.277
39.3%
0.045
19.5%
0.057
13.4%
Trading costs
0
0%
0.049
21.6%
0.105
24.6%
Residual
0.047
6.6%
0.006
2.5%
0.061
14.4%
N
681
681
681
No-boat returns
Attributed to:
Private information
Trading costs
Residual
N
All returns
Attributed to:
Public news
Private information
Trading costs
Residual
N

0.279
0.110
0
0.169
481

0.131
39.4%
0%
60.6%

0.528
0.223
0.208
0
0.097
1162

0.051
0.049
0.030
481

0.194
39.3%
37.7%
23.0%

0.188
42.2%
39.4%
0%
18.5%

0.076
0.047
0.049
0.016
1162

64

0.051
0.105
0.038
481

26.3%
53.9%
19.8%

0.330
40.2%
25.3%
26.1%
8.5%

0.114
0.057
0.105
0.047
1162

35.9%
16.5%
31.8%
15.8%

Table XV

Amsterdam Return Reversals and The Arrival of Boats
This table presents additional details on reversal patterns in security returns. It presents coe¢ cients of
S
S
= 0 + 1 pAM
the regression pAM
t 1 + ut for di¤erent scenarios, indicated by Bt 1 ; Bt 2 f0; 1g, which
t
indicate whether periods t and t 1 featured the arrival of a boat. Reported reversal coe¢ cients are
based on equations (9) and (10) and sum up the di¤erent interaction e¤ects. Di¤erences in coe¢ cients are
indicated with . ***, **, and * indicate whether di¤erences are statistically di¤erent at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively. The statistical tests are based on robust bootstrapped (1000 replications) standard
errors that come from estimating (9) and (10).
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
AM S
Current return, pt
EIC
All
Bt = 1
Bt = 0
Previous return, Bt 1 = 1
0.058
0.193
-0.023
-0.216**
AM S
Bt 1 = 0
-0.117
-0.160
0.067
0.227**
pt 1
-0.174**
-0.353***
0.090
BoE
Previous return, Bt
S
Bt
pAM
t 1

3% annuities
Previous return, Bt
S
pAM
Bt
t 1

1
1

1
1

=1
=0

-0.074
-0.051
0.023

-0.088
-0.068
0.020

-0.063
0.070
0.133

0.025
0.139

=1
=0

-0.073
-0.277
-0.204**

-0.042
-0.283
-0.241**

-0.095
-0.181
-0.087

-0.053
0.101

65

Notes
1

Ederington and Lee (1993), Fleming and Remolona (1999), Bollerslev, Cai and Song (2000), and Balduzzi, Elton and

Green (2001) focus on the link between news and interest rates, and DeGennaro and Schrieves (1997), Andersen and Bollerslev
(1998), Melvin and Yin (2000), Evans and Lyons (2008), and Hashimoto and Ito (2010) focus on the link between news and
exchange rates.
2

This paper is also related to the history of stock market integration. See Garbade and Silber (1978), Hoag (2006), and

Sylla et al. (2006).
3

The Internet Appendix is available in the online version of the article on the Journal of Finance website.

4

Wilson (1941, Appendices B to D) provides the identities of some of these investors. Most of these individuals also owned

stock in the most important Dutch stock of the period, namely, the Dutch East India Company (Dutch National Archives
1.04.02: 7075-7078).
5

Anecdotal evidence suggests that trade continued outside these o¢ cial hours in co¤ee shops and in front of the Jewish

synagogue (Van Nierop (1931)).
6

See for example Hope & Co., Amsterdam City Archives 735: 1510.

7

For more details see Rotterdam City Archives, OSA 2599.

8

The famous story that he received this information through a carrier pigeon, a full day before anyone else, is a myth

(Ferguson (1998), p. 15).
9

See Wilson (1941, pp. 74-75), Van Nierop (1931), and Hope & Co, City Archives Amsterdam 735: 78, 79, 115, and 1510.

10

The SSC was originally founded to transport slaves from Africa to the Spanish American colonies. These activities never

materialized and, instead, the company functioned predominantly as an investment vehicle in British government debt (Neal
(1990)).
11

Amsterdamsche Courant, February 14, 1778.

12

There were two minor …nancial crises in the period. In June 1772 the default of London speculator Alexander Fordyce

led to some turbulence in …nancial markets in London and Amsterdam. Furthermore, after Christmas 1772 a consortium
of Dutch bankers who had been bulling the market for English stocks defaulted. This led to a short-lived …nancial crisis in
Amsterdam (Wilson (1941)). Omitting these two episodes does not change the results in an important way.
13

Neal (1990) uses data reported by Castaing’s Course of the Exchange. Rogers (1902) uses stock prices reported by various

British newspapers.
14

The use of log rather than simple returns is motivated by the fact that log returns have less kurtosis, which facilitates

66

the statistical analysis. Results using simple returns are virtually the same.
Note that the three-day period includes the weekend. During the 18th century, trading continued during the weekend.
However, trade on Sunday was limited due to the absence of Christian traders. Likewise, Jewish traders did not participate
on Saturdays (Spooner (1983), p. 21). Section V.A of the Internet Appendix indicates that there is no evidence for more or
less volatility over the weekend. I therefore did not scale the three-day weekend return down.
15

Note that this period excludes the South Sea bubble of 1720.

16

See also the London Chronicle, Nov. 18, 1783.

17

To illustrate, an English freighter ship that tried to reach the Dutch shore on January 6 was blown all the way back to

Eastbourne on the English Channel, over a distance of 182 miles (Rotterdamsche Courant, February 4, 1776).
18

I thank Will Goetzmann for this suggestion.

19

This analysis follows Cutler, Poterba, and Summers (1989), who …nd that many of the largest 50 daily price changes

between 1946 and 1988 are di¢ cult to attribute to speci…c news events. In a similar vein, Fair (2002) identi…es 220 large
intradaily price changes between 1982 and 1999, of which only 69 can be attributed to the arival of relevant new information.
20

Dropping all observations for which the newspaper mentions “stocks” does not change the results.

21

I discuss the impact of informed in Section IV.D.

22

This is based on two sources. The …rst contains trading records of Abraham Cohen de Lara, a Portuguese-Jewish

merchant based in Amsterdam (City Archives Amsterdam 334: 722-723). The second contains information on the liquidation
of securities pledged as collateral in margin loans (City Archives Amsterdam 5075: 10603-10611).
23

The Amsterdam EIC return in response to Prime Minister Fox’s speech on November 28, 1783 is omitted in all density

plots, regression estimates, and variance calculations. The corresponding return of -14% is 18 standard deviations from the
mean of the EIC return distribution. If included, this datapoint would largely drive the variance results of the EIC, in which
case these results would not be representative of the full sample.
24

Because the return series are nonnormal (see the kurtosis measures in Table IX), a standard F-test on the equality of

variances is not suitable. I follow Boos and Brownie (2004) and use a nonparametric test based on mean absolute deviation
from the median. In particular, I use a Brown-Forsythe (B-F) test.
25

See Table IA.I (de…nition A) in Section III.A of the Internet Appendix for details.

26

For modern evidence on the delayed response to public news see Huberman and Regev (2001), Hong and Stein (2007),

and DellaVigna and Pollet (2009).
27

There is one problem with the estimation:

D
pLN
s 2 is not a perfect measure of news because returns in London presumably

re‡ect local liquidity shocks as well. This means that equation (1) su¤ers from attenuation bias. Speci…cally,

67

2

is biased

downwards. Nevertheless, as long as
28

D
pLN
s 2 conveys relevant information, the coe¢ cient should still be positive.

This setting can accomodate private information that is longer lived (as long as innovations are iid). The corresponding

identi…cation strategy is slightly more complicated and relies on the covariance of Amsterdam returns with returns in London
that take place further into the future. Empirically, these are small and add little to the simple analysis presented here.
29

This is the case in the canonical Kyle (1985) and Glosten and Milgrom (1985) models. In Section VI of the Internet

Appendix, I show that the results go through for the more general case in which cov(

t+d 1 ; t+d )

6= 0 for d 2 [1; 7].

30

See Biais and Green (2007) for another example where historical trading costs are lower than modern ones.

31

It is possible that the market’s response to information itself may have changed. More advanced information technology

could facilitate more e¢ cient information processing. It is not clear that this is the case, however. Bai, Philippon and Savov
(2013) show that even after decades of rapid technological progress, markets have not become more informative. In addition,
the results of this paper indicate that the Amsterdam market was not slow to respond to information.

0

