                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          FIRE-SALE FDI OR BUSINESS AS USUAL?

                                            Ron Alquist
                                          Rahul Mukherjee
                                            Linda Tesar

                                        Working Paper 18837
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18837


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




We thank Jean-Louis Arcand, Nicolas Berman, Satya P. Das, Iftekhar Hasan, Beata Javorcik, Andrei
Levchenko, Ugo Panizza, Jing Zhang, and seminar participants at the University of Michigan Finance
Day, the University of Vienna, the Bank of Portugal, HEC Lausanne, IHEID, the 2010 MEA Meetings,
and the Indian Statistical Institute for comments. We are grateful to our discussant Uday Rajan for
his thoughtful suggestions. Maggie Jim, Stela Rubinova, Argyn Toktamyssov, and Jingjing Xia provided
excellent research assistance. Linda Tesar gratefully acknowledges the support of the Ile-de-France
DIMeco program. Linda Tesar acknowledges support from the Ile-de-France DIMeco program, which
supported her research and teaching while as a visitor at the Paris School of Economics during the
academic year 2011-12. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Bank of Canada, or the Bank of
Canada's Governing Council.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Ron Alquist, Rahul Mukherjee, and Linda Tesar. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Fire-sale FDI or Business as Usual?
Ron Alquist, Rahul Mukherjee, and Linda Tesar
NBER Working Paper No. 18837
February 2013
JEL No. F2,F41

                                               ABSTRACT

Using a new data set, we examine the characteristics and dynamics of cross-border mergers and acquisitions
during emerging-market financial crises, that is, so-called “fire-sale FDI”. Our findings shed fresh
light on whether the transactions undertaken during crisis periods differ in fundamental ways from
those undertaken during more tranquil periods. The increase in foreign acquisitions during crises is
mainly driven by non-financial acquirers targeting firms in the same industry rather than foreign financial
firms. This increase in acquisition activity in a given industry is unrelated to the industry’s dependence
on external finance. There is also no evidence of an increase in the size of stakes bought during crises.
In terms of the effect of crises on emerging-market mergers and acquisitions, we find little evidence
that foreign acquisitions are resold, or “flipped”, more frequently than domestic acquisitions. Moreover,
flipping rates are uncorrelated with the industry’s dependence on external finance. Finally, the probability
of being flipped to a domestic buyer does not differ across crisis and non-crisis periods. All of these
results are robust to alternative empirical specifications, different definitions of crises, and the inclusion
of macroeconomic controls. Contrary to conventional wisdom, fire-sale FDI and asset flipping by
foreign firms appear to have been “business as usual”.


Ron Alquist                                           Linda Tesar
Bank of Canada                                        Department of Economics
234 Wellington Street                                 University of Michigan
Ottawa, ON K1A 0G9                                    Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
Canada                                                and NBER
ralquist@bank-banque-canada.ca                        ltesar@umich.edu

Rahul Mukherjee
Department of Economics , IHEID
Pavillon Rigot, Avenue de la Paix 11A
1202 Genève, Switzerland
rahul.mukherjee@graduateinstitute.ch
1    Introduction
“Fire-sale FDI” was a term first coined by Krugman (2000) to describe the surge in foreign acqui-
sitions of Asian firms during the 1997-98 financial crisis, even as portfolio investors sold o↵ their
holdings of Asian assets. Krugman cites anecdotal evidence from the business press that assets in
countries a↵ected by the crisis were sold to foreign investors at discounted prices due to the tight-
ening of credit conditions, the sudden depreciation of the nominal exchange rate, and the rapid
deterioration in macroeconomic conditions. The general phenomenon of fire sales of both real and
financial assets has been extensively studied in the finance literature (see Pulvino, 1998; Campbell
et al., 2011; Shleifer and Vishny, 1992, 1997). In addition, several important policy questions such
as the transfer of corporate control to foreign residents, the possibility of over-investment by foreign
firms, and the relative desirability of foreign direct investment compared with other types of inter-
national capital flows (e.g., Loungani and Razin, 2001; Mody and Negishi, 2001) hinge crucially on
the existence of fire-sale foreign direct investment during emerging market crises.
    Establishing definitive evidence of fire sales in emerging markets, however, has proven chal-
lenging. One issue is that a test for a fire sale of assets requires knowing how asset prices and
cross-border transactions would have evolved in the absence of the crisis. It is difficult to predict
equilibrium asset prices even under normal conditions, let alone during periods of financial stress.
In addition, during the past 20 years the surge in foreign investment in emerging markets coincided
with a wave of cross-border acquisitions and a surge in domestic mergers in emerging markets.
While the expansion of transactions in Asia seems impressive relative to the pre-crisis level of
acquisitions in emerging markets, it is less dramatic when viewed against the larger backdrop of
global merger and acquisition activity. Finally, the crisis coincided with, and in some cases was
the precipitating factor for, the deregulation of the market for corporate control in many emerg-
ing markets. By focusing on data leading up to and during the crisis, it is all but impossible to
disentangle the e↵ect of the crisis from the e↵ect of reducing barriers to foreign ownership.
    To overcome these challenges, this paper studies a large panel of corporate transactions in
emerging markets over a long period of time. The database contains approximately 32,000 foreign
and domestic acquisitions spanning the period between 1990 and 2007 in sixteen emerging mar-
kets. The variety of transactions in the database permits us to compare crisis-time cross-border
transactions with domestic transactions in emerging markets and with a large sample of non-crisis
transactions. The identification of crisis e↵ects is facilitated by the fact that crises occur at dif-
ferent times and in some countries but not in others. Furthermore, because the sample includes
the period after the Latin American and Asian financial crises in the mid- and late-1990s, we can
conduct direct comparisons between corporate transactions that occurred during the crisis period
with those that occurred during less volatile periods and during periods when there were fewer such
transactions.
    We examine six distinct implications of fire sales during crisis episodes in this paper. The first


                                                   2
three results are related to the identity and composition of acquirer-target matches during financial
crises. First, we ask whether the national and sectoral identities of acquirer-target matches di↵er
during crises. Our results indicate that the frequency of foreign acquisitions increases during
banking and currency crises, confirming the findings of Aguiar and Gopinath (2005) among others.
This tendency is more pronounced for foreign non-financial acquirers targeting firms in the same
SIC code. It runs counter to the view that the increase in foreign acquisitions is primarily driven by
foreign financial firms acquiring either other financial firms or non-financial firms. Second, to shed
light on the composition of crisis-time FDI we examine whether sectors that are more dependent on
external finance experience a greater incidence of foreign acquisitions during banking and currency
crises. The evidence indicates that even though external finance dependent sectors are more likely
to be the target of FDI, this characteristic is uncorrelated with the incidence of a banking and
currency crisis in the target country. Third, we test whether foreign firms acquire larger stakes in
the target firm during crises, which could be the case if the cost of acquiring shares is relatively low
during crises or if asymmetric information and agency problems can be circumvented by gaining
control. Contrary to the results reported in Acharya et al. (2011), there is no evidence of an increase
in the frequency of a controlling stake being acquired or in the size of the controlling stake acquired
during crises.
   The second set of results is related to the duration of crisis-time matches and is the key contribu-
tion of the paper. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to examine the post-acquisition
dynamics of firm ownership in emerging markets using a large panel of countries spanning a long
period of time. We first conduct a duration analysis on the length of acquirer-target relationships
initiated during and outside of crisis periods. Acquisitions made during a fire sale may be driven
by short-run, speculative motives rather than according to long-term investment plans (Acharya
et al., 2011). If that were the case, the cohort of crisis-time acquisitions would experience increased
rates of divestiture when asset markets recovered following the crises. The observable implications
of this behavior are a shorter duration of the acquirer-target relationship and a higher frequency of
divestiture for acquisitions made during crisis episodes. We provide a number of results regarding
the “turnover rate” of such acquisitions, which is defined as the probability of a firm being a target
after being acquired once. The fourth main result of the paper is that there is little evidence that
crisis-time foreign acquisitions have a higher turnover rate. In other words, foreign acquisitions
during crises are not flipped at faster rates than crisis-time domestic acquisitions.
   We also examine whether the duration of crisis-time acquisitions is influenced by dependence
on external finance. Some sectors of the economy may be more prone to acquisitions driven by
opportunistic or speculative motives during crises. The fifth result is that the degree of external
finance dependence bears no significant relationship with the turnover rate of acquisitions in those
industries, either in or out of crises. Next, in the cases where targets are flipped, the data provide
some insight into the types of firms that flip assets in emerging markets and the types of firms that



                                                   3
are subsequent buyers of the flipped target. About a third of “flippers” are foreign, which is about
the same proportion of foreign firms in the overall sample. In cases where foreign acquisitions are
flipped, the probability of being flipped to a domestic buyer is no greater if the foreign acquisition
was originally undertaken during a banking crisis. Thus, the sixth result is that the regression
evidence is inconsistent with the flipping of crisis-time asset purchases to domestic firms by foreign
acquirers.
   Although several papers have examined acquisitions and subsequent divestitures in the US
(Ravenscraft and Scherer, 1991; Kaplan and Weisbach, 1992; Bergh, 1997), few have focused on the
prevalence of this phenomenon in emerging markets. One exception is Holan and Toulan (2006),
who look at divestitures by foreign companies in Argentina between 1990 and 2002. More recently,
Rossi and Volpin (2004) and Erel et al. (2012) study the cross-country determinants of acquisitions
for a cross-section of di↵erent countries. In contrast to the last two papers, the primary focus of
this study is the divestiture process in emerging markets. Although we control for macroeconomic
variables in our regressions and can make statements about the aggregate determinants of acquisi-
tions and divestitures, we focus on the di↵erences between crisis-time and normal-time acquisition
and divestiture patterns.
   Our paper is related to the literature on country-level fire sales, as exemplified by Aguiar and
Gopinath (2005). They explicitly test for a relationship between firm-level liquidity and foreign
acquisitions in Asia. They find that the number of foreign acquisitions increased by 91% in the
period leading up to and after the liquidity crisis in Asia in 1996-98, whereas domestic transactions
declined by 27%. This conclusion mirrors our findings of an increase in the probability of foreign
acquisitions. They also find that during the Asian crisis the probability of a firm being acquired
is a decreasing function of the firm’s liquidity position, while the o↵er price to book value ratio
turns out to be an increasing function of firm liquidity. These two liquidity e↵ects were prominent
only in 1998, suggesting that a shortage of aggregate liquidity was a key determinant of these sales.
The findings of Aguiar and Gopinath (2005) motivate us to examine the e↵ect of external finance
dependence as a factor driving crisis-time acquisitions.
   An alternative approach to studying fire sales is to analyze returns to acquisitions during crises.
An implication of the fire-sale hypothesis is that there should be large abnormal returns for the
acquiring firm during periods when the target firm experiences distress. Using an event study
methodology, Chari et al. (2010) find that developed-market firms experienced significant positive
abnormal returns at the time of a controlling acquisition of an emerging market firm. However,
abnormal returns are also present in long periods of data and do not depend on crisis conditions in
the target country. Furthermore, these returns can be explained by the acquisition of control over
intangible assets in economic environments where corporate governance is weak. The acquisition of
foreign assets can thus be interpreted as a mechanism for completing the market in these economic
environments rather than as an opportunity to take advantage of depressed asset prices during a



                                                  4
financial crisis. The evidence presented in this paper is consistent with the evidence obtained from
asset prices in Chari et al. (2010). Just as Chari et al. (2010) find little evidence of fire sales in
asset prices, this paper finds only weak evidence of fire sales based on cross-border acquisitions and
divestitures.
    The paper is also related to Acharya et al. (2011). They construct and test a theoretical model
in which distressed firms are purchased by foreign acquirers that, in turn, re-sell (or flip) the target
after the crisis ends and asset markets recover. In a sample of approximately 7,000 transactions,
they find some evidence of flipping and an increase in controlling stakes during crises. The size and
scope of the database that we constructed enables us to examine these hypotheses with a richer set
of country and crisis controls. As we discuss below, there is no strong evidence of flipping in these
data.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We describe the data set in section 2. We then
present our results on the composition of cross-border mergers and acquisitions, duration during
crises, and the identity of buyers of flipped deals in sections 3, 4, and 5. Section 6 concludes.


2    Data
We use data from SDC Thompson’s International Mergers and Acquisitions database, which reports
public and private merger and acquisition (M&A) transactions involving at least a 5% ownership
stake in the target company. SDC collects information from more than 200 English and foreign
language news sources, SEC filings, as well as the filings from SDC’s international counterparts,
trade publications, newswire reports, and proprietary surveys of investment banks, law firms, and
other advisory firms. For each transaction, the SDC database provides target- and acquiring-firm
characteristics, including the names of the firms; their country of origin, industry, and primary SIC
classification; the percent of shares sought and finally acquired in the transaction; and the date by
which the transaction was completed.
    The data set contains all domestic and foreign acquisitions that took place between 1990 and
2007 and for which the target is located in one of sixteen emerging markets: Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru, Philippines, Singapore, South Africa, South
Korea, Taiwan, Thailand, and Vietnam. Although the database includes mergers as well as ac-
quisitions, mergers account for only a small fraction of total cross-border transactions. For this
reason, we refer to acquisitions in describing the data below. Wherever sample sizes allow us to
do so we check if there are di↵erences in results across di↵erent subsamples, in particular, Asia,
post-1997 Asia, and the sample of non-Asian countries. Our motivation for this lies in potential
regime di↵erences across Asia and Latin America, as well as pre- and post-crisis Asia.
    The identification of the crisis e↵ects relies on a comparison of transactions undertaken during
crisis and non-crisis periods. The time series and cross-sectional variation in the occurrence of
crises is therefore key to the identification of these e↵ects, so it is important that the definition of

                                                   5
the beginning and the end of each crisis is as accurate as possible. In the benchmark results, we
use the annual crisis dates identified in Laeven and Valencia (2010) for systemic banking crises and
in Laeven and Valencia (2008) for currency crises.1 Most of the results reported in the body of the
paper use the Laeven and Valencia (2010) banking crisis dates as the definition of a crisis. About
12% of the transactions in our sample take placing during banking crises, while only about 3.3%
and 2.5% take place during currency and twin crises, respectively. Thus tests of significance of crisis
e↵ects that rely only on currency or twin crises lack power. This fact motivates our use of banking
crises as our benchmark definition of a financial crisis, but we also perform robustness checks by
including both banking and currency crisis episodes in our definition. To assess the sensitivity of
the results to alternative definitions of the crises, we use the data on systemic banking crises and
currency crises from Reinhart and Rogo↵ (2009).
    We include a number of additional controls in the regressions. To check if the extent of foreign
ownership matters for our results, we include two alternative variables – the fraction of a firm
acquired during a transaction and the fraction of a firm owned after a transaction.2 In addition,
country- and industry-level controls are used as covariates. Four of these variables are related to
macroeconomic conditions in the country. They are the change in the nominal exchange rate (quar-
terly), the use of IMF credit and loans as a percentage of a country’s quota (quarterly), real GDP
per capita, and real GDP growth (the last two at annual frequency because of data availability).3
The data are from the IMF International Financial Statistics, the National Statistical Office (for
Taiwan), and the Central Bank of the Republic of China (for China). These macroeconomic controls
have been used to account for country-level, aggregate conditions that may influence the decision
to acquire a firm (e.g., Brown and Dinc, 2011), over and above the extraordinary circumstances of
    1
      Laeven and Valencia (2010) define a banking crisis as systemic if two conditions are met: (1) there are significant
signs of financial distress in the banking system (as indicated by significant bank runs, losses in the banking system,
and bank liquidations); and (2) there are significant banking policy intervention measures in response to significant
losses in the banking system. Policy measures are defined to be significant if at least three of the following conditions
are met: (1) extensive liquidity support is provided (5% of deposits and liabilities to nonresidents); (2) bank restruc-
turing costs exceed 3% of GDP; (3) systemically important banks are nationalized; (4) guarantees of bank liabilities
are put into place; (5) asset purchases from financial institutions exceed 5% of GDP; and (6) deposit freezes and bank
holidays are introduced. In their definition of currency crises, Laeven and Valencia (2008) build on the approach of
Frankel and Rose (1996). They define a currency crisis as a nominal depreciation of the currency of at least 30%
that is also at a least a 10% increase in the rate of depreciation compared to the year before. They use the percent
change of the end-of-period nominal bilateral exchange rate from the World Economic Outlook (WEO) database of
the IMF to identify currency crises. For countries that meet the criteria for several continuous years, they use the
first year of each 5-year window to identify the crisis. The set of episodes identified by this procedure also includes
large devaluations by countries that adopt fixed exchange rate regimes.
    2
      These two can be di↵erent when an acquiring firm already has an existing stake in a target.
    3
      We exclude a commonly used control variable, the real interest rate, because of data availability. We have
complete coverage of years and countries at the yearly frequency for real GDP per capita and real GDP growth,
and at the quarterly frequency for nominal exchange rate and the use of IMF credit and loans as a percentage of a
country’s quota. The coverage for both quarterly and yearly real interest rates is sparse for a few countries in the
early years of our sample. In particular, the quarterly data for real interest rates has missing values for the following
countries and years: Argentina (until 1993Q1), Brazil (until 1997Q4), Mexico (until 1993Q3), and Vietnam (until
1995Q4).



                                                           6
financial stress that characterize banking or currency crises. When conducting our analysis of the
manufacturing industry, we use the index of sectoral dependence on external finance from Rajan
and Zingales (1998).

2.1      Features of the Mergers and Acquisitions Data
Figure 1 depicts the value of acquisitions by foreign firms and FDI in Latin American and Asia. It
shows the surge in acquisitions in Latin America in 1996-1998 following the Mexican crisis in 1995
and the subsequent surge in capital flows into Asia in 1999. Acquisitions in both regions leveled o↵
in the early 2000s and increased again in Asia after 2004. Figure 2 decomposes the acquisitions in
each region into foreign and domestic transactions. This figure reveals that the increases in foreign
acquisitions in each region coincided with increases in domestic transactions.
       Table 1 shows the total number of transactions by year and by country of the target. Our
database includes 31,999 transactions, of which 11,462 involve a foreign acquirer.4 The largest
number of acquisitions occur in Brazil, China, India, Malaysia, Singapore and South Korea. Ap-
proximately two-thirds of all transactions occur in Asia and the remaining third occur in Latin
America. About 60% of all transactions in Latin America involve a foreign acquirer, while only
about a third of all transactions involve a foreign acquirer in Asia. The share of foreign acquirers
varies across countries, but it is generally stable over time.
       The breakdown of foreign acquirers by the country of the acquirer is shown in Table 2. The
United States accounts for a little over a quarter of foreign acquisitions in emerging markets, Europe
another quarter, and Asia about a third. When the transactions are broken down by one-digit SIC
code (see Table 3), the data indicate that about one third of acquiring firms in emerging markets
are in the finance, insurance and real estate (FIRE) sector and another third are manufacturing
firms. The breakdown by industry is similar for targets (Table 4) and for both domestic and foreign
transactions. Table 5 shows the industry decomposition by both acquiring firm and target firm.
While many transactions occur between firms in di↵erent sectors, the majority of transactions occur
within the same one-digit SIC code (e.g., foreign firms in the FIRE sector acquire firms in emerging
markets that are also in the FIRE sector).
       Table 6 decomposes the transactions by the share of the firm that the target owned after the
acquisition was completed. In approximately 70% of the transactions the acquirer obtains an
ownership stake of 50% or more of the target. In 45% of all domestic transactions and 48% of the
foreign transactions, the acquirer becomes the sole owner of the target. Thus, in almost half of all
cases the acquiring firm obtains a controlling stake in the foreign target.
   4
    For our regression results later, we use two definitions of a foreign firm. A “foreign” acquirer is either defined
as (1) a firm from a developed country; or (2) a non-domestic acquirer. Our reported results are based on the first
definition. The results are not sensitive to this choice because most of the foreign acquirers are from countries in
North America, Europe or Asia that are classified as developed markets.




                                                          7
3        Characteristics of Crisis Transactions
3.1       Does the Composition of Transactions Change During Crises?
A key question is whether the composition of transactions – in terms of the sectors to which
acquirers and targets belong, and the national identity of acquiring firms – changes during crisis
periods. Aguiar and Gopinath (2005) and Acharya et al. (2011) find evidence suggesting that during
crises domestic firms become credit constrained. Foreign firms una↵ected by the crisis have access to
greater liquidity and can therefore take advantage of buying opportunities in the countries a↵ected
by the crisis. These buying opportunities may be exploited by foreign firms in related industries
because they have greater resources to complete acquisitions compared to domestic firms or by
foreign financial firms that see an opportunity to buy firms and then resell them to domestic firms
after the crisis abates. Foreign non-financial firms outside of the target’s industry may complete
acquisitions more often during crises to take advantage of fire-sale prices for motives similar to
those of financial firms or for strategic reasons such as diversification.
        To test this hypothesis, we use a linear probability model to estimate the increase in likelihood
during crises of particular categories of acquisitions (e.g., foreign acquisitions).5 We estimate the
model:


                P (Dlkjct = 1 | ·) = ↵ +    C Dct   +   f f rack   +   jc jc   +   mc controlsct   + ✏kjct        (3.1)

where k, j, c, and t stand for transaction, single digit SIC industry of the target firm, country
and time respectively. The dependent variable in each estimation is a dummy (Dlkjct ) that take a
value of 1 if a transaction belongs to category l and 0 otherwise. For example, when comparing the
likelihood of a transaction being completed by a foreign acquiring firm during a crisis to the same
likelihood in a non-crisis period, the regressand is a “Foreign Acquisition Dummy”, DFkjct , that is
1 when the acquiring firm involved in transaction k, in industry j, in country c, at date t, belongs
to the category “foreign firm”, and 0 otherwise.
        The vector of explanatory includes the following variables: a crisis dummy Dct that varies
across countries and time, a vector of country⇥target-industry dummies                      jc ,   and the percentage
f rack of the target firm that is acquired in transaction k. In addition, a vector of country-level
    5
     The choice of the linear probability model as our baseline over non-linear models such as Logit or Probit is based
on several considerations. First, identification of the crisis e↵ect requires country⇥target-industry fixed e↵ects. If
foreign acquiring firms are always more active in certain countries, and a crisis occurs in these countries, then the
estimated coefficient on the country-level crisis dummy will ascribe part of the country e↵ect to the crisis. Probit
su↵ers from the incidental parameters problem when using maximum likelihood estimation so the parameters of the
model with fixed e↵ects cannot be consistently estimated with dummy variables. While Logit does not have this
issue, a large number of right hand side variables sometimes causes problems with computational convergence, and
we lose some information because any country⇥target-industry that has no variation in the left hand side variable
is automatically dropped. We thus use the linear probability model for the ease with which it can handle the panel
nature of our data, its interpretability, and also because 99.9% of our predicted probabilities lie between 0 and 1 (see
Horrace and Oaxaca (2006)). Results from a Logit model yield qualitatively similar conclusions.



                                                           8
macroeconomic controls controlsct – per capita GDP, GDP growth, currency depreciation, and
use of IMF credit as a percentage of quota – are included in the regressions as proxies for aggregate
conditions in the country of the target firm.6 The fraction acquired in a transaction is included to
control for acquisitions of di↵erent size. The coefficient of interest is             C.   In the results that follow,
a “foreign” acquirer is defined as a firm located in a developed market unless noted otherwise, and
a “financial” firm is one in the FIRE sector.
       Standard errors are clustered two-way at the level of country⇥target-industry and month except
for the regressions that restrict attention to the financial targets. The standard errors from those
regressions are clustered two way at the country and month level.7 The rationale for clustering in
this way is that there may be serial correlation between errors within the same country-industry
combination attributable to a time-varying factor not fully captured by fixed e↵ects at that level,
as well as correlation among di↵erent firms across all countries and industries within the month
due to common shocks.8
       The estimated coefficients of the linear probability model are reported in Table 7, which shows
the composition of foreign acquisitions in and out of banking crises in the countries where targets
are located. For this and later tables, “row” refers to the line containing the estimated coefficients.
For example, row 1 and row 2 report the coefficient on the banking crisis dummy (the coefficients
on the control variables are not reported for brevity) when the dependent variables are a dummy
variable indicating whether an acquisition was carried out by a foreign firm and a foreign financial
firm respectively. The model is also estimated using the Reinhart and Rogo↵ (2009) crisis dates
and with a dummy indicating whether a transaction took place either during a banking or currency
crisis. The results are similar to the ones reported here because most of the currency crises in the
sample were also associated with banking crises.
       Several interesting results emerge. Row 1 tells us that across all four samples, the likelihood
of being acquired by a foreign firm is significantly higher during a banking crisis than during
normal times, echoing the findings of Aguiar and Gopinath (2005) and Acharya et al. (2011). A
comparison of rows 3 and 2 tells us, however, that this change is more pronounced for a foreign
acquiring firm from the non-financial sector rather than the financial sector. There is some variation
across subsamples, with acquisitions by foreign financial sector firms being less prominent in Asia
than in Latin America and South Africa, while exactly the opposite is true for foreign non-financial
sector firms. It is also worth noting from row 4 that acquisitions by foreign non-financial acquirers
   6
      Because they vary across country and time, they are not redundant when coupled with our country-industry
fixed e↵ects.
    7
      See Petersen (2009).
    8
      Errors for a particular firm are likely to be correlated across time, but target firms are always nested in the same
country-industry group. Thus following Bertrand et al. (2004), Cameron et al. and Cameron and Miller (2010), we
cluster at the highest level of aggregation, which in our case is a country-industry group. We prefer clustering at
this level rather than a higher one such as country or industry, because the crisis-related shocks might be specific to
certain industries within crisis hit countries and a particular industry exists in all countries.




                                                            9
of non-financial targets are also more likely during banking crises.9
       The same pattern of primacy of the non-financial sector emerges when one examines the sectoral
identity of the foreign acquirers’ targets in rows 5 and 6. The likelihood of experiencing a foreign
acquisition goes up by more for a non-financial sector target than a financial sector target. In fact,
the probability of a foreign firm acquiring a financial target during banking crises does not change at
all compared with non-crisis times. This finding underscores the point that the surge of FDI in the
financial sector of countries hit by banking crises may have been simply a result of contemporaneous
deregulation rather than an intrinsic characteristic of banking crises, something that is missed by
studies that fail to compare the crisis period to both the pre- and post-crisis periods together.
Acquisitions of targets in the same industry by foreign non-financial firms increase during banking
crises (row 7), which shows that within-industry foreign acquisitions are not driven exclusively by
foreign financial firms acquiring financial firms.10 In summary, the increase in foreign acquisitions
during financial crises appears to be driven mainly by non-financial acquirers targeting firms in the
same industry rather than foreign financial firms.

3.2      Does External Finance Dependence Matter for Crisis Acquisition Patterns?
The previous section shows that when comparing periods of financial crises to non-crisis periods in
emerging markets, non-financial firms rather than financial firms seem to increase their acquisition
activity to a greater degree. Although this result calls into question the traditional account of
foreign financial firms leading a surge of FDI in the distressed sectors of the economy, it remains
possible that financial factors played a role in driving those acquisitions. Acquisitions may be
driven by financial stress if the targets being acquired during crises are those that rely on external
finance. If such finance is harder to come by during crises, then we could still have fire-sale FDI as
in Aguiar and Gopinath (2005).
       We test whether external finance dependence of an industry predicts acquisition patterns during
banking crises using the same linear probability model as before.11 The external finance dependence
measure is available only for the manufacturing sectors (one digit SIC 2 and 3), so we restrict
attention to those for the industry analysis. This leaves us with 11,012 transactions comprising
about 32% and 39% of the domestic and foreign acquisitions in the full sample.
       The following model is estimated:
   9
      Hence the result in row 3 that non-financial sector acquirers are acquiring more often is not driven by them
acquiring financial sectors firms in distress during the banking crisis.
   10
      An examination of the change in the likelihood of a foreign financial firms acquiring a financial firm across banking
crises and normal times shows that this change is not as pronounced as the result for the non-financial sectors, which
is reported in the table. These results are available upon request.
   11
      The results using the currency crisis dummies and the sensitivity analysis using the a Logit model are available
upon request.




                                                            10
                  P (Dlkjct = 1 | ·) = ↵ +    C Dct   +   ext extf inj   +   C,ext Dct   ⇥ extf inj +
                                                                                                              (3.2)
                                                    f f rack   +   c c   +   mc controlsct    + ✏kjct

       The vector of explanatory variables now include the crisis dummy Dct , the sectoral index of
external finance dependence extf inj from Rajan and Zingales (1998), its interaction with the crisis
dummy, a vector of country dummies              c   (as opposed to country⇥target-industry dummies), as
well as the control variables discussed in the previous section.12 The standard errors are clustered
two-way at the level of country⇥target-industry and month.
       Table 8 reports the results. Looking first at the full sample of countries (Panel A, row 1),
more external finance dependent manufacturing sectors are more likely to experience acquisitions
in which the acquiring firm is foreign, irrespective of the sector of the acquiring firm. However,
this likelihood is much larger for foreign non-financial sector firms (column 3) than financial sector
firms (column 2). Foreign financial and manufacturing sector acquirers acquire targets no more
frequently in sectors that are dependent on external finance in Asia (panel B, row 1, columns 2 and
4). What is more interesting is that the interaction of the external finance dependence measure and
the banking crisis dummy is never significant. In one of the first empirical investigations of asset fire
sales in the literature, Pulvino (1998) finds that fire sales of used aircraft are associated with asset
purchase by industry outsiders, especially during market downturns. Motivated by this finding,
the last column of Table 8 asks if acquisitions by non-manufacturing industry firms is correlated
with external finance dependence of the target firm’s industry during financial crises. We fail to
find such an e↵ect.
       Altogether, this evidence indicates that external finance dependence is neither more nor less
critical during banking crises – a surprising finding given the presumed importance of fire-sale FDI
in crisis-time Asia. Similar conclusions obtain for banking and currency crises, but they are not
reported here for brevity. Using alternative crisis dates from Reinhart and Rogo↵ (2009) also yields
qualitatively similar results. External finance dependence is not a factor driving these acquisitions.

3.3      Does the Degree of Corporate Control Sought Change During Crises?
Another question that has received attention and that is important in assessing the di↵erences
between FDI during crisis and normal periods is whether larger controlling stakes are acquired
during crises. With the asset prices of domestic target firms depressed during a crisis, foreign
acquirers may find it more profitable to acquire controlling stakes and acquire a larger share of a
particular target firm conditional on acquiring control. As before, we use a simple OLS framework
as the baseline specification to address both of these questions and perform robustness checks
  12
    Industry-level fixed e↵ects are excluded from this specification because the industry characteristics we use are
time invariant.


                                                          11
(available upon request) with the GLM-based methods suggested by Papke and Wooldridge (1996).
                                                  kjct
For the first question, we define a binary dummy Dcontrol that takes a value of 1 if a controlling
stake (i.e, 50% or more) in the target is acquired at time t, in the transaction k, in country c and
industry j, and 0 otherwise.13 The estimated model is:

                        kjct
                    P (Dcontrol = 1 | ·) = ↵ +        C Dct   +    jc jc   +   mc controlsct   + ✏kjct           (3.3)

       The regressors in this specification are a vector of country⇥target-industry dummies                   jc ,   the
four country-level macroeconomic controls controlsct used before, and the variable of interest – a
dummy Dct indicating whether the transaction took place during a domestic financial crisis.
       The results for banking crises are reported in Table 9, while those for currency crises are available
upon request. As in Tables 7 and 8, each row of results are for a given category of transactions.
For example, the first row asks if control was acquired more often by foreign acquiring firms when
targeting any firm in our sample of countries. None of the coefficients in the table are significant,
indicating that the patterns of acquiring control do not di↵er between crisis and non-crisis periods
in any of our samples.14 This evidence again shows the importance of comparing the crisis with
both the pre- and post-crisis periods, since the comparison between the crisis and the pre-crisis
period, which typically has more restrictions on foreign ownership, may bias the results towards
finding more control being acquired during crisis periods.
       Next, we estimate an OLS regression on the sub-sample of firms for which at least a 50% stake
                                            kjct
was acquired, where the dependent variable Dcontrol is replaced by f rackjct , the actual fraction of a
firm acquired in transaction k in industry j, country c and time t. The set of explanatory variables
is unchanged.


                          f rackjct = ↵ +     C Dct   +   jc jc    +   mc controlsct   + ✏kjct                   (3.4)

       Table 10 reports these results. For the subset of firms for which a controlling stake of at least
50% were acquired, crisis-time acquisitions typically involved the same or a lower share of the firm
being bought. Because fire sales are typically associated with the acquisition of larger stakes due to
depressed asset prices, this finding can be seen as indirect evidence that such sales are not a robust
feature of emerging market crises in general, and the Asian financial crisis in particular. GLM
estimates (see Papke and Wooldridge (1996)), that take into account that f rackjct is bounded
between 0 and 1, confirm these results and are available upon request.
  13
     We use four di↵erent definitions of a controlling stake using two cut-o↵s 50% and 100% and two di↵erent measures,
the fraction acquired in a transaction and the fraction owned after a transaction. To save space, we report results
only for controlling stakes defined as a fraction acquired of at least 50%. Our main results are not sensitive to the
definition of a controlling stake.
  14
     The results from Logit regressions, varying the definition of control to include only 100% acquisitions, including
both banking and currency crises, and using the Reinhart and Rogo↵ (2009) dates are available upon request. The
main conclusions are insensitive to these changes.



                                                              12
3.4   Summary of Results
    There are three main conclusions that we can draw from this section. First, the marked increase
in foreign non-financial firms acquiring non-financial targets is the primary feature of emerging mar-
ket financial crises. Second, the external finance dependence of a sector seems to have played no role
in determining the likelihood of acquisitions during crises. Third, the patterns of acquiring control
do not change during crises. In general, these conclusions are robust to alternative econometric
specifications and the use of di↵erent crisis dates.


4     The Duration of Crisis-Time Acquisitions
In this section, we examine the duration of the relationship between an acquirer and its target and
whether the duration of the relationship di↵ers for acquisitions that occurred during crises. To
the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to analyze the ownership dynamics of emerging
market acquisitions in general and crisis-time acquisitions in particular. Duration is measured by
identifying firms that appear two or more times in the database – first as a target in an initial
transaction, which identifies the beginning of the relationship. If the firm appears a second time as
a target, we postulate that the firm is being divested from the first transaction (when the target
firm appears in the data only twice) or from the immediately preceding transaction (when the
target firm appears more than twice). The second (or subsequent) sale thus marks the end of the
relationship. The duration is defined as the length of time between each transaction involving the
same target.
    If a target does not appear in the database after the initial transaction, it could mean one of
three things. First, the firm may have never become a target again (in which case we correctly
code the initial relationship as continuing); second, the firm may have gone out of business (and
we miscode the relationship as continuing); or third, the firm may have been reorganized by the
first buyer under a di↵erent name and thus does not show up as a target under the same name
(and, again, we miscode the initial relationship as continuing). To correct for the errors related
to the renaming of the target firms, we manually checked whether the firms that did not appear
more than once in the data set were renamed and corrected that error where possible. We cannot
correct for the errors related to a firm going out of business because there is no way of determining
this from our data set.
    Another source of error is that in partial acquisitions, pieces of the target may be owned by
di↵erent entities. Because SDC reports the identity of the firm or parties on the selling side only
in a small percentage of the total transactions, it is impossible in the vast majority of the cases to
confirm at the time of the second transaction that the initial buyer of the target is now the seller.
We can only verify that the target appears again (as a target) in the sample. To address this type
of error, we re-estimate our models on the subset of targets that were fully acquired in the initial


                                                  13
transaction. By including only full acquisitions, we are certain that the subsequent seller was the
original buyer. Although this procedure reduces the number of transactions in the sample, we still
capture most of the controlling transactions (at or above the 50% stake threshold) in our sample.
As Table 6 shows, the number of transactions falls from 22,733 to 15,064. Thus, full acquisitions
account for almost two-thirds of the transactions in which a majority stake was acquired.
       The object we estimate is the hazard function, which captures the risk of a member of the
population being acquired again a certain number of days after its last acquisition. The hazard
function h(ti ) defines the probability that firm i will experience an acquisition event in the interval
of time     ti , conditional on the fact that it has not been the target of an acquisition for ti units of
time since the last acquisition.15 Under the assumption that most acquisitions on the buyer side
involve a divestiture on the seller side, the hazard is also a reliable measure of the typical frequency
of divesture for the average firm or the turnover of M&A transactions.16
       The duration data from the sixteen countries are pooled together and analyzed using the Cox
proportional hazards model (see Cleves et al. (2008)). The key assumption is that hazard rates
are proportional to the baseline hazard across di↵erent patterns of explanatory variables. While
the model assumes no parametric form for the baseline hazards, it posits a functional relationship
between hazards for di↵erent explanatory variables. Let hjc (t) be the hazard function as defined
before, where j and c denote industry and country respectively. Then the Cox model we estimate
can be written as:

                                                  0
                         hjc (t|x) = hjc (t)ex         for j = 1, 2, ..., J and c = 1, 2, ..., C                     (4.1)

where hjc is the baseline hazard, which is allowed to be di↵erent across each country⇥target-
industry combination. x is a vector of explanatory variables and                           a vector of coefficients to be
estimated jointly with the baseline hazards hjc . Equivalently, our model can be written as


                    ln[hjc (t|x)] = ln[hjc (t)] + x0         for j = 1, 2, ..., J and c = 1, 2, ..., C               (4.2)
  15
     An event indexed by i is simply defined as a transaction in which firm i was a target. The starting time for the
risk of a subsequent transaction involving i is defined as the time at which the previous transaction between i and
the acquiring firm is completed. Then the “failure time” Ti measures the duration of time between two consecutive
transactions involving firm i as target. F , the cumulative density, S, the survivor function, f , the probability density,
and h, the hazard function are defined as:

                               F (ti )    =   Pr(Ti  ti )
                                S(ti )    =   1 F (ti ) = Pr(Ti > ti )
                                              dF (ti )   d(1 S(ti ))        0
                                f (ti )   =            =              =   S (ti )
                                               dti          dti
                                                                                          f (ti )
                                h(ti )    =    lim Pr(ti +    ti > Ti > ti |Ti > ti ) =
                                               ti !0                                      S(ti )

  16
   Examples where this may not be the case are when new shares are issued and bought by the acquiring firm or
when the firm’s debt is transformed into equity.



                                                             14
The sign of the estimated coefficients of the model can be interpreted as determining the direction
in which the explanatory variables shift the natural logarithm of each of the baseline hazards.
Letting the baseline hazards di↵er across country-industry combinations is analogous to having
country⇥industry fixed e↵ects, with the important di↵erence that the non-parametric estimation
also allows the shape of the baseline hazards to di↵er. Kalbfleisch and Prentice (1980) provide
details of the procedure used to estimate the baseline hazards hjc (t).

4.1   Are Crisis-Time Acquisitions Flipped More Frequently?
Table 11 presents the results from estimating several Cox models of the following form, each with
a di↵erent Dlkjct as explained below:


               ln[hjc (t|x)] = ln[hjc (t)] + Dlkjct +   f f rack   +   mc controlsct   + ✏kjct        (4.3)

   The non-parametric baseline hazards ln[hjc (t)] are stratified by country⇥target-industry. This
allows the baseline hazard for each country⇥target-industry combination to di↵er in shape, while
constraining the e↵ect of each of the regressors on the individual baseline hazards to be the same.
Each “row” of Table 11 presents the estimate of the coefficient            on a dummy variable Dlkjct , for
di↵erent ls. Dlkjct indicates membership of transaction k (in industry j, country c at time t) to
a particular set l. For example, l could refer to the set of acquisitions by foreign acquiring firms
or the set of acquisitions that took place during a crisis. The results in row 1 indicate whether
acquisitions by foreign firms have a significantly di↵erent hazard compared to domestic acquisitions
and hence show the estimated coefficient on a dummy variable DFkjct . It does so for four di↵erent
samples, displayed in the four columns of the table. The negative sign of the four coefficients in row
1 indicates a lower hazard of a subsequent transaction for the average target that was bought by
a foreign as opposed to a domestic acquirer. Given two acquiring firms, one foreign and the other
domestic, both acquiring the same fraction of a target in the same country-industry at the same
point in the business cycle, the foreign acquisition faces a lower risk of a subsequent transaction
and hence has a lower turnover rate than a domestic transaction.
   The following two rows report the turnover rates of acquisitions that were undertaken during
banking crises and financial crises. The latter dummy variable assumes a value of one if there is
a banking crisis, a currency crisis or both, according to Laeven and Valencia (2008, 2010). When
looking at the full sample of countries, the turnover rates are not significantly di↵erent across crisis
and normal times. Closer examination reveals that this finding is attributable to a significantly
lower turnover rate of crisis-time acquisitions for Asia, balanced out by a higher turnover rate for
the non-Asian sample. Note that the estimates for the banking crisis dummy and the financial
crisis dummy are identical for the Asian sample. These crises coincide in Asia according to the
benchmark crisis dates (Laeven and Valencia, 2008, 2010).
   The next three rows show several other features of merger duration emerging markets. First,

                                                   15
transactions between two firms in the same industry have a lower turnover rate compared with
transaction involving firms in two di↵erent industries. This evidence suggests that the matches
between firms in the same industry last longer than those in di↵erent industries. In addition, the
transactions involving financial firms and foreign financial firms as acquirers have higher turnover
rates than those involving non-financial firms and domestic non-financial firms, although the point
estimates are not statistically significantly di↵erent from zero in the Asia subsample. These regres-
sions provide a broad sense of how turnover rates di↵er across acquisitions, but the most pertinent
conclusion to draw from these results is that transactions completed during the Asian crisis had
lower turnover rates than those occurring during normal times. These acquisitions were actually
flipped less often than the transactions undertaken in tranquil times. This finding is evidence
against the fire-sale FDI hypothesis.
       In Tables 12 – 14 we explore this point in more detail. Each of these tables shows the estimates
of three coefficients –    F,    C   and   FC   – on three dummy variables: a dummy for foreign acquisitions
DF , a dummy DC for a crisis, and the interaction between these two dummies DF ⇥ DC . The
control variables are unchanged. The estimated model is:



 ln[hjc (t|x)] = ln[hjc (t)] +   F DF      +   C DC   +   F C DF   ⇥ DC +   f f rack   +   mc controlsct + ✏kjct   (4.4)

       Tables 12, 13, and 14 each look at di↵erent slices of the data – all acquisitions, acquisitions by
financial firms, and acquisitions between firms in the same industry.
       Table 12 indicates that foreign acquisitions have a lower turnover rate than domestic ones in nor-
mal times. But crisis-time acquisitions by domestic firms have lower turnover rates than non-crisis
acquisitions. The turnover of foreign acquisitions in and out of crises remains the same. Evidently
domestic and foreign acquisitions converge in terms of their turnover rates when conducted during
crises. An exception to these patterns seems to be Latin America and South Africa, where none of
these categories of acquisitions are di↵erent in terms of turnover rates.
       For acquisitions by financial firms (Table 13) the picture is di↵erent. Here foreign and domestic
financial acquiring firms are indistinguishable in and out of crisis. This is because the turnover rates
of both types of firms is lower for acquisitions completed during crises. For acquisitions conducted
between firms in the same industry (Table 14), the story is similar to the entire sample of firms
(Table 12). Foreign and domestic firms are di↵erent in normal times and converge during crisis
times.17 Overall, there is little evidence that crisis-time acquisitions by foreign acquirers are flipped
at faster rates than domestic ones.
       We modify a number of details to check the robustness of the results. The model is estimated
using acquisitions of 50% or above as well as 100% acquisitions only. We vary the definition of
  17
    It would be informative to conduct this type of analysis for the foreign financial acquisitions of financial targets,
but this subsample only contains a small number of transactions, rendering the estimates unreliable.



                                                             16
a financial crisis by first including only banking crises, then expanding the definition to include
currency crises and using alternative crises dates from Reinhart and Rogo↵ (2009).18 Introducing
these changes into the model leave the main conclusions from this section unchanged, and these
results are available upon request. In sum, there is little evidence that crisis-time foreign acquisitions
are flipped at faster rates than crisis-time domestic acquisitions or normal-time foreign acquisitions,
irrespective of the industrial sector in which the acquirer and target operate.

4.2    Is Duration Correlated With External Finance Dependence?
As noted above, financial crises may have di↵erent implications for acquisition patterns in indus-
tries that di↵er in their degree of dependence on external finance. For manufacturing firms, we did
not uncover any evidence that external finance dependence predicted higher likelihood of a foreign
acquisition during either a banking or a currency crisis. However, it remains possible that firms
operating in industries that are more dependent on external finance are resold more quickly if pur-
chased during a crisis. Acquisitions made during a fire sale may be driven by short-run, speculative
motives rather than according to long-term investment plans (Acharya et al., 2011) and external
finance dependent sectors may be more prone to acquisitions driven by such motives.
    Since the availability of the measure of external finance dependence from Rajan and Zingales
(1998) limits the sample to manufacturing firms, we examine the full sample and the Asian sub-
sample only: The non-Asian sample contains too few observations on manufacturing firms to obtain
reliable estimates of the baseline hazards. To keep the analysis as simple as possible, we test the
hypothesis separately for foreign acquisitions and domestic acquisitions.19 We also limit attention
to banking crises because currency crises in our sample a↵ected only about 3% of all firms. We use
a Cox model with the same set of controls as in the previous section, but the covariates of interest
are the banking crisis dummy DC , the measure of external finance dependence extf inj , and their
interaction.


                 ln[hjc (t|x)] = ln[hjc (t)] +    C DC   +    ext extf inj   +   ext,C DC   ⇥ extf inj +
                                                                                                                   (4.5)
                                                                  f f rack   +   mc controlsct   + ✏kjct
   18
      In addition, we estimate di↵erent parametric duration models instead of the Cox model, which makes no para-
metric assumptions about the baseline hazard. We estimate five di↵erent duration models – Exponential, Weibull,
Gompertz, Lognormal, and Loglogistic – each of which corresponds to a di↵erent specification of the baseline hazard.
When the parametric form of the baseline hazard is correctly specified, these models yield more efficient estimates.
We also estimate a shared frailty model, which corresponds closely to random e↵ects model for panel data. The
underlying assumption of our shared frailty model is that there is unobserved heterogeneity at the level of the target
firm and that this heterogeneity is correlated for the same firm. The main results are not sensitive to these alternative
specifications.
   19
      Thus, we do not address the related question of whether domestic and foreign acquisitions di↵er in this respect.
Doing so would require triple interaction terms, which would make the comparisons among the di↵erent subsamples
difficult to interpret.



                                                             17
    The question is whether the turnover rates of foreign or domestic acquisitions that took place
during crises increase with the external finance dependence of the industry to which the target
belongs. Table 15 reports the estimated coefficients. The point estimates show that acquisitions
during banking crises in more externally dependent sectors have a lower turnover rate, which is
opposite in sign to what we would expect if fire sales were important. None of the point estimates
are statistically significant for either the foreign or domestic acquisitions. There is no strong
relationship between external financial dependence and the duration of the transaction.
    As before, we run a number of robustness checks on these results. In the baseline specification
we only include acquisitions of at least 50% for reasons explained at the beginning of this section.
We vary this to include only 100% acquisitions. We also vary the definition of a financial crisis, using
banking crises dates from Reinhart and Rogo↵ (2009). The results reported here are insensitive to
these alternative assumptions. The regressions are available from the authors upon request.

4.3   Summary of Results
    The main result in this section is that the degree of external finance dependence bears no
significant relationship with the turnover rate of acquisitions in those sectors, either in or out
of crises. This conclusion mirrors the earlier findings about the irrelevance of external finance
dependence in predicting the likelihood of di↵erent categories of transactions during a crisis. This
evidence casts further doubt on the fire-sale hypothesis.


5     The Identity of Buyers in Flipped Deals
An important normative implication of fire sales is the conjecture that such sales lead to misalloca-
tion of ownership. For example, if domestic firms are fundamentally more efficient users of domestic
assets, but ownership passes from distressed domestic owners to foreigners during financial crises
purely due to the short-term liquidity issues of all potential domestic acquirers, then we expect to
observe crisis-time acquisitions being resold to domestic buyers rather than other foreign buyers
once the crisis ends.
    This observation motivates us to investigate the identity of the acquiring firm in those cases
where assets are flipped. The question of interest is whether foreign acquisitions during crises
are resold more frequently to domestic acquirers than to foreign acquirers and how this flipping
compares to flips by domestic acquiring firms. To conduct this comparison, we estimate a linear
                                                           k,i
probability model where the dependent variable is a dummy Ddom indicating whether, for a par-
ticular transaction k involving firm i as the target, the subsequent acquisition involving the same
target i had a domestic firm on the buyer side.




                                                  18
     k,i
 P (Ddom = 1 | ·) = ↵+      F DF + C DC + F C DF ⇥DC + f f rack + jc jc + mc controlsct +✏kjct     (5.1)

    There are 4,153 transactions involving targets that are acquired more than once, of which fewer
than a third were initially bought by a foreign firm. Thus the proportion of foreign firms among
acquirers who flip is actually slightly less than the proportion of foreign firms overall, which is
roughly 36%. Of these transactions, we focus on a subset of about 1500 acquisitions (1006 of them
in Asia) in which controlling stakes of at least 50% were acquired. We have already restricted
ourselves to a very thin slice of the data than in the previous parts of this analysis, so we only
examine the full sample and the Asian sample during banking crisis episodes. The estimation
results are reported in Table 16. The robustness checks with Logit regressions are not reported
here, but they can be obtained from the authors upon request.
    The sign and significance of the coefficients indicate that foreign acquirers are much less likely
than their domestic counterparts to flip to a domestic firm, regardless of whether they make their
acquisitions during crisis or normal times. Also, flips to domestic firms are equally common for the
crisis- and normal-time acquisitions of foreign firms. Thus foreign firms are less likely to flip their
acquisition to domestic firms (than other domestic acquirers) and do not change their behavior
during crises. This result also runs counter to the fire-sale FDI hypothesis.


6    Conclusion
In this paper we examine several observable implications related to the existence of fire-sale FDI
during emerging market crises. In the event of a fire sale, acquisitions (either FDI or a domestic
acquisition) are more likely to be driven by short-run, speculative motives rather than by long-term
investment plans. During crises we expect to observe that foreign acquisitions increase in sectors
that are more dependent on external finance; that firms acquire larger stakes because assets are
temporarily undervalued; and that divestiture rates increase among crisis-time acquisitions when
asset markets recover following crises. All three of these patterns are observable implications of the
fire-sale FDI hypothesis.
    We do not find systematic evidence for any of these phenomena related to fire-sale FDI. Our
results suggest that the frequency of acquisitions by foreign firms increases during banking and
currency crises, but that the increase is led by foreign non-financial acquirers targeting non-financial
firms rather than by foreign financial firms acquiring domestic firms. There is no evidence that
external finance dependence matters for the aggregate pattern of acquisitions during crises. Finally,
during crises there is no evidence that the frequency of controlling stakes acquired increases or that,
conditional on a controlling stake being acquired, the size of the stake acquired increases. These
conclusions are quite robust to alternative assumptions about empirical specification and the use


                                                  19
of alternative crisis dates.
   The main contribution of the paper is to conduct a duration analysis on the length of acquirer-
target relationships initiated during crisis periods. Based on our analysis of the data, crisis-time
FDI is indistinguishable from crisis-time domestic acquisitions, as well as FDI undertaken during
non-crisis periods in terms of their likelihood of subsequent divestiture, or turnover rate. Overall,
foreign and domestic financial acquiring firms are statistically indistinguishable in and out of crises.
Furthermore, the degree of external finance dependence bears no significant relationship with the
turnover rate of acquisitions in that sector, either in or out of crises. Finally, there is no evidence
that foreign firms flip crisis-time acquisitions to domestic firms. All of these results are robust to
alternative empirical specifications and di↵erent definitions of crises. Contrary to the conventional
wisdom, fire-sale FDI and flipping of assets therefore seem to be “business as usual” rather than
characteristic features of FDI undertaken during financial crises in emerging market economies.




                                                  20
References
V. Acharya, H. Shin, and T. Yorulmazer. Fire-sale FDI. The Korean Economic Review, 27(2):
  163–202, 2011.

M. Aguiar and G. Gopinath. Fire-sale foreign direct investment and liquidity crises. Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 87:439–452, 2005.

D. D. Bergh. Predicting divestiture of unrelated acquisitions: An integrative model of ex ante
  conditions. Strategic Management Journal, 18:715–731, 1997.

M. Bertrand, E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan. How much should we trust di↵erences-in-di↵erences
  estimates? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(1), 2004.

C. Brown and I. Dinc. Too many to fail? evidence of regulatory forbearance when the banking
  sector is weak. Review of Financial Studies, 24(4), 2011.

A. C. Cameron and D. L. Miller. Robust inference with clustered data. Handbook of Empirical
  Economics and Finance, 2010.

C. A. Cameron, J. B. Gelbach, and D. L. Miller. forthcoming. robust inference with multi-way
  clustering. Journal of Business and Economic statistics.

J. Campbell, S. Giglio, and P. Pathak. Forced sales and house prices. American Economic Review,
  101(5):2108–31, 2011.

A. Chari, P. P. Ouimet, and L. L. Tesar. The value of control in emerging markets. Review of
  Financial Studies, 23(4), 2010.

M. Cleves, W. Gould, R. Gutierrez, and Y. Marchenko. An Introduction to Survival Analysis Using
  Stata. Stata Press, 2008.

I. Erel, R. C. Liao, and M. S. Weisbach. Determinants of cross-border mergers and acquisitions.
  Journal of Finance, 67(3), 2012.

J. A. Frankel and A. K. Rose. Currency crashes in emerging markets: An empirical treatment.
  Journal of International Economics, 41(3-4), 1996.

P. D. Holan and O. Toulan. The antecedents and consequences of emerging market divestitures.
  Instituto de Empresa Business School Working Paper, (WP06-05), 2006.

W. C. Horrace and R. L. Oaxaca. Results on the bias and inconsistency of ordinary least squares
  for the linear probability model. Economics Letters, 90, 2006.



                                                21
J. D. Kalbfleisch and R. L. Prentice. The Statistical Analysis of Failure Time Data. Wiley, New
  York, 1980.

S. N. Kaplan and M. S. Weisbach. The success of acquisitions: Evidence from divestitures. The
  Journal of Finance, 47:107–138, 1992.

P. Krugman. Fire Sale FDI. University of Chicago Press, 2000.

L. Laeven and F. Valencia. Systemic banking crises: A new database. IMF Working Paper, 08/224,
  2008.

L. Laeven and F. Valencia. Resolution of banking crises: The good, the bad, and the ugly. IMF
  Working Paper, 10/146, 2010.

P. Loungani and A. Razin. How beneficial is foreign direct investment for developing countries?
  Finance and Development, 38, 2001.

A. Mody and S. Negishi. Cross-border mergers and acquisitions in east asia: Trends and implica-
  tions. Finance and Development, 38, 2001.

L. E. Papke and J. M. Wooldridge. Econometric methods for fractional response variables with an
  application to 401 (k) plan participation rates. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 90, 1996.

M. A. Petersen. Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing approaches.
  Review of financial studies, 22(1), 2009.

T. C. Pulvino. Do asset fire sales exist? an empirical investigation of commercial aircraft transac-
  tions. The Journal of Finance, 53:939–978, 1998.

R. Rajan and L. Zingales. Financial dependence and growth. The American Economic Review,
  1998.

D. J. Ravenscraft and F. M. Scherer. Divisional sell-o↵: A hazard function analysis. Managerial
  and Decision Economics, 12:429–438, 1991.

C. M. Reinhart and K. S. Rogo↵. This Time is Di↵erent: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly.
  Princeton University Press, 2009.

S. Rossi and P. F. Volpin. Cross-country determinants of mergers and acquisitions. Journal of
  Financial Economics, 74(2), 2004.

A. Shleifer and R. W. Vishny. Liquidation values and debt capacity: A market equilibrium ap-
  proach. The Journal of Finance, 47:1343–1366, 1992.

A. Shleifer and R. W. Vishny. The limits of arbitrage. The Journal of Finance, 52(1):35–55, 1997.

                                                22
Figure 1: Foreign Direct Investment Inflows and Value of Acquisitions by Foreign Firms and Region




    Source: UNCTAD.




                                               23
  Figure 2: Acquisitions in Latin America and Asia by Foreign and Domestic Firms




Source: UNCTAD.




                                       24
                                    Table 1: Transactions by Country Origin of Target


                                                No. of Transactions                         Share of Foreign Acquirers
                                   1990-94   1995-99   2000-04   2005-07   Total    1990-94     1995-99   2000-04   2005-07
     Latin America
                     Argentina      181       826       598       212      1,817     0.59        0.56       0.55         0.63
                     Brazil         175       962       937       277      2,351     0.49        0.54       0.45         0.36
                     Chile           92       284       307       137       820      0.71        0.60       0.47         0.51
                     Mexico         291       489       513       310      1,603     0.53        0.60       0.61         0.77
                     Peru            56       155       125        82       418      0.55        0.54       0.51         0.73

                     Total          795       2,716     2,480     1,018    7,009     0.56        0.56       0.51         0.59
     Asia
                     China          132        656      2,090     2,047    4,925     0.73        0.58       0.42         0.45
                     India          64          67       302      1,664    2,097     0.58        0.31       0.32         0.31




25
                     Indonesia       97        270       349       233      949      0.61        0.57       0.57         0.62
                     Malaysia       412       1,791     2,081     1,826    6,110     0.18        0.09       0.10         0.12
                     Philippines     78        348       280       194      900      0.54        0.45       0.35         0.29
                     Singapore      401        745       491       808     2,445     0.33        0.31       0.30         0.37
                     South Korea     48        331       776       994     2,149     0.33        0.57       0.31         0.12
                     Taiwan          47        153       376       233      809      0.55        0.46       0.40         0.41
                     Thailand       103        442       694       461     1,700     0.42        0.48       0.28         0.29
                     Vietnam        17          26        53        57      153      0.59        0.77       0.74         0.65

                     Total          1,399     4,829     7,492     8,517    22,237    0.38        0.33       0.30         0.30

     South Africa                   318       1371      744       320      2,753     0.19        0.22       0.27         0.42

     All Countries                  2,512     8,916    10,716     9,855    31,999    0.41        0.38       0.35         0.33

     Source: SDC Thompson.
                               Table 2: Foreign Transactions by Country Origin of Acquirer


                                                 No. of Transactions                    Share of Foreign Acquisitions
                              1990-94    1995-99       2000-04     2005-07     Total
     United States              304       1,132          921         751       3,108                0.27

     Europe                    272        1,038         1,085          749     3,144                0.27

     Asia                      287         816          1,205          1,182   3,490                0.30
        of which
         China                   7          14            15            25      61                  0.01
         Japan                  71         186           176           145      578                 0.05
         Hong Kong             106         262           430           361     1,159                0.10

     Latin America              41         139           115            64      359                 0.03




26
     Australia, Canada, and
     New Zealand               113         232           284           322      951                 0.08

     Other                      22         75            107           206      410                 0.04

     Total                     1,039      3,432         3,717          3,274   11,462

     Source: SDC Thompson.
                           Table 3: Foreign Acquirers by Industry


     Acquiring Firm SIC Category                     Domestic            Foreign
                                                  Freq.    Percent   Freq.    Percent   Total
 0   Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing            299       1.5%      85       0.7%     384
 1   Mining and Construction                      1,116      5.4%     918       8.0%    2,034
 2   Manufacturing (food, textiles, petroleum)    2,707     13.2%    1,810     15.8%    4,517
 3   Manufacturing (rubber, electronics)          2,933     14.3%    2,190     19.1%    5,123
 4   Transport and Communications                 1,623     7.9%     1,053      9.2%    2,676
 5   Wholesale and Retail                         1,121      5.5%     566       4.9%    1,687
 6   Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate          8,559     41.7%    3,372     29.4%    11,931
 7   Services (hotels, amusement)                 1,459      7.1%    1,087      9.5%    2,546
 8   Services (education, legal, other)            680       3.3%     369       3.2%    1,049
 9   Public Administration                          40       0.2%      12       0.1%      52

      Total                                       20,537    100%     11,462    100%     31,999

Source: SDC Thompson.




                                             27
                             Table 4: Target Firms by Industry


     Target Firm SIC Category                        Domestic            Foreign
                                                  Freq.    Percent   Freq.    Percent   Total
 0   Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing            320       1.6%     120       1.1%     440
 1   Mining and Construction                      1,165      5.7%    1,097      9.6%    2,262
 2   Manufacturing (food, textiles, petroleum)    3,199     15.6%    2,054     17.9%    5,253
 3   Manufacturing (rubber, electronics)          3,390     16.5%    2,369     20.7%    5,759
 4   Transport and Communications                 2,285     11.1%    1,334     11.6%    3,619
 5   Wholesale and Retail                         1,565      7.6%     777       6.8%    2,342
 6   Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate          5,383     26.2%    1,904     16.6%    7,287
 7   Services (hotels, amusement)                 2,253     11.0%    1,390     12.3%    3,643
 8   Services (education, legal, other)            939       4.6%     394       3.4%    1,333
 9   Public Administration                          38       0.2%      23       0.2%      61

      Total                                       20,537    100%     11,462    100%     31,999

Source: SDC Thompson.




                                             28
                                                        Table 5: Acquirer and Target Industry


                                                                                                   Target SIC Category
                                                  Acquirer SIC Category                                                                               Total
                                                                            0      1      2       3        4     5          6       7     8       9
      Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing                   0              133      3     109      13      18     22        72       7      7      0    384
      Mining and Construction                              1               5    1,276    102     128     132     48       242      42     58      1   2,034
      Manufacturing (food, textiles, petroleum)            2              116    105    2,981    290     117    313       401     108     82      4   4,517
      Manufacturing (rubber, electronics)                  3               15    146     328    3,308    203    281       450     267    117      8   5,123
      Transport and Communications                         4                3     83      79     132    1,820    72       190     241     43     13   2,676
      Wholesale and Retail                                 5               17     51     184     207      80    765       215     132     34      2   1,687
      Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                  6              135    514    1,335   1,418   1,014   680      5,313   1,106   401     15   11,931
      Services (hotels, amusement)                         7               12     27      85     160     169    115       249    1,614   114      1   2,546
      Services (education, legal, other)                   8                4     54      50      98      53     44       145     123    472      6   1,049
      Public Administration                                9                0      3      0        5      13      2        10       3      5     11     52

                                                          Total           440   2,262   5,253   5,759   3,619   2,342    7,287   3,643   1,333   61   31,999


     Source: SDC Thompson.




29
   Table 6: Fraction of Target Owned by Acquirer after Transaction


          Decile                 Domestic                Foreign
                              Freq.        Percent   Freq.    Percent    Total
       0-10 percent           1,211          5.9%     626       5.5%     1,837
       10-20 percent          1,367          6.7%     772       6.7%     2,139
       20-30 percent          1,365          6.6%     798       7.0%     2,163
       30-40 percent           933           4.5%     602       5.3%     1,535
       40-50 percent           958           4.7%     634       5.5%     1,592
       50-60 percent          1,712          8.3%    1,122      9.8%     2,834
       60-70 percent          1,252          6.1%     661       5.8%     1,913
       70-80 percent           521           2.5%     297       2.6%       818
       80-90 percent           758           3.7%     454       4.0%     1,212
      90-100 percent           589           2.9%     303       2.6%       892
        100 percent           9,871         48.1%    5,193     45.3%    15,064

           Total              20,537       100%      11,462   100%      31,999
Controlling Share (    50%)   14,703       71.6%      8,030   70.1%     22,733

 Source: SDC Thompson.




                                      30
                Table 7: What Type of Acquisitions Increased During Banking Crises?


 Acquirer             Target                 Full Sample     Asia     Post-1997 Asia    Non-Asia
 Foreign              All                     0.079***     0.075***      0.085***        0.060**
                                               (0.02)       (0.02)         (0.03)         (0.02)
                                  No. obs.     31,967       22,217        19,107           9,750
                                    R2         0.1429       0.1127        0.1119          0.1087
 Foreign Fin.         All                     0.027***      0.019*        0.025**        0.041**
                                               (0.01)       (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.02)
                                  No. obs.     31,967       22,217        19,107           9,750
                                    R2         0.0896       0.0731        0.0778          0.1231
 Foreign Non-Fin.     All                     0.051***     0.056***      0.060***          0.018
                                               (0.01)       (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.02)
                                  No. obs.     31,967       22,217        19,107           9,750
                                    R2         0.1672       0.1218        0.1223          0.1475
 Foreign Non-Fin.     Non-Fin.                0.052***     0.054***      0.058***          0.024
                                               (0.01)       (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.02)
                                  No. obs.     31,967       22,217        19,107           9,750
                                    R2         0.1888       0.1405        0.1405          0.1733
 Foreign              Fin.                      0.011        0.014         0.015          0.007
                                               (0.01)       (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)
                                  No. obs.     31,967       22,217        19,107           9,750
                                    R2          0.014       0.0129        0.0131          0.0179
 Foreign              Non-Fin.                0.064***     0.061***      0.068***        0.043**
                                               (0.01)       (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.02)
                                  No. obs.     31,967       22,217        19,107           9,750
                                    R2         0.2132       0.1731        0.1707          0.1995
 Foreign Non-Fin.     Same Ind.               0.039***     0.033***      0.035***         0.027
                                               (0.01)       (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.02)
                                  No. obs.     31,967       22,217        19,107           9,750
                                    R2         0.1598       0.1082        0.1063          0.1543


Notes: Point estimates of linear probability model coefficients. Coefficients marked ⇤ ⇤ ⇤, ⇤⇤, and
⇤ are significant at 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively. Reported coefficient is for dummy indicating
if transaction completed during domestic banking crisis, using the crisis dates from Laeven and
Valencia (2010). All specifications include country⇥industry fixed e↵ects, the fraction of a firm
acquired, and macroeconomic controls lagged 4 quarters. Standard errors, clustered two-way at
the level of country⇥industry and month, in parentheses.




                                                31
            Table 8: Dependence on External Finance and the Probability of Acquisition

                                                          Panel A: Full Sample
                             Foreign    For. Fin.        For. Non-Fin.   For. Manuf.   For. Non-Manuf.
 External Finance           0.154***     0.019*            0.135***       0.116***         0.038*
                             (0.04)      (0.01)             (0.04)         (0.04)          (0.02)
 Banking Crisis             0.112***      0.026            0.086***       0.086***          0.026
                             (0.04)      (0.02)             (0.03)         (0.03)          (0.02)
 Banking Crisis⇥Ext.fin.      0.003      -0.065              0.068          0.054          -0.051
                             (0.11)      (0.04)             (0.10)         (0.11)          (0.06)
 No. obs.                    10,997      10,997             10,997         10,997          10,997
 R2                          0.1024      0.0223             0.1093         0.1005          0.0174


                                                              Panel B: Asia
                             Foreign    For. Fin.        For. Non-Fin.   For. Manuf.   For. Non-Manuf.
 External Finance            0.106**     0.021              0.085**        0.074*           0.032
                              (0.05)     (0.01)              (0.04)        (0.04)          (0.02)
 Banking Crisis             0.164***     0.025             0.140***       0.142***          0.022
                              (0.04)     (0.03)              (0.03)        (0.02)          (0.03)
 Banking Crisis⇥Ext.fin.      -0.117     -0.052              -0.065        -0.081          -0.036
                              (0.11)     (0.07)              (0.09)        (0.11)          (0.09)
 No. obs.                      7,881      7,881              7,881          7,881           7,881
 R2                          0.0793      0.0251             0.0809         0.0753          0.0210

Notes: Point estimates of linear probability model regression coefficients. Coefficients marked
⇤ ⇤ ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ are significant at 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively. Banking crisis dates from Laeven
and Valencia (2010). All specifications include country fixed e↵ects, the fraction of a firm acquired,
and macroeconomic controls lagged 4 quarters. Standard errors, clustered two-way at the level of
country⇥industry and month, in parentheses.




                                                    32
                 Table 9: Is Control Sought More Often During Banking Crises?


  Acquirer            Target                  Full Sample     Asia   Post-1997 Asia    Non-Asia
  Foreign             All                       -0.012      -0.011       -0.024         -0.026
                                                (0.02)      (0.03)       (0.04)         (0.02)
                                   No. obs.      9,313       5,167        4,435          4,146
                                     R2         0.0976      0.0755       0.0796         0.0752
  Foreign Fin.        All                       -0.048      -0.019       -0.037         -0.047
                                                (0.05)      (0.07)       (0.08)         (0.06)
                                   No. obs.      2,662       1,768        1,538           894
                                     R2         0.1449       0.135       0.1521         0.1204
  Foreign Non-Fin.    All                       -0.004      -0.018       -0.026         -0.014
                                                (0.02)      (0.04)       (0.04)         (0.03)
                                   No. obs.      6,651       3,399        2,897          3,252
                                     R2         0.0795      0.0676       0.0668         0.0651
  Foreign Non-Fin.    Non-Fin.                  -0.001      -0.004       -0.015         -0.017
                                                (0.02)      (0.04)       (0.04)         (0.03)
                                   No. obs.      6,400       3,233        2,759          3,167
                                     R2         0.0787      0.0663       0.0645         0.0637
  Foreign             Fin.                      -0.011      -0.023       -0.047         0.044
                                                (0.08)      (0.11)       (0.12)         (0.08)
                                   No. obs.      1,422        925          806            497
                                     R2         0.0704      0.0839       0.0907         0.0383
  Foreign             Non-Fin.                  -0.011      -0.005       -0.014         -0.034
                                                (0.02)      (0.03)       (0.03)         (0.02)
                                   No. obs.      7,891       4,242        3,629          3,649
                                     R2         0.0904      0.0685       0.0721         0.0703
  Foreign Non-Fin.    Same Ind.                 -0.007      -0.041       -0.054         -0.013
                                                (0.03)      (0.04)       (0.04)         (0.03)
                                   No. obs.      4,704       2,278        1,944          2,426
                                     R2         0.0897      0.0807       0.0817         0.0730


Notes: Point estimates of linear probability model coefficients. Coefficients marked ⇤ ⇤ ⇤, ⇤⇤, and
⇤ are significant at 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively. Dependent variable is a dummy indicating if
a controlling stake of 50% or more was acquired. Reported coefficient is for dummy variable that
shows if transaction completed during domestic banking crisis, using the crisis dates from Laeven
and Valencia (2010). All specifications include country⇥industry fixed e↵ects, the fraction of a
firm acquired, and macroeconomic controls lagged 4 quarters. Standard errors, clustered two-way
at the level of country⇥industry and month, in parentheses.




                                                33
                 Table 10: Are Larger Stakes Acquired During Banking Crises?


 Acquirer            Target                 Full Sample      Asia      Post-1997 Asia   Non-Asia
 Foreign             All                       -0.019*      -0.031*       -0.040**         -0.013
                                                (0.01)        (0.02         (0.02)         (0.01)
                                 No. obs.        5,710        2,792          2,438          2,918
                                   R2           0.0478       0.0456         0.0505        0.0386
 Foreign Fin.        All                        -0.014       -0.021         -0.038          0.007
                                                (0.02)       (0.03)         (0.04)         (0.02)
                                 No. obs.        1,187         687            603            500
                                   R2           0.1241       0.1064         0.1224        0.1556
 Foreign Non-Fin.    All                         -0.02       -0.036        -0.041*         -0.015
                                                (0.01)       (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.01)
                                 No. obs.        4,523        2,105          1,835          2,418
                                   R2           0.0506       0.0557         0.0635        0.0352
 Foreign Non-Fin.    Non-Fin.                   -0.019       -0.034        -0.040*         -0.015
                                                (0.01)       (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.01)
                                 No. obs.        4,371        2,004          1,752          2,367
                                   R2           0.0492       0.0523         0.0576        0.0340
 Foreign             Fin.                     -0.059***    -0.069***      -0.076**         -0.027
                                                (0.02)       (0.02)         (0.04)         (0.02)
                                 No. obs.         688          405            352            283
                                   R2           0.0616       0.0743          0.08         0.0798
 Foreign             Non-Fin.                   -0.015       -0.024         -0.033         -0.013
                                                (0.01)       (0.02)         (0.02)         (0.01)
                                 No. obs.        5,022        2,387          2,086          2,635
                                   R2           0.0465       0.0426         0.0477        0.0353
 Foreign Non-Fin.    Same Ind.                  -0.018       -0.001         -0.006        -0.027*
                                                (0.01)       (0.02)         (0.03)         (0.01)
                                 No. obs.        3,223        1,411          1,233          1,812
                                   R2           0.0597       0.0661         0.0714        0.0464


Notes: Point estimates of OLS coefficients. Coefficients marked ⇤ ⇤ ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ are significant at
1%, 5%, and 10% respectively. Dependent variable is the fraction of a firm acquired, conditional on
a controlling stake of 50% or more being acquired. Reported coefficient is for dummy variable that
shows if transaction completed during domestic banking crisis, using the crisis dates from Laeven
and Valencia (2010). All specifications include country⇥industry fixed e↵ects and macroeconomic
controls lagged 4 quarters. Standard errors, clustered two-way at the level of country⇥industry
and month, in parentheses.




                                                34
                        Table 11: Merger Duration and Individual Covariates
                                      Stake Acquired 50%

                                Full Sample         Asia   Post-1997 Asia   Non-Asia
             Foreign Acq.         -0.196***   -0.269***       -0.205*         -0.105
                                    (0.07)      (0.10)         (0.12)         (0.08)
             No. obs.               22,715      14,998         13,138          7,717
             Log L                -8,975.90   -6,202.50      -4,986.80       -2,765.9
             Banking Crisis         -0.163    -0.358***      -0.437***         0.207
                                    (0.13)      (0.10)         (0.10)         (0.17)
             No. obs.               22,715      14,998         13,138          7,717
             Log L                -8,979.50   -6,202.10      -4,981.50       -2,765.2
             Financial Crisis        -0.12    -0.358***      -0.437***        0.314*
                                    (0.13)      (0.10)         (0.10)         (0.18)
             No. obs.               22,715      14,998         13,138          7,717
             Log L                -8,980.50   -6,202.10      -4,981.50       -2,763.5
             Same Industry        -0.373***   -0.357***      -0.316***      -0.414***
                                    (0.05)      (0.06)         (0.06)         (0.12)
             No. obs.               22,715      14,998         13,138          7,717
             Log L                -8,954.00   -6,191.10      -4,978.60       -2,756.1
             Financial Acq.        0.403***    0.320***       0.219**        0.605***
                                    (0.07)      (0.07)         (0.09)         (0.12)
             No. obs.               22,715      14,998         13,138          7,717
             Log L                -8,955.30   -6,196.90      -4,985.30       -2,748.9
             For. Fin. Acq.        0.224**       0.136         0.127         0.369***
                                    (0.10)      (0.14)         (0.18)         (0.09)
             No. obs.               22,715      14,998         13,138          7,717
             Log L                -8,978.80   -6,208.10      -4,989.30       -2,763.3


Notes: Point estimates of Cox regression coefficients. Coefficients marked ⇤ ⇤ ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ are
significant at 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively. Banking crisis dates from Laeven and Valencia (2010)
and Laeven and Valencia (2008). All specifications stratified by country⇥industry. Also includes
fraction of a firm acquired and macroeconomic controls lagged 4 quarters. Standard errors, clustered
at the level of country⇥industry, in parentheses.




                                                35
       Table 12: The E↵ect of Crises on Merger Duration: All Acquirers
                           Stake Acquired 50%


                                        Panel A: Banking Crisis
                          Full Sample        Asia   Post-1997 Asia   Non-Asia
 F                         -0.195***     -0.290**        -0.205       -0.019
                             (0.07)       (0.12)         (0.15)       (0.08)
 C                            -0.25     -0.456***      -0.555***       0.273
                             (0.15)       (0.12)         (0.13)       (0.22)
 FC                           0.064        0.269          0.175       -0.433
                             (0.17)       (0.21)         (0.23)       (0.27)
No. obs.                     22,715       14,998         13,138       7,717
Log L                      -9,124.60    -6,291.00      -5,050.10     -2,819.8
H0 :    F   +   FC   =0     -0.131        -0.021         -0.030      -0.451*
H0 :    C   +   FC   =0     -0.186        -0.187        -0.380*       -0.160


                                        Panel B: Financial Crisis
                          Full Sample        Asia   Post-1997 Asia   Non-Asia
 F                         -0.194***     -0.290**        -0.205        0.010
                             (0.07)       (0.12)         (0.15)       (0.08)
 C                             -0.2     -0.456***      -0.555***     0.409**
                             (0.16)       (0.12)         (0.13)       (0.20)
 FC                           0.045        0.269          0.175      -0.481**
                             (0.15)       (0.21)         (0.23)       (0.19)
No. obs.                     22,715       14,998         13,138        7,717
Log L                      -9,126.20    -6,291.00      -5,050.10     -2,818.0
H0 :    F   +   FC   =0     -0.149        -0.021         -0.030      -0.471**
H0 :    C   +   FC   =0     -0.156        -0.187        -0.380*       -0.073

 Notes: Point estimates of Cox regression coefficients. Coefficients
 marked ⇤ ⇤ ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ are significant at 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively.
 Crisis dates from Laeven and Valencia (2010). All specifications strati-
 fied by country⇥industry. Also includes fraction of a firm acquired and
 macroeconomic controls lagged 4 quarters. Standard errors, clustered
 one-way at the level of country⇥industry, in parentheses.




                                        36
 Table 13: The E↵ect of Crises on Merger Duration: Financial Acquirers
                         Stake Acquired 50%


                                       Panel A: Banking Crisis
                         Full Sample        Asia   Post-1997 Asia   Non-Asia
 F                          0.024        -0.002         0.114         0.152
                            (0.11)       (0.18)         (0.24)       (0.11)
 C                          -0.239     -0.516***      -0.699***       0.277
                            (0.25)       (0.19)         (0.20)       (0.28)
 FC                          -0.11        -0.25         -0.421       -0.226
                            (0.30)       (0.37)         (0.42)       (0.56)
No. obs.                    7,249         5,046         4,312        2,203
Log L                     -3,085.80    -2,143.50      -1,652.50      -931.2
H0 :   F   +   FC   =0     -0.086       -0.253          -0.307       -0.074
H0 :   C   +   FC   =0     -0.349      -0.766**       -1.120***       0.051


                                       Panel B: Financial Crisis
                         Full Sample        Asia   Post-1997 Asia   Non-Asia
 F                          0.002        -0.002          0.114        0.114
                            (0.11)       (0.18)         (0.24)       (0.09)
 C                          -0.185     -0.516***      -0.699***       0.472
                            (0.29)       (0.19)         (0.20)       (0.40)
 FC                         0.013         -0.25         -0.421       -0.068
                            (0.24)       (0.37)         (0.42)       (0.36)
No. obs.                    7,249         5,046         4,312        2,203
Log L                     -3,087.10    -2,143.50      -1,652.50      -929.6
H0 :   F   +   FC   =0      0.015       -0.253          -0.307       0.046
H0 :   C   +   FC   =0     -0.172      -0.766**       -1.120***      0.404*

 Notes: Point estimates of Cox regression coefficients. Coefficients
 marked ⇤ ⇤ ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ are significant at 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively.
 Crisis dates from Laeven and Valencia (2010). All specifications strati-
 fied by country⇥industry. Also includes fraction of a firm acquired and
 macroeconomic controls lagged 4 quarters. Standard errors, clustered
 one-way at the level of country⇥industry, in parentheses.




                                       37
       Table 14: The E↵ect of Crises on Merger Duration: Same SIC
                         Stake Acquired 50%


                                       Panel A: Banking Crisis
                         Full Sample        Asia   Post-1997 Asia   Non-Asia
 F                         -0.175*     -0.350**        -0.196         0.040
                            (0.09)       (0.14)        (0.16)        (0.10)
 C                        -0.327**     -0.497**      -0.650***        0.027
                            (0.16)       (0.20)        (0.21)        (0.23)
 FC                         0.216        0.338          0.232        -0.110
                            (0.20)       (0.30)        (0.33)        (0.24)
No. obs.                   13,474        8,385          7,368         5,089
Log L                     -4,254.40    -2,720.20     -2,243.20      -1,525.3
H0 :   F   +   FC   =0      0.040        -0.012        0.036         -0.070
H0 :   C   +   FC   =0     -0.112        -0.159        -0.417        -0.084


                                       Panel B: Financial Crisis
                         Full Sample        Asia   Post-1997 Asia   Non-Asia
 F                         -0.152*     -0.350**        -0.196         0.117
                            (0.09)       (0.14)        (0.16)        (0.10)
 C                          -0.236     -0.497**      -0.650***        0.324
                            (0.16)       (0.20)        (0.21)        (0.20)
 FC                         0.077        0.338          0.232       -0.461**
                            (0.18)       (0.30)        (0.33)        (0.19)
No. obs.                   13,474        8,385          7,368         5,089
Log L                     -4,255.80    -2,720.20     -2,243.20      -1,523.8
H0 :   F   +   FC   =0     -0.075        -0.012        0.036        -0.344**
H0 :   C   +   FC   =0     -0.158        -0.159        -0.417        -0.137

 Notes: Point estimates of Cox regression coefficients. Coefficients
 marked ⇤ ⇤ ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ are significant at 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively.
 Crisis dates from Laeven and Valencia (2010). All specifications strati-
 fied by country⇥industry. Also includes fraction of a firm acquired and
 macroeconomic controls lagged 4 quarters. Standard errors, clustered
 one-way at the level of country⇥industry, in parentheses.




                                       38
    Table 15: Merger Duration and External Finance Dependence


                              Panel A: Foreign Acquisitions
                          Full Sample     Asia     Post-1997 Asia
      External Finance       -0.683      -0.216        -0.126
                             (0.61)      (0.69)        (0.86)
      Banking Crisis         0.225        0.625         0.586
                             (0.27)      (0.41)        (0.57)
      Bank⇥Ext.fin.          -0.983      -1.495        -1.642
                             (0.78)      (1.03)        (1.16)
      No. obs.               2,703        1,472         1,282
      Log L                  -710.9      -363.0        -290.8


                              Panel B: Domestic Acquisitions
                          Full Sample     Asia     Post-1997 Asia
      External Finance       -0.049       0.273         0.344
                             (0.34)      (0.35)        (0.35)
      Banking Crisis         -0.378      -0.236        -0.334
                             (0.26)      (0.35)        (0.39)
      Bank⇥Ext.fin.          -0.326      -1.556        -1.732
                             (0.91)      (1.50)        (1.52)
      No. obs.               4,986        3,605         3,158
      Log L                 -1,935.6    -1,506.3      -1,187.2

Notes: Point estimates of Cox regression coefficients. Coefficients
marked ⇤ ⇤ ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ are significant at 1%, 5%, and 10% respectively.
Crisis dates from Laeven and Valencia (2010). All specifications strati-
fied by country⇥industry. Also includes fraction of a firm acquired and
macroeconomic controls lagged 4 quarters. Standard errors, clustered
at the level of country⇥industry, in parentheses.




                                  39
             Table 16: Identity of Buyers in Flipped Deals
                         Stake Acquired 50%


                                      Full Sample     Asia

              F                        -0.510***    -0.625***
                                         (0.04)       (0.04)
              C                         -0.086**      -0.069
                                         (0.04)       (0.06)
              FC                          0.131       0.131
                                         (0.08)       (0.12)
             No. obs.                     1,525       1,006
             R2                          0.3828       0.4363
             H0 :   F   +   FC   =0    -0.379***    -0.494***
             H0 :   C   +   FC   =0      0.046        0.062

Notes: Point estimates of linear probability model coefficients. Coeffi-
cients marked ⇤ ⇤ ⇤, ⇤⇤, and ⇤ are significant at 1%, 5%, and 10% respec-
tively. Dependent variable is a dummy indicating if acquisition flipped
to a domestic firm. Crisis dates from Laeven and Valencia (2010). All
specifications include country⇥industry fixed e↵ects, the fraction of a
firm acquired, and macroeconomic controls lagged 4 quarters. Standard
errors, clustered two-way at the level of country⇥industry and month,
in parentheses.




                                      40
