                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      LAWYERS AS AGENTS OF THE DEVIL IN A PRISONER'S DILEMMA GAME:
                    EVIDENCE FROM LONG RUN PLAY

                                      Orley C. Ashenfelter
                                        David E. Bloom
                                        Gordon B. Dahl

                                       Working Paper 18834
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18834


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2013




The authors are grateful to the Russell Sage and Alfred P. Sloan Foundations for financial support.
An early version of this paper, with limited data on arbitration cases in New Jersey, appeared as a
1993 NBER working paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Orley C. Ashenfelter, David E. Bloom, and Gordon B. Dahl. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Lawyers as Agents of the Devil in a Prisoner's Dilemma Game: Evidence from Long Run
Play
Orley C. Ashenfelter, David E. Bloom, and Gordon B. Dahl
NBER Working Paper No. 18834
February 2013
JEL No. J52,K0

                                              ABSTRACT

Do the parties in a typical dispute face incentives similar to those in the classic prisoner’s dilemma
game? In this paper, we explore whether the costs and benefits of legal representation are such that
each party seeks legal representation in the hope of exploiting the other party, while knowing full well
that failing to do so will open up the possibility of being exploited. The paper first shows how it is
possible to test for the presence of such an incentive structure in a typical dispute resolution system.
It then reports estimates of the incentives for the parties to obtain legal representation in wage disputes
that were settled by final-offer arbitration in New Jersey. The paper also reports briefly on similar
studies of data from discharge grievances, court-annexed disputes in Pittsburgh, and child custody
disputes in California. In each case, the data provide evidence that the parties face strong individual
incentives to obtain legal representation which makes the parties jointly worse off. Using our New
Jersey data, we find that expert agents may well have played a productive role in moderating the biases
of their clients, but only early on in the history of the system. Over time, the parties slowly evolved
to a non-cooperative equilibrium where the use of lawyers becomes nearly universal, despite the fact
that agreeing not to hire lawyers is cheaper and does not appear to alter arbitration outcomes.


Orley C. Ashenfelter                                 Gordon B. Dahl
Industrial Relations Section                         Department of Economics
Firestone Library                                    University of California, San Diego
Princeton University                                 9500 Gilman Drive #0508
Princeton, NJ 08544                                  La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER                                             and NBER
c6789@princeton.edu                                  gdahl@ucsd.edu

David E. Bloom
Harvard School of Public Health
Department of Global Health and Population
665 Huntington Ave.
Boston, MA 02115
and NBER
dbloom@hsph.harvard.edu
“The nickname Prisoner’s Dilemma, attributed to A.W. Tucker, derives from the original
anecdote used to illustrate the game. Two prisoners, held incommunicado, are charged with the
same crime. They can be convicted only if either confesses. Further, if only one confesses, he is
set free for having turned state’s evidence and is given a reward to boot. The prisoner who has
held out is convicted on the strength of the other’s testimony and is given a more severe sentence
than if he had also confessed. It is in the interest of each to confess whatever the other does. But
it is in their collective interest to hold out.”

                                                       --Rapoport and Chammah (1965)

I. Introduction

       This paper explores the possibility that the parties to a typical dispute face incentives very

similar to those faced by the prisoners in the classic dilemma described above. The goal is to

explore the possibility that the costs and benefits of legal representation are structured so that

each individual party seeks representation in the hope of exploiting the other party, while

knowing full well that failing to do so will open up the possibility of being exploited.

       In the prisoner's dilemma the players are faced with incentives that may lead to behavior

that is not in the best interests of either party. The incentive structures embedded in such

institutions provide a payoff to each party for engaging in noncooperative behavior. The mere

existence of such incentives is not enough to produce the prisoner's dilemma, however. In order

to produce inefficiency the payoffs to noncooperative behavior must be larger than the costs.

Determining whether a particular institution embodies the incentives associated with the

prisoner's dilemma thus requires determining whether the individual benefits to engaging in

noncooperative behavior are likely to exceed the costs.

       The first part of this paper shows how it is possible to test for the presence of an incentive

structure like the one in a prisoner's dilemma game in a typical dispute resolution system. The

goal is to measure the payoff matrix faced by the parties. Although the analysis is framed in the

context of an arbitration system it could equally as well be applied to any dispute resolution




                                                  1
system, including the court system. The second part of the paper reports estimates of the

incentives for the parties to obtain legal representation in wage disputes that were settled by

final-offer arbitration in New Jersey. 1 The paper also reports briefly on similar studies of data

from (1) the arbitration of discharge grievances, (2) the arbitration of court-annexed disputes in

Pittsburgh, and (3) the settlement of child custody disputes in California. All of these data

provide evidence that the parties face strong individual incentives to obtain legal representation.

Whether these incentives lead to excessive legal representation that has no social benefit is

discussed in the final section of the paper. Using our New Jersey data, we find some evidence

that lawyers may well have improved outcomes by moderating client biases early on in the

history of the system. However, over time, the parties slowly evolved to a non-cooperative

equilibrium where the use of lawyers becomes nearly universal, despite the fact that agreeing not

to hire lawyers is cheaper and does not appear to alter arbitration outcomes.


II. Incentives for Noncooperation

        The theoretical literature on the economics of litigation, particularly game theory applied

to law, is extensive. In contrast, there has been less empirical work, consisting of a few

experimental papers on game theory and litigation and some empirical work in field settings. 2

The main contribution of this paper is to lay out a simple model of the role lawyers play in

dispute resolution, and empirically test whether the incentives present in such systems generate a

prisoner’s dilemma.


1
  A related, but more technical analysis of New Jersey’s arbitration system, can be found in Ashenfelter
and Dahl (2012).
2
  For a summary of theoretical models of negotiation and legal services, see Spier (2007). Prominent
papers in this literature include Katz (1988), Kerkmeester (1995), P’ng (1983), Reinganum and Wilde
(1986), Rong (2011), and Spier (1994). Experimental papers on game theory and litigation include
Ashenfelter, Currie, Farber, and Spiegel (1992), Kritikos (2006), and Plott and Coughlan (2002). Greiner
and Pattanayak (2012) provide an example of empirical work in a field setting.


                                                   2
       We lay out the incentives for noncooperation in the setting of labor disputes, although the

discussion could easily be applied to other environments as well. We assume the employer seeks

the highest net value added (the value of the workers’ output less their costs) consistent with

recruiting enough workers, and the union seeks to receive the highest labor costs consistent with

the continued viability of the employer. In the typical case where arbitration is used to settle

such labor disputes, workers and employers have long term relationships they would like to see

continue indefinitely. However, it is necessary to change the terms of the employment

agreement as the external labor market changes, and this causes disputes over just how much the

compensation of these workers should increase.

       To avoid costly strikes, arbitration is sometimes used as the procedure to resolve these

compensation disputes. In most labor disputes, and as we model them in this section, the two

parties are disagreeing over next year’s wage increase, expressed in percent terms. For example,

the union may wish for a 6% increase in wages while the employer may be arguing for a 2%

increase in wages. The arbitrator, as a third entity, has his own idea of what would be a

reasonable increase in wages in percent terms; often the arbitrator’s preferred wage increase lies

somewhere between the demands of the two parties.

       It is now widely agreed that if the parties submit their disputes to arbitration, they will be

facing some uncertainty over just what wage increase the arbitrator will select (see Ashenfelter

and Bloom 1984, Farber and Bazerman 1986, Bloom 1986, Ashenfelter 1987, and Olson,

Dell'Omo, and Jarley 1992). Suppose the distribution from which the arbitral awards come has a

normal distribution, with mean u and standard deviation s. If the old wage rate is w and

employment is e, then the increase in the wage bill that the parties may expect if they go to

arbitration without employing agents is weu (i.e., the old wage multiplied by the number of



                                                 3
employees multiplied by the expected percent increase in wages as decided on by the arbitrator).

       Now let us consider the payoff to the union if the union employs an agent, but the

employer does not. Suppose that by employing an agent the union may expect to improve the

mean of the distribution from which the arbitrators’ awards are drawn by the quantity a. This

shift is depicted in Figure 1. It follows that if the union proceeds to arbitration and employs an

agent it will expect to receive the wage bill we(u+a). Assuming the agent's fee is x', the net

wage bill expected if an agent is retained is we(u+a)-x'. The increase in the wage bill that the

union may expect from employing an agent is thus wea-x', and the proportionate increase is a-x

(where x=x'/we, the proportion that legal costs are of the wage bill.)

       The employer’s net value added if the union engages an agent, but the employer does not,

is z-we(u+a), where z represents the value of the union's work. The employer's net value added

if neither party engages an agent is z-weu. The increase in the net value added to the employer as

a proportion of the wage bill is thus -a for the case where the union employs an agent and the

employer does not.

       The upper right hand corner of the matrix in Table 1 contains the payoffs to the employer

(the first entry) and the union (the second entry) as calculated above for the case where the union

retains an agent and the employer does not. (The payoffs are expressed relative to the case

where neither party retains an agent and the payoffs in this latter case are normalized to zero.)

The remaining parts of the payoff matrix are easily filled in by the same type of analysis. For

simplicity it is assumed that if an employer retains an agent it has the same effect on the

distribution of arbitral awards as when the union retains an agent. This makes the payoff matrix

symmetric, although it is by no means necessary.

       The payoff matrix in Table 1 represents a prisoner's dilemma if a-x>0. For in this case it




                                                 4
pays for the union to retain an agent regardless of what the employer does. If the employer does

not retain an agent, the union receives a wage bill increase of a-x, which is greater than 0. (The

payoff a-x is called “the temptation” in the extensive literature on the prisoner's dilemma.)

Likewise, if the employer does retain an agent, the union is certainly better off doing so also

since -x>-a. (The quantity -a is called the “sucker's payoff”!) In sum, the union is better off

employing an agent regardless of what the employer does.

        It is easy to see that when a-x>0, precisely the same reasoning applies to the employer's

choices. In this case the employer is also better off employing an agent regardless of what the

union does. The end result: if the union and the employer do what is in their individual best

interests they both retain agents and expend the resources 2x, but the arbitration results are

precisely the same as what would have occurred if neither union nor employer had retained

agents. The private demand for legal services generated in this way is clearly socially

inefficient.

        It is well known that the existence of a payoff matrix like the one in Table 1 creates

incentives for the parties to arrive at cooperative contracts. In particular, if the game is modeled

as an infinitely repeated game, the Folk Theorem implies that each of the parties will select the

cooperative outcome and not hire agents, as long as the discount rate is high enough.

        It is also clear, however, that making such contracts may well be impossible if the parties

do not have repeated disputes (or relatively infrequent disputes). Additionally, there are other

contexts such as tort litigation where ex ante contracting is impossible. An enormous literature

in experimental psychology attempts to clarify the conditions under which cooperation may be

expected (for example, see Rapoport 1965 and Axelrod 1984). Suffice it to say here that in the

experimental literature the parties do often manage to arrive at the cooperative result. Moreover,




                                                  5
cooperation tends to increase with experience and with the extent to which the parties appreciate

the social dilemma in which they are trapped, while it tends to decrease with the magnitude of

“the temptation” to cheat.

       It is easy to generalize the payoff matrix and still keep the basic structure of a prisoner's

dilemma game. For example, there is no reason why the payoff to retaining an agent must be the

same for each party. Suppose that the mean arbitral award is increased by a" when the union

alone retains an agent, and that the mean arbitral award is decreased by a' when the employer

alone retains an agent. The upper right hand corner of the payoff matrix then contains the

elements (-a", a"-x), while the lower left hand corner of the payoff matrix contains the elements

(a'-x, -a'). These payoffs represent a prisoner's dilemma if a'-x>0 and a"-x>0, since in this case

"the temptation" to behave noncooperatively exists for both parties. Moreover, the dominant

strategies where both parties retain agents is strictly inefficient only if a'-a"-x<0 and a"-a'-x<0.

       A similar generalization could be made for costs, with one party facing lower costs than

the other. If the employer faces costs x' and the union faces costs x", then the dominant

strategies where both parties retain agents is strictly inefficient only if a'-a"-x'<0 and a"-a'-x"<0.

The goal in this paper is to estimate the parameters a' and a" so as to test for the existence of a

prisoner’s dilemma. As we will document in our empirical analysis for wage disputes in New

Jersey, our estimates of a' and a" are approximately equal to each other. This symmetry in

benefits implies that the non-cooperative outcome is suboptimal for both parties, as they both

retain agents and spend x' and x". However, the arbitration results are no different (in

expectation) as what would have happened if neither side had hired costly agents.

       Note that if there is heterogeneity in costs and benefits for different bargaining pairs (e.g.,

if one party can hire an agent more cheaply than the other), this could explain why in some cases




                                                  6
one party hires a lawyer while the other party does not. In cases where it is optimal for one party

to hire a lawyer but not the other, there is no prisoner’s dilemma. Only bargaining pairs ending

up in the non-cooperative outcome represent a prisoner’s dilemma.

        Another generalization of the payoff matrix would be to let the benefit a or the cost x be

random variables. There is likely to be a great deal of uncertainty regarding the lawyer’s

contribution and to a lesser extent, the lawyer’s fees. 3 In this case, a prisoner’s dilemma results

if the expected value of the benefit minus the cost of hiring a lawyer is greater than zero, i.e., if

E[a-x]>0. Uncertainty can help explain why some parties might be observed on the off-diagonal

cells of the matrix. In particular, some parties may underestimate or overestimate the benefits to

hiring a lawyer, particularly when they have little experience from which to form expectations.

Additionally, notice that if employers or unions are risk-averse, they may employ agents even in

cases where a-x is negative in expectation. 4

        A final modification of the payoff matrix may be appropriate if the amount of the parties’

expenditure on legal resources influences the amount by which the mean of the distribution of

arbitral awards is shifted when an agent is retained. For example, suppose that the payoff to the

union, in the case where the employer does not retain an agent, increases with additional

expenditure on the agent. That is, suppose that a=a(x), with da/dx>0. The union will calculate

that the optimal amount to spend on their agent requires that a(x)-x be maximized, which occurs

when da/dx=1. As a first approximation, this implies that da=dx, or that the incremental payoff

to retaining an agent be equal to the costs of doing so. In this scenario, the improvement in the


3
  Uncertainty in fees could arise if lawyers are paid on an hourly basis rather than a fixed fee.
4
  With risk aversion, parties will seek lawyers for even more negative values of a-x as the variance in the
non-represented outcome increases. In many instances clients may use lawyers to avoid stepping on the
legal land mines they may encounter without professional advice. In final offer arbitration, a system we
discuss shortly, the offer of the other side limits just how bad the non-represented case can turn out.



                                                     7
outcome that the parties obtain by retaining an agent is, at the margin, appropriated by the agent.

This suggests that an indirect way to measure the fee an agent receives may be available from an

analysis of the empirical payoff matrix. In short, a (or a' and a") may well be indirect measures

of the magnitude of the agents' fees. 5


III. Lawyers and the Arbitration of Wage Disputes

A. Final Offer Arbitration

        In some cases it may be possible to quantify explicitly the payoffs a and a-x by

contrasting the numerical outcomes of a dispute resolution system in each of the four cases

indicated by the matrix. In other cases it is only possible to observe who is adjudged the victor

in some dispute. This is the situation in final-offer arbitration. In particular, under final-offer

arbitration each party submits a proposed wage increase. The arbitrator must select one or the

other of these offers without compromise. This is in contrast to conventional arbitration, where

the arbitrator often specifies a salary increase between the proposals of the two sides.

        In our empirical example, final offer arbitration was the default procedure for resolving

disputes in the public sector in New Jersey from 1978 to 1995. New Jersey law specifies that

police and fire department workers, and their municipal employers, enter into arbitration if they

can not reach an agreement 60 days before a contract expires. Formal arbitration proceedings

involve the choice of an arbitrator, several intermediate hearings where documentation is passed

back and forth, and a final hearing where the arbitrator provides the ruling. At each of the points

where the parties interact, they can observe whether the other party has retained an expert agent

and can respond by hiring an agent for future interactions if it is in their best interest.


5
  Another extension would be to allow lawyers to increase the surplus to be split. When there is a single
issue under dispute, like a salary increase, a model without this feature seems natural. But in other
settings with multiple dimensions over which to bargain, lawyers could increase the surplus.


                                                    8
       Since there are often large gaps between such interactions, there is time value to hiring an

agent. The proceedings usually span several months and can often take a year or longer.

Therefore, it is natural to think the payoff to hiring an agent will increase by every month and for

every additional hearing the agent is on the case. We do not observe the timing of when agents

are hired, so we will not formally model this time value. However, it plays an important

background role in terms of generating a prisoner’s dilemma. If there were no time value, then

there would be no advantage to hiring an agent first (since the other party would respond by

hiring an agent instantaneously), and therefore a prisoner’s dilemma could not exist.


B. Estimation Procedure

       A simple model that has been remarkably successful in several final offer applications

assumes that the arbitrator first decides what would be a reasonable award, and then selects

whichever offer is closest to it (see Farber 1980, Ashenfelter and Bloom 1984, Farber and

Bazerman 1986, Ashenfelter, Dow, and Gallagher 1986, and Olson, Dell'Omo and Jarley 1992).

If we denote the arbitrator's numerical award by y, and the employer and union offers by m and n

(where m<n), the employer's offer is selected if y-m<n-y, which is true if y<(m+n)/2. Since y

has a normal distribution with mean u and standard deviation s, it follows that the probability the

employer’s offer is selected is Pe=F{[(m+n)/2s]-u/s}, where F{.} is the value of the cumulative

unit normal distribution function. Pe=F{.} is a probit function, with argument (m+n)/2, the mean

of the employer and union offers. The constant in this probit function, -u/s, is the negative of the

(standardized) mean of the distribution of arbitrator awards, while the slope, 1/s, is the reciprocal

of the standard deviation of this distribution. Graphically, the probability the employer’s offer is

chosen as a function of the average of the two offers is given by the shaded area in Figure 2.

       As described in the previous paragraph, there is a common distribution from which



                                                  9
arbitrator’s decisions are drawn, rather than different distributions for each arbitrator. This

modeling choice is motivated by the incentives in many systems which try to make arbitrators

impartial and statistically indistinguishable from each other. For example, in our primary

example of wage disputes, the arbitrator is chosen with veto input from each of the parties, so

that systematically pro-union or pro-employer arbitrators will never hear a case.

       With this setup it is a relatively easy matter to determine what the payoff matrix must

look like in terms of the underlying probability of an employer victory. In particular, suppose

that p represents the value of Pe that results when neither union nor employer retain an agent.

Then, to first order, the probability that the employer will be victorious (holding constant both

the employer and union offers) when only the union retains an agent is p-fa/s, where f is the unit

normal density function (evaluated at the same point as p). In effect the mean of the distribution

of arbitrator awards is increased by a when the union retains an agent, and this decreases the

probability of an employer victory by fa/s (since -f/s is the derivative of Pe with respect to u).

Figure 3 illustrates the decrease in the probability of an employer victory when the union hires a

lawyer relative to neither side hiring a lawyer. By the same reasoning, when the employer

retains an agent, but the union does not, the probability of an employer victory increases by fa/s.

Finally, when both parties retain agents the probability of an employer victory is identical to the

case when both parties refrain from engaging agents.

       Table 2 contains the payoff matrix translated into the implied probabilities of an

employer victory as a function of each of the strategies available to the parties. The symmetry of

the payoff matrix translates into symmetry in the probabilities of an employer victory. The most

important difference between the payoff matrix and the table of implied probabilities of an

employer victory is the absence of any role for the agent's fees in the latter. This is an important




                                                  10
point, because in some applications it is not possible to measure the payoff matrix directly. A

necessary condition for the presence of a prisoner's dilemma payoff structure is that fa/s>0,

which occurs if a>0. This condition will be satisfied if the probability of a union victory, given

that the employer does not retain an agent, is greater when the union employs an agent than when

it does not. However, finding this to be the case is not sufficient to guarantee that the prisoner's

dilemma incentive structure exists. It is also necessary that the union's increased payoff be

greater than the cost of obtaining it. That is, we require that a-x>0, not just that a>0.

Unfortunately, it is not possible to determine whether this is the case from an examination of the

probability structure alone. In the case of final-offer arbitration there is a fairly natural method

for translating from the observed probabilities to the underlying payoff structure, but this need

not always be the case.

        Asymmetry in the payoff matrix will translate into asymmetry in the probability of an

employer victory. If the decrease in the mean of the distribution of arbitral awards is a' when the

employer retains an agent, the probability of an employer victory when the employer retains an

agent and the union does not becomes p+fa'/s. Similarly, if the increase in the mean of the

distribution of arbitral awards is a" when the union retains an agent, the probability of an

employer victory when the union retains an agent but the employer does not becomes p-fa"/s.

The probability of an employer victory when both parties retain an agent is thus p+f(a'-a")/s.

Although the matrix of probabilities no longer retains the symmetric simplicity of Table 2, it is

still the case that the probability in the lower right hand cell of the matrix is a simple linear

combination of the probabilities in the remaining three cells of the matrix. This is, of course, a

restriction that may be tested.

        In our main example of arbitrated wage disputes in New Jersey, we will be able to use the




                                                  11
data to say something about the payoff structure of the prisoner’s dilemma game discussed in

this section. In particular, we will estimate a model which allows the parties to maximize the

expected payoff to hiring an agent. This expected payoff will be a function of both the

probability of winning and the wage outcome if they win. In other examples we discuss, it is

more difficult to attach a valuation to an employer or union victory. These examples serve as

cases which are consistent with a prisoner’s dilemma payoff structure, but are less definitive.


C. Empirical Results

        We collected data on all public sector wage disputes resolved by final-offer arbitration in

New Jersey from 1978 to 1995. This period corresponds to the era when final-offer arbitration

was the default procedure for the settlement of contract disputes by public safety workers

(mainly police officers). 6 To improve data accuracy, two readers independently entered data for

each case docket onto a standard form. Any discrepancies were the rechecked and entered by a

third individual. We collected data for 814 cases with available information on lawyer use; 620

of these cases also had information on the employer’s and union’s final offers.

        Simple summary statistics reveal several interesting facts. First, the arbitrators have

typically been more likely to select the union's offer than the employer's offer: employers won

39% of the cases submitted to arbitration during the time period 1978 to 1995. This result is

inconsistent with the notion that the equilibrium outcome in this dispute resolution system is a

simple 50% victory rate for the employer. Moreover, the probability of obtaining these results if

p=.5 is extremely small. This suggests that either the parties are not behaving symmetrically


6
 Richard Lester participated in the design of this arbitration system and followed its development
continuously since its founding in 1978. For details see Lester (1989) and Bloom (1980). Starting in
1996, the default procedure switched to conventional arbitration (where the arbitrator is not bound to
choose the final offer of one of the parties).



                                                    12
when they submit their final offers, or the arbitrators are not treating the parties’ offers

symmetrically.

        The rate at which employers and unions use lawyers suggests an alternative explanation

for these unbalanced win/loss records. Unions are far more likely to enlist the assistance of a

professional agent in selecting an arbitrator, preparing the arbitration case, and in presenting this

case to the arbitrator. In the period from 1978 to 1995, unions employed lawyers in 83 percent

of arbitration cases compared to only 62 percent for employers. If the parties obtain an

advantage from retaining an agent, then the fact that the unions are much more likely to retain an

agent than are the employers may account for the greater probability that their offer is selected

by the arbitrator.

        Table 3 provides the empirical analogue to the matrix of predicted probabilities contained

in Table 2. This matrix is remarkably similar to the predicted one. The probabilities along the

diagonal are nearly equal, and the matrix is fairly close to symmetric. In fact, the advantage to

the employer of retaining an agent (an increased win rate of 30 percentage points), is slightly

greater than the advantage to the union of retaining an agent (an increased win rate of 22

percentage points). In an additive model this implies that the employer win rate when both

parties retain an agent should be 49%, while it is actually only 45%. Despite these small

discrepancies, a formal statistical test does not reject the symmetry hypothesis (at the .05

confidence level).

        Although the results in Table 3 are suggestive, they suffer from two deficiencies. First,

they do not control for the offers the parties have made. If these offers are correlated with the

probability that the parties retain an agent, then the results in Table 3 may simply reflect the

possibility that the parties who retain agents make less aggressive offers than those who don't.




                                                  13
Second, the probability matrix in Table 3 does not allow comparison of the financial payoffs

associated with retaining an agent against the costs.

        Table 4 remedies these problems. It contains the results of fitting a probit function to the

actual arbitrator selections. The probit function contains the mean of the parties' final offers

(which are expressed as percent increases in wages), year dummies, and dummy variables

indicating whether the union or employer retained a lawyer. 7 The probit estimates reveal that

hiring a lawyer increases the chance of a party winning by about 25% for both the employer and

the union. The coefficients on the lawyer dummy variables can be translated into estimates of

the shifts in the distribution of arbitral awards that result from retaining an agent. The estimated

shifts control for the offers made by the parties and indicate that when the union retains an agent

the distribution of awards is shifted upward by 2.12%. Likewise, the results indicate that when

the employer retains an agent the distribution of awards is shifted downward by 2.48%. These

shifts are statistically significant (at the .05 significance level) and represent a change of about

two-thirds of a standard deviation of the arbitrator’s preferred distribution of awards.

        The empirical results in Table 4 imply that a>0, and that each party increases the chance

their offer will be accepted when they retain agents. There still remains the question of whether

the benefits are worth the cost, however. It seems very likely that they are. A permanent

increase in the compensation of a police officer by 1% would have a discounted present value of

perhaps $2,000 to $3,000. Legal fees are typically said to be about $5,000 per case for the union,

and up to $15,000 per case for the employer (see Lester 1989). It would take a bargaining unit of

only 5 to 10 employees to make it well worth the cost for each party individually to retain an

agent. In short, it appears that the incentive structure in New Jersey’s final-offer arbitration


7
 There are fewer observations in Table 4 compared to Table 3, since information on the final offers of the
parties is not available for all cases.


                                                   14
system creates a prisoner's dilemma.

        A potential limitation with the analysis is the possibility that some omitted variable is

influencing the outcomes, and that it is correlated with whether the parties retain an agent. In

this case the estimated differential payoffs to retaining an agent may be systematically biased. 8

Apart from implementing a field experiment with randomized trials, however, this type of

omitted variable bias is a potential problem for all empirical studies. While our results should be

interpreted with this caution in mind, at a minimum, tests of the prisoner's dilemma incentive

structures set out here should be used to investigate other dispute resolution systems, including

the court system.

        Although possible endogeneity cannot be addressed with our available data, a few field

studies that have controlled for the presence of counsel through randomization tend to find a

positive effect of having counsel. Greiner and Pattanayak (2012) found a modest improvement

in the outcome of appeals to state administrative law judges based on a randomized offer of

counsel. Stapleton and Teitelbaum (1972) found a statistically significant benefit in terms of

delinquency findings for juveniles offered lawyers. Seron et al. (2001) found that tenants offered

lawyers suffered significantly fewer adverse outcomes than tenants not offered lawyers.

        There are several questions raised by our findings for final offer arbitration in New

Jersey, including why the unrepresented parties don’t retain lawyers and whether the parties can

sustain cooperative behavior over time. These, of course, are precisely the puzzles raised in the

extensive empirical literature about the prisoner's dilemma based on experimental games. Before


8
  For example, suppose lawyers refuse to represent employers or unions with weak cases. Then the use of
lawyers might be correlated with higher success rates, even though the driving factor is the strength of the
case. In discharge grievances, custody battles, and other types of disputes where details of the case are
largely based on what occurred in the past, lawyer screening of clients is more likely to be an important
issue. In disputes over wages or benefits, however, the lawyer can always change the strength of the case
by convincing his client to make a more reasonable final offer.


                                                    15
exploring these important questions with our New Jersey data, we first present evidence on the

incentives to retain agents in other systems in the following section.


IV. Incentives to Retain Agents in other Systems

A. Discharge Grievances

          Union contracts commonly specify that if an employee is unfairly treated, he or she may

formally object to the treatment. The employee does this by filing a grievance. If the grievance

cannot be settled through negotiation, then it is usually presented to an arbitrator for decision.

          Grievances may be filed for many different reasons, but a common case is one where an

employee has been discharged for some behavior that is unacceptable to the employer. Block

and Stieber (1987) have reported a very thorough study of a sample of discharge grievances,

which includes arbitrator decisions that are both published and unpublished. In their study Block

and Stieber estimated the probability that a discharge grievance would be denied (the union

loses) as a function of whether the parties did or did not retain attorneys to assist in the selection

of the arbitrator, and in the preparation and presentation of their case to the arbitrator. The

results of their study are contained in the probability matrix in Table 5. 9

          The results in Table 5 are similar to those in Table 3, and they are consistent with the

prisoner’s dilemma incentive structure of Table 2. As before, arbitrator decisions favor unions in

more than 50% of disputes, even when both parties retain lawyers. Like the New Jersey final-

offer arbitration cases, the probability matrix here is somewhat asymmetric, but here the

asymmetry indicates that the probability of a union victory is changed by more when the union

retains a lawyer than when the employer retains a lawyer.

          One unusual feature of the Block and Stieber study is the presence in the data of many


9
    An additional example using discharge grievances can be found in Wagar (1994).


                                                    16
disputes decided by the same arbitrator. The results in Table 5 control (through the introduction

of arbitrator dummy variables) for the arbitrator in the case. As a result, Table 5 implies that the

effectiveness of lawyers in changing outcomes is not due primarily to their ability in helping the

parties to select arbitrators that will be more favorably disposed toward their cases.

       It is not possible to convert the probabilities in Table 5 into a payoff matrix of the form in

Table 1 because it is difficult to attach a valuation to a union or employer victory. Presumably,

the union worker's loss is the discounted present value of the difference between his or her wage

in the unionized job and his or her wage elsewhere. Union wage premiums are generally

estimated to be around 10%, so a job that would otherwise pay $25,000 may generate a premium

of $2,500 per year, or a discounted present value of perhaps $25,000. Since the union increases

its victory rate by 18 percentage points by hiring a lawyer, the legal fee for a discharge case

could approach $5,000 before the payoff would no longer make it worthwhile for the union to

retain a lawyer. Precisely how to value the employer's victory in such a case is an open question.

       In sum, the data from the grievance arbitration cases suggests the effect of retaining legal

representation on the probability of each party being victorious is substantial. Reasonable

calculations suggest it is quite possible that the incentive structure in the grievance arbitration

system represents a prisoner's dilemma.


B. Arbitration of Court Claims

       For a variety of reasons several courts have adopted a procedure whereby the parties in a

civil lawsuit submit their claims to arbitration. Adler, Hensler, and Nelson (1983) examine the

outcomes of such an arbitration system which has been operating in Pittsburgh for over thirty

years. In their study, Adler, Hensler, and Nelson estimate the percentage of a plaintiff's claim

that is awarded to the plaintiff as a function of whether the parties retain a lawyer. The results of



                                                  17
this study are contained in the estimated payoff matrix in Table 6. These data have very similar

implications to those contained in Tables 3 and 5. Again, the payoff matrix is only

approximately symmetric. Here the advantage to using a lawyer is greater for the defendant than

the plaintiff.

        An especially useful feature of the data in Table 6 is that they are a very natural

representation for the payoff matrix. Suppose, for example, the plaintiff's attorney is paid on the

traditional contingent fee basis. In this form of payment the plaintiff's fee is established as one-

third of the award, if any. According to Table 6, a plaintiff who retains a lawyer may expect to

obtain 82% of his or her claim if the defendant does not use a lawyer. Such a plaintiff must

expect to pay about 27% of the claim to the lawyer, however. On the other hand, the expected

advantage to the plaintiff of retaining a lawyer is 22% (82%-60%) of the claim. The result: The

advantage to the plaintiff is just about equal to the cost.

        The payoff matrix in Table 6 also demonstrates the real costs of legal representation.

Suppose that the plaintiff pays his or her attorney in accord with the contingent fee system. If

the plaintiff retains an attorney and the defendant does not, then the plaintiff expects to have a

net payoff of 55% (82%-27%) of the claim. This is slightly below the 60% of the claim that the

plaintiff may expect if the defendant does not retain a lawyer. On the other hand, if the plaintiff

and the defendant both retain attorneys, then the plaintiff may expect to receive only 43% (65%-

22%) of the claim. Nevertheless, if the plaintiff does not retain an attorney, he or she may well

be stuck with the “sucker's payoff” of only 24% of the claim.

        After a careful study of lawyer’s costs, Adler, Hensler, and Nelson conclude that,

“...taking into account the amount they spend on legal fees, represented litigants can expect to

obtain better net outcomes, on average, than litigants who appear pro se” (that is, unrepresented




                                                  18
by lawyers). 10 This, of course, is precisely what we should expect if the incentive structure in

the Pittsburgh arbitration system represents a prisoner's dilemma.


C. Child Custody Disputes

        Among the most difficult disputes to study are those that arise from the breakup of the

family. Among other problems, monetary valuations of the various outcomes of the dispute are

difficult, if not impossible, to establish by an outside observer. One of the most contentious

issues in such disputes is the question of who will retain physical custody of the child of two

divorced parents. In an empirical study, Mnookin, Maccoby, Depner, and Albiston (1989) have

presented some data on the outcomes of such disputes as a function of whether the mother and

father retain lawyers. These data are arrayed in the probability matrix in Table 7.

        The results in Table 7 have very similar implications to those in the previous tables. The

likelihood that a mother or father prevails in retaining the physical custody of the child is clearly

related to whether they retain a lawyer. Although the probability matrix is asymmetric, it is

consistent with an additive structure for the payoff matrix. For example, under an additive

structure the predicted percentage of cases where the mother retains custody of the child when

both parents retain lawyers is 69%. This may be contrasted against the 65% of cases where the

mother actually retained custody in these circumstances.

        There are many potential problems in using the results of Table 7 to make inferences.

For example, Mnookin, et. al. report that in virtually every case the mother wished to have

physical custody of the child. However, it is not clear that fathers are so interested in this matter.


10
  Adler, Hensler, and Nelson do not consider the possibility that this may lead to a prisoner's dilemma
incentive structure, and their analysis of net costs takes into account the actual empirical frequency of the
other parties use of legal representation. As a result, instead of a study of the payoff matrix, they are
reporting estimates of the net payoffs actually received by the parties.



                                                     19
Thus, it is possible that whether the father retains a lawyer is simply a signal that the father

wishes to obtain custody of the child. If this is the case, then Table 7 may overstate the impact

on the outcomes when the father retains a lawyer as compared to the case when the father does

not retain a lawyer. A more complete statistical analysis is required before these results should

be accepted at face value. Despite these reservations, it is seems possible that the court system

for dealing with marital disputes over child custody may also contain the incentive structure of a

prisoner's dilemma.


V. The Evolution of Lawyer Use

A. Learning over Time

       One of the more interesting features of the New Jersey arbitration dataset analyzed in

Section III is that it spans the entire period during which final offer arbitration was used, from

1978 to 1995. We can therefore study the system from its very beginnings, including the

evolution of lawyer use and how unions and employers learned about the system over time.

When final-offer arbitration began in New Jersey, employers and unions arguably had little

information about arbitrators’ beliefs and the effect of hiring agents.

       Lawyer use by the parties starts out low, but increases over time. In 1978, the first year

of arbitration in New Jersey for police and fire employees, both sides use lawyers in only 30

percent of arbitration cases. Indeed, for the first third of our sample period (1978-1983), both

sides use lawyers 44% of the time. This rises to 51% for the middle third of our sample (1984-

1989) and shoots up further to 67% of cases where both sides use a lawyer in the last third of our

sample (1990-1995). Using a chi-square test, this increase over time is highly statistically

significant (chi-square statistic = 27.0, p-value = 0.001).

       Figure 4 plots the pattern of agent usage by employers and unions over time.        As can be



                                                  20
seen in the figure, this initially low fraction is largely due to low lawyer usage by employers. By

the end of our sample period, agent use is the dominant choice for both parties, with lawyer

usage rates for the employer and union reaching roughly 90 percent. As the figure illustrates, the

lopsided use of lawyers by the union compared to the employer declines substantially over time.

        As documented in Table 8, this time series pattern of lawyer use by the parties predicts

the time series pattern in arbitration outcomes. Regressing the employer victory rate in a year on

the difference in lawyer usage rates (the fraction of cases the employer uses a lawyer minus the

fraction of cases the union uses a lawyer) yields a coefficient estimate of 0.47 (s.e.=0.16). In

other words, a 10 percentage point increase in the use of lawyers by employers compared to

unions is associated with a 4.7 percentage point increase in employer victories.

        There is some suggestive evidence that previous experience with arbitration affects future

lawyer use, especially for employers. As depicted in Figure 5, employers in bargaining units that

have never been involved in arbitration before hire lawyers 57% of the time. This percentage

rises to 62% the second through fourth time an employer is involved in an arbitrated dispute, and

continues to rise to 68% for the fifth or higher arbitrated dispute. The increase for unions is

much smaller, although they also start out using lawyers at a higher rate. Using a chi-square test,

the difference in lawyer use based on past arbitration experience is significant for employers at

the 10% level (chi-square statistic = 5.1, p-value = 0.08) and insignificant for unions (chi-square

statistic = 1.4, p-value = 0.49).

        One explanation for the pattern of agent use in Figures 4 and 5 is that some parties

(particularly employers) learned about the dangers of not hiring a lawyer gradually over time.

Alternatively, employers may have behaved more cooperatively in the (unfulfilled) hope that this

would encourage a union response. In either case, it appears the parties have converged to the




                                                 21
non-cooperative equilibrium by the end of our sample period, with most parties hiring lawyers.

       There still remains the question of why the remaining unrepresented parties at the end of

our sample period do not hire lawyers. One possibility is that costs vary, so it makes sense for

some units to hire lawyers but not others, even after the parties understand how things work. For

example, it is more expensive (on a per employee basis) for a small union to hire a lawyer

compared to a large union. If costs vary in this way, some parties will face prisoner’s dilemma

incentives while others will not.


B. Lawyers as Moderators of Client Bias

       The empirical analysis in Section III provides convincing evidence that, left alone, the

parties do not construct and present their offers as successfully as when they retain expert agents

to assist them. So far we have modeled lawyers as helping the parties by moving the arbitrator to

favor their position independent of the facts. In principle, however, lawyers could also help to

eliminate inefficiencies in the conduct of strategic interaction. In this section, we extend the

model to allow lawyers to improve the process by moderating any biases or overconfidence that

may have led to impasse in the first instance.

       To motivate the analysis it is useful to first ask why the parties to a dispute end up in

arbitration in the first place. Since arbitration is costly in terms of money, time, and labor-

management relations, it would seem to be in the best interests of both parties to agree to a

settlement. One leading explanation for bargaining impasse is that the parties have divergent and

overly optimistic expectations about the arbitrated outcome. 11 With such biases, negotiations are


11
  Asymmetric information or differing levels of optimism have been used to explain why ex-post
negotiations sometimes fail (Bebchuck 1984, Priest and Klein 1984) and to describe attorney fees in
contingent cases (Dana and Spier 1993). Other examples include Babcock et al (1995), Babcock and
Olson (1992), Bolton and Croson (2012), Farber and Bazerman (1989), Farber and Katz (1979), Guthrie
and Sally (2004), and Hovander (2010).


                                                 22
more likely to fail and the parties will be forced into arbitration. One useful contribution of

lawyers may be that they moderate the unrealistic expectations of their clients. To make this

analysis concrete, suppose the two parties have divergent beliefs about the mean of the

arbitrator’s preferred award distribution. If lawyers help their clients understand what is

reasonable in a given case, there are now two potential advantages to hiring them. As before,

lawyers shift the distribution of the arbitrator’s preferred award (as depicted in Figure 1), but

now they also provide clients with potentially more accurate (i.e., less biased) information about

the location of the arbitrator’s award distribution.

       In the absence of lawyers, the party with less bias will win more often, since their wage

offer will be closer to the arbitrator’s preferred award on average. Moreover, lawyers have the

potential to moderate final offers, and hence increase the probability their client will win the

case. It is possible to test whether lawyers moderate biased expectations by looking at the final

offers of the parties. This is a particularly important characteristic of the final-offer system,

since the offers of the parties provide a complete summary of their strategic behavior. Moreover,

it is possible to estimate the moderating effect of lawyers even if the center of the arbitral

distribution is not known by using a fixed-effects estimator, much in the manner of the fixed-

effects estimator so often used to eliminate bias in the typical cross-section relationship.

Subtracting the final offer of the employer from the final offer of the union differences out any

common observed or unobserved variables.

       Figure 6 graphs the average spread between the union’s and the employer’s final offers

for each year. In the first six years of our data this difference varies between two and three

percentage points, but by 1984 it drops to 1.5 percentage points. The decreasing trend in final

offers roughly parallels the increasing use of agents over time plotted in Figure 4, suggesting that




                                                  23
agents may moderate final offers. 12 To determine if this drop is driven by the use of lawyers, in

Table 9 we regress the difference between the final offers of the union and employer on dummy

variables for whether the employer hires an agent and whether the union hires an agent, where to

capture differences over time, we interact these lawyer use dummies with three time period

dummies.

        The coefficient for employer’s agent usage is significantly negative for the first time

period of 1978-1983. The estimate implies that lawyers cause employers to increase their offers

by over half of a percentage point on average during 1978-1983. This is precisely the direction

that the moderating effect would be expected to be for an employer. However, we do not find

any effects for later time periods, when the estimated coefficients are close to zero and

statistically insignificant. So while lawyers may have helped to moderate employer expectations

in the nascent years of New Jersey’s final offer arbitration system, lawyers no longer served this

important function later on. In addition, none of the coefficients for the union are statistically

significant, suggesting that any overconfidence or biases may have been asymmetric.


VI. Conclusion

        The analysis in this paper spells out how the demand for legal services may arise from a

set of incentives like those contained in the classical prisoner's dilemma game. When incentives

are so structured it is in each individual's interest to behave in a way that makes the parties

jointly worse off. Although there are obvious incentives for the parties to reach enforceable

contracts when the incentives are like those in a prisoner's dilemma, it is far from clear that it is

possible to implement such contracts.


12
   The wide gap in offers in the early years may also reflect learning by the parties about how arbitrators
treat more extreme final offers (i.e., learning about the arbitrators’ preferred award distribution).



                                                     24
        All of the data available on differential outcomes in the dispute resolution systems

studied here are consistent with the incentives present in a prisoner's dilemma. In short, the data

imply that it is individually rational for the parties to retain costly agents so as to increase the

likelihood that they will prevail, even though there is little evidence that the result will be any

different from what would occur if both parties did not retain agents.

        A key issue in the empirical analysis of strategic behavior is whether expert agents have

efficiency-enhancing effects. Other researchers have argued that lawyers can help bridge costly

impasse by encouraging cooperation rather than conflict in disputes (see Gilson and Mnookin,

1994, Mnookin 2010). The unique institutional structure we study, and the longitudinal

character of the data we use, provide a unique opportunity to study this question. We find some

evidence that expert agents may have played an important role in moderating biases early in the

history of the system. However, the parties have slowly evolved to a non-cooperative

equilibrium where the use of third-party agents has become nearly universal and where agents

are used primarily to move the arbitrator’s decisions.

        If these empirical results do accurately portray the incentive structures the parties face in

most dispute resolution systems, they raise three important questions. First, do the parties

respond to these incentives and employ an excess amount of legal services? None of the

empirical material in this paper directly addresses this issue. The experimental psychology

literature indicates that the mere presence of a prisoner's dilemma incentive structure does not

automatically lead to noncooperative behavior, even in situations where it would be most

expected. (Indeed, this is often considered a major deficiency in the usefulness of game theoretic

solutions as positive predictions about behavior. Game theoretic solutions strongly predict that

noncooperative behavior should be the result in a prisoner's dilemma game. See Luce and Raiffa




                                                   25
(1957).) It is likely that behavior in ongoing dispute resolution systems parallels the

experimental behavior to some extent. For example, some union-employer contracts specify

“expedited arbitration” for certain grievances. Expedited arbitration usually prohibits the use of

lawyers by the parties, and specifies that the arbitrator's decision in such cases will have no value

in setting “a precedent.” Apparently some bargaining pairs are able to cooperate in the presence

of a prisoner's dilemma payoff structure, while others are not. It would be interesting to know

just how common such cooperation actually is. It seems likely that cooperative behavior will be

easier to encourage when it is possible to alter the temptation to cheat and when the parties are

aware of the social dilemma they face.

       Second, it is natural to ask just what mechanism it is that produces the prisoner's dilemma

incentive structures in dispute resolution systems. It may be that lawyers help convince

arbitrators or judges to rule in favor of their clients with a more professional and persuasive

presentation of the case. If so, both parties will face strong incentives to retain costly lawyers.

Lawyers may also offer clients the benefit of past experience gained from similar arbitration or

court cases. For example, the lawyer's expertise may be used to select the third-party decision-

maker in a dispute resolution system. In the courts the lawyer will help the client to “shop for

the most favorable judge” or to “select the favorable jury.” Or perhaps lawyers are skilled at

uncovering facts which bolster their client’s argument. In both of these cases the lawyer must

expend resources to research and accumulate useful information. Of course, if the other party

engages in the same behavior then the mean result will be unchanged, and both parties will have

paid a lawyer's fee without any corresponding gain in the mean result. On the other hand, it is

likely that the variance in the outcomes of the dispute resolution process will be reduced if both

parties engage in this behavior, and this may be an unintended benefit to the process. Of course




                                                 26
this leaves open the question of whether the introduction of extra information into arbitration

proceedings or judge, jury, and arbitrator shopping has benefits great enough to justify the social

costs.

         Finally, the empirical results in this paper raise questions about the efficiency of Anglo-

American legal procedures that are provocative and apparently very controversial. Gordon

Tullock (1980) has argued for the superiority of continental (or “inquisitorial”) trials over Anglo-

American (or “adversarial”) trials primarily on the grounds that the adversarial system sets up

prisoner's dilemma incentives that lead to over-investment in legal resources. Despite some

arguments to the contrary, 13 most of the empirical issues raised by Tullock are rarely addressed

by legal scholars. As Tullock observes, lawyers are not generally encouraged to acknowledge

this problem or to study it, perhaps because it is not in the best financial interests of the legal

profession. 14 The fact that the legal profession has a vested interest in the legal system, however,

raises questions about the role of institutional structures in the law and the motivation for their

existence. While not all lawyering is likely to be prisoner’s dilemma material, it would be

interesting to consider whether some of the existing rules of legal procedure act to enforce the

prisoner's dilemma incentive structure and thereby increase the demand for legal services.




13
   See especially Landes and Posner (1979). A more general theoretical discussion of some related issues
is contained in Jack Hirshleifer (1987).
14
   Tullock (1980, p. 97), despite acknowledging that he is a lawyer, is more blunt: “A change from our
system to the continental system would eliminate a sizable part of the demand for lawyers A sharp fall in
the demand for lawyers would, of course, impoverish the present profession. Many lawyers would
become vacuum-cleaner salesmen, law schools would be compelled to close... Under the circumstances,
the opposition of the lawyers to the type of legal system used on the continent is understandable.”



                                                   27
                                        REFERENCES

Adler, Jane, Deborah Hensler and Charles Nelson. 1983. Simple Justice: How Litigants Fare in
        the Pittsburgh Court Arbitration Program. Institute for Civil Justice, Rand Corporation.

Ashenfelter, Orley. 1987. Arbitrator Behavior. American Economic Review, 77:342-346.

Ashenfelter, Orley and David Bloom. 1984. Models of Arbitrator Behavior: Theory and
      Evidence. American Economic Review, 74:111-125.

Ashenfelter, Orley and Gordon B. Dahl. 2012. Bargaining and the Role of Expert Agents: An
      Empirical Study of Final Offer Arbitration. Review of Economics and Statistics, 94:116-
      132.

Ashenfelter, Orley, James Dow and David Gallagher. 1986. Arbitrator and Negotiator Behavior
      Under an Appellate System. Mimeo, Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University.

Ashenfelter, Orley Janet Currie, Henry Farber and Matthew Spiegel. 1992. An Experimental
      Comparison of Dispute Rates in Alternative Arbitration Systems. Econometrica,
      60:1407-1433.

Axelrod, Robert. 1984. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books.

Babcock, Linda, George Loewenstein, Samuel Issacharoff and Colin Camerer. 1995. “Biased
      Judgments of Fairness in Bargaining,” American Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 5, pp.
      1337-1343.

Babcock, Linda and Craig Olson. 1992. “The Causes of Impasses in Labor Disputes,” Industrial
      Relations, Vol. 31, No. 2, pp. 348-360.

Bebchuk, Lucian A. 1984. Litigation and Settlement under Imperfect Information. Rand
      Journal of Economics, 15:404-415.

Block, Richard and Stieber, Jack. 1987. The Impact of Attorneys and Arbitrators on Arbitration
       Awards. Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 40:543-555.

Bloom, David. 1980. Customized ‘Final-Offer’: New Jersey’s Arbitration Law. Monthly Labor
      Review, 103:30-33.

Bloom, David. 1986. Empirical Models of Arbitrator Behavior under Conventional Arbitration.
      Review of Economics and Statistics, 68:578-585.

Bolton, Gary and Rachel Croson. 2012. The Oxford Handbook of Economic Conflict
       Resolution. Oxford University Press.

Dana, James, Jr. and Kathryn Spier. 1993. Expertise and Contingent Fees: The Role of



                                               28
       Asymmetric Information in Attorney Compensation. Journal of Law, Economics and
       Organization, 9:349-367.

Farber, Henry. 1980. An Analysis of Final-Offer Arbitration. Journal of Conflict Resolution,
        5:683-705.

Farber, Henry and Bazerman, Max. 1986. The General Basis of Arbitrator Behavior: An
        Empirical Analysis of Conventional and Final-Offer Arbitration. Econometrica,
        54:1503-1528.

Farber, Henry and Max Bazerman. 1989. “Divergent Expectations as a Cause of Disagreement
        in Bargaining: Evidence from a Comparison of Arbitration Schemes,” Quarterly Journal
        of Economics, Vol. 104, pp. 99-120.

Farber, Henry and Harry Katz. 1979. “Arbitration and the Incentive to Bargain,” Industrial and
        Labor Relations Review, Vol. 33, No. 1, pp. 55-63.

Gilson, Ronald and Robert Mnookin. 1994. “Disputing through Agents: Cooperation and
       Conflict between Lawyers in Litigation,” Vol. 94, No. 2, pp. 509-566.

Greiner, James and Cassandra W. Pattanayak. 2012. Randomized Evaluation of Legal
       Assistance: What Difference Does Representation (Offer and Actual Use) Make? The
       Yale Law Journal 121:2118-2214.

Guthrie, Chris and David Sally. 2004. Impact Bias: The Impact of the Impact Bias on
       Negotiation. Marquette Law Review 87:817-828.

Hirshleifer, Jack. 1987. The Economic Approach to Conflict. In Gerard Radnitzky and Peter
       Bernholz, eds. Economic Imperialism: The Economic Approach Applied Outside the
       Field of Economics. Paragon House Publishers.

Hovander, Elisa. 2010. Optimistic Biases: Implications for Incentives and Dispute in
      Contractual Relationships. Working paper.

Katz, Avery. 1988. Judicial Decisionmaking and Litigation Expenditure. International Review
       of Law and Economics, 8:127-143.

Kerkmeester, Heico. 1995. Game Theory as a Method in Law and Economics. In Boudewijn
      Bouckaert and Gerrit De Geest, eds. Essays in Law and Economics II: Contract Law,
      Regulation, and Reflections on Law and Economics. Antwerpen, Maklu.

Kritikos, Alexander. 2006. The Impact of Compulsory Arbitration on Bargaining Behavior: An
       Experimental Study. Economics of Governance. 7:293-315.

Landes, William and Richard Posner. 1979. Adjudication as a Private Good. Journal of Legal
      Studies, 8:235-284.



                                              29
Lester, Richard. 1989. Analysis of Experience Under New Jersey's Flexible Arbitration System.
        The Arbitration Journal, 44:14-21.

Luce, R. Duncan and Raiffa, Howard. 1957. Games and Decisions. John Wiley & Sons.

Mnookin, Robert. 2010. Bargaining with the Devil. Simon & Schuster.

Mnookin, Robert, Eleanor Maccoby, Catherine Albiston and Charlene Depner. 1990. Private
     Ordering Revisited: What Custodial Arrangements are Parents Negotiating? In Stephen
     Sugarman and Herma Hill Kay, eds. Divorce at the Crossroads. Yale University Press.

Olson, Craig, Gregory Dell'Omo and Paul Jarley. 1992. A Comparison of Interest Arbitrator
       Decision-Making in Experimental and Field Settings. Industrial and Labor Relations
       Review, 45:711-723.

Plott, Charles and Peter Coughlan. 1997. An Experimental Analysis of the Structure of Legal
        Fees: American Rule vs. English Rule. Working paper #1025, California Institute of
        Technology.

P’ng, Ivan Paak-Liang. 1983. Strategic Behavior in Suit, Settlement, and Trial. Bell Journal of
        Economics, 14:539-550.

Priest, George and Benjamin Klein. 1984. The Selection of Disputes for Litigation. Journal of
        Legal Studies, 13:1-55.

Rapoport, Anatol and Chammah, Albert. 1965. Prisoner's Dilemma: A Study in Conflict and
      Cooperation. The University of Michigan Press.

Reinganum, Jennifer and Louis Wilde. 1986. Settlement, Litigation, and the Allocation of
      Litigation Costs. Rand Journal of Economics, 17:557-566.

Seron, Carroll et al. 2001. The Impact of Legal Counsel on Outcomes for Poor Tenants in New
       York City’s Housing Court: Results of a Randomized Experiment. Law and Society
       Review, 35:419-434.

Spier, Kathryn. 1994. Settlement Bargaining and the Design of Damage Awards. Journal of
        Law, Economics and Organization, 10:84-95.

Stapleton, W. Vaughan and Lee E. Teitelbaum. 1972. In Defense of Youth: A Study of the Role
       of Counsel in American Juvenile Courts. Russell Sage Foundation.

Tullock, Gordon. 1980. Trials on Trial. Columbia University Press.

Wagar, Terry. 1994. The Effect of Lawyers on On-Discipline/Discharge Arbitration Decisions.
      Journal of Labor Research. 94:283-300.



                                              30
                                                    Table 1

                         Proportionate Effects on the Net Wage Bill and Net Value Added
                               of Union and Employer Strategies to Use a Lawyer




                                                              Union Uses:

                                                 No Lawyer                  Lawyer




                           No Lawyer                0, 0                    -a, a-x
        Employer Uses:




                              Lawyer               a-x, -a                   -x, -x




Note: The first entry represents the employer’s payoff and the second entry represents the
union’s payoff.

a = mean shift in the distribution of arbitrator awards resulting from the use of a lawyer

x = cost (as a percentage of the wage bill) of using a lawyer
                                              Table 2

      Predicted Effects on the Percentage of Employer Victories in Final-Offer
          Arbitration of Union and Employer Strategies to Use a Lawyer




                                                        Union Uses:

                                         No Lawyer                        Lawyer




                                                                                  fa
                         No Lawyer             p                           p−
                                                                                   s
        Employer Uses:




                                                   fa
                           Lawyer          p+                                 p
                                                    s




f = normal density

a = mean shift in the distribution of arbitrator awards resulting from the use of a lawyer

s = standard deviation of arbitrator awards
                                             Table 3

       Employer Victories in Final Offer Arbitration in New Jersey, 1978-1995




                                                        Union Uses:

                                         No Lawyer                         Lawyer




                                             41%                            19%*
                         No Lawyer
                                           (61 obs.)                      (253 obs.)
        Employer Uses:




                                             71%*                           45%+
                           Lawyer
                                           (79 obs.)                      (421 obs.)




Note: 814 Observations.
*
 Award rate is significantly different from the rate when neither party uses a lawyer (at the .05
significance level)
+
 Award rate is not significantly different from the rate when neither party uses a lawyer (at the
.05 significance level)
                                               Table 4

  Estimated Effect of Hiring a Lawyer on the Probability of an Employer Victory,
                Final Offer Arbitration in New Jersey, 1978-1995



                                               Dependent Variable = Employer Victory
                                               Probit Estimates   Change in Probability



Employer Hires a Lawyer                              0.722*                 0.258*
                                                    (0.124)                (0.042)

Union Hires a Lawyer                                 -0.630*                -0.245*
                                                     (0.155)                (0.060)

Average of Final Offers                              0.291*                 0.109*
                                                    (0.050)                (0.019)

Log-Likelihood                                       -354.8
Observations                                         620

         Implications for the Arbitrator’s Distribution of Preferred Wage Changes

Standard Deviation                                  3.44%

Mean Shift if Employer Hires a Lawyer               -2.48%

Mean Shift if Union Hires a Lawyer                  2.12%


Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the municipality level, reported in parentheses. The probit
regression also includes 17 year dummies. The change in the probability of an employer victory
associated with a change in the independent variable calculated at the means of the other
explanatory variables.

*Statistically significant at the .05 significance level
                                                 Table 5

                              Percentage of Discharge Grievances Sustained
                              (for the Union) in 755 Arbitrations, 1979-1982




                                                           Union Uses:

                                             No Lawyer                     Lawyer




                                                 57%                         75%*
                         No Lawyer
                                              (159 obs.)                   (59 obs.)
        Employer Uses:




                                                46%*                        65%+
                           Lawyer
                                              (270 obs.)                  (267 obs.)




*
 Award rate is significantly different from the rate when neither party uses a lawyer (at the .05
significance level)
+
 Award rate is not significantly different from the rate when neither party uses a lawyer (at the
.05 significance level)

Source: Block and Stieber (1987)
                                             Table 6

       Percentage of Plaintiff Claims (Debt Collection, Personal Injury, Breach
        of Contract, Property Damage) Awarded by Arbitrators in Pittsburgh




                                                       Plaintiff Uses:

                                         No Lawyer                         Lawyer




                          No Lawyer          60%                             82%*
        Defendant Uses:




                            Lawyer           24%*                            65%+




*
 Award rate is significantly different from the rate when neither party uses a lawyer (at the .05
significance level)
+
 Award rate is not significantly different from the rate when neither party uses a lawyer (at the
.05 significance level)

Source: Adler, Hensler, and Nelson (1983)
                                               Table 7

                        Percentage of Mothers Awarded Child Physical Custody
                      in San Mateo and Santa Clara Counties, California, 1984-85




                                                         Mother Uses:

                                            No Lawyer                   Lawyer




                      No Lawyer                75%                       86%
       Father Uses:




                         Lawyer                49%                       65%




Source: Mnookin, Maccoby, Depha, and Albiston (1989).
                                                Table 8

           Yearly Employer Victory Rate and the Difference in Lawyer Use,
                  Final Offer Arbitration in New Jersey, 1978-1995



                                   Dependent Variable = Employer Victory Rate in a Year
                                                      OLS Estimate


Difference in Lawyer Usage Rates                              0.47*
                                                              (0.16)

Adjusted R-squared                                              0.32
Observations                                                     18


Notes: Standard errors reported in parentheses. Each observation represents a yearly average.
Difference in lawyer usage rates is defined as the fraction of cases the employer uses a lawyer
minus the fraction of cases the union uses a lawyer in a year.

*Statistically significant at the .05 significance level
                                               Table 9

          The Moderating Effect of Lawyers on the Difference in Final Offers,
                 Final Offer Arbitration in New Jersey, 1978-1995



                                        Dependent Variable = Difference in Final Offers
                                                       OLS Estimates


Employer Hires a Lawyer Interacted with:

             1978 ≤ year ≤ 1983                                -0.590*
                                                               (0.284)
             1984 ≤ year ≤ 1989                                 0.012
                                                               (0.165)
             1990 ≤ year ≤ 1995                                -0.011
                                                               (0.152)

Union Hires a Lawyer Interacted with:

             1978 ≤ year ≤ 1983                                 0.076
                                                               (0.289)
             1984 ≤ year ≤ 1989                                -0.147
                                                               (0.289)
             1990 ≤ year ≤ 1995                                 0.115
                                                               (0.208)

R-squared                                                       0.108
Observations                                                    620


Notes: Standard errors, clustered at the municipality level, reported in parentheses. The
regression also includes time period dummies.

*Statistically significant at the .05 significance level
                                         Figure 1

                     Effect of the Union Hiring a Lawyer on the
                    Distribution of Arbitrators’ Preferred Awards



 f(y)




                                         u       u+a

                                             a

When the union hires a lawyer, the distribution of arbitrators’ awards shifts by the
quantity a so that the mean award increases from u to u + a.
                                        Figure 2

       The Probability of an Employer Victory as a Function of the Final Offers



f(y)




                        m      ½(m+n)        n

Shaded area represents the probability of an employer victory given the employer’s final
offer, m, and the union’s final offer, n.
                                         Figure 3

  Effect of the Union Hiring a Lawyer on the Probability of an Employer Victory



 f(y)




                                B


                                    A



                                 ½(m+n)

Area A+B represents the probability of an employer victory for the set of final offers m
and n if neither side hires a lawyer. Area B represents the decrease in this probability if
the union hires a lawyer but the employer does not for the same set of final offers (since
area A is the probability of an employer victory in this case).
                                                             Figure 4
                             Employer Victory Rate and the Use of Lawyers by the Employer and Union,
                                         Final Offer Arbitration in New Jersey, 1978-1995


          100


           90


           80


           70


           60
Percent




           50


           40


           30


           20


           10


            0
                78      79     80     81      82     83       84      85     86          87   88   89      90      91      92      93     94      95
                                                                                  Year

           Percent of Cases in which Employer Uses a Lawyer        Percent of Cases in which Union Uses a Lawyer        Percent of Employer Victories
                                                                  Figure 5
                                             Lawyer Use Based on Prior Arbitration Experience,
                                              Final Offer Arbitration in New Jersey, 1978-1995
                         90.00


                         80.00


                         70.00


                         60.00
Percent Using a Lawyer




                         50.00


                         40.00


                         30.00


                         20.00


                         10.00


                          0.00
                                      none                                       1-3 times                                    4 or more
Employers                        57% (319 obs.)                               62% (345 obs.)                              68% (150 obs.)
Unions                           81% (319 obs.)                               84% (345 obs.)                              83% (150 obs.)

                                               Number of Previous Times a Municipal Bargaining Unit Has Been to Arbitration
                                                                                           Figure 6

                                                        Difference between the Union's and the Employer's Final Offers,
                                                               Final Offer Arbitration in New Jersey, 1978-1995
                               3




                              2.5
Percentage Point Difference




                               2




                              1.5




                               1




                              0.5
                                    78   79   80   81    82    83        84       85       86          87     88        89         90   91   92   93   94   95
                                                                                                Year
                                                                                       Difference in Final Offers*
                                                                    *Final offer of the union minus final offer of the employer.
