                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    GENERALIZED SOCIAL MARGINAL WELFARE WEIGHTS FOR OPTIMAL TAX
                              THEORY

                                            Emmanuel Saez
                                          Stefanie Stantcheva

                                         Working Paper 18835
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18835


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2013




We thank Steve Coate, Florian Ederer, Marc Fleurbaey, Bas Jacobs, Louis Kaplow, Henrik Kleven,
Etienne Lehmann, Ben Lockwood, Thomas Piketty, Larry Samuelson, Maxim Troshkin, Aleh Tsyvinski,
Matthew Weinzierl, Nicolas Werquin, three anonymous referees, and numerous conference participants
for useful discussions and comments. We acknowledge financial support from NSF Grant SES-1156240,
the MacArthur Foundation, and the Center for Equitable Growth at UC Berkeley. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Emmanuel Saez and Stefanie Stantcheva. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Generalized Social Marginal Welfare Weights for Optimal Tax Theory
Emmanuel Saez and Stefanie Stantcheva
NBER Working Paper No. 18835
February 2013, Revised July 2015
JEL No. H21

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper proposes a new way to evaluate tax reforms, by aggregating losses and gains of different
individuals using “generalized social marginal welfare weights.” A tax system is optimal if no budget
neutral small reform can increase the weighted sum of (money metric) gains and losses across individuals.
Optimum tax formulas take the same form as standard welfarist tax formulas by simply substituting
standard marginal social welfare weights with those generalized marginal social welfare weights. Weights
directly capture society’s concerns for fairness allowing us to cleanly separate individual utilities from
social weights. Suitable weights can help reconcile discrepancies between the welfarist approach and
actual tax practice, as well as unify in an operational way the most prominent alternatives to utilitarianism
such as Libertarianism, Equality of Opportunity, or Poverty alleviation.


Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
saez@econ.berkeley.edu

Stefanie Stantcheva
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 232
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
sstantcheva@fas.harvard.edu
       This paper proposes a novel approach to optimal tax theory using generalized social marginal
welfare weights. In our approach, presented in Section I, there is no social welfare objective
primitive that the government maximizes. Instead, our primitives are generalized social marginal
welfare weights which represent the value that society puts on providing an additional dollar
of consumption to any given individual.1 These weights directly reflect society’s concerns for
fairness. Equipped with such weights, we can evaluate small budget neutral tax reforms by
simply aggregating money metric utility gains and losses across individuals using the weights.
If the net aggregate gain is positive, the reform is desirable (and conversely). We define a tax
system as locally optimal if no small reform is desirable.2 This has four implications.
       First, optimal tax formulas in our theory take the same form as optimal tax formulas in the
standard approach by simply substituting standard social welfare weights with our generalized
weights. Hence, our theory remains as tractable as the standard approach and can easily be
operationalized for any specification of generalized welfare weights. Second, our theory nests
the standard welfarist approach where the government maximizes a social welfare function
that depends solely on individual utilities if we define generalized social welfare weights to be
equal to the standard marginal social welfare weights.3 Third, if the weights are non-negative,
then our theory respects the Pareto principle in the sense that, around the local optimum,
there is no Pareto improving small reform. Fourth, our theory is by nature local as we can only
evaluate small changes around a given tax/transfer system but we have no way of systematically
comparing two local optima. In most applications however, the local optimum will be unique.
       The key advantage of our approach is that weights can be defined very generally allowing
us to capture a broader set of concepts of justice than the standard approach. Weights can
depend on individual and aggregate characteristics, some of which are endogenous to the tax and
transfer system. The characteristics which enter the welfare weights determine the dimensions
along which society considers redistribution to be fair. These characteristics could be part of
individuals’ utilities (in the welfarist spirit). Importantly, though, social welfare weights can
also depend on individual or aggregate characteristics which do not enter individuals’ utilities.
Conversely, the welfare weights can omit some characteristics which enter individuals’ utility
functions, but for which society does not deem it fair to compensate individuals.
   1
     We take society’s preferences as given and do not analyze how they could arise through the political process.
   2
     With the tax reform approach, we can evaluate beneficial reforms even starting from non optimal tax system.
   3
     To be precise, our theory nests the first order approach of the standard social welfare function maximization.
As is well known (see e.g. Piketty and Saez, 2013, for a survey), the optimum of the standard approach is also
such that no small reform can increase social welfare and the welfare effect of the reform is the aggregate of gains
and losses using the standard social marginal welfare weights. One advantage of the standard approach relative
to ours is that local optima (if they are multiple) can be ranked using the primitive social welfare function.
        In Section II, we contrast our approach with the standard approach through several exam-
ples. First, we show that making generalized social marginal weights depend not only on net
disposable income but also on net taxes paid produces a non-degenerate optimal tax theory
even absent behavioral responses. Second, generalized social weights can depend on what in-
dividuals would have done absent taxes and transfers. Hence, we can capture the idea that
society dislikes marginal transfers toward “free loaders” who would work absent means-tested
transfers. Third, our approach can capture horizontal equity concerns. A reasonable criterion
is that introducing horizontal inequities is acceptable only if it benefits the group discriminated
against. This dramatically limits the scope for using non-income based tags.
        In Section III, we show how the most prominent alternatives to welfarism can be re-cast
within our theory, i.e., we can derive the generalized social welfare weights implied by those
alternative theories. First, the equality of opportunity principle developed by Roemer (1998)
and Roemer et al. (2003) concentrates weights uniformly on those coming from a disadvantaged
background as, conditional on earnings, they have more merit (have worked harder) than those
coming from an advantaged background. As the likelihood of coming from a disadvantaged
background decreases with income, social weights decrease with income for a reason completely
orthogonal to the decreasing marginal utility of income in utilitarianism. It also provides a
rationale for less progressive taxes when there is high social or intergenerational mobility. Sec-
ond, a poverty alleviation objective that respects the Pareto principle can be captured by social
welfare weights concentrated on those below the poverty threshold.4
        All formal proofs, several theoretical extensions, as well as results from a simple online survey
designed to elicit social preferences of subjects are presented in the online Appendix.



I        Presentation of our Approach
Individual utilities and taxes. We present our approach using income taxation.5 Consider
a population with a continuum of individuals indexed by i. Population size is normalized to
one. Individual i derives utility from consumption ci and incurs disutility from earning income
zi ≥ 0, with a utility representation:


                                          ui = u(ci − v(zi ; xui , xbi ))
    4
     In online Appendix B, we consider additional alternatives to welfarism, such as Libertarianism, Rawlsianism,
or the Fair Income Tax of Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2011) and show how they map into social weights.
   5
     The same approach can be applied to other forms of taxation or transfer policies.



                                                        2
where xui and xbi are sets of characteristics. The functions u and v are common to all individuals.
u is increasing and concave and v is increasing and convex in z. The quasilinear functional forms
rules out income effects on earnings which greatly simplifies optimal tax formulas (see below).
ui is a cardinal utility representation for individual i as viewed by the Planner (see below). xu
are characteristics that exclusively enter the utility function, while xb will be characteristics that
also affect the generalized social welfare weights introduced below.6 Two important individual
characteristics are considered throughout the paper. First, we consider a person’s productivity
per unit of effort wi ≡ zi /li where li is labor supply. wi is distributed in the population with a
density f (w) on [wmin , wmax ]. Second, we consider the cost of work θi that affects the disutility
from producing any unit of effort, distributed according to a distribution p(θ) on [θmin , θmax ].
For instance, the disutility from labor could take the form θi ṽ(zi /wi ), so that any unit of effort
is more costly for high θi agents.
       The government sets an income tax T (z) as a function of earnings only so that ci = zi −T (zi ).7
Individual i chooses zi to maximize u(zi − T (zi ) − v(zi ; xui , xbi )).

Generalized social marginal welfare weights. We propose a novel theory of taxation
that starts from the social welfare weights. For any individual, we define a generalized social
marginal welfare weight gi which measures how much society values the marginal consumption
of individual i. We will assess the welfare gains from any reform by weighting the money
metric welfare gains or losses to each individual using these weights and characterize optimal
tax systems as systems around which no small reform can yield a welfare gain.

Definition 1 The generalized social marginal welfare weight on individual i is gi = g(ci , zi ; xsi , xbi )
where g is a function, xsi is a set of characteristics which only affect the social welfare weight,
while xbi is a set of characteristics which also affect utility.

       Naturally, the generalized weights are only defined up to a multiplicative constant as they
measure only the relative value of consumption of individual i. Importantly, they are allowed
to depend on individual characteristics xsi and xbi . These characteristics may be unobservable to
the government or it may be impossible or unacceptable to condition the tax system on them.
They nevertheless enter the social welfare weights because they affect how deserving a person
is deemed by society. For instance, xsi might include family background (see our treatment of
   6
     It is possible to consider a more general utility with ui = u(xci · ci − v(z; xui , xbi )) where xci would be a shifter
parameter for the marginal utility from consumption. For simplicity, we abstract from this heterogeneity as
none of our examples require it.
   7
     Section II.C considers tax systems that can also depend on other observable individual characteristics
(“tags”).

                                                             3
                       Figure 1: Generalized Social Welfare Weights Approach
Notes: The figure depicts the three sets of individual characteristics xb , xu , and xs . Characteristics xu enter
solely the utility function (i.e, they affect individual utilities and choices). Characteristics xs enter solely the
generalized social welfare weights (i.e., they affect how society values marginal transfers to each individual).
Characteristics xb enter both the utility function and social weights.


“Equality of Opportunity” in section III.A), a characteristic that typically does not affect one’s
taxes directly but affects perceptions of deservedness.
    As depicted on Figure 1, there is an important conceptual distinction between the sets
of characteristics xb , xu , and xs . Characteristics which enter the social welfare weight are
dimensions that society considers potentially fair to redistribute across and to compensate for.
For instance, if the disutility of work θi is due mostly to differences in health status or disability,
then it might be fair to include it in the social welfare weight (see the “Free Loaders” example in
section II.B). Conversely, if differences in disutility of work are mostly based on preferences for
leisure, then they might not enter the social welfare weight (see the “Fair Income Tax” example
in online Appendix B.5). These value judgments are directly embodied in the specification of
the social welfare weights.
    We keep individual preferences standard and individuals’ utility maximization intact. Al-
though it is possible to modify individual preferences to directly incorporate justice and fairness
criteria (see Alesina and Angeletos, 2005, Fehr and Schmidt, 1999), that would still leave open
the question of how to aggregate individual preferences.

Tax reform analysis. We now turn to defining desirable tax reforms around T (z) and an
optimal tax criterion. For a given ε, we define the perturbed tax system in the direction ∆T as

                                                         4
the tax system z → T (z) + ε∆T (z). We will derive the behavioral responses, revenue changes,
and social welfare changes when ε → 0, i.e., according to the Gâteaux differential.8 In the main
text, we consider only the first order approach because of its simplicity and its applicability to
all cases we consider later on. We show in online Appendix A.1 how to formally consider second
order conditions and a fully rigorous local optimization approach.
       Denote by zi (T ) the earning choice of agent i under tax system T . The behavioral response
                                                                                                      zi (T +ε∆T )−zi (T )
induced by the tax reform of system T in the direction ∆T is ∆zi ≡ limε→0                                      ε
                                                                                                                           .
Using the standard envelope argument from the individual’s optimization of zi , the small tax
reform ε∆T mechanically changes individual disposable income by −ε∆T (zi ), but the induced
behavioral response in earnings ε∆zi has no first-order effect on utility. We denote by Ui (T ) the
                                                                                                   Ui (T +ε∆T )−Ui (T )
indirect utility of agent i under T , the utility first order change is ∆Ui ≡ limε→0                        ε
                                                                                                                          =
−uci · ∆T (zi ).9 Therefore, ∆T (zi ) measures the money-metric first order welfare impact of
the tax reform in direction ∆T on individual i.10 Hence, the first order effect on welfare is
  R
− i gi ∆T (zi )di where di denotes the integral measure over all agents i in the population.
       Next, we define a small tax reform as being budget neutral if it has no first order effect on
net tax revenue (i.e., the Gâteaux differential of tax revenue is zero).

Definition 2 Budget neutral tax reform. A small tax reform in direction ∆T (z) is budget
                               R                                               R
neutral if and only if limε→0 { i [T (zi (T + ε∆T )) + ε∆T (zi (T + ε∆T ))]di − i T (zi (T ))di}/ε = 0.

In Definition 2, ε → 0 both from the right (ε > 0) and left (ε < 0). Hence, if a small reform in
direction ∆T (z) is budget neutral then a reform in direction −∆T (z) is also budget neutral.
       Next, we define a tax reform as being desirable if its first order effect on welfare is positive.

Definition 3 Tax reform desirability criterion. A small budget neutral tax reform around
                                                     R
T (z) in direction ∆T (z) is desirable if and only if i gi ∆T (zi )di < 0, with gi the generalized social
marginal welfare weight on individual i evaluated at (ci = zi − T (zi ), zi , xsi , xbi ).

Last, we can define a locally optimal tax system as a tax system around which no budget neutral
                                                R                       R
tax reform can improve welfare. Note that if i gi ∆T (zi )di > 0 then i gi · (−∆T (zi ))di < 0.
   8
      Effectively, this amounts to considering first order effects in ε. We always consider interior tax systems so
that if a small reform in the direction ∆T is feasible, a small reform in direction −∆T is also feasible.
    9
      To see this, denoting by ui (c, z) individual i utility function, we have the following first order expansion:
Ui (T + ε∆T ) = ui (zi (T + ε∆T ) − T (zi (T + ε∆T )) − ε∆T (zi (T + ε∆T )), zi (T + ε∆T )) = Ui (T ) − uci · ε∆T (zi ) +
[uci ·(1−T ′ (zi ))+uzi ]·ε∆zi +o(ε) = −uci ·ε∆T (zi )+o(ε) as uci ·(1−T ′ (zi ))+uzi = 0 by individual maximization.
   10
      The incentive constraints are reflected in the behavioral response to the tax change. There are revenue effects
from the behavioral responses. The welfare effect calculus requires that there are no externalities of individuals’
actions and that the social welfare function is not paternalistic (i.e., respects individuals’ optimization).


                                                           5
This immediately gives necessary conditions for a local optimum:11

Proposition 1 Local optimal tax criterion. If a tax system T (z) is a local optimum then
                                                             R
for any small budget neutral tax reform in direction ∆T (z), i gi ∆T (zi )di = 0, with gi the
generalized social marginal welfare weight on individual i evaluated at (zi − T (zi ), zi , xsi , xbi ).

As in the standard theory (see e.g. Kleven and Kreiner 2006, Chetty 2009, Hendren, 2013),
the tax reform approach requires knowing only the weights gi and the behavioral responses
around the current system while the optimal tax criterion requires knowing the weights gi and
the behavioral responses at the optimum. Hence, the tax reform is more readily applicable.

From individual weights to applicable weights in the tax formula. The weights on
each individual gi are not immediately applicable. As noted, they can depend on unobservable
characteristics or elements that the tax system cannot condition upon. They merely embody
society’s judgment of fairness, without taking into account observability or feasibility. To apply
the weights to the evaluation of tax systems, the individual weights need to be “aggregated”
up to only those characteristics that the tax system can be conditioned on. For a tax system
purely based on income, T (z), the weights need to be aggregated at each income level z.

Local optimal tax formulas. With Proposition 1, we can obtain an optimal tax formula that
is particularly simple in the case with no income effects on labor supply that we consider here
(Diamond, 1998). The proof is the same as in the standard approach (see Piketty and Saez,
2013) and is presented in online Appendix A.2.12 Let H(z) denote the cumulative earnings
distribution function and h(z) the earnings density. Both naturally depend on the tax system.

Definition 4 Let Ḡ(z) be the (relative) average social marginal welfare weight for individuals
who earn more than z:                                R
                                                             gi di
                                       Ḡ(z) ≡                  R
                                                         {i:zi ≥z}
                                                                                                            (1)
                                                 P rob(zi ≥ z) · i gi di
Let ḡ(z) be the corresponding average social marginal welfare weight at earnings level z, with
                   R∞                                             1 d(Ḡ(z)·[1−H(z)])
Ḡ(z)[1 − H(z)] = z ḡ(z ′ )dH(z ′ ), or, equivalently ḡ(z) = − h(z)       dz
                                                                                      .
                                         R∞
From definition 4, we have Ḡ(0) =        0
                                              ḡ(z)dH(z) = 1, so that the weights ḡ(z) average to one.
  11
     We discuss second order conditions in online Appendix A.1. The extra complexity required is not needed in
the applications we consider later on and hence relegated to the appendix.
  12
     Using small tax reforms around the optimum, Saez (2001) informally derived an optimal income tax formula
that generalizes the formulas of Mirrlees (1971) to situations with heterogeneous populations, where individuals
differ not only in skills but also possibly in preferences. Jacquet and Lehmann (2015) provide a fully rigorous
proof of the formula with heterogeneous populations and give conditions under which it applies. We always
assume here that these conditions hold.

                                                         6
Proposition 2 The optimal marginal tax rate at income level z satisfies the formula:

                                                         1 − Ḡ(z)
                                      T ′ (z) =                                                               (2)
                                                  1 − Ḡ(z) + α(z) · e(z)

with e(z) the average elasticity of earnings zi with respect to the retention rate 1 − T ′ for
individuals earning zi = z, α(z) the local Pareto parameter defined as zh(z)/[1 − H(z)].13

       The optimal tax formula looks exactly as in Saez (2001), replacing the standard weights
by the generalized social marginal welfare weights, averaged at each income level. Accordingly,
some standard results would hold under the same conditions. For instance, T ′ (z) ≥ 0 if average
social marginal welfare weights ḡ(z) are decreasing in income.14 The optimal marginal tax rate
at the very top is zero if the income distribution is bounded.
We can similarly express the optimal linear tax rate τ as a function of the welfare weights:15

Proposition 3 The optimal linear income tax rate satisfies the formula:
                                                                            R
                                    1 − ḡ                                       gi · zi di
                               τ=                      with       ḡ ≡ R        i     R                       (3)
                                  1 − ḡ + e                               i
                                                                             g i di ·    z di
                                                                                        i i

                                                  R
and e the elasticity of aggregate income               z di
                                                      i i
                                                              with respect to the retention rate (1 − τ ).

ḡ can be interpreted as the average gi weighted by income zi (relative to the population average
                                                                    R
gi ) or symmetrically as the average zi weighted by gi (relative to i zi di).
       As in standard optimal tax theory, formulas (2) and (3) hold at an optimum but are not
necessarily sufficient. Importantly, there may be several tax systems that can satisfy the formu-
las. Our theory is fundamentally local and hence cannot rank optima when they are multiple.
This is a disadvantage relative to any approach that maximizes a social objective and hence
provides a complete ordering of all tax systems.

Advantages of the generalized approach. First, our approach allows us to re-use existing
tax formulas such as equations (2) and (3) once they are written in terms of the welfare weights
at each income level. Hence, it also nests the standard approach. Second, it can easily ensure
that any tax optimum is (locally) constrained Pareto efficient as long as the generalized weights
gi are all non-negative. In that case, our theory respects individual preferences. Third and
  13
     The local Pareto parameter α(z) is constant and equal to the Pareto parameter for Paretian distributions.
To be precise, when defining α(z), h(z) is defined as the virtual density that would hold at z if the income tax
system were linearized at z. See Saez (2001) and Piketty and Saez (2013) for details.
  14
     This condition is satisfied with standard utilitarian weights. See Appendix A.2 for details on these results.
  15
     See again online Appendix A.2 for a short derivation and Piketty and Saez (2013) for details.

                                                              7
most importantly, as we will outline throughout the paper, our approach grants great flexibility
in the choice of the welfare weights gi . The fact that social welfare weights can depend on
characteristics outside of individuals’ utilities, as well as ignore characteristics from individuals’
utilities–as illustrated in Figure 1–allows us to incorporate elements that matter in actual tax
policy debates but that cannot be captured with the standard welfarist approach.16

Implicit Pareto weights. As is well known, under standard regularity conditions, any second-
                                                                                  R
best allocation can be obtained maximizing a linear social welfare function SW F = i (ωi · ui )di
with suitable Pareto weights ωi ≥ 0. The following proposition extends this result to our setting.

Proposition 4 For any non-negative generalized weights function and a local optimum T (z),
there exist Pareto weights ωi ≥ 0 such that T (z) satisfies the first order condition formula (2)
                                R
of the maximization of SW F = i (ωi · ui )di. The Pareto weights are such that ωi = gi /uci ≥ 0
where gi and uci are evaluated at the optimum allocation.

   Hence, our approach can be reverse-engineered to obtain a set of Pareto weights ωi and
                                                R
a corresponding standard social welfare function i (ωi · ui )di. Importantly, because gi /uci is
evaluated at the optimum allocation, it is taken as fixed in the maximization of SW F . In
practice as we shall see, it is impossible to posit the correct weights ωi without first having
solved for the optimum using our approach that starts with the social marginal weights gi . In
addition, it is typically impossible to translate the generalized social welfare weights into Pareto
weights that are fixed and hence cannot be modified with changes in the environment. A social
                                                       R
welfare function with endogenous Pareto weights such as i ωi (T )ui di would not deliver the same
solution as our approach and could lead to Pareto dominated outcomes.17



II      Enriching the Welfarist Approach
In this section, we show how the use of suitable generalized social marginal welfare weights
can enrich the welfarist approach by reconciling some of the discrepancies between the welfarist
approach (and particularly the widely used utilitarian case) and actual tax practice. Table 1
summarizes these results by contrasting actual tax practice (column 1), the standard welfarist
  16
     The tax reform approach, which is per se not specific to the generalized welfare weights, has the advantage
that it can evaluate reforms even starting from non-optimal systems.
  17
     A closely related point has also been made by Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2015) who show that their fair income
tax social objective maximization can also be obtained as the maximization of a weighted sum of utilities but the
weights “would have to be computed for each new problem, that is, as a function of the set of allocations among
which the choice has to be made,..., and could only be ascertained after the optimal allocation is identified.”


                                                       8
approach (column 2), and our generalized social marginal welfare weights approach (column 3)
in various situations. In each situation, column 3 indicates what property of social marginal
welfare weights is required to make this approach fit with actual tax policy practice.


II.A        Optimal Tax Theory with Fixed Incomes
We start with the simple case in which pre-tax incomes are completely inelastic to taxes and
transfers. This puts the focus solely on redistributive issues. It is a useful illustration of our
approach, especially as contrasted with the standard welfarist approach. We specialize our
general framework with a disutility of work v(z; zi0 ) = 0 if z ≤ zi0 and v(z; zi0 ) = ∞ if z > zi0 .
Thus, zi0 is an exogenous characteristic of individual i, contained in xui , and choosing zi = zi0
is always optimal for individual i, so that the distribution of incomes is exogenous to the tax
system. In equilibrium, utility is ui = u(ci ). We review first the standard utilitarian setting.
                                                                                  R
Standard utilitarian approach. The government chooses T (z) to maximize i u(zi − T (zi ))di
                                   R
subject to the resource constraint i T (zi )di ≥ 0 (with multiplier p). A point-wise maximization
with respect to T (z) yields u′ (z − T (z)) = p so that c = z − T (z) is constant across z. Hence,
utilitarianism with inelastic earnings and a concave individual utility function, homogeneous
across individuals, leads to complete redistribution of incomes. The government taxes 100
percent of earnings and redistributes income equally across individuals (Edgeworth, 1897).
       This simple case highlights three drawbacks of utilitarianism. First, complete redistribution
seems too strong a result. In reality, even absent behavioral responses, many and perhaps even
most people would still object to full taxation on the grounds that it is unfair to fully confiscate
individual incomes. Second, the outcome is extremely sensitive to the specification of individual
utilities, as linear utility calls for no taxes at all, while introducing just a bit of concavity leads
to complete redistribution. Third, the utilitarian approach cannot handle well heterogeneity in
individual utility functions, a problem known as inter-personal utility comparisons. To see this,
suppose that utilities are heterogeneous of the form ui = xi · u(ci ) . The optimum is such that
xi · u′ (ci ) are equal for all i. Hence, consumption should be higher for individuals with higher
xi , i.e., individuals more able to enjoy consumption. In reality, society would be reluctant to
redistribute based on preferences, as confirmed by our online survey in online Appendix C.18

Generalized Social Marginal Welfare Weights. The simplest way to illustrate the power
of our approach with fixed incomes is to use the generalized weights from definition 1 without
  18
    Redistribution based on marginal utility is socially acceptable if there are objective reasons a person has
higher needs, such as having a medical condition requiring high expenses, or a large family with many dependents.


                                                       9
using any additional characteristics (xui = zi0 , for all i, and xb and xs are empty).

                                                                                                        ∂g̃
Definition 5 Simple generalized weights: Let gi = g(ci , zi ) = g̃(ci , zi −ci ) with g̃c ≡             ∂c
                                                                                                              ≤ 0,
             ∂g̃
g̃z−c ≡    ∂(z−c)
                    ≥ 0. There are two polar cases of interest:
i) Utilitarian weights: gi = g(ci , zi ) = g̃(ci ) for all zi , with g̃(·) decreasing.
ii) Libertarian weights: gi = g(ci , zi ) = g̃(zi − ci ) with g̃(·) increasing.

       Weights depend not only negatively on c but also positively on net taxes paid z − c. g̃c ≤ 0
can reflect decreasing marginal utility of consumption as under utilitarianism or more generally
the old notion of “ability to pay” (those with higher disposable income can afford paying $1
extra in taxes more easily). g̃z−c ≥ 0 reflects the fact that taxpayers contribute more to society
and hence are more deserving. Alternatively, individuals are entitled to their income and hence
become more deserving as the government taxes away their income.19,20
       The optimal tax system, according to Proposition 1 is such that no reform can increase social
welfare at the margin, where transfers are evaluated using the g weights. Since, T (z) = z − c,
g̃(c, z − c) = g̃(z − T (z), T (z)). With no behavioral responses, the optimal rule is simple: social
welfare weights g̃(z − T (z), T (z)) need to be equalized across all incomes z. Intuitively, if we
had non equalized weights with g̃(z1 − T (z1 ), z1 ) > g̃(z2 − T (z2 ), z2 ), transferring a dollar from
those earning z2 toward those earning z1 (by adjusting T (z1 ) and T (z2 ) correspondingly and in
a budget balanced manner) would be desirable (the formal proof is in online Appendix A.4).

Proposition 5 The optimal tax schedule with no behavioral responses is such that:

                                                1
                              T ′ (z) =                    so that   0 ≤ T ′ (z) ≤ 1.                          (4)
                                          1 − g̃z−c /g̃c

Corollary 1 In the standard utilitarian case, T ′ (z) ≡ 1. In the libertarian case, T ′ (z) ≡ 0.

       We present in online Appendix C results from a survey asking subjects to rank taxpayers
with various incomes and tax burdens in terms of deservedness of a tax break. Respondents
put weight on both disposable income and gross income, showing that social preferences are
in between the polar utilitarian and libertarian cases. Such data can be used to recover social
preferences g(c, z). For instance, the specification g(c, z) = g̃(c − α(z − c)) = g̃(z − (1 + α)T (z))
with g̃ decreasing and where α is a constant parameter delivers an optimal tax with a constant
marginal tax rate T ′ (z) = 1/(1 + α) and is empirically calibrated in online Appendix C.2.
  19
     This is akin to an “Equal Sacrifice” principle in money metric utility terms. Weinzierl (2014) also incorpo-
rates a libertarian element in an optimal tax model by considering a mixed objective.
  20
     We assume away government funded public goods in our setup for simplicity.

                                                           10
II.B        Transfers and Free Loaders
The public policy debate on transfers often focuses on whether non-workers are deserving of
support or not. Transfer beneficiaries are deemed deserving if they are truly unable to work, that
is, if absent any transfers, they would still not work and live in great poverty without resources.
Conversely, they are considered non-deserving, or “free loaders” if they could work and would do
so absent more generous transfers. The presence of such “free loaders”, perceived to take undue
advantage of a generous transfer system, is precisely why many oppose welfare (see e.g., Ellwood
(1988)). It is also the reason why many welfare programs try to target populations which are
deemed more vulnerable and less prone to taking advantage of the system. Historically, disabled
people, widows, and later on single parents have been most likely to receive public transfers.21
Our online survey in online Appendix C confirms that people have strong views on who, among
those out-of-work, is deserving of support. We consider a basic model to explain how generalized
weights can be used to capture the concept of free loaders.


Model. Starting from our general model, assume that individuals can either work and earn
z = 1, or not work and earn zero z = 0. We take the special functional utility form: u(c − θ · z)
where z ∈ {0, 1}. Consumption c is equal to c0 if an individual is out of work and to c1 =
(1 − τ ) + c0 if she works, so that τ is the net tax rate on earnings.22 Taxes fund the transfer c0 .
The cost of work θ is private information and distributed according to a cdf P (θ). An individual
with cost of work θ works if and only if θ ≤ c1 − c0 = 1 − τ . Hence, the fraction of people
working is P (1 − τ ). Let e be the elasticity of total earnings P (1 − τ ) with respect to 1 − τ .
       This model is a special case of the optimal linear tax model discussed in Section I. Hence, we
can immediately apply formula (3) and the optimal tax is τ ∗ = (1−ḡ)/(1−ḡ+e). As non-workers
                                                 R            R        R
have zi = 0 and workers have zi = 1, we have ḡ = i gi zi di/( i gi di· i zi di) = ḡ1 /[P ·ḡ1 +(1−P )·ḡ0 ]
where P = P (1 − τ ), ḡ1 is the average gi on workers, and ḡ0 is the average gi on non-workers.


Standard utilitarian approach. Under the utilitarian objective, we have gi = u′ (c0 ) for all
non-workers so that ḡ0 = u′ (c0 ).23 Hence, the utilitarian approach cannot distinguish between
the deserving poor and free loaders. The utilitarian social welfare weight placed on non-workers
depends only on c0 and is completely independent of whether the person would have worked
absent taxes and transfers: The standard approach cannot take into account counterfactuals.
  21
     The origins of the US welfare system since 1935, starting with the Aid to Families with Dependent Children
and continuing with the Temporary Assistance to Needy Families assistance programs highlights that logic.
  22
     As there are only two earnings outcomes, R0 and 1, this tax system is fully general.
  23
     For workers, gi = u′ (c1 − θi ) so that ḡ1 = θ≤1−τ u′ (c0 + (1 − τ ) − θ)dP (θ)/P < ḡ0 .


                                                      11
Generalized social welfare weights. The generalized weights allow us to treat the deserving
poor differently from the free loaders. The deserving poor are those with θ > 1, (who would
not work, even absent any transfer). The free loaders are those with 1 ≥ θ > 1 − τ (who do not
work because of the existence of transfers). Denoting by P0 = P (1) the fraction working when
τ = 0, there are P = P (1 − τ ) workers, 1 − P0 deserving poor, and P0 − P free loaders.
       Let us assume that society sets social marginal welfare weights as follows. Workers obtain
a standard weight gi = u′ (c1 − θi ) if zi = 1. The deserving poor obtain a standard weight
gi = u′ (c0 ) if zi = 0 and θi ≥ 1. Finally, the free-loaders obtain a weight gi = 0 if zi = 0 and
θi < 1. The weight function is gi = g(ci , zi ; θi , τ ). In our general notation, xbi = (θi , τ ).24
       With such weights, we have ḡ0 = u′ (c0 )·(1−P0 )/(1−P ), as only a fraction (1−P0 )/(1−P ) of
the non-workers are deserving. Hence, ḡ0 is lower relative to the utilitarian case. ḡ1 is unchanged
relative to the utilitarian case. Therefore, ḡ = ḡ1 /[P · ḡ1 + (1 − P ) · ḡ0 ] is now higher than in
the utilitarian case and τ ∗ is correspondingly lower (keeping e and P constant). As expected,
the presence of free loaders reduces the optimal tax rate τ ∗ relative to the standard case.
       In the extreme case in which all non-workers are free-loaders, the optimal transfer (and hence
the tax rate financing it) is zero. This corresponds to the (extreme) view that all non employment
is created by an overly generous transfer system. As long as there are some deserving poor
though, the tax rate and transfers will be positive.
       For a given τ , when e is larger, (1 − P0 )/(1 − P ) is smaller as more people become free
loaders. Hence a higher e reduces τ ∗ not only through the standard efficiency effect e but also
through the channel ḡ as it negatively affects society’s view on how deserving the poor are.
       This example also illustrates that ex post, it is possible to find suitable Pareto weights for
the welfarist approach that can rationalize the tax rate τ ∗ obtained with generalized welfare
                                 R
weights. In this case, maximizing θ ω(θ)·u(c−θ·z)·dP (θ) with ω(θ) = 1 for θ ≤ 1−τ ∗ (workers)
and θ ≥ 1 (deserving poor) and ω(θ) = 0 for 1 − τ ∗ < θ < 1 (free loaders). However, the Pareto
weights ω depend on the optimum tax rate τ ∗ and, hence, cannot be specified ex ante. Note
that our approach is not equivalent to making the Pareto weights endogenous. Indeed, a social
                             R
welfare function of the form: θ ω(θ, τ ) · u(c − θ · z) · dP (θ) with ω(θ, τ ) = 1 for θ ≤ 1 − τ and
θ ≥ 1 and ω(θ, τ ) = 0 for 1 − τ < θ < 1 would not yield the same solution because we would
have to take into account the change in social welfare stemming from changes in the endogenous
Pareto weights. What is more, such a social welfare objective with endogenous Pareto weights
  24
     Note that the cost of work θi enters into the social welfare weights so that it is fair to compensate people
for their differential cost of work. If instead θ reflected pure laziness, then this might not be the case (as in the
Fair Income Tax theory of Fleurbaey and Maniquet, 2011, also covered in online Appendix B.5).



                                                         12
could yield Pareto dominated outcomes.25 Instead, our approach consists in weighting utility
changes using locally fixed weights, which respects the local Pareto principle.

Application 1: Desirability of in-work benefits. As shown in Piketty and Saez (2013), in
the nonlinear tax model of Section I, when some individual do not work, the optimal marginal
tax rate at the bottom with zero earnings takes the simple form T ′ (0) = (ḡ0 − 1)/(ḡ0 − 1 + e0 )
where ḡ0 is the average social marginal welfare weight on those out-of-work and e0 is (minus)
the elasticity of the fraction of individuals out-of-work with respect to 1 − T ′ (0). Unlike in the
standard utilitarian case, in which ḡ0 > 1 and hence T ′ (0) > 0, with free loaders, ḡ0 is lower
and could be lower than one, in which case T ′ (0) < 0, i.e., in-work benefits are optimal.

Application 2: Transfers over the business cycle. Individuals are less likely to be respon-
sible for their unemployment status in a recession than in an expansion, so that the composition
of those out of work changes over the business cycle. Hence, this is a force pushing toward ex-
panding benefits in bad times. Results from the online survey show indeed that support for the
unemployed depends strongly on whether they can or cannot find jobs (see online Appendix C).


II.C        Tagging and Horizontal Equity Concerns
Under welfarism, if agents can be separated into different groups, based on attributes, so-called
“tags,” which are correlated with earnings ability or behavioral elasticities, then an optimal tax
system should generally have differentiated taxes across those groups.26 Mankiw and Weinzierl
(2010) explore a tax schedule differentiated by height and use this stark example as a critique
of utilitarianism. In practice, society seems to oppose taxation based on such characteristics,
probably because it is deemed unfair to tax differently people with the same ability to pay.
These ‘horizontal equity’ concerns, or the wish to treat ‘equals as equals’ seem important in
practice and a realistic framework for optimal tax policy needs to be able to include them.27
       It is possible to capture horizontal equity concerns using generalized social welfare weights
if we extend our basic framework to allow the weights to be dependent on the reform considered
(instead of depending solely on the current level of taxes and transfers as we have done so far).
To save space, we will not develop a general theory but will solely focus on a simple example.
  25
     Indeed, reforms that increase the weights could be desirable even if all agents’ utilities decline slightly.
  26
     Some attributes can be perfect tags in the sense of being impossible to influence by the agent. An example
would be height, which has been shown to be positively correlated with earnings (see Mankiw and Weinzierl,
2010), or gender. Others are potentially elastic to taxes (such as the number of children or marital status).
  27
     Kaplow (2001) criticizes the concept of horizontal equity and highlights that it will conflict with the Pareto
principle in some cases. Our non-negative social welfare weights guarantee that this cannot occur in our setup.


                                                        13
       To illustrate this in the simplest way possible, we consider a Ramsey tax problem where
linear taxation is designed to raise a given (non-transfer) revenue E. There are two groups
which differ according to an observable and perfectly inelastic attribute m ∈ {1, 2}. The two
groups differ according to their taxable income elasticities (respectively denoted e1 and e2 ). The
tax rate on group m is denoted by τm . The budget constraint, with multiplier p, is:
                                              Z                        Z
                                       τ1 ·             zi di + τ2 ·             zi di ≥ E.                       (5)
                                                  i∈1                      i∈2


We abstract entirely from vertical equity issues by assuming that utilities are linear in con-
sumption so that uci = 1. As a result, under the utilitarian criterion, all individuals have
the same social marginal welfare weight. The standard utilitarian approach would naturally
lead to different tax rates for each group, following standard Ramsey considerations, such that
τm = (1 − 1/p)/(1 − 1/p + em ) where p > 0 is determined so that the tax system raises exactly
E to meet the budget constraint (5) (see online Appendix A.5 for a formal proof). Hence, the
standard tax system would generate horizontal inequities, i.e., some individuals are taxed more
than others based on a tag and conditional on income. Without loss of generality, we assume
e2 > e1 so that group 2 is more elastic and should optimally be taxed less.
       How can we specify generalized social marginal welfare weights to reflect the view that
horizontal inequities are unfair? First, as in the utilitarian case, absent any horizontal inequity
(i.e., if τ1 = τ2 ), we assume that weights are equal across the population (and normalized to
one). Second, if the tax system creates horizontal inequity (i.e., τ1 6= τ2 ), then social marginal
welfare weights are equal to one for individuals in the group facing the highest tax rate and
zero for those facing the lowest tax rate. However, such weights are not sufficient to ensure
that the no tagging tax system with τ1 = τ2 is a local optimum. Indeed, starting from this tax
system, lowering τ2 and increasing τ1 would be desirable as everybody has the same weights (no
equilibrium would exist). Hence and last, we need to expand our framework and make weights
depend on the direction of reform as well when we start from an equitable tax system and the
small reform introduces a horizontal inequity.28 In our simple example with linear taxation,
starting from identical tax rates for the two groups, a small reform that introduces inequity can
lead to (a) τ1 > τ2 , or (b) τ1 < τ2 . In case (a), group 1 suffers from a horizontal inequity because
of the reform and the weights are set equal to one on group 1 and zero on group 2. In case (b)
conversely, the weights are set equal to zero on group 1 and one on group 2. Such weights are
  28
     If the system is inequitable to start with (i.e., τ1 6= τ2 ), then a small reform will not affect the sign of the
initial inequity and hence the weights do not need to depend on the reform.



                                                                14
designed to avoid horizontal inequities unless they benefit the group discriminated against.

Regularity assumptions. We assume that there is a uniform tax rate τ1 = τ2 = τ ∗ that can
                                                          R                       R
raise E. We assume that the tax functions τ1 → τ1 · i∈1 zi di and τ2 → τ2 · i∈2 zi di, and the
                                   R           R
uniform rate tax function τ → τ · ( i∈1 zi di + i∈2 zi di) are all single peaked (Laffer curves).

   Naturally, the peaks are, respectively, at τ1 = 1/(1 + e1 ), τ2 = 1/(1 + e2 ), and τ = 1/(1 + e),
where e is the elasticity of total income with respect to 1 − τ .

                                                                            R              R
Proposition 6 Let τ ∗ be the (smallest) uniform rate that raises E: τ ∗ (          z di+
                                                                                i∈1 i
                                                                                               z di)
                                                                                            i∈2 i
                                                                                                        = E.
i) If 1/(1 + e2 ) ≥ τ ∗ then the only local optimum has horizontal equity with τ1 =        τ2 = τ ∗ .
ii) If 1/(1+e2 ) < τ ∗ then the only local optimum has horizontal inequity with τ2∗ = 1/(1+e2 ) < τ ∗
                                                                                       R
(revenue maximizing rate on group 2) and τ1∗ < τ ∗ is the smallest τ1 such that τ1 · i∈1 zi di + τ2∗ ·
R
     z di = E. This optimum Pareto dominates the uniform tax system τ1 = τ2 = τ ∗ .
  i∈2 i


   Therefore, a tax system with horizontal inequity can be an optimum only if it helps the group
discriminated against, i.e., no reform can improve the welfare of those discriminated against.
This can happen only when tagging creates a Pareto improvement, which dramatically reduces
the scope for using tagging in practice. In our example, if the government wants to set τ2 at a
lower level than τ1 , then τ2 must necessarily be set at the revenue maximizing rate.
   This is reminiscent of a Rawlsian setup, in which society only cares about the least well-off.
Here, the set of people whom society cares about is endogenous to the tax system. Namely,
they are the ones discriminated against because of tagging. In other words, we can rephrase
the Rawlsian criterion as follows: “It is permissible to discriminate against a group using taxes
and transfers not based on ability to pay only in the case where such discrimination allows to
improve the welfare of the group discriminated against.”



III     Link with Alternative Justice Principles
In this section, we illustrate how our framework can be connected to justice principles that are
not captured by the standard welfarist approach but have been discussed in the normative tax
policy literature. We use formula (2) to show how social welfare weights derived from alternative
justice principles map into optimal tax formulas.




                                                 15
III.A         Equality of Opportunity
To capture the concept of equality of opportunity, Roemer (1998) and Roemer et al. (2003)
consider models where individuals differ in their ability to earn, but part of the ability is due to
family background (which individuals are not responsible for) and to merit (which individuals
are responsible for). Conditional on family background, merit is measured by the percentile of
the earnings distribution the individual is in. Society is willing to redistribute across family
backgrounds but not across earnings conditional on family background.
       Formally, individual i’s utility is ui = u(ci −v(zi /wi )). wi is productivity stemming from two
sources. First, individual i is born into a low or high family background denoted by Bi = 0, 1.
Second, through merit (e.g., hard work at school), individual i reaches rank ri conditional on
background and hence obtains a productivity wi at the ri -th percentile of the distribution of
productivity conditional on Bi , F (w|Bi ). For any rank r, productivity is higher when coming
from the high background.
   Once wi is realized, individuals have identical utility (and hence earnings behavior) regardless
                                R
of background. Let c̄(r) ≡ ( (i:ri =r) ci di)/P rob(i : ri = r) be the average consumption of
those at conditional rank r. Equality of opportunity can be captured by weights of the form
gi = g(ci ; c̄(ri )) = 1(ci ≤ c̄(ri )), with xsi = c̄(ri ), xui = wi and xbi empty. Weights are concentrated
on those who consume less than average conditional on within background rank (i.e. merit).
       We assume that the government cannot observe family background and hence has to base
taxes and transfers on earnings z only.29 In that case, with any T (z) such that T ′ (z) < 1,
conditional on rank r, individuals from an advantaged background earn more and consume
more than those from a disadvantaged background. Hence, gi = 1 for all individuals from the
disadvantaged background and gi = 0 for all individuals from the advantaged background. Next,
we aggregate the weights at each z level. They imply that Ḡ(z) is the fraction of individuals
from disadvantaged background earning at least z relative to the population wide fraction of
individuals from disadvantaged background. This is also known as the representation index.
This leads to the social welfare function proposed by Roemer et al. (2003) which counts only
the utility of those from a disadvantaged background. Naturally, we expect Ḡ(z) to decrease
with z as it is harder for those coming from a disadvantaged background to reach upper incomes.
If the representation of individuals from a disadvantaged background is zero at the top, the top
  29
    In reality, family background is observable but the real advantage derived from family background for each
individual is not. As a result, family background is an imperfect tag for ability advantage derived from family
background. Society could be reluctant to use such a tag because of horizontal equity concerns as discussed
above. A person might come from a privileged family background and yet might not have received much parental
support. Taxing such a person more (conditional on earnings) would be unfair.


                                                      16
tax rate should be set to maximize tax revenue. Hence, equality of opportunity provides a
justification for having social welfare weights decreasing with income, which is orthogonal to
the utilitarian mechanism of decreasing marginal utility of consumption.

Calibrating the weights to US intergenerational mobility: The US intergenerational
income mobility statistics produced by Chetty et al. (2014) can be used to illustrate this
discussion. Suppose we define low background as having parents coming from the bottom half
of the income distribution of parents. Column (1) in Table 2 displays the fraction of individuals
with parents below median income above various percentiles of the income distribution.30 As
individuals with parents below median are by definition half of the population, Ḡ(z) is simply
half of column (1) and is reported in column (2). Ḡ(z) falls from 1 at percentile 0 (by definition)
to .333 at the 99.9th percentile. Hence, in contrast to the standard utilitarian case where Ḡ(z)
converges to zero for large z (with a concave utility function with marginal utility converging
to zero), in the equality of opportunity case, Ḡ(z) converges to a positive value of 1/3 because
a substantial fraction of high earners come from a disadvantaged background. Ḡ(z) appears
stable within the 99th percentile as Ḡ(z) is virtually the same at the 99th percentile and the
99.9th percentile. Hence, under this equality of opportunity criterion, individuals at the 99.9th
percentile are deemed no less deserving than individuals at the lower 99th percentile because
they are equally likely to come from a disadvantaged background.
       This has two important optimal tax consequences for top earners. First, with a Pareto
parameter a = 1.5 and an elasticity e = .5, the optimal top asymptotic tax rate is τ = 1/(1 +
a · e) = .57 in the utilitarian case and τ = (1 − 1/3)/(1 − 1/3 + a · e) = .47 in the equality of
opportunity case.31 Second, a society which values individuals coming from a low background
would use progressive income taxation but the top tax rate would be stable within the top
one percent because the representation of individuals from disadvantaged background is stable
above the 99th percentile.
       To illustrate these properties, Table 2, column (3) presents optimal marginal tax rates at
various income levels using formula (2). The weights Ḡ(z) are from column (2). We calibrate
α(z) using the actual distribution of income based on 2008 income tax return data, the latest
year available. We use a constant elasticity e = 0.5 which is a mid to upper range estimate based
on the literature (see Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz, 2012). Because of uncertainty in the level of
  30
     These estimates are based on all US individuals born in 1980-1 with their income measured at age 30-31.
In this simulation, we take a short-cut and assume these estimates hold more broadly in the full population.
  31
     Naturally, in a less meritocratic society than the United States at present, Ḡ(z) for large z could possibly
be smaller and the optimal top tax rate correspondingly closer to the optimal utilitarian tax rate.



                                                       17
e, the simulations should be considered as illustrative at best. Column (3) shows that optimal
marginal tax rates are U-shaped but about constant above the 99th percentile. For comparison,
columns (4) and (5) present the utilitarian weights Ḡ(z) and optimal marginal tax rates T ′ (z)
assuming a log-utility so that the welfare weight ḡ(z) at income level z, is proportional to
1/(z − T (z)). The utilitarian case delivers optimal tax rates that are about 10 points higher
than the equality of opportunity case and significantly more progressive.


III.B        Poverty Alleviation
The poverty rate, defined as the fraction of households below a given disposable income thresh-
old (the poverty threshold) attracts substantial attention in the public debate. Hence, it is
conceivable that governments aim to either reduce the poverty gap (defined as the amount of
money needed to lift all households out of poverty) or reduce the poverty rate (the number of
households below the poverty threshold). A few studies have considered government objectives
incorporating such poverty concerns. Besley and Coate (1992) and Kanbur, Keen, and Tuomala
(1994) show how adopting poverty minimization indexes affects optimal tax analysis. Impor-
tantly, their findings imply that the outcomes can be Pareto dominated. In this section, we
show how generalized welfare weights can incorporate poverty alleviation considerations in the
traditional optimal tax analysis while maintaining the Pareto principle.
      Let us denote the poverty threshold by c̄. Anybody with disposable income c < c̄ is poor.
Utility is taken to be a special case of our general formulation: ui = u(ci − v(zi /wi )).

Poverty gap minimization and implicit negative weights. Kanbur, Keen, and Tuomala
(1994) derive the tax system minimizing the poverty gap. If the lowest ability agent exerts
positive labor supply, the authors find that the bottom marginal tax rate should be negative
as illustrated on Figure 2(a) in a (pre-tax income, post-tax income) plane. It is well-known,
however, that in the welfarist case, the optimal tax rate at the bottom cannot be negative if
everybody works and the lowest earnings are strictly positive (Seade, 1977). Indeed, starting
from a negative bottom rate at minimum earnings level zb > 0, slightly increasing the bottom
marginal tax rate below zb would be Pareto improving without violating incentive constraints:
it allows the lowest productivity agent to work less, which is welfare improving, and also raises
more revenue, as the marginal tax rate is negative to start with. This is a Pareto improvement.32
      The discrepancy between the poverty gap minimization and the welfarist objective arises
because the former does not take into account the disutility from work for the lowest productivity
 32
      The proof is exactly symmetrical to the proof of the famous zero marginal tax rate top result.

                                                        18
agents. Pushing them to work more is always desirable under a poverty gap objective.

Generalized Social Welfare Weights. Let us instead consider our generalized weights ap-
proach. If the demogrant can be made bigger than c̄, then the optimum way to fight poverty
is to raise enough taxes to set the demogrant equal to c̄. Once the poverty threshold has been
attained, there is no reason to have differences in social welfare weights and hence the weights
would all be equal to a fixed g for those with positive earnings so that Ḡ(z) = g for z > 0. Using
formula (2), we would have T ′ (z) = (1 − g)/(1 − g + α(z) · e(z)), where g is set so that total taxes
collected raise enough revenue to fund the demogrant c̄. The less trivial case is when even with
g = 0, tax revenue cannot fund a demogrant as large as c̄. Let us denote by z̄ the (endogenous)
earnings level such that c̄ = z̄ − T (z̄), i.e., that defines the pre-tax poverty threshold.
       A natural way to capture a “poverty gap alleviation” objective is to assume that social
welfare weights are concentrated among individuals with disposable income c below the poverty
threshold c̄. We can therefore specify the generalized welfare weights as follows: g(c, z; c̄) = 1
if c < c̄ and g(c, z; c̄) = 0 if c ≥ c̄.33 In this case, xui = wi , xsi = c̄, and xb is empty. We
                                                                        R∞
have ḡ(z) = 0 for z ≥ z̄ and ḡ(z) = 1/H(z̄) for z < z̄ so that 0 ḡ(z)dH(z) = 1. Hence,
we have Ḡ(z) = 0 for z ≥ z̄. We obtain Ḡ(z) = [1 − H(z)/H(z̄)]/[1 − H(z)] for z < z̄ (as
                 R z̄
Ḡ(z)[1 − H(z)] = z ḡ(z ′ )dH(z ′ )). Applying formula (2) yields the following proposition.

Proposition 7 The optimal tax schedule that minimizes the poverty gap is:

                                                       1
                                     T ′ (z) =                       if   z > z̄
                                                 1 + α(z) · e(z)

                                             [1/H(z̄) − 1]H(z)
                     T ′ (z) =                                                        if   z ≤ z̄
                                 [1/H(z̄) − 1]H(z) + α(z)[1 − H(z)] · e(z)
As [1/H(z̄) − 1]H(z̄) = 1 − H(z̄), the marginal tax rate is continuous at the poverty threshold z̄.
The marginal tax rate maximizes revenue above z̄ and is positive (and typically large) below z̄.
The shape of optimal tax rates is quite similar to the standard utilitarian case and is illustrated
on Figure 2(b) in a (pre-tax income, post-tax income) plane. Our approach can be viewed as
minimizing the poverty gap while respecting the Pareto principle.34
  33
    A less extreme (but still tractable) version of this assumption would set g(c, z; c̄) = g if c ≥ c̄ with 0 < g < 1.
  34
    “Poverty rate minimization,” where the government attempts to minimize the number of people living below
the poverty line by concentrating weights on those at the poverty threshold, is treated in online Appendix B.4.




                                                          19
                                                                   ! ! ! ! !!!!!
          ! ! ! ! !!!!!



                                                                     Positive large T’(z)
  !!!

                                 T’(z)>0                     !!                                   Revenue maximizing
                   T’(z)<0                                                                              T’(z)



                                                                                            !!                         z
             !!!                                       z
              (a) Direct poverty gap minimization                      (b) Generalized weights approach


                             Figure 2: Optimal policies for poverty gap minimization
Notes: The figure displays the optimal tax schedule for poverty gap alleviation in a (pre-tax income z, post-tax
income c = z −T (z)) plane. Panel (a) plots the schedule for the approach that consists in directly minimizing the
poverty gap (Kanbur, Keen, and Tuomala,1994). The marginal tax rate is negative below the poverty threshold
z̄. Panel (b) plots the schedule derived using generalized welfare weights concentrated on those in poverty. The
optimal tax schedule is similar to the standard utilitarian case with high marginal tax rates at the bottom.


IV          Conclusion
This paper has shown that the concept of generalized marginal social welfare weights is a fruitful
way to extend the standard welfarist theory of optimal taxation. The use of suitable generalized
social welfare weights can help enrich the traditional welfarist approach and account for existing
tax policy debates and structures while retaining (local) Pareto constrained efficiency. Our
theory brings back social preferences as a critical element for optimal tax theory analysis.
Naturally, this flexibility of generalized social weights begs the question of what social welfare
weights ought to be and how they are formed.
        Generalized welfare weights can be derived from social justice principles, leading to a norma-
tive theory of taxation. The most famous example is the Rawlsian theory where the generalized
social marginal welfare weights are concentrated solely on the most disadvantaged members of
society. As we have discussed, binary weights (equal to one for those deserving more support and
zero otherwise) have normative appeal and can be used in a broad range of cases. The Rawlsian
case can also be extended to a discrete number of groups, ranked according to deservedness,
such that society has redistributive preferences across groups but libertarian preferences within
groups. Naturally, who is deserving might itself be endogenous to the tax system. Such weights
can also prioritize justice principles in a lexicographic form.
        First, injustices created by tax policy (such as horizontal inequities) may have the highest

                                                       20
priority. In that case, those deserving of support are those discriminated against whenever
horizontal inequities arise. Hence, horizontal inequities are allowed only if they help the group
discriminated against, dramatically lowering the scope for such policies (such as tagging) that
are recommended by the standard welfarist approach but typically not observed in practice.
       Second, deserving individuals will be those who face difficult economic situations through
no fault of their own. This captures the principle of compensation. Health expenses come to
mind, explaining why virtually all advanced countries adopt generous public health insurance
that effectively compensate individuals for the bad luck of facing high health expenses. Once
disparities in health care costs have been compensated by public health insurance provision, this
element naturally drops out of social welfare weights. Family background is obviously another
element that affects outcomes and that individuals do not choose. This explains why equality of
opportunity has wide normative appeal both among liberals and conservatives. Policies aiming
directly to curb such inequities such as public education or inheritance taxation can therefore
be justified on such grounds.35 Naturally, public education or inheritance taxation cannot fully
erase inequalities due to family background. This leaves a role for taxes and transfers based on
income that aim at correcting remaining inequities in opportunity as in the theory of Roemer
et al. (1993) which can be implemented using intergenerational mobility statistics.
       Third, even conditional on background, there remains substantial inequality in incomes.
Part of this inequality is due to choices (preferences for leisure vs. consumption) but part is due
to luck (ability and temperament are often not based on choice). Naturally, there is a debate on
the relative importance of choices vs. luck, which impacts the resulting social welfare weights.36
As in the fair income tax theory, the generalized social welfare weights have the advantage
of highlighting which differences society considers unfair (for example, due to intrinsic skill
differences) and which it considers fair (for example, due to different preferences for work).37
       Finally, there might be scope for redistribution based on more standard utilitarian principles,
i.e., the fact that an additional dollar of consumption matters more for lower income individuals
than for higher income individuals. In the public debate, this principle seems relevant at the
low income end to justify the use of anti-poverty programs but less widely invoked to justify
progressive taxation at the upper end.
       Social preferences are indeed shaped by beliefs about what drives disparities in individual
economic outcomes (effort, luck, background, etc.) as in the model of Piketty (1995). We show
  35
     Piketty and Saez (2013b) consider optimal inheritance taxation with such “meritocratic” weights concen-
trated on those receiving no inheritance.
  36
     The case of luck vs. deserved income is treated in online Appendix B.2.
  37
     See the treatment of the fair income tax theory in online Appendix B.5.


                                                    21
in online Appendix C that online surveys can be used to empirically estimate social preferences,
leading to a positive theory of taxation. Alternatively, the inverse optimum tax literature
estimates the weights that would make the current tax system optimal. More ambitiously,
economists can also cast light on those mechanisms and hence enlighten the public perceptions
so as to move the debate up to the higher level of normative principles.


References
Alesina, Alberto, and George-Marios Angeletos. 2005. “Fairness and Redistribution.” Ameri-
can Economic Review 95 (3): 960–980.
Besley, Timothy, and Steven Coate. 1992. “Workfare versus Welfare: Incentive Arguments for
Work Requirements in Poverty-Alleviation Programs.” American Economic Review 82(1): 249–261.
Chetty, Raj. 2009. “Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural and
Reduced-Form Methods.”Annual Review of Economics 1: 451–488.
Chetty, Raj, Nathan Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “Where is the
Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 129 (4): 1553–1623.
Diamond, Peter. 1998. “Optimal Income Taxation: An Example with a U-Shaped Pattern of
Optimal Marginal Tax Rates.” American Economic Review 88 (1): 83–95.
Edgeworth, Francis. 1897. “The Pure Theory of Taxation.” Economic Journal 7: 46–70.
Ellwood, David. 1988. Poor Support: Poverty and the American Family. New York: Basic Books.
Fehr, Ernst, and Klaus Schmidt. 1999. “A Theory of Fairness, Competition, and Cooperation.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (3): 817–868.
Fleurbaey, Marc, and François Maniquet. 2011. A Theory of Fairness and Social Welfare.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fleurbaey, Marc, and François Maniquet. 2015. “Optimal Taxation Theory and Principles of
Fairness.” unpublished.
Hendren, Nathan. 2013. “The Policy Elasticity.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 19177.
Jacquet, Laurence, and Etienne Lehmann. 2015. “Optimal Income Taxation when Skills and
Behavioral Elasticities are Heterogeneous.” CESifo Working Paper 5265.
Kanbur, Ravi, Michael Keen, and Matti Tuomala. 1994. “Optimal Nonlinear Income Taxation
for the Alleviation of Income-Poverty.” European Economic Review 38 (8): 1613–1632.
Kaplow, Louis. 2001. “Horizontal Equity: New Measures, Unclear Principles (Commentary).”In
Inequality and Tax Policy, edited by Kevin A. Hassett and R. Glenn Hubbard, 75–97. Washington
DC: American Enterprise Institute Press.
Kleven, Henrik, and Claus Kreiner. 2006. “The Marginal Cost of Public Funds: Hours of Work
Versus Labor Force Participation.” Journal of Public Economics 90: 1955–1973.
Mankiw, Greg, and Matthew Weinzierl. 2010. “The Optimal Taxation of Height: A Case Study
of Utilitarian Income Redistribution.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 2 (1): 155–76.
Mirrlees, James. 1971. “An Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation.” Review of
Economic Studies 38: 175–208.
Piketty, Thomas. 1995. “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics 110 (3): 551–584.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013. “Optimal Labor Income Taxation.” In Handbook
of Public Economics, Vol. 5, edited by Alan Auerbach, Raj Chetty, Martin Feldstein, and Emmanuel

                                               22
Saez, 391-474. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, North-Holland.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2013b. “A Theory of Optimal Inheritance Taxation,”
Econometrica 81 (5): 1851–1886.
Roemer, John. 1998. Equality of Opportunity, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Roemer, John et al., 2003. “To What Extent Do Fiscal Systems Equalize Opportunities for Income
Acquisition Among Citizens?” Journal of Public Economics 87: 539–565.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2001. “Using Elasticities to Derive Optimal Income Tax Rates.” Review of
Economic Studies 68: 205–229.
Saez, Emmanuel, Joel Slemrod, and Seth Giertz. 2012. “The Elasticity of Taxable Income with
Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review.” Journal of Economic Literature 50 (1): 3–50.
Seade, Jesus. 1977. “On the Shape of Optimal Tax Schedules.” Journal of Public Economics 7 (2):
203–235.
Weinzierl, Matthew. 2014. “The Promise of Positive Optimal Taxation: Normative Diversity and
a Role for Equal Sacrifice.” Journal of Public Economics 118: 128–142.




                                              23
                                                  Table 1: Generalized Social Marginal Welfare Weights


                                                    Actual Practice        Standard Welfare                      Generalized Social
                                                                           Criterion                             Marginal Welfare Weights
                                                    (1)                    (2)                                   (3)

          Pareto Efficiency                         Desirable              Yes                                   Yes (local) if g non negative

          Optimal taxes with fixed incomes          Non-degenerate         Degenerate                      g must depend on taxes paid
                                                                           (Full redistribution desirable) in addition to consumption

          Free Loaders                              Important              Cannot capture                        Can be captured if g
                                                                           counterfactuals                       depends on counterfactual
                                                                                                                 (whether work absent transfers)

          Tagging                                   Used minimally         Highly desirable                      Can justify non desirability
24




                                                                                                                 if g depends on horizontal equity

          Poverty Alleviation                       Relevant criterion     Direct poverty minimization           Can maintain Pareto efficiency
                                                                           leads to Pareto inefficiency


     Notes: This table contrasts actual practice (column 1), the standard welfarist approach (column 2), and our generalized social marginal welfare weights
     approach (column 3) in various situations listed on the left-hand-side of the table. In each situation, column 3 indicates what property of social marginal
     welfare weights (denoted by g) is required to make this approach fit with actual tax policy practice.
               Table 2: Equality of Opportunity vs. Utilitarian Optimal Tax Rates

                                          Equality of Opportunity                    Utilitarian (log-utility)
                                 Fraction           Implied         Implied        Utilitarian        Utilitarian
                                from low          social wel-       optimal           social           optimal
                              background          fare weight       marginal         welfare           marginal
                               (=parents             Ḡ(z)          tax rate       weight Ḡ(z)        tax rate
                             below median)        above each         at each       above each           at each
                               above each          percentile      percentile       percentile        percentile
                                percentile                        (in percent)                       (in percent)
                                    (1)                (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)
 Income Percentile
 z = 25th percentile               0.443             0.886              53             0.793               67
 z = 50th percentile               0.373             0.746              45             0.574               58
 z = 75th percentile               0.303             0.606              40             0.385               51
 z = 90th percentile               0.236             0.472              34             0.255               42
 z = 99th percentile               0.170             0.340              46             0.077               54
 z = 99.9th percentile             0.165             0.330              47             0.016               56

Notes: This table compares optimal marginal tax rates at various percentiles of the distribution (listed by row)
using an equality of opportunity criterion (in column (3)) and a standard utilitarian criterion (in column (5)).
Both columns use the optimal tax formula T ′ (z) = [1 − Ḡ(z)]/[1 − Ḡ(z) + α(z) · e] discussed in the text where
Ḡ(z) is the average social marginal welfare weight above income level z, α(z) = (zh(z))/(1 − H(z)) is the local
Pareto parameter (with h(z) the density of income at z, and H(z) the cumulative distribution), and e the
elasticity of reported income with respect to 1 − T ′ (z). We assume e = 0.5. We calibrate α(z) using the actual
distribution of income based on 2008 income tax return data (and ignoring the effects of changing taxes on α(z)).
For the equality of opportunity criterion, Ḡ(z) is the representation index of individuals with income above z
who come from a disadvantaged background (defined as having a parent with income below the median). This
representation index is estimated using the national intergenerational mobility statistics of Chetty et al. (2014)
based on all US individuals born in 1980-1 with their income measured at age 30-31. For the utilitarian criterion,
we assume a log-utility so that the social welfare weight ḡ(z) at income level z is proportional to 1/(z − T (z)).




                                                        25
                        Online Appendix for
           “Generalized Social Marginal Welfare Weights
                     for Optimal Tax Theory”
                        By Emmanuel Saez and Stefanie Stantcheva


A      Proofs of Results in the Text
A.1     Local Optimum Approach
In this section, we provide definitions of local optima and derive first and second order conditions.
     We focus on money-metric utilities ui = ci − v(zi ; xui , xbi ) (i.e., removing the common concave
transformation u(.)) so as to express all utility gains or losses in dollar terms.
     We start from an initial budget neutral tax schedule T . As in the main text, we denote by
zi (T ) the earnings of agent i and by Ui (T ) = zi (T ) − T (zi (T )) − v(zi (T ); xui , xbi ) the indirect
money-metric utility of agent i under the tax system T . We denote by gi (T ) = g(zi (T ) −
T (zi (T )), zi (T ), xsi , xbi ) the generalized social welfare weight under the tax system T .
                                                                              R
     For any tax schedule T̃ , we define the budget function B(T̃ ) = i T̃ (zi (T̃ ))di where T̃ (zi (T̃ ))
is tax paid by individual i when the tax schedule is T̃ . The fact that the initial tax system T is
budget neutral implies that B(T ) = 0. We define the social welfare function W (T̃ |T ) from tax
system T̃ using the social welfare weights evaluated at T as follows:
                                                         Z
                                             W (T̃ |T ) = gi (T )Ui (T̃ )di.                           (A1)
                                                    i


Since the weights gi (T ) are evaluated at the initial tax system T , they are held fixed in this
definition, and hence T̃ → W (T̃ |T ) is a standard social welfare function for evaluating tax
systems. Because all individual utilities are money-metric, the social marginal welfare weight
on individual i is indeed gi (T ) · uci = gi (T ). We can define a local tax optimum as follows:

Definition A1 Local Optimum. The initial tax system T is a local optimum if and only if
there exists a neighborhood of T such that for any budget neutral tax system T̃ (i.e., a tax system
such that B(T̃ ) = 0) in this neighborhood, we have W (T̃ |T ) ≤ W (T |T ).

Using this formal definition, we can easily prove Proposition 1 from the main text.
   As in Proposition 1, consider a perturbed tax system T +ε∆T in direction ∆T that is budget
neutral to a first order (according to Definition 2). This implies that the budget function
ε → R(ε) = B(T + ε∆T ) is such that (a) R(0) = 0 (as the initial T is budget neutral,
R(0) = B(T ) = 0), (b) R′ (0) = 0 (as the direction of reform ∆T is first order neutral budget,
we have [R(ε) − R(0)]/ε = [B(T + ε∆T ) − B(T )]/ε) → 0 when ε → 0). Hence the tax system
T̃ε (z) = T (z) + ε∆T (z) − R(ε) (where −R(ε) is a lumpsum adjustment) is exactly budget
neutral for all ε. Indeed, as there are no income effects, earnings decisions are the same under
tax system T + ε∆T and tax system T̃ε so that B(T̃ε ) = B(T + ε∆T ) − R(ε) ≡ 0.
     For ε small enough, the tax system T̃ε = T + ε∆T − R(ε) is in the neighborhood of T
from Definition A1. Because T is a local optimum, we have W (T̃ε |T ) ≤ W (T |T ) for ε small
enough and W (T̃ε=0 |T ) = W (T |T ). Hence, the function ε → W (T + ε∆T − R(ε)|T ) has a local
maximum at ε = 0. This implies that the first and second order conditions hold. The first order
                                                                                   R
condition dW (T +ε∆T
                   dε
                      −R(ε)|T )
                                |ε=0 = 0 is exactly equivalent to the condition i gi ∆T (zi )di = 0 in
the proposition.
                                        2
     The second order condition is d W (T +ε∆T dε2
                                                   −R(ε)|T )
                                                             |ε=0 ≤ 0. This second order condition does
not have a simple expression but it can be checked on a case by case basis, like in standard
optimal tax theory.


A.2     Derivation of the Optimal Tax Formulas using Weights
We show how to derive the optimal nonlinear tax formula (2) and the optimal linear tax formula
(3) using the generalized welfare weights approach. In each case, we consider a small budget
neutral tax reform. At the optimum, the net welfare effect has to be zero.

Proof of Proposition 2. Optimal non-linear tax. Consider a small reform δT (z) in which
the marginal tax rate is increased by δτ in a small band from z to z + dz, but left unchanged
anywhere else. The reform mechanically collects extra taxes dzδτ from each taxpayer above z.
As there are 1 − H(z) individuals above z, dzδτ [1 − H(z)] is collected. With no income effects
on labor supply, there is no behavioral response above the small band.
     Those in the income range from z to z + dz have a behavioral response to the higher
marginal tax rate. A taxpayer in the small band reduces her income by δz = −ezδτ /(1 −
T ′ (z)) where e is the elasticity of earnings z with respect to the net-of-tax rate 1 − T ′ . As
there are h(z)dz taxpayers in the band, those behavioral responses lead to a tax loss equal to
−dzδτ · h(z)e(z)zT ′ (z)/(1 − T ′ (z)) with e(z) the average elasticity in the small band. Hence,
the net revenue collected by the reform is
                                                                             
                                                                  T ′ (z)
                       dR = dzδτ · 1 − H(z) − h(z) · e(z) · z ·                                  (A2)
                                                                1 − T ′ (z)

This revenue is rebated lumpsum so that the reform is budget neutral. With no income effects,
this lumpsum rebate has no labor supply effect on earnings.
    What is the effect of the reform on welfare using the generalized welfare weights gi ? The


                                                  2
                  R                              R
welfare effect is i gi dRdi for zi ≤ z and − i gi (δτ dz − dR)di for zi > z. Hence, the net effect on
                 R              R
welfare is dR · i gi di − δτ dz {i:zi ≥z} gi di. At the optimum, the net welfare effect is zero. Using
                                                                             R               R
the expression for dR above and the fact that (1 − H(z))Ḡ(z) = {i:zi ≥z} gi di/ i gi di, the net
welfare effect can be rewritten as
       Z                                                             Z
                                                   T ′ (z)
 dzδτ · gi di · 1 − H(z) − h(z) · e(z) · z ·                   − dzδτ · gi di · (1 − H(z)) · Ḡ(z) = 0 (A3)
         i                                       1 − T ′ (z)             i
                     R
Dividing by dzδτ ·       i
                             gi di and re-arranging, we get

                                     T ′ (z)      1    1 − H(z)
                                               =     ·          · (1 − Ḡ(z)).
                                   1 − T ′ (z)   e(z) z · h(z)

Using the local Pareto parameter α(z) = zh(z)/(1 − H(z)), we obtain formula (2).
Discussion of the optimal non-linear tax formula: If average social marginal welfare
weights ḡ(z) are decreasing in income, T ′ (z) is always non-negative. To see this, note that by
definition Ḡ(z) = 1 when z = zbottom , the bottom of the earnings distribution. Next, ḡ(z)
decreasing implies that Ḡ(z) < 1 for z > zbottom . Hence, the optimal tax formula then implies
that T ′ (z) > 0. The condition that social welfare weights are decreasing in income is always
satisfied with standard utilitarian weights (gi = uci ), or using a standard concave social welfare
           R
function i G(ui )di (with gi = G′ (ui )uci ). We do not impose this condition a priori for all
primitive weights gi in our generalized framework.
    Similarly, the zero top tax rate result continues to hold if the income distribution is bounded
and average social marginal welfare weights ḡ(z) are decreasing in income. The argument is the
same as in the Mirrlees model: The top tax rate cannot be positive because otherwise, we could
reduce it, which would induce top tax earners to work more (and would not have an adverse
effect on revenues above the top earner, since there is no agent earning more). Next, the top
tax rate cannot be negative by the argument in the previous paragraph.
    Finally, the zero bottom tax rate result continues to hold under the same conditions as in
the Mirrlees model, namely, that the bottom earner has strictly positive earnings, in which case
the result directly follows from the formula with Ḡ(z) = 1 when z = zbottom .

Proof of Proposition 3. Optimal linear tax. Consider a small reform δτ . This increases
                                   R                                                       R
mechanically tax revenue by δτ · i zi di. By definition of the aggregate elasticity e of i zi di with
                                                                                       τ
                                                                                                R
respect to 1 − τ , this reduces tax revenue through behavioral responses by −e · 1−τ      · δτ · i zi di.
                                                        τ
                                                                  R
Hence, the net effect on revenue is dR = [1 − e · 1−τ     ] · δτ · i zi di. This revenue is rebated
lumpsum to individuals so that the reform is budget neutral. With no income effects on labor
supply, this rebate has no further impact on earnings.
   What is the effect of the reform on welfare using the generalized welfare weights gi ? The
                 R                                         R            R
welfare effect − i gi (−dR+zi ·δτ )di, or, rearranged, dR· i gi di−δτ i (zi ·gi )di. At the optimum,


                                                       3
this is zero. Using the expression for dR above, this implies:
                                           Z       Z            Z
                                  τ
                            1−e·       · δτ · zi di · gi di = δτ · (zi · gi )di
                                 1−τ           i       i            i


or equivalently                                                      R
                                    τ                                  (zi · gi )di
                              1−e·     = ḡ        with     ḡ = R       i   R
                                   1−τ                                z di · i gi di
                                                                     i i

which can easily be re-expressed as the optimal formula (3).


A.3      Proof of Proposition 4
Suppose that we have a non-negative generalized weights function and a local optimum T̃ (z).
Consider maximizing the social welfare function SWF:
                                             Z
                                    SW F = (ωi · ui )di                               (A4)
                                                       i


with the Pareto weights such that ωi = gi /uci ≥ 0 where gi and uci are evaluated at the
optimum allocation (held fixed in the maximization). For any tax function, consumption is
given by ci = zi − T (zi ).
    We can solve this maximization problem using again a variation approach as in Section A.2
to obtain the same optimal tax formula as in the case for generalized social welfare weights with
the individual weights ωi uci . Hence, it is clear that T̃ (z) satisfies the optimal tax formula (2)
coming from the first order condition of the maximization of SWF in (A4). 


A.4      Taxation with fixed incomes
Proof of Proposition 5: g̃(z − T (z), T (z)) has to be constant with z. Hence, setting the
derivative of g̃(z − T (z), T (z)) with respect to z to zero, yields g̃c · (1 − T ′ (z)) + g̃z−c · T ′ (z) = 0
and the optimal tax formula (4). 0 ≤ T ′ (z) ≤ 1 since g̃c ≤ 0 and g̃z−c ≥ 0. Note that this is a
first-order ordinary nonautonomous differential equation of the form

                                            T ′ (z) = f (z, T (z))

with initial condition on T (0) given by the government budget constraint. If g̃ is continuous
in both its arguments, so is f (z, T (z)) for z ∈ [0, ∞). Then, by the Cauchy-Peano theorem, a
solution T (z) exists, with continuous derivative on [0, ∞). If both f (z, T (z)) and ∂f (z,T
                                                                                           ∂z
                                                                                              (z))
                                                                                                   are
continuous, then, by the uniqueness theorem of the initial value problem, the solution is unique.





                                                      4
A.5        Horizontal Equity
Derivation of the optimal differentiated tax rates:
    Individual i belonging to group m ∈ {0, 1} chooses zi to maximize ui = zi · (1 − τm ) −
v(zi ; xui , xbi ) so that 1 − τm = vz (zi ; xui , xbi ) and dui /dτm = −zi (using the envelope theorem).
                                  R           R                        R           R
The government maximizes i∈1 ui di+ i∈2 ui di subject to τ1 · i∈1 zi di+τ2 · i∈2 zi di ≥ E. Denoting
                        R
by Zm (1 − τm ) = i∈m zi di, the aggregate income in group m as a function of the net-of-tax rate
1 − τm , we can form the Lagrangian (p is the multiplier):
                        Z                   Z
                  L=              ui di +             ui di + p · [τ1 · Z1 (1 − τ1 ) + τ2 · Z2 (1 − τ2 ) − E]
                            i∈1                 i∈2


The first order condition in τm is:
              Z                                                                     
    dL                                  dZm                         τm 1 − τm dZm
0=        =−        zi di+p· Zm − τm              = −Zm +p·Zm 1 −                        ,
    dτm         i∈m                  d(1 − τm )                   1 − τm Zm d(1 − τm )

                                                           1−τm dZm
Hence, introducing the elasticity em =                      Zm d(1−τm )
                                                                        ,     we have
                                                                 
                                            τm                                      τm     1 − 1/p
                                  1=p· 1−        em                       i.e.,          =         ,
                                          1 − τm                                  1 − τm     em

so that, re-arranging, we obtain τm = (1−1/p)/(1−1/p+em ) as in the main text. The multiplier
p is set so that the government budget constraint is met. Naturally, this requires E to be below
the revenue maximizing level that is obtained with p = ∞ and the standard revenue maximizing
tax rates τm = 1/(1 + em ).

Proof of Proposition 6: Suppose 1/(1 + e2 ) ≥ τ ∗ . Start with the tax system τ1 = τ2 = τ ∗
with τ ∗ below the revenue maximizing rate 1/(1 + e2 ) for group 2. Hence, any budget neutral
reform with δτ2 < 0 requires δτ1 > 0. Given the structure of our weights (that load fully on
group 1 which becomes discriminated against), this cannot be desirable either. Naturally, as
e1 < e2 , τ ∗ is also below the revenue maximizing rate 1/(1 + e1 ) for group 1 so that symmetrical
reforms δτ2 > 0 and δτ1 < 0 are not desirable. Hence, τ1 = τ2 = τ ∗ is an optimum.
     Let us prove that this optimum is unique. Suppose (τ1 , τ2 ) is another optimum. If τ1 = τ2
then τ1 = τ2 > τ ∗ as τ ∗ is the smallest uniform rate raising E. Then δτ1 = δτ2 < 0 will typically
raise revenue and benefit everybody (as the Laffer curve τ → τ · (Z1 + Z2 ) is single peaked in
τ ). Hence, we can assume without loss of generality that τ2 < τ ∗ < τ1 :1 The optimum has
horizontal inequity and τ2 , τ1 bracket τ ∗ . If not and τ2 < τ1 < τ ∗ , then τ ∗ would not be the
smallest uniform τ raising E. If τ ∗ < τ2 < τ1 then by singlepeakedness of the Laffer curve in
τ2 , decreasing τ2 (which is above its revenue maximizing rate) would raise revenue and improve
everybody’s welfare. With τ2 < τ ∗ < τ1 , it must be the case that δτ2 > 0 does not raise revenue.
  1
      The proof in the other case τ2 > τ ∗ > τ1 proceeds the same way.


                                                                      5
If it did, that reform with δτ1 < 0 would benefit group 1 where all the weight is loaded. Hence,
τ2 is above the revenue maximizing rate 1/(1 + e2 ) but this contradicts 1/(1 + e2 ) ≥ τ ∗ .
     Suppose 1/(1+e2 ) < τ ∗ and consider the tax system τ2 = 1/(1+ e2 ) and τ1 < τ ∗ the smallest
                        R               R
tax rate such that τ1 · i∈1 zi di + τ2 · i∈2 zi di = E. τ2 maximizes tax revenue on group 2. So
δτ2 > 0 requires δτ1 > 0 to balance budget and is not desirable. δτ2 < 0 requires δτ1 > 0 to
budget balance and is not desirable as all the weight is loaded on group 1. δτ1 < 0 with δτ2 = 0
lowers revenue (as τ1 is the smallest tax rate raising E). Hence, this is an optimum. Note that
τ2 = 1/(1 + e2 ) raises more revenue than τ2 = τ ∗ . Hence, τ1 does not need to be as high at τ ∗
to raise (combined with τ2 = 1/(1 + e2 )), total revenue E so that τ1 < τ ∗ .
     We can prove that it is unique. First, the equitable tax system τ1 = τ2 = τ ∗ is not an
optimum because δτ2 < 0 raises revenue and hence allows δτ1 < 0 which benefits everybody.
Suppose τ2 < τ1 is another optimum. Then τ2 must be revenue maximizing (if not moving in
that direction while lowering τ1 is desirable), then τ1 must be set as in the proposition. 


B       Additional Results
B.1     Mapping Pareto weights to generalized welfare weights
                                                                              R
Proposition B1 For any social welfare function of the form SW F = i (ωi ·ui )di with ωi ≥ 0 ex-
ogenous Pareto weights, there exist generalized social welfare weights with function g(c, zi ; xsi , xbi ) =
ωi · uci (ci − v(zi ; xbi )) with xsi = i, such that the tax system maximizing SW F is an optimum for
generalized social welfare weights given the function g.

    The proof is immediate by comparing the first-order conditions for the social welfare max-
imization to the condition characterizing the optimum with generalized weights in (A3) in
Section A.3. Note here that individual identities directly enter the welfare weights, so that, in
the notation from the text, xsi = i. Alternatively, suppose the Pareto weights ω depended on
i only through a set of characteristics xsi , so that ωi = ω(xsi ). Then, again, the corresponding
generalized weights are directly functions g(ci , zi ; xsi , xbi ) = ω(xsi ) · uci (ci − v(zi ; xbi )).


B.2     Luck Income vs. Deserved Income
A widely held view is that it is fairer to tax income due to “luck” than income earned through
effort and that it is fairer to insure against income losses beyond individuals’ control.2 Our
framework can capture in a tractable way such social preferences, which differentiate income
streams according to their source.3 These preferences could, under some conditions on the
    2
      See e.g., Fong (2001) and Devooght and Shokkaert (2003) for how the notion of control over one’s income
is crucial to identify what is deserved income and Cowell and Shokkaert (2001) for how perceptions of risk and
luck inform redistributive preferences.
    3
      The problem of luck vs. deserved income is also discussed in Fleurbaey (2008), chapter 3.



                                                      6
income processes, also provide a micro-foundation for generalized social welfare weights g̃(c, z−c)
increasing in T = z − c, as presented in Section II.A in the main text.
     Suppose there are two sources of income: y d is deserved income, due to one’s own effort, and
y l is luck income, due purely to one’s luck. Total income is z = y d + y l . Let us denote by Ey l
average luck income in the economy.
     Consider a society with the following preferences for redistribution: Ideally, all luck income
y should be fully redistributed, but individuals are fully entitled to their deserved income y d .
  l

These social preferences can be captured by the following binary set of weights:

                                          gi = 1(ci ≤ zi − yil + Ey l )                                        (A5)

In our notation, xsi = (yil , Ey l ), with Ey l being an aggregate characteristic common to all agents.
A person is “deserving” and has a weight of one if her tax confiscates more than the excess of
her luck income relative to average luck income. Otherwise, the person receives a zero weight.4
Observable luck income: Suppose first that the government is able to observe luck income
and condition the tax system on it, with Ti = T (zi , yil ). In this case, as discussed in Section I, it
is necessary to aggregate the individual gi weights in (A5) at each (z, y l ) pair. The aggregated
weights are given by: ḡ(z, y l ) = 1(z − T (z, y l ) ≤ z − y l + Ey l ), where Ey l is a known constant,
independent of the tax system. Hence, the optimum is to, first, ensure everybody’s luck income
is just equal to Ey l with T (z, y l ) = y l − Ey l + T (z) where T (z) is now a standard income tax
set according to formula (4), which leads to T (z) = 0, as society does not want to redistribute
deserved income. A real-world example of luck income are health costs. Health costs are
effectively negative luck income and the desire to compensate people for them leads to universal
health insurance in all advanced economies.
No behavioral responses and unobservable luck income. We assume first that y l and y d
are exogenously distributed in the population and independent of taxes (we consider below the
case with elastic effort). With unobservable luck income, we make sufficient assumptions that
guarantee that any change in total income is partially driven by luck income and partially by
deserved income.
Assumption: yil = αȳi + εi and yid = (1 − α)ȳi − εi . ȳi is distributed iid across agents with a
density fȳ (.), εi is distributed iid across agents with a density fε (.) on [ε, ε̄], and 0 < α < 1.
    ȳi is an individual-specific income effect that affects total income: Individuals with high ȳi
have both higher deserved income and higher luck income. On the other hand, α is an economy-
wide share factor that determines how much luck income an individual has relative to deserved
income for a given total income (say, as a function of the institutional features of the economy).
εi is a random shock to the split between luck income and deserved income.
   4
     In this illustration, we have considered the special case of binary individual weights. More generally, we could
specify weights in a continuous fashion based on the difference between yil − Ey l and zi − ci . Such alternative
weights would also provide a micro-foundation for the function g̃(c, z − c).


                                                         7
    If luck income is not observable, taxes can only depend on total income, with Ti = T (zi ).
This model can provide a micro-foundation for the generalized weights g̃(c, z − c) introduced in
Definition 5.
    If we aggregate the individual weights at each (c, z), we obtain g̃(c, z − c) = P rob(yil − Ey l ≤
zi − ci |ci = c, zi = z). Using the expression for luck income and the fact that zi = yil + yid = ȳi ,
this can be rewritten as g̃(c, z − c) = P rob(εi ≤ Ey l + (1 − α)zi − ci |ci = c, zi = z). By
the independence assumption, the distribution of ε conditional on c and z is equal to the
unconditional distribution. Hence,
                                 Z       (1−α)z−c+Ey l                Z       (1−α)(z−c)−α·c+Ey l
                g̃(c, z − c) =                           fε (x)dx =                                 fε (x)dx
                                     ε                                    ε

.
     From the expression above, we obtain: ∂g̃(c,z−c)
                                                 ∂c
                                                      |(z−c) = −αfε ((1 − α)z − c + Ey l ) < 0. Hence,
g̃(c, z − c) is decreasing in its first argument c.
     Next, ∂g̃(c,z−c)
             ∂(z−c) c
                      | = (1−α)fε ((1−α)z −c+Ey l ) > 0. Hence, despite the absence of behavioral
effects here, the social weights depend positively on z − c, even controlling for c.
     As in Proposition 5, the optimal tax system T (z) equalizes g̃(z − T (z), T (z)) across all z.
The presence of indistinguishable deserved income and luck income is enough to generate a
non-trivial theory of optimal taxation, even in the absence of behavioral responses.
     Beliefs about what constitutes luck income versus deserved income will naturally play a large
role in the level of optimal redistribution with two polar cases. If all income is deserved, as lib-
ertarians believe in a well-functioning free market economy, the optimal tax is zero. Conversely,
if all income were due to luck, the optimal tax is 100% redistribution. If social beliefs are such
that high incomes are primarily due to luck while lower incomes are deserved, then the optimal
tax system will be progressive.
Behavioral responses and unobservable luck income. If we assume that deserved income
responds to taxes and transfers (for example through labor supply responses), while luck income
does not, we can obtain multiple equilibria. The discussion here is heuristic. Individuals are
allowed to differ in their productivity. Utility is ui = u(ci −v(zi −yil , wi )) where wi is productivity.
In this case, xui = wi , xbi = yil and xsi = Ey l , again common to all agents. We consider the linear
tax case and the rest of the notation is as in Proposition 3. We also assume that individual
know their luck income before they make labor supply decisions so that no individual decisions
are taken under uncertainty.
    Intuitively, there can be multiple locally optimal tax rates if the elasticity e of deserved
income with respect to (1 − τ ) is sufficiently high at low tax rates and sufficiently low at high
tax rates. This is expected to happen because luck income is inelastic while deserved income is
elastic.
    To see this, recall that the optimal linear tax is given by formula (3): τ = (1 − ḡ)/(1 − ḡ + e).


                                                             8
Note that with a linear tax redistributed lumpsum, we have ci = (1 − τ ) · zi + τ · Ez where Ez is
the average of z in the population. Hence, yil −Ey l ≤ zi −ci is equivalent to (Ez−zi )τ ≤ Ey l −yil .
Therefore, we can rewrite ḡ as:
                                    R
                                         1((Ez − zi )τ ≤ Ey l − yil ) · zi
                              ḡ = R   i                               R
                                       1((Ez  − z   )τ ≤ Ey l − yl ) ·    z
                                     i            i              i       i i
                     R
                  1(0≤Ey l −yil )·zi
At τ = 0, ḡ =   R               R
                        l −y l )· z . If   higher luck income is on average correlated with a higher total
                         i
               i 1(0≤Ey     i      i i
income,  Cov(1(0 ≤ Ey l − yil ), zi )    < 0. Then, at τ = 0, ḡ < 1 and hence the right-hand-side of
the optimal tax formula (3) is positive so that society would like a tax rate τ higher than zero.
Suppose that at τ = 0.5, e > 1 (i.e, deserved income is very elastic and the fraction of deserved
income in total income is large at medium tax rate levels such as τ = 0.5). As ḡ ≥ 0, the right
hand side of (3) is below 0.5 so that society would like a tax rate τ below 0.5. Consequently, by
continuity, there is a tax rate in the interval [0, 0.5] that satisfies the optimal tax formula (3)
and also satisfies the second order condition. We call this equilibrium the “low tax optimum.”
    Similarly, at τ = 0.9, as long as e < (1 − ḡ0.9 )/9 where ḡ0.9 is the average welfare weight
from formula (3) evaluated at τ = 0.9 (i.e., at high tax levels, deserved income is small relative
to luck income and hence total income is fairly inelastic), then we know that at τ = 0.9, the
right hand side of the optimal tax formula in (3) is above 0.9. Hence, by continuity, there is a
point in [0.5, 0.9] where the two sides are equated. Note that this equilibrium does not satisfy
the second order condition: Just below this equilibrium, decreasing the tax rate is desirable
while just above this equilibrium, increasing the tax rate is desirable. Hence, it is not a local
optimum.
    Furthermore, by the assumption that luck income is exogenous to taxes, we know that
at τ = 1, nobody supplies any deserved income and therefore e = 0. Hence, τ = 1 is also
an equilibrium. Whether this equilibrium is a local maximum or not depends on whether
there is an additional equilibrium in [0.9, 1). For instance, suppose that at τ = 0.95, we have
                 5
e > (1−ḡ0.95 ) 95 , where ḡ0.95 is the average welfare weight from formula (3) evaluated at τ = 0.95.
In this case, there is another equilibrium in [0.9, 0.95] which is stable (i.e., satisfies the second
order conditions) and, if there are no more equilibria in [0.95, 1), the equilibrium at τ = 1
is unstable (i.e., does not satisfy the second order condition). On the other hand, if there is
no additional equilibrium in [0.9, 1), then the equilibrium at τ = 1 satisfies the second order
conditions. These additional equilibria are also “high tax optima.”
    In either case, this heuristic example illustrates the possibility of having multiple equilibria
with generalized social welfare weights.

    Economies with social preferences favoring hard-earned income over luck income could hence
end up in two possible situations. In the low tax optimum, people work hard, luck income makes
up a small portion of total income and hence, in a self-fulfilling manner, social preferences tend
to favor low taxes. In the alternative optimum, high taxes lead people to work less, which

                                                        9
implies that luck income represents a larger fraction of total income. This in turn pushes
social preferences to favor higher taxes, to redistribute away that unfair luck income (itself
favored by the high taxes in the first place). Thus, our framework can encompass the important
multiple equilibria outcomes of Alesina and Angeletos (2005) without departing as drastically
from optimal income tax techniques.5
   Note that although each of the equilibria is locally Pareto efficient, the low tax can well
Pareto dominate the high tax optima. The tax reform approach is inherently local.


B.3      Libertarianism, Rawlsianism, and Political Economy
Libertarian case. From the libertarian point of view, any individual is fully entitled to his
pre-tax income and society should not be responsible for those with lower earnings. This view
could for example be justified in a world where individuals differ solely in their preferences
for work but not in their earning ability. In that case, there is no good normative reason to
redistribute from consumption lovers to leisure lovers (exactly as there would be no reason
to redistribute from apple lovers to orange lovers in an exchange economy where everybody
starts with the same endowment). This can be modeled in our framework by assuming that
gi = g(ci , zi ) = g̃(ci − zi ) is increasing in its only argument. Hence, xsi and xbi are empty.
Formula (2) immediately delivers T ′ (zi ) ≡ 0 at the optimum since then ḡ(z) ≡ 1 and hence
Ḡ(z) ≡ 1 when marginal taxes are zero. In the standard framework, the way to obtain a zero
tax at the optimum is to either assume that utility is linear in consumption or to specify a
convex transformation of u(.) in the social welfare function which undoes the concavity of u(.).


Rawlsian case. The Rawlsian case is the polar opposite of the Libertarian one. Society
cares most about those with the lowest earnings and hence sets the tax rate to maximize their
welfare. With a social welfare function, this can be captured by a maximin criterion.6 In our
framework, it can be done instead by assuming that social welfare weights are concentrated
on the least advantaged: gi = g(ui − minj uj ) = 1(ui − minj uj = 0) so that neither zi nor ci
(directly) enter the welfare weight and xsi = ui − minj uj , while xb is empty (there could still
be heterogeneity in individual characteristics as captured in xui .) If the least advantaged people
have zero earnings, independently of taxes, then Ḡ(z) = 0 for all z > 0. Formula (2) then
implies T ′ (z) = 1/[1 + α(z) · e(z)] at the optimum. Marginal tax rates are set to maximize tax
revenue so as to make the demogrant −T (0) as large as possible.
Political Economy. Political economy considerations can be naturally incorporated. The
   5
      In Alesina and Angeletos (2005), the preferences of the agents are directly specified so as to include a taste
for “fairness,” while social preferences are standard. We leave individual preferences unaffected and load the
concern for fairness exclusively onto the social preferences. We find this more appealing because, first, this
allows a separation between private and social preferences that do not always coincide in reality and, second,
because it leaves individual preferences fully standard.
    6
      Atkinson (1975) derives formally the Ralwsian optimal income tax using the maxi-min approach.


                                                        10
most popular model for policy decisions among economists is the median-voter model. Consider
                                                                        R
one specialization of our general model, with ui = u((1 − τ )zi + τ i zi − v(zi ; xui )). These are
                                                                                           R
single peaked preferences in τ , so that the preferred tax rate of agent i is: τi = (1−zi / i zi )/(1−
    R
zi / i zi +e). Hence, the median    voter is the voter with median income, denoted by zm and hence
                                R
                          1−zm / i zi                                R
the optimum has: τ = 1−zm / R zi +e . Note that τ > 0 when zm < i zi , which is the standard case
                                i
with empirical income distributions. This case can be seen as a particular case of generalized
weights where all the weight is concentrated at the median voter.


B.4     Poverty Alleviation – Poverty Rate Minimization
Suppose the government cares only about the number of people living in poverty, that is the
poverty rate. In that case, the government puts more value in lifting people above the poverty
line than helping those substantially below the poverty line. Yet, let us assume that, in contrast
to the analysis of Kanbur, Keen, and Tuomala (1994), the government also wants to respect the
Pareto principle.
    We can capture such an objective by considering generalized social marginal welfare weights
concentrated solely at the poverty threshold c̄. Hence g(c, z; c̄) = 0 for c below c̄ and above c̄,
and g(c, z; c̄) = ḡ for c = c̄ (ḡ is finite if a positive fraction of individuals bunch at the poverty
threshold as we shall see, otherwise g(c, z; c̄) would be a Dirac distribution concentrated at
c = c̄). This implies that Ḡ(z) = 0 for z ≥ z̄ and Ḡ(z) = 1/[1 − H(z)] for z < z̄.

Proposition B2 The optimal tax schedule that minimizes the poverty rate is:

                                                      1
                                    T ′ (z) =                     if   z > z̄
                                                1 + α(z) · e(z)

                                              −H(z)
                        T ′ (z) =                                          if   z ≤ z̄
                                    −H(z) + α(z)[1 − H(z)] · e(z)
   Hence, there is a kink in the optimal tax schedule with bunching at the poverty threshold c̄.
The marginal tax rate is Rawlsian above the poverty threshold and is negative below the poverty
threshold so as to push as many people as possible just above poverty. Hence, the optimum
would take the form of an EITC designed so that at the EITC maximum, earnings plus EITC
equal the poverty threshold as illustrated in Figure A1. This schedule is indeed closer to the
schedule obtained by Kanbur, Keen, and Tuomala (1994) than the poverty gap minimization
we considered in the main text. However, in contrast to Kanbur, Keen, and Tuomala (1994),
our schedule remains constrained Pareto efficient.




                                                        11
                                  Figure A1: Poverty Rate Minimization

                        ! ! ! ! !!!!!

                          Kink + bunching



                  !!
                                                             Revenue maximizing
                                                                   T’(z)
                                      Negative T’(z)
                                         = EITC


                             !!                                                             z


The figure displays the optimal tax schedule in a (pre-tax income z, post-tax income c = z − T (z)) plane for
poverty rate minimization. The optimal tax schedule resembles an EITC schedule with negative marginal tax
rates at the bottom.


B.5     Fair Income Taxation
The fair income taxation theory developed by Fleurbaey and Maniquet considers optimal in-
come tax models where individuals differ in skills and in preferences for work.7 Based on the
“Compensation objective” (Fleurbaey, 1994) and the “Responsibility objective”, the theory de-
velops social objective criteria that trade-off the “Equal Preferences Transfer Principle” (at the
same preferences, redistribution across unequal skills is desirable) and the “Equal Skills Transfer
Principle” (at a given level of skill, redistribution across different preferences is not desirable).
A trade-off arises because it is impossible to satisfy both principles simultaneously. Intuitively,
the government wants to favor the hard working low skilled but cannot tell them apart from
the “lazy” high skilled. In this section, we outline how one criterion of fair income tax the-
ory (the wmin -equivalent leximin criterion) translates into a profile of social marginal welfare
weights. Our outline does not provide complete technical details. We simply reverse engineer
the weights using the optimal fair income tax formula. Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2015) provide
(independently) a more rigorous and complete connection between the axioms of fair income
tax theory and standard optimal income taxation.8
   7
     Fleurbaey (2008) and Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2011), chapters 10 and 11 present their fair income tax
framework in detail. A number of studies in standard optimal income tax theory has also considered models
with heterogeneity in both preferences and skills (see Boadway et al. 2002, Cuff, 2000, Lockwood and Weinzierl,
2015, and the surveys by Kaplow, 2008 and Boadway 2012).
   8
     Our approach using formula (2) requires estimating weights by income level. It is of course not always
straightforward to derive aggregated weights by income level (see Fleurbaey and Maniquet, 2015 for a discussion


                                                      12
    We specialize our general framework to the utility function: ui = ci − v(zi /wi , θi ) where wi is
again the skill of individual i and θi captures heterogeneous preferences for work. Hence labor
supply is li = zi /wi and it is assumed that l ∈ [0, 1] so that l = 1 represents full-time work.
Again, formula (2) provides the optimal marginal tax rate in this model.
    The wmin -equivalent leximin criterion proposed by Fleurbaey and Maniquet puts full weight
on those with w = wmin who receive the smallest net transfer from the government.
    This criterion leads to an optimal tax system with zero marginal tax rates in the earnings
range [0, wmin ]. Therefore, all individuals with earnings z ∈ [0, wmin ] receive the same transfer.
The optimal tax system maximizes this transfer and has positive marginal tax rate above wmin ,
with T ′ (z) = 1/(1 + α(z) · e(z)) > 0 for z > wmin (Theorem 11.4 in Fleurbaey and Maniquet,
2011). Using (2), this optimal tax system implies that Ḡ(z) = 1 for 0 ≤ z ≤ wmin , i.e.,
R∞
  z
    [1 − g(z ′ )]dH(z ′ ) = 0. Differentiating with respect to z, we get ḡ(z) = 1 for 0 ≤ z ≤ wmin .
This implies that the average social marginal welfare weight on those earning less than wmin is
equal to one. Because the government tries to maximize transfers to those earning less than
wmin , social marginal welfare weights are zero above wmin .9
    This criterion, and the average weights g (z) implied by it, can be founded on the following
underlying generalized social marginal welfare weights. Let Tmax ≡ max(i:wi =wmin ) (zi − ci ).
Formally, the weights are functions: gi = g(ci , zi ; wi , wmin , Tmax ) where xbi = wi , xui = θi ,
and xsi = (wmin , Tmax ), where wmin is an exogenous aggregate characteristic, while Tmax is an
endogenous aggregate characteristic. Note that, as discussed in the outline of our approach,
the characteristics that appear in the utility function but not in the social welfare weights are
characteristics that society does not want to redistribute accross. This is the case here for
preferences for work θi , which are not considered fair to compensate for. This is in contrast to
the “Free Loaders” case in section II.B, where the cost of work was viewed as caused by health
differentials or disability, which are considered as fair to compensate for.
    More precisely, the weights that rationalize the Fleurbaey-Maniquet tax system are such
that: g(ci , zi ; wi , wmin , Tmax ) = g̃(zi − ci ; wi , wmin , Tmax ) with i) g̃(zi − ci ; wi , wmin , Tmax ) = 0 for
wi > wmin , for any (zi − ci ) (there is no social welfare weight placed on those with skill above
wmin no matter how much they pay in taxes) and ii) g̃(.; wmin , wmin , Tmax ) is an (endogenous)
Dirac distribution concentrated on z −c = Tmax (that is, weights are concentrated solely on those
with skill wmin who receive the smallest net transfer from the government). This specification
forces the government to provide the same transfer to all those with skill wmin . Otherwise,
if an individual with skill wmin received less than others, all the social welfare weight would
concentrate on her and the government would want to increase transfers to her. When there are
agents with skill level wmin found at every income level below wmin , the sole optimum is to have
equal transfers, i.e., T ′ (z) = 0 in the [0, wmin ] earnings range. Weights are zero above earnings
wmin as wmin -skilled individuals can at most earn wmin , even when working full time.
of this important point).
    9
      As social marginal welfare weights ḡ(z) average to one, this implies there is a welfare weight mass at wmin .


                                                         13
C      Empirical Testing using Survey Data
The next step in this research agenda is to provide empirical foundations for our theory. There
is already a small body of work trying to uncover perceptions of the public about various
tax policies. These approaches either start from the existing tax and transfers system and
reverse-engineer it to obtain the underlying social preferences (Christiansen and Jansen 1978,
Bourguignon and Spadaro 2012, Zoutman, Jacobs, and Jongen 2012) or directly elicit preferences
on various social issues in surveys.10
    In this section, using a simple online survey with over 1000 participants, we elicit people’s
preferences for redistribution and their concepts of fairness. Our results confirm that public
views on redistribution are inconsistent with standard utilitarianism. We then show how actual
elicited social preferences can be mapped into generalized social marginal welfare weights.
    The questions of our survey are clustered in two main groups. The first set serves to find out
what notions of fairness people use to judge tax and transfer systems. We focus on the themes
addressed in this paper, such as taxes paid matter (keeping disposable income constant), whether
the wage rate and hours of work matter (keeping earned income constant), or whether transfer
recipients are perceived to be more or less deserving based on whether they can work or not.
The second set has a more quantitative ambition. As described in Section II.A, it aims at
estimating whether and how social marginal welfare weights depend both on disposable income
c and taxes paid T .
    Our survey was conducted in December 2012 on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service, using
a sample of slightly more than 1100 respondents.11 The complete details of the survey are pre-
sented next in Section C.1. The survey asks subjects to tell which of two families (or individuals)
are most deserving of a tax break (or a benefit increase). The families (or individuals) differ in
earnings, taxes paid, or other attributes. The results are presented in Section C.2


C.1      Online Survey Description
Our survey was conducted in December 2012 on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service, using a
sample of 1100 respondents,12 all at least 18 years old and US citizens. The full survey is available
online at https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_9mHljmuwqStHDOl. The first part of the
survey asked some background questions, including: gender, age, income, employment status,
marital status, children, ethnicity, place of birth, candidate supported in the 2012 election,
political views (on a 5-point spectrum ranging from “very conservative” to “very liberal”), and
  10
     See Yaari and Bar-Hillel (1984), Frohlich and Oppenheimer (1992), Cowell and Shokkaert (2001), Fong
(2001), Devooght and Schokkaert (2003), Engelmann and Strobel (2004), Ackert, Martinez-Vazquez, and Rider
(2007), Gaertner and Schokkaert (2012), Weinzierl (2014), Kuziemko, Norton, Saez, and Stantcheva (2015). Our
focus on tax reform and on (local) marginal welfare weights might make it much easier to elicit social preferences
than if trying to calibrate a global objective function.
  11
     The full survey is available online at https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_9mHljmuwqStHDOl
  12
     A total of 1300 respondents started the survey, out of which 200 dropped out before finishing.


                                                       14
State of residence. The second part of the survey presented people with sliders on which they
could choose the (average) tax rates that they think four different groups should pay (the top
1%, the next 9%, the next 40% and the bottom 50%). The other questions focused on eliciting
views on the marginal social welfare weights and are now described in more detail. Parts in
italic are verbatim from the survey, as seen by respondents.

Utilitarianism vs. Libertarianism. The question stated: “Suppose that the government is
able to provide some families with a $1,000 tax break. We will now ask you to compare two
families at a time and to select the family which you think is most deserving of the $1,000 tax
break.” Then, the pair of families were listed (see right below). The answer options given were:
“Family A is most deserving of the tax break”, “Family B is most deserving of the tax break” or
“Both families are equally deserving of the tax break”.
    The series shown were:
Series I: (tests utilitarianism)
1) Family A earns $50,000 per year, pays $14,000 in taxes and hence nets out $36,000.
    Family B earns $40,000 per year, pays $5,000 in taxes and hence nets out $35,000.
2) Family A earns $50,000 per year, pays $15,000 in taxes and hence nets out $35,000.
    Family B earns $40,000 per year, pays $5,000 in taxes and hence nets out $35,000.
3) Family A earns $50,000 per year, pays $16,000 in taxes and hence nets out $34,000.
    Family B earns $40,000 per year, pays $5,000 in taxes and hence nets out $35,000.
    For purely utilitarian preferences, only net income should matter, so that the utilitarian-
oriented answers should be 1) B is most deserving, 2) Both are equally deserving, 3) A is most
deserving. Hence utilitarian preferences should produce a large discontinuity in preferences
between A and B when we move from scenario 1) to scenario 2) to scenario 3).
Series II: (tests libertarianism)
1) Family A earns $50,000 per year, pays $11,000 in taxes and hence nets out $39,000.
    Family B earns $40,000 per year, pays $10,000 in taxes and hence nets out $30,000.
2) Family A earns $50,000 per year, pays $10,000 in taxes and hence nets out $40,000.
    Family B earns $40,000 per year, pays $10,000 in taxes and hence nets out $30,000.
3) Family A earns $50,000 per year, pays $9,000 in taxes and hence nets out $41,000.
    Family B earns $40,000 per year, pays $10,000 in taxes and hence nets out $30,000.
    For purely libertarian preferences, only the net tax burden should matter, so that the
libertarian-oriented answers should be 1) A is most deserving, 2) Both are equally deserv-
ing 3) B is most deserving. Hence libertarian preferences should produce a large discontinuity
in preferences between A and B when we move from scenario 1) to scenario 2) to scenario 3).
    To ensure that respondents did not notice a pattern in those questions, as they might if they
were put one next to each other or immediately below each other, we scattered these pairwise
comparisons at different points in the survey, in between other questions.


                                               15
Testing for the weight put on net income vs. taxes paid. In this part of the survey,
we created fictitious households, by combining different levels of earnings and taxes paid. Each
fictitious household is characterized by a pair (y, τ ) where y denotes gross annual income, which
could take values in Y = {$10, 000; $25, 000; $50, 000; $100, 000; $200, 000; $500, 000; $1, 000, 000}
and where τ is the tax rate, which could take values in T = {5%, 10%, 20%, 30%, 50%}. All
possible combinations of (y, τ ) were created for a total of 35 fictitious households. Each respon-
dent was then shown 5 consecutive pairs of fictitious households, randomly drawn from the 35
possible ones (uniformly distributed) and ask to pick the household in each pair which was most
deserving of a $1000 tax break. As an example, a possible draw would be:
    “Which of these two families is most deserving of the $1,000 tax break?
    Family earns $100,000 per year, pays $20,000 in taxes, and hence nets out $80,000
    Family earns $10,000 per year, pays $1,000 in taxes, and hence nets out $9,000 ”

Test of utilitarianism based on consumption preferences. Utilitarian social preferences
lead to the stark conclusion that people who enjoy consumption more should also receive more
resources. To test this, we asked respondents:
    “Which of the following two individuals do you think is most deserving of a $1,000 tax break?
- Individual A earns $50,000 per year, pays $10,000 in taxes and hence nets out $40,000. She
greatly enjoys spending money, going out to expensive restaurants, or traveling to fancy desti-
nations. She always feels that she has too little money to spend.
- Individual B earns the same amount, $50,000 per year, also pays $10,000 in taxes and hence
also nets out $40,000. However, she is a very frugal person who feels that her current income
is sufficient to satisfy her needs.”
    The answer options were again that A is most deserving, B is most deserving, or that both
A and B are equally deserving.

Test of Fleurbaey and Maniquet social preferences. To test whether social preferences
deem hard-working people more deserving, all else equal, we asked respondents:
    “Which of the following two individuals is most deserving of a $1,000 tax break?
- Individual A earns $30,000 per year, by working in two different jobs, 60 hours per week at
$10/hour. She pays $6,000 in taxes and nets out $24,000. She is very hard-working but she
does not have high-paying jobs so that her wage is low.
- Individual B also earns the same amount, $30,000 per year, by working part-time for 20 hours
per week at $30/hour. She also pays $6,000 in taxes and hence nets out $24,000. She has a
good wage rate per hour, but she prefers working less and earning less to enjoy other, non-work
activities.”
    The answer options were again that A is most deserving, B is most deserving or that both
A and B are equally deserving.

Test of the free loaders model. To test whether the concept of free loaders presented in

                                                 16
the main text is relevant for social preferences, we created 4 fictitious individuals and asked
people to rank them according to who they deem most deserving. Ties were allowed. The exact
question was:
    “We assume now that the government can increase benefits by $1,000 for some recipients of
government benefits. Which of the following four individuals is most deserving of the $1,000
increase in benefits? (...)
- Individual A gets $15,000 per year in Disability Benefits because she cannot work due to a
disability and has no other resources.
- Individual B gets $15,000 per year in Unemployment Benefits and has no other resources. She
lost her job and has not been able to find a new job even though she has been actively looking
for one.
- Individual C gets $15,000 pear year in Unemployment Benefits and has no other resources.
She lost her job but has not been looking actively for a new job, because she prefers getting less
but not having to work.
- Individual D gets $15,000 per year in Welfare Benefits and Food Stamps and has no other
resources. She is not looking for a job actively because she can get by living off those government
provided benefits.”


C.2     Results
C.2.1   Qualitative Social Preferences

Table A1 reports preferences for giving a tax break and or a benefit increase across individuals
in various scenarios.
Marginal utility of income. Panel A considers two individuals with the same earnings, same
taxes, and same disposable income but who differ in their marginal utility of income. One
person is described as “She greatly enjoys spending money, going out to expensive restaurants,
or traveling to fancy destinations. She always feels that she has too little money to spend.” while
the other person is described as “She is a very frugal person who feels that her current income
is sufficient to satisfy her needs.” Under standard utilitarianism, the consumption loving person
should be seen as more deserving of a tax break than the frugal person. In contrast, 74.4%
of people report that consumption loving is irrelevant suggesting that marginal utilities driven
by individual taste should not be relevant for tax policy as long as disposable income is held
constant. This fits with the view described in this paper that, in contrast to welfarism, actual
social welfare weights have little to do with tastes for enjoying consumption. Furthermore, in
sharp contrast to utilitarianism, 21.5% think the frugal person is most deserving and only 4.4%
of people report that the consumption loving person is the most deserving of a tax break. This
result is probably due to the fact that, in moral terms, “frugality” is perceived as a virtue while
“spending” is perceived as an indulgence.


                                                17
Hard worker vs. leisure lover. Panel B considers two individuals with the same earnings,
same taxes, and same disposable income but different wage rates and hence different work hours:
one person works 60 hours a week at $10 per hour while the other works only 20 hours a week at
$30 per hour. 54.4% of respondents think hours of work is irrelevant. This suggests again that
for a majority (albeit a small one), hours of work and wage rates are irrelevant for tax policy as
long as earnings are the same. A fairly large group of 42.7% of subjects think the hardworking
low wage person is more deserving of a tax break while only 2.9% think the part-time worker
is most deserving. This provides support to the fair income tax social criteria of Fleurbaey
and Maniquet discussed in Section B.5. Long hours of work do seem to make a person more
deserving than short hours of work, conditional on having the same total earnings.
Transfer recipients and free loaders. Panel C considers transfer recipients receiving the
same benefit levels. Subjects are asked to rank 4 individuals in terms of deservedness of extra
benefits: (1) a disabled person unable to work, (2) an unemployed person actively looking for
work, (3) an unemployed person not looking for work, (4) a welfare recipient not looking for
work. Subjects rank deservedness according to the order just listed. In particular, subjects find
the disabled person unable to work and the unemployed person looking for work much more
deserving than the able-bodied unemployed or welfare recipient not looking for work. This
provides very strong support to the “free loaders” theory laid out in Section II.B that ability
and willingness to work are the key determinants of deservedness of transfer recipients. These
results are consistent with a broad body of work discussed above.
Disposable income vs. taxes paid. In the spirit of our analysis of Section II.A with fixed
incomes, we analyze whether revealed social marginal welfare weights depend on disposable
income and/or taxes paid. Table A2 presents non-parametric evidence showing that both dis-
posable income and taxes paid matter and hence that subjects are neither pure utilitarians (for
whom only disposable income matters) nor pure libertarians (for whom only taxed paid matter).
    Panel A in Table A2 considers two families A and B with similar disposable income but
dissimilar pre-tax income (and hence, different taxes paid). Family B has lower taxes and pre-
tax incomes than family A. We keep family B constant and vary family A’s taxes and disposable
income. Overall, subjects overwhelmingly find family A more deserving than family B. To put
it simply, most people find that a family earning $50,000 and paying $15,000 in taxes is more
deserving of a tax break than a family earnings $40,000 and paying $5,000 in taxes. This implies
that disposable income is not a sufficient statistics to determine deservedness, and that taxes
paid enter deservedness positively. This contradicts the basic utilitarian model of Section II.A.
    One small caveat in this interpretation is that if respondents consider consumption and
labor to be complementary in utility, they might be choosing to compensate people who earn
more income through higher consumption. However, as shown by Chetty (2006), labor supply
fluctuations are not very correlated with consumption changes, so that consumption and labor
cannot be complementary enough to explain our results.


                                               18
    Panel B in Table A2 considers two families A and B with similar taxes paid but dissimilar
pre-tax income (and hence dissimilar disposable income as well). Family B has lower pre-tax
and disposable income than family A. We again keep family B constant and vary family A taxes
and disposable income. Subjects overwhelmingly find family B more deserving than family A.
To put it simply, most people find that a family earning $40,000 and paying $10,000 in taxes
is more deserving of a tax break than a family earnings $50,000 and paying $10,000 in taxes.
This implies that taxes paid is not a sufficient statistics to determine deservedness and that
disposable income affects deservedness negatively. This contradicts the basic libertarian model.
    Therefore, Table A2 provides compelling non-parametric evidence that both taxes and dis-
posable income matter for social marginal welfare weights as we posited in Section II.A.

C.2.2    Quantifying Social Preferences

Table A3 provides a first attempt at estimating the weights placed by social preferences on both
disposable income and taxes paid. Recall the simple linear form discussed above, g̃ (c, T ) =
g̃ (c − αT ), for which the optimal marginal tax rate with no behavioral effects is constant at all
income levels and equal to T ′ = 1/ (1 + α). To calibrate α, we created 35 fictitious families,
each characterized by a level of taxes and a level of net income.13 Respondents were sequentially
shown five pairs, randomly drawn from the 35 fictitious families and asked which family is the
most deserving of a $1,000 tax break. This menu of choices allows us in principle to recover the
social preferences g̃(c, T ) of each subject respondent.
     Define a binary variable Sijt which is equal to 1 if fictitious family i was selected during
random display t for respondent j, and 0 otherwise. The regression studied is:

                                     Sijt = β0 + βT dTijt + βc dcijt ,

where dTijt is the difference in tax levels and dcijt is the difference in net income levels between
the two fictitious families in the pair shown during display t to respondent j. Under our
assumption on the weights, dc/dT = α represents the slope of the (linear) social indifference
curves in the (T, c) space. Families (that is, combinations of c and T ) on higher indifference
curves have a higher probability of being selected by social preferences. Hence, there is a
mapping from the level of social utility derived from a pair (T, c) and the probability of being
selected as most deserving in our survey design. The constant slope of social preferences,
α, can then be inferred from the ratio dT   dc
                                               |S=constant = − ββTc . Table A3 shows the implied α
and the optimal marginal tax rates in four subsamples.14 The implied α is between 0.37 and
0.65, so that the implicit optimal marginal tax rates are relatively high, ranging from 61%
  13
     Annual incomes could take one of 7 values $10K, $25K, $50K, $100K, $200K, $500K, $1 million, and taxes
paid (relative to income) could take one of 5 values, 5%, 10%, 20%, 30%, and 50%.
  14
     First, using the full sample and then dropping higher income groups ($1 million and above and $500K and
above respectively) or the lowest income group ($10K).



                                                    19
to 74%. In part, this reflects our implicit assumption of no behavioral effects, which would
otherwise tend to reduce the optimal tax rates at any given level of redistributive preferences.
Interestingly, the implied marginal tax rates decrease when higher income fictitious families are
not considered. Columns 5 and 6 highlight an interesting heterogeneity between respondents
who classify themselves as “liberal” or “very liberal” (in column 5), and those who classify
themselves as “conservative” or “very conservative” (in column 6). Liberals’ revealed preferred
marginal tax rate is 85%, while that of conservatives is much lower at 57%. Liberals put a
very small weight on taxes paid relative to disposable income (column 5) while conservative put
almost an equal weight on taxes paid relative to disposable income (column 6). Hence, liberals
are relatively close to the utilitarian polar case while conservative are about mid-way between
the utilitarian and libertarian polar cases.
    This simple exercise confirms the results from Table A2 that both net income and the tax
burden matter significantly for social preferences and that it is possible to determine the relative
weight placed on each. More complex and detailed survey work in this spirit could help calibrate
the weights more precisely.




                                                20
Appendix References
Ackert, Lucy, Jorge Martinez-Vazquez, and Mark Rider. 2007. “Social Preferences and
Tax Policy Design: Some Experimental Evidence,” Economic Inquiry 45(3), 487-501.
Alesina, Alberto and George-Marios Angeletos. 2005. “Fairness and Redistribution,”
American Economic Review 95(3), 960-980.
Atkinson, Anthony B. 1975. “La ‘Maxi-Min’ et l’imposition optimale des revenus,” Cahiers
du Séminaire d’Econométrie 16, 73–86.
Boadway, Robin. 2012. From Optimal Tax Theory to Tax Policy, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Boadway, Robin, Maurice Marchand, Pierre Pestieau, and Maria del Mar Racionero.
2002. “Optimal Redistribution with Heterogeneous Preferences for Leisure,” Journal of Public
Economic Theory 4(4), 475–798.
Bourguignon, François and Amedeo Spadaro. 2012. “Tax-benefit Revealed Social Pref-
erences,” Journal of Economic Inequality 10(1), 75-108.
Chetty, Raj. 2006. “A New Method of Estimating Risk Aversion,” American Economic Review
96(5), 1821-1834.
Christiansen, Vidar and Eilev Jansen. 1978. “Implicit Social Preferences in the Norwegian
System of Indirect Taxation,” Journal of Public Economics 10(2), 217–245.
Cowell, Frank and Erik Schokkaert. 2001. “Risk perceptions and distributional judgments,”
European Economic Review 45 (4-6), 941-952.
Cuff, Katherine. 2000. “Optimality of Workfare with Heterogeneous Preferences,” Canadian
Journal of Economics 33, 149–174.
Devooght, Kurt and Erik Schokkaert. 2003. “Responsibility-sensitive Fair Compensation
in Different Cultures,” Social Choice and Welfare 21, 207-242
Engelmann, Dirk and Martin Strobel. 2004. “Inequality Aversion, Efficiency and Maximin
Preferences in Simple Distribution Experiments,” American Economic Review 94(4), 857–69.
Fleurbaey, Marc. 1994. “On Fair Compensation”, Theory and Decision 36, 277–307.
Fleurbaey, Marc. 2008. Fairness, Responsability and Welfare, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Fleurbaey, Marc and François Maniquet. 2011. A Theory of Fairness and Social Welfare,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fleurbaey, Marc and François Maniquet. 2015. “Optimal Taxation Theory and Principles
of Fairness,” unpublished.
Fong, Christina. 2001. “Social Preferences, Self-interest, and the Demand for Redistribution,”
Journal of Public Economics 82(2), 225–246.
Frohlich, Norman and Joe A. Oppenheimer. 1992. Choosing Justice: An Experimental
Approach to Ethical Theory, Berkeley University of California Press.
Gaertner, Wulf and Erik Schokkaert. 2012. Empirical Social Choice: Questionnaire-
Experimental Studies on Distributive Justice, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kaplow, Louis. 2008. The Theory of Taxation and Public Economics, Princeton University
Press: Princeton.
Kuziemko, Ilyana, Michael Norton, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva. 2015.


                                             21
“How Elastic are Preferences for Redistribution? Evidence from Randomized Survey Experi-
ments”American Economic Review 105(4), 1478–1508.
Lockwood, Benjamin and Matthew Weinzierl. 2015. “De Gustibus non est Taxandum:
Heterogeneity in Preferences and Optimal Redistribution.” Journal of Public Economics 124:
74–80.
Weinzierl, Matthew C. 2014. “The Promise of Positive Optimal Taxation: Normative Di-
versity and a Role for Equal Sacrifice.” Journal of Public Economics 118, 128–142.
Yaari, Menahem E. and Maya Bar-Hillel. 1984. “On Dividing Justly,” Social Choice and
Welfare 1(1), 1–24.
Zoutman, Floris, Bas Jacobs, and Egbert Jongen. 2012. “Revealed Social Preferences of
Dutch Political Parties”, Tinbergen Institution Discussion Paper.




                                           22
                                 Table A1: Revealed Social Preferences

                                             (1)                  (2)                   (3)

 A. Consumption
 lover vs. frugal
                                       Consumption           Consumption           Consumption
 obs. = 1,125                         lover > Frugal        lover = Frugal        lover < Frugal
                                           4.1 %                74.4 %                21.5 %
                                          (0.6 %)               (1.3 %)               (1.2 %)

 B. Hardworking
 vs. leisure lover
                                     Hardworking >            Harworking          Harworking <
 obs. = 1,121                         Leisure lover         = Leisure Lover       Leisure Lover
                                         42.7 %                 54.4 %                2.9 %
                                        (1.5 %)                (1.5 %)               (0.5 %)
 C. Transfer
 Recipients and
 Free Loaders
                                     Disabled person         Unemployed         Unemployed not    Welfare
                                        unable to            looking for          looking for  recipient not
 obs. = 1,098                             work                  work                 work       looking for
                                                                                                   work
 Average rank (1-4) assigned                1.4                   1.6                 3.0           3.5
                                          (0.018)                (0.02)             (0.023)       (0.025)
 % assigned first rank                    57.5 %                37.3 %               2.7 %         2.5 %
                                          (1.3 %)               (1.3 %)             (0.4 %)       (0.4 %)
 % assigned last rank                      2.3 %                 2.9 %              25.0 %        70.8 %
                                          (0.4 %)               (0.4 %)             (1.1 %)       (1.2 %)

Notes: This table reports preferences for giving a tax break and or a benefit increase to individuals in various
scenarios. Panel A considers two individuals with the same earnings, same taxes, and same disposable income
but high marginal utility of income (consumption lover) vs. low marginal utility of income (frugal). In contrast
to utilitarianism, 74.4% of people report that consumption loving is irrelevant and 21.5% think the frugal person
is most deserving. Panel B considers two individuals with the same earnings, same taxes, and same disposable
income but different wage rates and hence different work hours. 54.4% think hours of work is irrelevant and
42.7% think the hardworking low wage person is more deserving. Panel C considers out-of-work transfer recipients
receiving the same benefit levels. Subjects find the disabled person unable to work and the unemployed person
looking for work much more deserving than the abled bodied unemployed person or the welfare recipient not
looking for work. For all statistics, standard errors are reported in parentheses below each estimate.




                                                       23
                           Table A2: Utilitarian vs. Libertarian Preferences

                                                (1)             (2)                  (3)
              A. Utilitarian Test
                                            Family B: z = $40,000, T=$5,000, c=$35,000
                                           Family A:        Family A:           Family A:
              Most                         z=$50,000        z=$50,000           z=$50,000
              deserving                    T=$14,000        T=$15,000           T=$16,000
              family                       c=$36,000        c=$35,000           c=$34,000
              A>B                            48.8 %          54.8 %               65.2 %
                                             (1.5 %)         (1.5 %)              (1.4 %)
              A=B                            38.8 %          37.3 %               28.0 %
                                             (1.4 %)         (1.4 %)              (1.3 %)
              A<B                            12.4 %           7.9 %                6.8 %
                                             (1.0 %)         (0.8 %)              (0.7 %)
              B. Libertarian Test
                                           Family B: z = $40,000, T=$10,000, c=$30,000
                                           Family A:        Family A:           Family A:
              Most                         z=$50,000        z=$50,000           z=$50,000
              deserving                    T=$11,000        T=$10,000           T=$9,000
              family                       c=$39,000        c=$40,000           c=$41,000
              A>B                             7.7 %           3.6 %                3.1 %
                                             (0.8 %)         (0.6 %)              (0.5 %)
              A=B                            29.1 %          40.0 %               23.7 %
                                             (1.3 %)         (1.5 %)              (1.3 %)
              A<B                            63.2 %          56.4 %               73.2 %
                                             (1.4 %)         (1.5 %)              (1.3 %)

Notes: Sample size 1,111 subjects who finished the survey. Subjects were asked which of Family A vs. Family B
was most deserving of a $1,000 tax break in 6 scenarios with different configurations for pre-tax income z, taxes
paid T , and disposable income c = z − T . The table reports the fraction of subjects reporting that family A is
more deserving (A > B), families A and B are equally deserving (A = B), family B is more deserving (A < B).
Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                       24
                                                        Table A3: Calibrating Social Welfare Weights

                                                            Probability of being deemed more deserving in pairwise comparison

               Sample                               Full         Excludes         Excludes      Excludes                   Liberal      Conservative
                                                                   cases             cases        cases                   subjects        subjects
                                                                with income      with income  with income                   only            only
                                                                  of $1m         of $500K + of $500K + and
                                                                                              $10K or less
                                                     (1)             (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)              (6)
               d(Tax)                            0.0017***       0.0052***         0.016***            0.015***         0.00082***        0.0032***
                                                  (0.0003)        (0.0019)         (0.0019)            (0.0022)          (0.00046)        (0.00068)

               d(Net Income)                    -0.0046***       -0.0091***        -0.024***          -0.024***         -0.0048***       -0.0042***
                                                 (0.00012)        (0.00028)        (0.00078)          (0.00094)          (0.00018)        (0.00027)
25




               Number of observations              11,450           8,368            5,816               3,702             5,250            2,540
               Implied α                            0.37            0.58              0.65               0.64               0.17             0.77
                                                   (0.06)          (0.06)            (0.07)             (0.09)             (0.12)           (0.16)

               Implied marginal tax rate            73 %            63 %             61 %                61 %               85 %             57 %

     Notes: Survey respondents were shown 5 randomly selected pairs of fictitious families, each characterized by levels of net income and tax, for a total of
     11,450 observations, and asked to select the family most deserving of a $1,000 tax break. Gross income was randomly drawn from {$10K, $25K, $50K,
     $100K, $200K, $500K, $1 million} and tax rates from {5%, 10%, 20%, 30%, 50%}. The coefficients are from an OLS regression of a binary variable equal to
     1 if the fictitious family was selected, on the difference in tax levels and net income levels between the two families of the pair. Column (1) uses the full
     sample. Column (2) excludes fictitious families with income of $1 million. Column (3) excludes families with income of $500K or more. Column (4) further
     excludes in addition families with income below $10K. Column (5) shows the results for all families but only for respondents who classify themselves as
     “liberal” or “very liberal,” while Colum (6) shows the results for respondents who classify themselves as “conservative” or “very conservative.” The implied
     α is obtained as (the negative of) the ratio of the coefficient on d(Tax) over the one on d(Net income). Bootstrap standard errors in parentheses. The
     optimal implied constant marginal tax rate (MTR) under the assumption of no behavioral effects is, as in the text, M T R = 1/(1 + α). The implied MTRs
     are high, between 61% and 74%, possibly due to the assumption of no behavioral effects. In addition, the implied MTR declines when respondents are not
     asked to consider higher income fictitious families. Respondents who consider themselves Liberals prefer higher marginal tax rates than those who consider
     themselves Conservatives.
