NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAREER PROGRESSION, ECONOMIC DOWNTURNS, AND SKILLS
Jerome Adda
Christian Dustmann
Costas Meghir
Jean-Marc Robin
Working Paper 18832
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18832

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

We are grateful for funding from the DfES through the Centre for Economics of Education and to
the ESRC through CEMMAP and the Centre for Fiscal Policy at the IFS. Costas Meghir thanks the
ESRC for funding through a Professorial Fellowship (RES-051-27-0204) as well as the Cowles foundation
at Yale. JM Robin gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Economic and Social Research
Council through the ESRC Centre for Microdata Methods and Practice grant RES-589-28-0001, and
from the European Research Council (ERC) grant ERC-2010-AdG-269693-WASP. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jerome Adda, Christian Dustmann, Costas Meghir, and Jean-Marc Robin. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Career Progression, Economic Downturns, and Skills
Jerome Adda, Christian Dustmann, Costas Meghir, and Jean-Marc Robin
NBER Working Paper No. 18832
February 2013
JEL No. C15,C23,C33,I24,J01,J08,J22,J24,J3,J31,J6,J62
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the career progression of skilled and unskilled workers, with a focus on how careers
are affected by economic downturns and whether formal skills, acquired early on, can shield workers
from the effect of recessions. Using detailed administrative data for Germany for numerous birth cohorts
across different regions, we follow workers from labor market entry onwards and estimate a dynamic
life-cycle model of vocational training choice, labor supply, and wage progression. Most particularly,
our model allows for labor market frictions that vary by skill group and over the business cycle. We
find that sources of wage growth differ: learning-by-doing is an important component for unskilled
workers early on in their careers, while job mobility is important for workers who acquire skills in
an apprenticeship scheme before labor market entry. Likewise, economic downturns affect skill groups
through very different channels: unskilled workers lose out from a decline in productivity and human
capital, whereas skilled individuals suffer mainly from a lack of mobility.

Jerome Adda
Department of Economics
European University Institute
Villa San Paolo
Via della Piazzuola 43
50133 Firenze
j.adda@ucl.ac.uk
Christian Dustmann
Department of Economics
University College London
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK
c.dustmann@ucl.ac.uk

Costas Meghir
Department of Economics
Yale University
37 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06511
and IZA
and also NBER
c.meghir@yale.edu
Jean-Marc Robin
Sciences Po
Department of Economics
(Office room, J402)
28 rue des Saints Pères
75007 Paris France
jeanmarc.robin@sciences-po.fr

1

Introduction

The early years in a worker’s career are essential, not only because wages rise most
rapidly, but also because workers may be most vulnerable to economic shocks and make
important choices about training and investment into human capital. Since these early
choices and events may have significant long-term career consequences, it is important
to understand their dynamics and effects, as well as the way they interact with shocks
to the overall economy.
One essential part of this early career progression is wage growth, which has been
seen as a consequence of investment in learning and human capital (see, e.g., Ben-Porath
(1967), Becker (1964), Rosen (1972), Rosen (1976))1 , mobility and job shopping (see,
e.g, Mincer and Jovanovic (1981), Topel and Ward (1992)), or both (see, e.g., Gladden
and Taber (2000), Altonji, Smith, and Vidangos (2009), or Gladden and Taber (2009b)).
Although this literature provides important insights into worker’s wage progressions,
however, it offers little information about how early career progression is affected by
economic shocks, and how wage growth, transitions between jobs and into and out of
non-employment, and the economic cycle interact.2 Such a knowledge gap is surprising,
not only because youth unemployment is a major concern, but because recent research
highlights the potentially harmful effects that economic shocks at early ages may have
on workers’ careers (see, e.g., Oreopoulos, Von Wachter, and Heisz (2012)).
A related question is how the harmful effects of economic shocks on young workers’
careers can be minimized. It is possible, for instance, that skills acquired not on the
job but in specifically designed training schemes can help shield young workers from
adverse labor market shocks. The possibility that this type of training provision may
help lessen the impact of economic shocks on young workers is suggested by the milder
impact that the recent global recession has had on youth unemployment in countries with
well-developed firm-based vocational training schemes.3 To test this conjecture, however,
1

See Lemieux (2006) for an assessment of estimating wage determination equations based on learning
models.
2
See also French, Mazumder, and Taber (2006) who emphasize this point and address it in a reduced
form context.
3
For instance, while the youth unemployment rate between 2007 and 2011 has increased in most
OECD countries, it has remained stable in Austria and Switzerland and has even decreased in Germany
- all countries with a large structured apprenticeship system that trains young workers for particular

2

it is important to better understand the factors that determine wage growth, mobility,
and non-employment, as well as their relation to economic shocks, in a context that
allows young individuals the opportunity to obtain vocational training in a structured
apprenticeship program.
In this paper, we address this issue by asking two important questions: First, how
do workers’ careers progress after secondary school in a world where wages grow through
job shopping and on-the-job learning and workers have the initial choice to acquire
occupation-specific skills in a 2-3 year structured vocational training scheme. Second,
how do the career profiles of workers who have chosen to enroll in a vocational training scheme compare with the profiles of those who have not, and how are these profiles
affected by economic shocks that hit individuals at different career stages. Addressing
these questions will not only throw light on how early career apprenticeship programs
affect career progression - an issue under renewed scrutiny in the policy debates of many
countries - but also how early career vocational training may help alleviate the effects of
economic downturns on employment and the career progression of young workers.
To answer these questions, we develop a life cycle model of career choice and career
progression in which workers decide whether to acquire occupation-specific training after
secondary school and before entering the labor market or to join the labor market as
unskilled workers. We model this choice in accordance with the institutional features
in Germany, where almost four in five workers enter the labor market after secondary
school either directly as unskilled workers or indirectly as apprentices, who enroll in a
2 to 3-year structured, firm-based training scheme before entering the labor market as
skilled workers.4 The German system is unique in that it allows a precise distinction
between skilled (i.e., those who choose apprenticeship) and unskilled workers (i.e., those
who decide to join the labor market directly) in a homogeneous work environment in
which training decisions are made at the start of the career and skilled and unskilled
occupations after secondary school (OECD Labor Market Statistics 2012)
4
Apprenticeship training combines formal classroom teaching with on-the-job training by qualified
supervisors who implement a structured curriculum that leads to skill certification within a narrowly
defined occupation, such as bank clerk or plumber. Firm-based apprenticeship training schemes have a
number of advantages over vocational schools: craft techniques and customer interaction may be taught
more effectively in a work environment than in the classroom, and firms may know better than schools
which skills are needed in the workplace. Firm-based training may also allow for smoother transitions
of firm-trained apprentices into employment (see Ryan, 2001 and Parey, 2009 for evidence).

3

workers do similar jobs.5
Our model allows for direct job-to-job mobility, as well as transitions into and out
of non-employment. We allow the key parameters that characterize search frictions to
differ across skill groups, over the experience profile, and, importantly, over the business cycle. We model workers’ career progressions in a framework in which wages grow
because workers learn on the job and through job shopping. Our model thus draws on
models of education choice6 and wage determination.7 It also builds on the empirical
labor literature, endowing the wage equation with a rich stochastic structure in which
wages grow with experience and job-(firm-)specific tenure and depend on a match-specific
component as in Wolpin (1992).8 The wage equations are specific to the two alternative careers (skilled or unskilled) as in a Roy type model. In the presence of search
frictions, these careers could differ in rates of job arrival, job destruction, and mobility.
For example, if occupation-specific apprenticeship training reduces flexibility because of
training specificity, the job arrival rates should be lower for apprentices and lead to longer
unemployment spells.9 Our framework also draws on the macro labor literature by allowing both aggregate shocks and labor market transitions to affect relative wages between
the two groups (see Barlevy (2002), Nagypal (2005), Petrongolo and Pissarides (2008)
or Shimer (2012)). Our model thus enables assessment of the business cycles effect on
labor market attachment, experience, and job mobility, with a particular emphasis on
heterogeneous effects across skill groups and at various stages of a career.
Our analysis is based on unique administrative data drawn from social security
records, which allows us to track the careers and wages of individuals from their entry to the labor market onwards. These data also provide precise records of the training
choices individuals make after labor market entry. The high quality of these data is an
5

There is a large overlap in occupations for workers who enter the labor market directly after secondary
school and those who train in an apprenticeship scheme.
6
See, e.g., Card (1999), Taber (2001), Card (2001), Cameron and Heckman (1998).
7
See, e.g., papers by Willis and Rosen (1979), Heckman and Sedlacec (1985), Altonji and Shakotko
(1987), Topel (1991), Altonji and Williams (1998), Altonji and Williams (2005), Parent (1999), Dustmann and Meghir (2005).
8
For recent contributions on wage dynamics, see, for example, Meghir and Pistaferri (2004), Low,
Meghir, and Pistaferri (2010) and Altonji, Smith, and Vidangos (2009). Sullivan (2010) and Pavan
(2011) study wages in a structural context that allows agents to choose between occupations.
9
See, e.g., Heckman (1993). See also Fitzenberger and Kunze (2005), who investigate whether this
lock-in effect explains part of the gender wage gap in Germany.

4

important strength of our approach: they accurately record all wages, shifts between different jobs, and transitions between non-employment and work, enabling us to precisely
assign wages to firms. Our sample covers men from what used to be West Germany, born
between 1960 and 1972 and observed from 1975 until 2004, a period that encompasses
three decades and many entry cohorts. Our data therefore allow us to compare the careers of individuals who enter the labor market faced with effectively different economic
conditions and training costs because of the varying availability of skilled training and
different opportunity costs of training. They thus provide exogenous variation that allows us to identify initial choices of whether to enroll in apprenticeship training or enter
the labor market directly, which we combine with a dynamic model that characterizes
apprenticeship and non-apprenticeship careers. The data also reflect variations in the
economic cycle that expose workers to recessions at various stages of their careers.
We find that, at an early career stage, the careers of individuals who choose to acquire
apprenticeship training at labor market entry (hereafter, skilled workers) differ markedly
from those who do not (”unskilled” workers). Those who undergo training enter the labor
market with far higher wages, while those who enter as unskilled workers undergo a period
of rapid wage growth during the first 5 years in the labor market. Remarkably, this wage
growth during the early career phase is due primarily to on-the-job learning and to a far
lesser extent, to job shopping. Also interesting are the differences in the fundamental
parameters that drive wage progressions for these two groups: whereas unskilled workers
have higher job destruction rates than skilled workers, they also have higher job arrival
rates, both on and off the job. Although these differences narrow over the career, they
never converge, a surprising observation given that individuals are fairly homogeneous
before making their training choice and compete for similar jobs.
These differences in the underlying parameters, which are greater in the early career
stages, lead to surprising differences in the way skilled and unskilled workers respond to
economic shocks. Evaluating the long-run effect of a recession, we find that economic
shocks have permanent effects on human capital for both unskilled and skilled workers.
Nonetheless, the career stage at which a recession hits is important: economic shocks at
an early stage in a career have larger consequences on accumulated work experience than

5

at a later stage. We then investigate whether these shocks to employment translate into
wages. We find that exposure to an economic shock early in a worker’s career leads to
wage reductions that persist for 5 to 10 years. However, the wage differential between
skilled and unskilled workers is smaller than human capital would suggest, a result of the
dramatic differences in recession-induced job mobility. Whereas skilled workers tend to
remain with the same firm, unskilled workers are more mobile and compensate for the
loss in human capital through the accumulation of search capital.
By identifying precise channels through which workers’ careers are affected by economic shocks, our model contributes to an important and growing recent literature on
the effect of economic shocks on workers (see, e.g., Ruhm (1991), Jacobson, LaLonde,
and Sullivan (1993), Oddbjorn and Roed (2006), Davis and von Wachter (2011), or Oreopoulos, Von Wachter, and Heisz (2012)). These earlier studies, however, although they
provide interesting insights into the possibly devastating effects of economic shocks on
workers’ careers, do not distinguish between job destruction caused by economic recession and job destruction that would have happened anyway. Moreover, in any analysis
based on DiD type identification strategies, longer term projections may be confounded
by other economic shocks. Our analysis, in contrast, while supporting the key findings
of these papers, extends the literature by distinguishing recession effects from job separations that would have occurred anyway, by isolating the impact of a past shock on
future careers from other possible determinants, and by comparing the career impacts of
shocks that hit workers at different career stages.
Our paper also contributes to a better understanding of training schemes that develop
workplace-related vocational skills, schemes that are (once again being) recognized as a
key factor in strengthening competitiveness and growth.10 A crucial question for assessing
such schemes, however, is how they affect workers’ productivity and employment patterns.
Yet although the literature estimates the effects of apprenticeship training on wages11 and
10

See, e.g., President Obama’s ”manufacturing skill speech” (http://www.whitehouse.gov/thepress-office/2011/06/08/president-obama-and-skills-americas-future-partners-announce-initiatives ) or
the British Governments renewed emphasis on firm-based apprenticeship programs (see the UK 2011
budget (http://cdn.hm-treasury.gov.uk/2011budget complete.pdf ) and its allotment of an additional
£180 million for up to 50,000 additional apprenticeship places.
11
See, e.g., Winkelmann (1996) and Fersterer and Winter-Ebmer (2003), who report OLS estimates
for the wage returns to apprenticeship training in Germany and Austria of around 15-20 percent, and
Fersterer, Pischke, and Winter-Ebmer (2008), who report IV estimates of 2.5 and 4 percent per year of

6

provides important insights into the returns to enrollment in vocational training schemes,
its focus on the wage component ignores the role of endogenous experience profiles and
the effects of selection into work (e.g., on life cycle earnings through employment). Not
only are these factors likely to be very important in any career comparison of skilled
and unskilled workers, they may interact differently with aggregate shocks for skilled
versus unskilled workers. Our contribution, therefore, is to provide a more detailed
understanding of the various channels that lead to higher returns for workers who undergo
apprenticeship training, a key factor in assessing whether such training schemes should
be encouraged in other countries.
The remainder of the discussion is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the
data set, outlines the institutional features, and provides descriptive statistics. Section 3
defines the model, section 4 explains our estimation method, and section 5 reports our
results. Section 6 concludes the paper.

2

Background and Data

In this section, we give some brief description about training choices and the firm based
apprenticeship system we are analyzing in this paper. We then describe our data and
sample, and provide some descriptive statistics.

2.1

The Apprenticeship System

The German Apprenticeship System is a vocational training programme which combines
on-the-job training, provided by the firm, with school education, provided and funded by
the state. Similar systems operate in Austria and Switzerland. The system offers training
in more than 500 white- and blue collar occupations

12

. In practise, individuals choose

from a fairly small number of training professions. For instance, in our data, 70 percent
of all male apprentices are concentrated in 20 three digit occupations, with slightly more
than two-third of those being blue collar ones.
Apprenticeship training typically starts after secondary school, at around the age of
16, and lasts for 2 to 3 years. Germany tracks children after the age of 10 in lower,
training .
12
See http://berufenet.arbeitsagentur.de/berufe/index.jsp. for details.

7

intermediate and upper secondary schools. Pupils who attend lower and intermediate
secondary schools typically enroll in blue or white collar apprenticeship schemes. Pupils
who attend upper secondary schools are entitled to enroll directly into university.13
Apprenticeship training is highly structured, with a well-defined curriculum. It takes
place at the workplace for 3-4 days a week, under the supervision of qualified instructors,
where practical and workplace related knowledge is acquired, and at vocational state
schools for 1-2 days a week, where more general and academic knowledge, as well as theoretical knowledge specific to the chosen occupation is obtained. Both the practical and
the academic components are examined at the end of the training period, and successful
candidates obtain a professional qualification. We refer the reader to Steedman, Gospel,
and Ryan (1998) for more details.

2.2

Data and Sample

Our main data is a 2 percent sample of administrative social security records, covering
the years between 1975 and 2004, and made available by the German Institute for Employment Research. It records all spells of employed work of workers in the private and
public sectors, with exact dates when each job started and ended. The data does not
cover civil servants and the self employed. The data set reports the average daily pre-tax
wage at the end of each calendar year for ongoing employment spells. For individuals
who change firms within a calendar year, we observe the average wage from the beginning of the calendar year or the employment spell (if it started after the beginning of the
calendar year) until the end of that spell. Thus wages are not averaged across different
firms. The wage data is top coded at the earnings limit for social security contributions.
For the sample we consider, this concerns only about 2.2 percent of all wage spells. We
take top coding into account in our estimation procedure, and we describe details below.
The data contains also information on the apprenticeship training period, and whether
a worker holds an apprenticeship qualification or not, as well as their overall educational
qualifications.
In our analysis, we focus on West-German men born in the period between 1960-1972,
who enter the labor market with a lower or intermediate secondary degree, which is not
13

See Dustmann (2004) for a detailed description of the German school system.

8

sufficient for attending university directly, and which is typically obtained by the age
of 16. We select these cohorts to ensure that we only include individuals whom we can
observe at the start of their labor market career so that we avoid any initial conditions
problem.
We then define two groups: individuals who enroll in apprenticeship schemes for at
least 2 years and successfully complete their training (in what follows we refer to these
individuals as ”skilled”), and individuals who enroll for a shorter period, but do not
graduate, or do not enroll and enter the labor market directly (we refer to these as
”unskilled”).14
From this data, we construct a data set of quarterly spells, thus assuming that all
decisions are made on a quarterly basis. Whenever during a quarter multiple spells are
present (e.g. an employment and an unemployment spell), we assign to that quarter the
spell that covers the largest proportion of that quarter. When the individual does not
move firms and thus the wage we observe is an average over more than one quarter, we
treat this as a time aggregated wage where we do not observe the individual constituents
of this average. This time aggregation problem is fully accounted for during estimation,
as we explain later.
The data contains 38,018 individuals who enroll in an apprenticeship training scheme
after secondary school, and 4,392 individuals who join the labor market directly and
without further training. These are followed through time, quarter after quarter up until
2004; we have thus a total of 3,667,223 quarterly observations. Finally, to identify the
determinants of choices of school tracks at age 10, we use 69,084 individuals who follow
the vocational track and 10,608 who follow the academic track. We provide more detail
on the sample selection in Appendix A.
As mentioned above, there is a large overlap in terms of occupations for skilled and
unskilled workers. In our sample individuals are employed in 292 3-digit occupations
after labor market entry. Out of those, 19 occupations employ only unskilled workers
14

As an alternative to firm-based apprenticeship training, some youth attend vocational schools, which
offer classroom training for two to three years, with unpaid work experience, and lead to a certificate
equivalent to a firm-based apprenticeship (see Parey (2009) for details). About 6 percent of our sample
undertakes qualifying training in these vocational schools. Wage profiles of those who went through firm
based training and vocational schools are almost identical. We add these to the group of skilled workers.

9

(and these employ just about 1 percent of all unskilled workers), and 53 occupations
employ only skilled workers (and these employ just 1.4 percent of all skilled workers).

2.3

Descriptive Analysis of the Data

Wage Profiles and Labor Market Transitions. Figure 1 displays the log real wage
profile as a function of years of potential labor market experience (defined as age minus
the age at the end of compulsory schooling, taken to be 16) for skilled workers (those with
an apprenticeship qualification, denoted as “Skilled Wage”), for those currently training
as apprentices (“Wage in Apprenticeship”) and for unskilled workers (“Unskilled Wage”),
as well as the difference in wages between the skilled and unskilled (right-hand axis).
The figure shows that the unskilled have a rapid increase in their wage during the
first five years in the labor market, with real wages increasing by 11 percent per year
on average. Over the next twenty years however, overall wage growth is just below 9
percent, resulting in a 0.4 percent real average growth per year. Those who enroll in
apprenticeship training schemes are paid a very low wage during their training period,
covering part of the cost of their training. At the end of the apprenticeship training,
however, wages increase sharply and overtake those of the unskilled. From there on, the
wages of skilled workers increase slightly faster, by about 1 percent per year. After twenty
years, wages of skilled workers are about 15 percent higher than those of the unskilled.
From this graph it almost seems puzzling that anyone wishes to follow an apprenticeship career, given the large up-front investment in training that lasts about 3 years and
the apparently low rate of return in terms of wages. Comparing the net present value
of the flow of wages as depicted in Figure 1 between skill groups shows that unskilled
individuals are better off by about 2.3 percent.15 Of course these simple figures are misleading, as comparative advantage and other differences between the two career paths
may well explain the large participation rates in apprenticeship schemes. This is one of
the questions we investigate below, by allowing for such differences in the model that will
follow.
Indeed, wages are only one dimension along which skill groups may differ. Another
15

This figure is calculated over a horizon of 25 years using an annual discount rate of 0.95 and assuming
no selection into education.

10

important dimension is labor market attachment. Figure 2 shows the proportion of
individuals who are in work as a function of age.16 It is apparent from the figure that
labor market attachment of skilled workers is stronger than that of the unskilled, with
a higher fraction of the skilled working at any age. The difference in the proportion of
individuals working narrows from about 10 percent at age 25 to 5 percent around age 40.
In Table 1 we report in more detail the transitions of the two skill groups between
the different states. The table displays the quarterly transition probabilities by skill
status and time in the labor market, which starts when the individual has found a first
job or an apprenticeship training scheme. The figures show that unskilled workers have
a higher probability of dropping out of work. During the first five years in the labor
market, each quarter, about 3 percent of employed skilled workers exit, while this figure
is about 9 percent for the unskilled. This proportion decreases when we focus on more
senior workers, and the difference between the two groups narrows. The figures in Table 1
also reveal that skilled individuals have a higher probability to return to work from nonemployment. For instance, for workers with 5 to 10 years of potential experience, 19
percent of skilled unemployed individuals find a job from one quarter to the next. For
the unskilled this figure is only 7 percent. Further, the probability of job to job transitions
is higher at the beginning for the unskilled, but declines after five years for both groups
and becomes marginally higher for the skilled.
To summarize, these figures indicate that - overall - the unskilled spend less time
working. Over a 25 years period, they work a total of 21.9 years, compared with a total
of 22.5 years for skilled workers. If we combine labor market participation and wages,
using a replacement rate of 40 percent when unemployed, we find that skilled individuals
are two percent better off in terms of net present value when they first enter the labor
market; this number increases to 5 percent if we assign zero earnings to unemployed
workers. Hence, the decision to obtain apprenticeship training cannot be assessed solely
on the basis of the implied earnings advantage as depicted in Figure 1. Another important
dimension of this choice is the employment prospect.
Figure 3 plots the number of firms in which an individual have been employed, where
16
Germany has a compulsory military draft system during the period we consider, and we have eliminated interruptions that are due to military service while constructing the figure.

11

the horizontal axis carries potential experience. It is evident from this figure that the
unskilled are more mobile during the first few years in the labor market. Thus, job
shopping can be an important source of the large initial wage growth for unskilled workers,
as we illustrate in Figure 1. To investigate this further, we decompose wage growth
into within and between firm wage growth and plot it against potential experience (see
Figure 4), distinguishing between the two skill groups. Between job wage growth is indeed
substantial, between 20 and 40 percent for the unskilled during the first 2-3 years in the
labor market, when skilled workers are still in the training phase. The gain in wages falls
over time, but is still large for both groups until about 5-7 years in the labor market,
with returns being close to zero after about 15 years. Within firm wage growth for the
the unskilled is likewise very high early on in the career reflecting the rapid learning that
takes place on the job. The equivalent training for the skilled takes place during the
training period (which we have not shown in the figure).
Figure 5 shows the path of residual wages for both skill groups over time, together
with the deviation of GDP from a trend. The residual wage is obtained by projecting
wages on age and regional dummies, so as to make individuals comparable across years.
We have also shaded the periods when GDP is below its trend, which we define as an
economic downturn. Our data encompasses three downturns, one in the mid-seventies, a
large one in the early eighties and one at the end of our sample, which starts in 2004. The
figure shows that wages are procyclical, with a correlation with GDP of 0.4 for unskilled,
and 0.57 for skilled workers. The precise mechanism that leads to such a correlation
is difficult to assess in a reduced form context. We return to this issue in detail in
Section 5.4.

3

The Model

We now turn to the description of the key features of our model, which is set in discrete
time, and where one period lasts one quarter. It focuses on individuals who leave secondary education at age 16 (and who chose the low or intermediate school track at age
10, see Section 2.1). At that point individuals have the choice either to enroll in an apprenticeship scheme, or to enter the labor market as unskilled workers. Once this choice
12

has been made, individuals start their career. Throughout their work career, individuals
receive job offers with some probability, which may differ depending on whether they
are employed or not. Jobs can end either because of a quit or because of exogenous job
destruction. Wage growth occurs through several channels. It first depends on whether
individuals decide to train in a structured apprenticeship scheme, where wages are low
during the training period, but increase substantially after training is completed. Second,
we incorporate learning-by-doing, and we distinguish between general human capital and
firm-specific human capital. Finally, wages may grow through job mobility as we allow
for heterogenous worker-firm productivity matches. Individual choices include moving
between jobs when the opportunity arises and between work and unemployment as well
as the initial choice to undergo an apprenticeship. All these choices are made in order
to maximize the present value of future payoffs. Individuals derive utility from wages,
from benefits when out of work and from leisure. Those benefits are a function of the
wage earned in the last job in accordance with the benefit system in Germany. The
information set of agents consists of their skill status, their work experience, their tenure
on the job in the firm, their time invariant unobserved characteristics, the current value
of the productivity match with the firm, and the aggregate state of the economy. We
now describe relevant features of our model in more detail.
Aggregate shocks: We characterize the macroeconomic fluctuations of the economy
around the steady-state growth trend by de-trended GDP. The macro shock is relevant
because it potentially affects the relative price of the two skill groups as well as the
relative attractiveness of being out of work. It also affects the probability of finding a job
as well as the job destruction rate, in a way specific to both skill groups. This allows the
model to capture the different effect business cycles have on skilled and unskilled workers
along several dimensions, such as unemployment duration or job tenure, and which we
will explore later on. The macro state variable Gt is modeled as a discrete two-state
Markov process of order one. The transition probabilities are presented in Appendix C
in Table A1.

13

Wages and Matches: If a worker and a firm form a match at time t, the output is
split according to a rule that yields an annual wage wit to the worker. The way the split
is determined is not modeled here. Wage contracts are continuously updated following
shocks to match productivity, and, as in a standard Mortensen and Pissarides (1994)
model, really bad productivity shocks may result in unemployment.
Wages are modeled as follows. Let Si ∈ {0, 1} denote the worker’s apprenticeship
qualification status (1 for skilled and 0 for unskilled). Let Xit be the number of quarters
spent in work (including the apprenticeship period) since age 16.17 Let Tit denote the
number of quarters spent in the current job (Tit = 0 if the worker starts working in the
firm in period t). Let εi be a permanent individual characteristic that is unobserved by
the econometrician but is known by the worker and observed by the employer. Quarterly earnings wit are functions of the macroeconomic shock, Gt , skilled training, Si ,
experience, Xit , tenure, Tit , the unobserved permanent heterogeneity variable, εi , and a
match-specific component, κit :
ln wit = α0 (εi ) + αS Si + αX (Xit , Si ) + αT (Tit , Si ) + αG (Si )Gt + κit ,

(1)

where αX and αT are two skill-specific functions of experience and tenure. We use a
piecewise linear function, with nodes at 0, 2, 4, 6, 10 and 30 years of experience and
tenure. The specification is motivated by the fact that most of the non linearity in wage
profiles is early on, so we have a denser grid between 0 and 10 years of actual experience.
Unobserved heterogeneity affects the overall level of log wages and is discrete. This
specification is in line with the empirical evidence found in French, Mazumder, and
Taber (2006). They show that the return to experience appears to be unrelated to the
business cycle. The specification with an additive and separate unobserved productivity
term is consistent with findings in Gladden and Taber (2009a).
When the worker and the firm first meet (Tit = 0) they draw a match specific effect κi0
such that
κi0 ∼ N (0, σ02 (Si )) ,

(2)

which captures the heterogeneity in wages when individuals start a new job. We in17

Xi,t+1 = Xit + 1 if the worker is working in period t; otherwise, Xi,t+1 = Xit . We do not allow for
depreciation of skills while unemployed.

14

terpret this as match specific heterogeneity and we allow it to differ by apprenticeship
status allowing us to estimate the extent to which job opportunities vary for skilled and
unskilled workers. In the empirical application we also distinguish between skilled workers and those still in training to allow the innovation of the match component to be
different.18 Flinn (1986) shows the importance of worker-firm productivity matches to
explain the wage path of young workers. For subsequent periods within the firm, the
match component evolves as
κit = κit−1 + uit ,

(3)

uit ∼ iid N (0, σu2 (Si )).

(4)

This allows for the possibility that the value of a match and the contracted wage can
change, while permitting persistence over time. Indeed, Topel and Ward (1992) show
that the match is close to a random walk. Contrary to the US and the UK, in Germany,
the cross sectional variance of wages does not increase over the lifecycle, which means
that a random walk of wages that continued across jobs would lead to counterfactual
implications and would be inappropriate. This led us to the above specification, where
the random walk component is reinitialized when changing jobs.
The utility of working and being out of work: Utility is assumed to take a log
form. In addition, we allow for a mobility cost or benefit µi when a worker moves between
jobs. This allows for the possibility that workers may move to a job that pays lower wages,
as is observed in the data. The one-off benefit/cost of moving is an iid random variable
µi such that

µi ∼ N (mµ (Si ), σµ2 (Si )).
The instantaneous utility of work is therefore:
RitW ≡ RW (Si , Gt , Xit , Tit , κit , εi ) = ln(wit ) + µi ITit =0

(5)

where ITit =0 is an indicator variable equal to one for the first period of employment.
18

Note that we are able to identify firm-worker productivity matches for those in training as we observe
wages during that period as well.

15

While unemployed, the individual derives a utility from unemployment benefits; these
are calculated as a fraction of the last wage when employed (denoted as wi(−1) ), as in
the German unemployment insurance (UI) system that was in place over the period we
consider here.

19

In addition, there is a utility of leisure which varies across individuals

on the basis of their skills, experience, unobserved heterogeneity εi and a Gaussian white
noise ηit with variance ση2 . Thus, the instantaneous utility of unemployment is:
RitU ≡ RU (Si , Xit , wi(−1) , ηit ) = ln(γU wi(−1) ) + γ(Xit , Si , εi ) + ηit ,
(6)
ηit ∼ iid N (0, ση2 (Si )),
with γU = 0.4 and where γ(Xit , Si , εi ) is the utility of leisure, which is skill-specific, and
varies with unobserved heterogeneity (in a multiplicative way) and experience. The effect
of experience is modeled as a piecewise constant function (with nodes at 0, 2, 4, 6 and
30 years of experience).
Finally, we assume that all shocks {κi0 , uit , µi , ηit } are jointly as well as serially
independent, and independent of the unobserved heterogeneity vector εi (see below for a
complete description of unobserved heterogeneity).
Transitions: Individual decisions to work, to move to a new job or to quit working are
carried out by comparing the lifetime values of each of these states.20 More specifically,
employed individuals may be laid off with probability δit ≡ δ(Gt , Si , Xit ), which depends
on the state of the business cycle as well as experience and skill status. Exogenously
displaced individuals suffer a loss of their match specific effect which will lead on average
to lower wages upon re-entry, followed by a catch-up as the worker shop for better
matches. These facts are consistent with findings in Bender, Dustmann, Margolis, and
Meghir (2002) and von Wachter and Bender (2006). Conditional on not being laid off,
they draw an alternative job offer with probability πitW ≡ π W (Gt , Si , Xit ). Unemployed
individuals draw a job offer with probability πitU ≡ π U (Gt , Si , Xit ), which is a function
of the aggregate shock, skills and experience. They decide whether to take this job,
19

When UI is exhausted (after about 18 months), an unemployed worker moves on to the means-tested
unemployment assistance. Given the length of time for eligibility and the generosity of social assistance
for lower wage individuals, we have made the simplifying assumption that the replacement rate is always
40 percent, which is on average correct for our population. Modeling the entire system would imply an
increased state space.
20
The structure of the value functions is presented in appendix B.

16

depending on how the value of working compares to the value of unemployment. As
the business cycle affects both job arrival rates and layoffs, our model has some of the
features that are discussed in the macro labor literature (see for instance Davis and
Haltiwanger (1992), Barlevy (2002), Nagypal (2005), Petrongolo and Pissarides (2008)
or Shimer (2012)).
Training decision: The choice to enroll in apprenticeship training is assumed to be
a one-off decision made at age 16, and based on the comparison of the value of a career
under the two training alternatives, allowing for both the direct cost of training and
foregone earnings. We assume that both an unskilled job and an apprenticeship position
are available immediately. For simplicity, we refer to that decision as ”decision at age 16”,
although there is some heterogeneity in our sample, and in practise, we start modeling
from the point we see individuals joining the first job or an apprenticeship scheme.
The choice to become an apprentice is based on comparing the value of this decision
with the value of joining the labor market directly, minus the cost of the training decision,
which can be expressed as
V (Ωit |Si = 1) − costit > V (Ω̃it |Si = 0),

(7)

where V (Ωit |S = j), j ∈ {0, 1} is the present value of payoffs, conditional on the state
variables at age 16 and the career chosen. At the start of the career, experience and
tenure are set to zero. The state vector Ωit contains also the business cycle state Gt
at that date, the match effect κi0 and mobility cost µi . The value of unskilled work
is conditioned on Ω̃it , which is also evaluated at zero experience and tenure, the same
business cycle shock, but with an offer from a different firm for an unskilled position.
This offer consists of a match effect κ̃i0 and mobility cost µ̃i .
The cost of training is modeled as:
costit = λR (Ri , Gt ) + λ0 (εi ) + ωit ,

(8)

where λR (Ri , Gt ), represents the (deterministic) direct costs of apprenticeship training,
which we allow to depend on the relative scarcity of apprenticeship training schemes
across time and regions (see e.g. Parey (2009) who illustrates the strong variation in
17

training schemes across regions in Germany). We proxy these by including interactions
between region of residence, Ri , and the state of the business cycle, Gt , both measured
when the choice is made at age 16. These interactions reflect how aggregate shocks affect
each of the eleven regions of (West) Germany. Such differential effects of GDP shocks
across regions will occur because industrial composition differs across regions or because
employment in some industries is more procyclical than in others. The availability of
data for thirteen birth cohorts observed in eleven states provides exogenous variation
that helps for estimation.
We allow for unobserved heterogeneity in the costs of training, λ0 (εi ), so as to capture
the possibility that individuals may differ in their ability to learn in an academic environment. Finally, we denote by ωit a normally distributed iid shock to the cost of training
(capturing for instance travel costs as well as family background) that is revealed to the
individual before the training choice is made. It induces a probability for this choice,
conditional on all the other shocks, from which it is independent. The shocks ωit and
λ0 (εi ), together with the match specific effects in both alternatives and the non-pecuniary
benefits, need to be integrated out because they are not observed.21
Unobserved heterogeneity: As detailed above, wages and apprenticeship costs depend on unobserved heterogeneity. As argued by Taber (2001), who also analyzes a model
of schooling choice and careers, it may be far too restrictive to allow for just one factor
of heterogeneity. We thus assume that the vector εi consists of two random variables
which follow a bivariate discrete distribution, each with two points of support. The two
elements capture the ability to learn (which thus correspond to the individual specific
costs of training), and productivity in the labor market; they may be positively or negatively correlated or possibly not be correlated at all. Hence this specification allows both
for selection on unobserved returns to skilled training and for ability bias as expressed in
21

In principle one could estimate a richer model allowing for regional shocks and mobility but this
would greatly increase the state space and the choices to be made (see Kennan and Walker (2011) or
Dahl (2002)).

18

the labor literature.22

23

The choice to acquire skills through the apprenticeship system

depends on the costs of training (observed or not) and on the expected wage gains.

4

Estimation

4.1

The Selection of our Population and Initial Conditions

As we explain above, the population whose labor market behavior we model consists of
individuals who at 10 years of age have enrolled in the lower or intermediate secondary
school track (a decision that is made by parents, based on primary school teacher’s
recommendations), but not in the high school track, who complete secondary schooling
by the age of 16, and who either enroll into an apprenticeship training scheme afterwards,
or enter the labor market without further formal training.

24

Thus, the population we consider does not cover those who - at the age of 10 - enroll
into higher track schools, allowing them to ultimately enter university. This is about 20
percent of each cohort. To address this initial conditions problem we specify a reduced
form probability of choosing the academic path, as a function of the region and year of
birth of the individual (reflecting the economic conditions at the time) as well as of the
two factors of unobserved heterogeneity in the vector εi . The key assumption in this
approach is that the distribution of unobserved heterogeneity is independent of region
and cohort. We estimate the parameters describing the probability of choosing the lower
tracks together with the parameters of the model.

4.2

Method of Simulated Moments

The model is estimated using simulated method of moments, by minimizing the distance
between a set of chosen moments from the data and the moments implied by the simulated
22

See for example Griliches (1971), Card (2001), Heckman and Vytlacil (2005) and Carneiro, Heckman,
and Vytlacil (2006) among many others.
23
In practice we normalize one point of support to be zero and include a constant in the wage of each
sector and in the cost of apprenticeship.
24
Table 2 shows that for the cohorts 1960, 1965, and 1970, around two in three individuals choose
apprenticeship training; the fraction of each cohort entering the labor market without further education
decreases slightly, from 16 percent for the 1960 cohort, to 11 percent for the 1970 cohort. The fraction
of those who choose an academic career (which typically follows graduation from a high track secondary
school) increases slightly, from 20 percent to 24 percent.

19

careers from the model (McFadden (1989)). The criterion we minimize takes the following
form:

M (θ) = (m̂ − g S (θ))0 Σ̂−1 (m̂ − g S (θ))
where m̂ represents a vector of data moments, g S (θ) represents the moments implied by
the model, based on S simulated careers, and Σ̂ is a weighting matrix. Here we chose
Σ̂ to be a diagonal matrix which contains the variances of the observed moments. The
standard errors are estimated as in Gourieroux, Monfort, and Renault (1993).
Estimation is based on the simulation of 12,000 individual careers, starting from the
point when - at 10 years of age - individuals are allocated to the lower, intermediate, or
higher (and more academic) track. Using the simulated data we then construct moments
that correspond to those we obtain from the observed data. We deal with time aggregation in wages by generating simulated data at the quarterly frequency, imposing the
same time aggregation as on the real data, and constructing the moments in the same
way. For instance, for workers employed a full calendar year within the same firm, the
administrative data we use reports an average of the wage over the year, even if there
were wage changes. In the simulations, we also average wages for workers who stay with
the firm.
We deal with top coding of wages in a similar way. We impose the same rules for
top coding in the simulated data as in the observed ones. This procedure is essentially
similar to a Tobit model, given the normality assumptions we have made for the shocks.
We use a total of 414 moments to estimate a total of 116 parameters. The career
paths of skilled and unskilled workers are characterized by 169 moments which we use
to estimate 70 parameters; the training choice is characterized by 13 parameters, and
we use 124 moments to estimate these; the choice of the academic track is described by
33 parameters, where estimation is based on 121 data moments. A full list of moments
can be found in the tables of Appendix D, and we will describe here only the estimation
of some of the key parameters of the model. When constructing moments, we always
control both for region and aggregate time trends so that identification does not rely on
pure cross-sectional or temporal variation.

20

The career path of individuals is characterized by a number of conditional moments,
obtained from linear regressions, for instance, by regressing the (log) wage level on a
function of experience, tenure and the business cycle for skilled and unskilled individuals. This set of moments helps identifying the return to experience and tenure by skill
groups. To identify the variance of wages over the life-cycle, which depends on the distribution of initial matches and unobserved ability, we regress the squared residual of the
wage equation on a constant and a function of potential labor market experience, by skill
groups. Moments obtained from a regression of changes in log wages on a function of
experience, tenure, business cycle and skill group help to identify match specific heterogeneity, as well as the return to tenure and experience. To identify the innovation to the
match specific effect, we use as moments the coefficients from a regression of the squared
residual of the wage change equation on skill groups dummies.
We further estimate linear probability models to characterize the proportion of individuals in work and linear regressions to describe the number of jobs held as a function
of potential experience and business cycle. When considering business cycle effects, we
always allow for separate effects between skill groups and interact it with potential experience. This interaction captures how business cycles affect young and older workers
differently.
For the choice of apprenticeship at age 16, we use as moments the proportion of
apprentices by region and year. We proceed in a similar way for the choice of the
academic track, by matching the proportion of individuals who chose the lower track by
region and year in the observed data and in the simulated data. Finally, in constructing
the moments we account for heterogeneity due to the initial region of residence at age 16,
as well as aggregate time trends by including regional dummies and a quadratic trend.

5
5.1

Career Paths across Skill Groups and Economic
Shocks
The Fit of the Model

We start by summarizing how well our model fits the data, by comparing some of its
key predictions to those we obtain from the raw data. One important set of moments
21

are the evolution of employment and log wages over the life cycle, for the two groups
of workers. These are summarized in Figure 6, comparing the profiles we obtain from
the data with those generated by our model. As is apparent from the figures, not only
does the model capture the wage profile over the life cycle very well, but it also matches
quite precisely the slightly U-shaped profiles of the proportion of individuals in work. An
important moment is the fraction of individuals who do not acquire skills by enrolling
in apprenticeship training. Here the overall proportion of unskilled is 10.5 percent in
the raw data, while the model’s prediction is about 9.4 percent. We provide additional
assessment of the fit of the model along various dimensions in much detail in Appendix D.
Overall, the results show that the model fits the data moments remarkably well.25

5.2

The Parameter Estimates

We now turn to the estimated parameters. Table 3 presents a subset of parameters
that are fundamental for understanding differences in the early and later career paths
between skilled and unskilled workers. These include parameters that characterize the
distribution of innovations to match specific effects, and the distribution of match specific
effects (first panel), as well as the job destruction rate and the job arrival rates (second
panel).
The first panel reports the standard deviations of the initial match specific effects and
the innovations to match specific effects, σ0 and σu , the dynamics of which we describe in
equations (2) and (3). The estimates show that the skilled and the unskilled face different
match specific distributions. Whereas initial matches are similar across skill groups, the
variance of innovations to match specific effects for the unskilled is larger than for the
skilled, although the difference is not significant. Differences in these parameters, paired
with a higher job-to-job mobility due to differences in job destruction and offer rates (to
which we turn next), may partly explain the high wage growth for the unskilled, which
is shown in Figure 1. We present below in Section 5.3 a decomposition of wage growth
to better understand its determinants.
25

We do not assess the fit of the model using chi-square tests. Given the large number of observations we use for the estimation of the moments, and given the degree of over-identification, even small
deviations from the data moments will be statistically significant.

22

In the second panel of Table 3 we report the job destruction rates (δ), and the job arrival rates when employed (πW ) and when unemployed (πU ), again separately for skilled
and unskilled workers. We do not report estimates for individuals who are in apprenticeship training, as - in accordance with regulations in Germany - individuals cannot
be fired during the training period, once enrolled. As we explain in section 3, we allow
the job arrival and destruction rates to vary with skill level, time in the labor market,
and the business cycle. Inspection of the Table shows that the job destruction rates are
markedly higher for unskilled than for skilled workers, particularly in the first four years
in the labor market. The difference persists beyond that period, but becomes smaller.
Thus, exogenous separations seem to play a far more important role for the mobility of
unskilled workers during the first years in the labor market. Unskilled individuals have
- on the other hand - higher job arrival rates while on the job, as well as when in unemployment, in booms as well as in recessions. These differences between the two groups
explain the differences in transitions in Table 1 which we discussed above. They will
also be important for our analysis of the way skilled and unskilled workers enter and exit
non-employment during recessionary periods. Our estimates indicate, as emphasized by
Petrongolo and Pissarides (2008) or Shimer (2012), that variations across the business
cycle in separation rates are smaller than the variation in the probability of obtaining
job offers.
We now turn to the returns to experience and tenure. Our parameter estimates in
Table 4 correspond to the wage equation (1). As we explain in Section 3, we allow for
non-linear returns to tenure and work experience, and we allow the tenure and experience
profiles to vary by skill group. Notice that we start the experience and tenure clock at
the beginning of the first job for unskilled workers and at the beginning of apprenticeship
training for skilled workers. The wage profiles based on the raw data, and displayed in
Figure 1, suggest that the returns to work experience are non linear, steepest during the
first 6 years, and basically flat beyond that period. This is reflected by the estimated
parameters in the table: during the first six years in the labor market, wages grow faster
for unskilled workers. Over a period of 30 years of experience, the average wage gain from
experience is 1.5 percent per year for unskilled workers and 1 percent for skilled workers.

23

The lower returns to experience for the skilled is partly due to the return to experience
being captured in the apprenticeship effect, which is substantial (0.98 log points). The
estimated returns to tenure, on the other hand, are very low for both skill groups, varying
between 0.1 to 0.2 percent per year.26 These estimates represent the causal effect of an
additional year on the job. However, they do not explain entirely the differential wage
growth across skill groups, as skilled and unskilled workers accumulate different levels
of work experience and job seniority over the years. We address this issue directly in
section 5.3 below, using simulations to construct the appropriate counterfactuals.
How are wage profiles of skilled and unskilled workers affected by the business cycle?
We address that question by allowing the effect of the business cycle on log wages to
differ between skill groups (see equation (1) for details). The estimates in the table show
that, during upturns, wages increase by about 2 percent for skilled individuals, and by
about 5 percent for unskilled workers. These results are in line with the findings of Bils
(1985) or Basu (1996). Our findings provide evidence of pro-cyclical productivity, net
of composition effects (induced by both observed or unobserved characteristics) due to
differential participation in the labor market. We return to the effect of business cycles
in more detail below.
As we point out above, we allow for two dimensions of unobserved heterogeneity: first,
individuals may differ in their ability to learn, which is important for the decision whether
or not to enroll in apprenticeship training. Secondly, individuals may be differently
productive at any level of skills accumulated. This formulation recognizes that abilities
to perform in the labor market may differ from those required to acquire further training
- which we believe is an important distinction in particular when modeling jobs with a
high craft and manual component. We find that high ability individuals and those with
lower cost of training are more likely to enroll in apprenticeship training schemes. This
is because the returns to choosing a skilled career is higher for high ability workers. We
also find evidence that the two unobserved ability characteristics are correlated (although
not strongly), where high ability individuals are also more likely to have higher training
costs. Hence, the selection of individuals into apprenticeship training is complex, as it
26
See Altonji and Shakotko (1987), Neal (1995) and Gathmann and Schoenberg (2010) who also find
low returns to firm tenure respectively on US and German data.

24

draws both high productivity individuals for whom the return to a skilled job is higher
and low productivity individuals who, on the other hand, have a lower cost of training.
We refer the reader to the appendix Table A2 for a detailed presentation of the results.

5.3

Returns to Training and Wage Growth by Skill Group

While in the previous section we discussed the parameters of the wage equation, we now
turn to the wage returns of the two career choices, by decomposing it into its various
determinants, like human capital accumulation or job shopping.
Wage Returns What are the wage returns to choosing an apprenticeship training
scheme as opposed to entering the labor market directly? To address this question, we
compute the returns to training over a 40 year horizon, by simulating wage profiles for
workers and by computing the net present value of earnings. We report here average
treatment effects, i.e. the returns to training for the average worker. To compute these
we allocate workers to both skill groups and compare their net present values under both
scenarios.
The figures we present in Table 5 are the ratios of the net present values of earnings
for skilled and unskilled workers. We compute these for two scenarios: evaluated before
(column Age 16 ), and after (column Age 19 ) the training period. The former will include
the apprenticeship period, and thus the foregone wages while in training. Notice that
the figures we present in the table are not simply the returns to training while in work,
but incorporate all differences in career paths, including non-employment spells and
differences in job destruction rates. These numbers are not directly comparable to the
parameters estimated in earnings functions, which are, under fairly strong assumptions,
interpretable as the internal rates of return to training (see e.g. Willis 1986, Card (1999),
Card (2001) and Heckman, Lochner, and Todd (2006)).27
The first row reports the “OLS” returns, which are simply calculated by comparing
wage (and unemployment benefit) flows, and therefore ignores sorting. The return to
apprenticeship is close to 16 percent, or just above 5 percent per year. Evaluated before
27

Among these assumptions are that education and experience profiles are log-additive, and that workers are continuously employed after labor market entry. Further, as these are marginal rates of returns,
costs of education incurred through reducing the lifespan available for working are not considered.

25

the training period, this figure is lower, about 7.2 percent. In the next row we display the
average treatment effect. We now find lower returns, close to 11 percent (or 4 percent
if the training period is included). This lower return is the consequence of the sorting
based on unobserved characteristics which we described at the end of section 5.2.
As the returns we compute include non-employment spells, the question arises how
these should be evaluated. In the figures in row 2, we assign to those spells imputed
unemployment benefits, which are rather generous in Germany. An alternative is to
allocate zero wages to those spells.28 As skilled individuals have a higher labor market
attachment (see e.g. Figure 2), the returns now increase slightly, from 10.9 percent
to 11.6 percent. Although not directly comparable, our estimates are thus of a similar
magnitude than the 2.5 - 4 percent returns per year of apprenticeship training obtained by
Fersterer, Pischke, and Winter-Ebmer (2008), who, in a reduced form setting, instrument
the length of apprenticeship training by the time to failure of firms that close down during
the training period.
Decomposing Wage Growth We now turn to the components of wage growth over
the life cycle. This is similar to French, Mazumder, and Taber (2006) who study wage
growth for a population of young and low skilled individuals in the US in a reduced form
framework. However, while with reduced form techniques, it is difficult to assess the
relative magnitude of these alternative sources of wage growth, due to the endogeneity
of labor supply and job to job mobility, one strength of our model is that it allows us
to construct counterfactual life-cycle profiles, by comparing profiles with and without
returns to experience, tenure, or job mobility.
We simulate life-cycle profiles of wages and labor supply for both skilled and unskilled
workers over their life cycle and report annual wage growth - conditional on working - over
many periods. For skilled workers, we compute the annual wage growth 5 years after
enrollment in apprenticeship training, to avoid capturing the graduation effect (three
years after enrollment), which is substantial (see Figure 1). For unskilled workers, we
decompose wage growth for the first 5 years, and for all the subsequent years. We then
28

This would be more standard, and, for instance, in line with the literature that evaluates the effect
of firm closure on wages (see e.g. Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993)).

26

assess the contribution of experience and tenure to wage growth, by simulating wages
and labor market transitions when one of these components of wage growth is set to
zero. A third channel of wage growth in our model is the evolution of the firm-worker
match. This process follows a random walk, and conditional on staying in the same
firm, the match quality is likely to rise, as negative shocks would lead to quits. To
understand how important this is for wage growth, we simulate wage profiles, setting the
variance of these innovations to zero. A final channel of wage growth comes from job
shopping. To assess its contribution, we simulate an economy where individuals never
receive alternative offers while on the job. We assume that individuals do not anticipate
any of these departure from the baseline, which means that we solve the model and the
optimal decisions for the baseline parameter values. This implies that we keep individual
behavior constant between scenarios, and we can therefore abstract from changes in wages
because of composition effects.
We present the results of these simulations in Table 6. The baseline results in the first
row of the Table show that workers who enter the labor market without further training
experience strong wage growth over the first years of their careers, with wages growing
at a rate of 11 percent per year. Wage growth slows down considerably after this initial
period, to about 0.7 percent. For skilled workers, wage growth after the first five years
in the labor market is slightly higher at 1.4 percent.
In line with findings by Altonji and Shakotko (1987) and Altonji and Williams (2005),
firm tenure plays a minor role for wage growth, as suggested by the estimates in the
second row. Likewise, the evolution of the worker-firm match plays a negligible role,
except for unskilled workers in the later part of their career. On the other hand, the
effect of experience is very important, in particular for workers who enter the labor
market without training. Over the first 5 years in the labor market, the annual wage
growth decreases from 11 percent to only 0.8 percent if we exclude experience effects.
After five years, the returns to experience are far lower for both groups of workers. It
is perhaps unsurprising that human capital accumulation through work experience is
an important driver for unskilled workers, as they are more likely to learn on-the-job
what skilled workers learn in a more formal training environment. However, the relative

27

magnitude of the contribution of experience to wage growth, in particular during the first
half decade in the labor market, is remarkable. This is particularly so as the contribution
of job shopping is far lower: job-to-job mobility increases average annual wage growth
from 2.9 percent to 3.8 percent - which is substantial, but far less than the contribution
of experience.
At first sight, these relatively low returns to job shopping in the early career phase
seems at odds with Figure 4, where workers who move to a new firm have on average
large increases in their wages. However, for these increases to contribute to wage growth
over several years, workers need to have fairly stable careers, which is not the case for
young unskilled workers during their early career stages, as shown in Figure 2. Thus,
transitions into non-employment may eliminate workers’ search capital, and decrease
the overall contribution of job shopping to wage growth in the early career stages. An
important advantage of our approach is that we can account for this, while a reduced
form analysis which decomposes wage growth into between- and within firm wage growth
as in Topel and Ward (1992) may overstate job shopping.
For skilled workers, work experience plays a smaller role due to their concentrated
human capital accumulation during their training period, and subsequent higher entry
wages after training. However, the contribution of general work experience to wage
growth is notably higher for skilled than for unskilled workers after the first five years
in the labor market. Job mobility plays likewise an important role in explaining wage
growth, with a change in wage growth from 0.5 percent per year to 1.4 percent (which is
in absolute terms higher than for unskilled workers over the same period).
Therefore, the perhaps most interesting result from these decompositions is that while job shopping contributes to wage growth of young workers who enter the labor
market without further training - learning through work experience is by far the most
important component of their wage growth in the early career stages. This finding is
interesting also in the light of a debate in the literature that considers on-the-job training
and learning by doing as two alternative ways to accumulate skills. As pointed out by
Heckman, Lochner, and Cossa (2003), whether skills are acquired in a learning-by-doing
way, or whether learning is rivalrous with working, as in Becker (1964) and Ben-Porath

28

(1967), has important and different implications for transfer policies.

5.4

Career Effects of Recessions

Young people have most likely been the main victims of the last economic crisis, and
have been most severely affected by unemployment in almost all OECD countries. One
exception is Germany, where youth unemployment was only 3 percentage points above
the overall unemployment rate in 2007, and where this difference has decreased to 2.5
percentage points by 2011. Moreover, Germany’s youth unemployment rate has been
persistently lower than that in many OECD countries over the last few decades. Some
authors suspect this to be a consequence of the apprenticeship training scheme that
facilitates entry into the labor market for young workers (see e.g. Ryan (2001)). But
how exactly this should work, and whether these transitions may also help young workers
to remain in work during a recession is altogether unclear.
Our analysis allows us to shed light on this question, and to study the effect of business
cycles on the careers of young workers who did, and who did not acquire apprenticeship
training, thus addressing the question of whether apprenticeship type education schemes
help to shield young workers from the consequences of an economic downturn on unemployment. Moreover, our analysis improves on the reduced-form literature29 , in three
important ways. First, we are able to isolate the longer-run effects of an economic crisis on both future wages and employment prospects, whereas results from reduced form
methods may be contaminated by subsequent economic shocks. Second, it is difficult to
find a meaningful control group to evaluate for instance the effect of losing a job during a
recession. As we show below, recessions affect workers in many dimensions, and changes
in job-to-unemployment transitions are only one aspect. Workers who keep their job may
nonetheless be affected by the recession in other dimensions - which is difficult to measure
in a reduced form analysis. In contrast, the ability to simulate career paths for a given
individual with and without a recession allows us to build the relevant counterfactual.
Finally, the previous literature has focussed on the effect of losing a job, rather than the
effect of a recession per se. Answering the latter question is challenging, as even those
29

See for instance Ruhm (1991), Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993) or Davis and von Wachter
(2011).

29

who do not lose their job may be negatively affected by an economic downturn, which
needs to be evaluated to assess the overall cost of a recession. Another related difficulty
stems from the fact that not all workers who lose their job during a recession, lose it
because of it. To distinguish between the two groups is very difficult with reduced form
econometric techniques. Again, the ability to simulate counterfactuals with and without
a recession, allows us to single out those who lose their job because of the recession, all
else being held the same.
To explore the effect of a recession, we compare the careers of workers who face two
situations. First, a baseline scenario, where no recession occurs. Second, a scenario
where a recession takes place either early, or later in a worker’s career (we set these at
3 and 15 years of potential experience). While workers do not know ex ante when the
recession occurs and for how long it will last, they have expectations that are consistent
with the history of booms and recessions in Germany over the period we consider. In
our simulations, a recession lasts for 3 years, which is consistent with the stochastic
process described in Table A1. We then compute the differences in labor market status,
work experience, firm tenure and in log wages (assuming zero wages for the unemployed)
between each of these two scenarios. The results are displayed in Figures 7 to 11. In
each figure, the period of the recession is indicated by the shaded area.
Employment, Experience and Mobility In Figure 7 we display the change in
employment for the two skill groups. A recession early on in a cohort’s career (left panel
of Figure 7) decreases the proportion of individuals working by about 2 percent.30 The
effect is similar for the two skill groups. It takes both groups about 5 years after the end
of the recession to return to their baseline employment. When the recession hits workers
at a later career stage (after 15 years in the labor market, right panel), the effects are
smaller and more short-lived for both groups. Further, they are now larger for skilled
workers.
One channel through which these employment effects lead to lasting career effects is
by reducing the accumulation of human capital. We explore that in Figure 8 where we
30

This figure is consistent with the numbers reported by Burda and Hunt (2011), for the recessions
that occurred during that period.

30

show the effects these shocks have on labor market experience. Experiencing a recession
at an early stage of the career leads to a permanent decrease in human capital of about
0.07 to 0.09 years of experience. The effect is larger for unskilled individuals than for
skilled ones. For the older cohort, the effect is smaller, and - as implied by the previous
figure - the reduction in experience is more pronounced for unskilled individuals.
Besides affecting labor market experience, economic shocks may also have an effect
on job mobility. On the one hand, a recession may reduce mobility, by reducing job
offer arrivals while on the job; on the other hand, it may increase job mobility, by
increasing job destruction rates. Both effects may differ by skill groups. Our model allows
for the underlying fundamental parameters to change through a recessionary period, as
illustrated by the estimates in Table 3. One way to illustrate how exposure to a recession
affects job mobility is to consider its effect on firm seniority, which is what we do in
Figure 9. These figures show a distinctively different mobility response for the two
skill groups. While unskilled workers experience a decrease in their firm tenure during
the recession, skilled workers face an increase. There are two counteracting processes at
work: during recessions there are more transitions from work to non-employment, forcing
workers to look for new jobs; on the other hand, those who are in work choose more often
to remain with the same firm, which increases firm tenure. While for skilled workers,
the latter effect dominates, the opposite is the case for unskilled workers. After the
recession, firm tenure decreases, as skilled workers start moving between firms again. It
is noticeable that the effect on mobility is quite persistent, especially for skilled workers.
When the recession hits older cohorts, the overall response pattern are similar. Thus, it
seems that recessions decrease mobility for skilled workers, which may have consequences
for their earnings - something we investigate next.
Wages and Workforce Composition Figure 10 shows the effect on earnings, which
we set to zero for the unemployed. For a recession striking after 2 years of potential
experience, both skilled and unskilled workers suffer a loss in earnings of comparable
magnitude. However, as implied by the graphs above, the reason of this drop differs
across skill groups. While it is mostly the loss in human capital accumulation through a
decrease in experience for the unskilled, it is the lack of accumulating search capital for
31

the skilled. A recession leads to a prolonged decrease in earnings, especially for skilled
individuals, which can last for up to 10 years. When the recession hits an older cohort
(right panel), the effects are more moderate for skilled workers’ earnings, but larger for
unskilled workers’ earnings. Again, this is a consequence of the effect on job mobility, as
the loss of search capital is smaller for older skilled workers. We have also evaluated the
total effect of a recession, calculated as the change in the net present value of earnings
over a period of 15 years, and starting from the beginning of the recession. For workers
hit by a recession early on in their career, the net present value of earnings drops by about
2.3 percent for both skill groups. For a recession that hits workers at a later stage, the
effect is 3 percent for unskilled and 2 percent for skilled workers. Hence, training leads
not only to higher wages in general, but offers some element of insurance in downturns
as well.
A recession changes also the composition of the workforce - something that we have
so far ignored, as we compared similar individuals in the analysis above, focussing on
average treatment effects. In Figure 11, we illustrate composition effects, by plotting
the ratio of high to low productivity individuals who are in work. These figures show
that the composition of the workforce in terms of workers’ unobserved abilities changes
indeed, with low productivity individuals being more likely to exit to non-employment.
This is similar to the findings of Solon, Barsky, and Parker (1994) and Lemieux (2006),
although these authors emphasize the composition bias in aggregate statistics due to the
underweighting of (observed) low skilled individuals. Our focus here is different, as we
condition on a population of similar skills, and uncover the change in unobserved ability.
The composition effect is stronger early on in the career, with a change in the ratio of
high to low productivity workers of about 2 percent. The effects are also long-lived:
it takes about 6 years after the recession has ended to bring the ratio of high to low
productivity workers to the pre-recessionary level. This suggests that low productivity
workers in both skill groups are harder hit by a recession, and find it more difficult to get
back to work, even years after the recession has ended. The magnitude of this selection
decreases with the age of the cohort exposed to the recession. This change in composition
of the workforce tends to moderate the pro-cyclicality of wages, a phenomenon that has

32

been described in aggregate data (see for instance Stock and Watson (1999)).
Who is affected in a Recession? As we argued above, recessions affect workers in
many ways. A salient effect is the increase in unemployment, and many papers have
evaluated the effect of losing a job on earnings and other outcomes. However, recessions
also affect the mobility, and hence the earnings of continuously employed individuals.
We now analyze separately the effect of an economic downturn, on those who lost their
job because of the recession, and those who did not. To implement this, we identify those
individuals who lose their job during the recession, but would not have lost their job in
the non-recessionary baseline scenario. We also identify those who have not lost their job
because of the recession. We calculate for these two groups of workers the net present
value of their earnings for the baseline scenario, and the recession scenario, and compare
the effects. As before, we consider the period from the start of the recession until 15
years after the recession.
When the recession hits workers at an early career stage, those who lose their job
because of the recession suffer a loss of 23 percent in discounted life-time earnings, where
the loss is similar across skill groups. Most interestingly, workers who do not lose their
job because of the recession, forego about 1 to 2 percent in net present value. The reason
is that these workers lose also search capital because of reduced job to job mobility.
The latter is especially important for skilled workers who are employed throughout the
recession. Our results therefore illustrate the difficulty of estimating the effect of job loss
on workers’ wage careers, especially during a recession, as a result of the difficulty in
defining an appropriate control group. As we demonstrate here, also those workers who
do not lose their job in a recession are affected. A further difficulty, which we highlight
above, is the change in the selection of workers into work over the business cycle, based
on their unobserved productivity. Our analysis is able to overcome both issues by using
simulations to construct a proper counterfactual.

33

6

Conclusion

Since the recent global recession, the issue of how individuals’ careers interact with economic shocks has drawn renewed interest. However, because recessions impact various
parameters that govern workers career paths simultaneously, any analysis of this subject
is inherently complex. Any thorough assessment of the issue, therefore, first requires
appropriate modeling and estimation of the fundamental mechanisms that drive workers career paths. We attempt this task through an empirical analysis of administrative
data for Germany, a country that has attracted attention for its performance throughout
the last recession. A distinctive feature of Germany’s labor market is the structured
vocational training scheme that trains about 65 percent of each cohort and is sometimes
credited for the performance of the German labor market. Hence, besides modeling workers career paths and their interactions with economic shocks, we also model individuals
initial choices of whether or not to enroll in an apprenticeship training scheme at labor
market entry, allowing for differences between skilled and unskilled workers.
Several aspects of our findings are interesting. First, we show not only that skilled
and unskilled workers have different career paths, but that they respond to economic
shocks in very different ways. These differences are related to intergroup differences in
the parameters underlying the process of human capital accumulation and job mobility
and how these are affected by economic shocks. After conditioning on unobserved heterogeneity (whereby we allow individuals to differ in terms of productivity and ability to
learn), we find that although vocational training within an apprenticeship scheme offers
a higher return, this additional return is quite modest and corresponds to less than 4
percent per year of training. One reason is that workers who do not enroll in apprenticeship training experience rapid on-the-job learning during the first years in the labor
market. In fact, one of our most interesting findings is that although job shopping is
important for the early wage growth of unskilled workers, on-the-job learning is far more
important.
Another intergroup distinction is the response to economic downturns, particularly
when recession hits workers at an early stage in their careers. Whereas unskilled workers
are more likely to transit to non-employment and suffer larger losses to human capital
34

than skilled workers, they do not experience larger wage losses because they gain search
capital through mobility while skilled workers lose it by remaining with the same employer. This observation clearly illustrates that economic shocks have different effects on
the two drivers of wage growth - learning-by-doing and job mobility - for skilled versus
unskilled workers.
Another important aspect of our analysis is that it is carried out for a country in
which the vast majority of young people enroll in apprenticeship training. Thus, young
workers who enter the labor market directly are exposed to a work environment in which a
large fraction of co-workers have been well trained (in a structured 3-year apprenticeship
scheme), which creates a fertile learning environment. This fact may explain not only
why on-the-job learning, as opposed to job shopping, plays such an important role for
these young workers during their first years in the labor force, but also why the returns
to apprenticeship training are relatively low. It also implies that as the average skill level
of peers - and thus the learning environment - in the workplace changes, so may the
returns to experience. Hence, although the returns to enrolment in a 3-year structured
apprenticeship training scheme may seem relatively modest in Germany, they may be far
larger in countries (e.g., the UK) where only a small fraction of workers receives structured
job training. Nonetheless, we believe that the fundamental differences uncovered by our
analysis in the way young skilled and unskilled workers respond to economic shocks are
likely to generalize to other economic environments.
One important insight from our analysis is the difficulty of precisely assessing the
effect of recessions on workers careers, a problem intrinsically related to the complexity
of recessionary effects on individual career paths. Not only does an economic shock lead
to responses through a variety of different channels (e.g., job experience and learning, job
shopping, or innovations at work), it also changes the composition in the workforce with
respect to unobservable characteristics. It affects all workers, including those individuals
who do not lose their jobs as a direct result of the recession. As challenging as it is
to address these first two issues in a reduced form context, however, it is even more
difficult to identify appropriate counterfactual scenarios. Our work thus also highlights
the importance of precisely defining which effects are identified in any analysis of the

35

consequences of a recession. At the same time, our findings demonstrate the strength
of our structural approach not only in isolating the direct long-term consequences of
an economic shock on individuals’ careers but also in estimating different parameters of
interest and thereby facilitating creation of different counterfactual situations.

36

References
Altonji, J., and R. Shakotko (1987): “Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority?,” in Unemployment, trade unions, and dispute resolution, ed. by O. Ashenfelter, and K. Hallock, vol. 47,
pp. 219–241. International Library of Critical Writings in Economics.
Altonji, J., and N. Williams (1998): “The Effects of Labor Market Experience, Job Seniority and Mobility on Wage Growth,” Research in Labor Economics, 17, 233–276.
(2005): “Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority? A Reassessment,” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, pp. 370–397.
Altonji, J. G., A. Smith, and I. Vidangos (2009): “Modeling Earnings Dynamics,” NBER
Working Papers 14743.
Barlevy, G. (2002): “The sullying effect of recessions,” Review of Economic Studies, 69(1),
65–96.
Basu, S. (1996): “Cyclical productivity: Increasing returns or cyclical utilization?,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 111, 719–751.
Becker, G. (1964): Human Capital. Columbia University Press, New York, 3rd edn.
Ben-Porath, Y. (1967): “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings,”
Journal of Political Economy, 75(4), 352–365.
Bender, S., C. Dustmann, D. Margolis, and C. Meghir (2002): “Worker Displacement
in France and Germany,” in Losing Work, Moving on: International Perspectives on Worker
Displacement. Peter J. Kuhn,, Michigan, Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, Kalamazoo.
Bils, M. J. (1985): “Real Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Panel Data,” Journal
of Political Economy, 93(4), 666–689.
Burda, M. C., and J. Hunt (2011): “What Explains the German Labor Market Miracle in
the Great Recession?,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 273–335.
Cameron, S. V., and J. J. Heckman (1998): “Life Cycle Schooling and Dynamic Selection Bias: Models and Evidence for Five Cohorts of American Males,” Journal of Political
Economy, 106(2), 262–333.
Card, D. (1999): “The causal effect of education on earnings,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by O. C. Ashenfelter, and D. Card, vol. 3, pp. 1801–1863. Elsevier.
(2001): “Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Progress on some Persistent Econometric Problems,” Econometrica, 69, 1127–1160.
Carneiro, P., J. Heckman, and E. Vytlacil (2006): “Estimating Marginal and Average
Returns to Education,” mimeo UCL.
Dahl, G. B. (2002): “Mobility and the Return to Education: Testing a Roy Model with
Multiple Markets,” Econometrica, 70(6), 2367–2420.
Davis, S. J., and J. Haltiwanger (1992): “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and
Employment Reallocation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3), 819–863.

37

Davis, S. J., and T. von Wachter (2011): “Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss,” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity.
Dustmann, C. (2004): “Parental background, secondary school track choice, and wages,”
Oxford Economic Papers, pp. 209–230.
Dustmann, C., and C. Meghir (2005): “Wages, experience and seniority,” Review of Economic Studies, 72(1).
Fersterer, J., J.-S. Pischke, and R. Winter-Ebmer (2008): “Returns to Apprenticeship
Training in Austria: Evidence from Failed Firms,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics,
110(4), 733–753.
Fersterer, J., and R. Winter-Ebmer (2003): “Are Austrian returns to education falling
over time?,” Labour Economics, 10(1), 73–89.
Fitzenberger, B., and A. Kunze (2005): “Vocational Training and Gender: Wages and
Occupational Mobility among young Workers,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 21(3),
392–415.
Flinn, C. (1986): “Wages and Job Mobility of Young Workers,” Journal of Political Economy,
94, S88–S110.
French, E., B. Mazumder, and C. Taber (2006): “The Changing Pattern of Wage Growth
for Low Skilled Workers,” in Working and Poor: How Economic and Policy Changes Are
Affecting Low-Wage Workers, ed. by Blank, Danziger, and Shoeni.
Gathmann, C., and U. Schoenberg (2010): “How General is Human Capital? A TaskBased Approach,” Journal of Labor Economics, 28, 1–49.
Gladden, T., and C. Taber (2000): “Wage Progression Among Low Skilled Workers,” in
Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform, ed. by Card, and Blank.
(2009a): “The relationship between wage growth and wage levels,” Journal of Applied
Econometrics, 24(6), 914–932.
(2009b): “Turnover and Wage Growth for Low Skilled Young Men,” .
Gourieroux, C., A. Monfort, and E. Renault (1993): “Indirect Inference,” Journal of
Applied Econometrics, 8, S85–S118.
Griliches, Z. (1971): “Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric Problems,”
45(1), 1–22.
Heckman, J. (1993): “Assessing Clinton’s program on job training, workfare, and education
in the workplace,” Discussion paper, NBER Working Paper 4428.
Heckman, J., and G. Sedlacec (1985): “Heterogeneity, Aggregation, and Market Wage
Functions: An Empirical Model of Self-Selection in the Labor Market,” Journal of Political
Economy, 93(6), 1077–1125.
Heckman, J., and E. Vytlacil (2005): “’Structural equations, treatment effects and econometric policy evaluation’, Fisher-Schultz Lecture,” 73(3), 669–738.

38

Heckman, J. J., L. Lochner, and R. Cossa (2003): “Learning-By-Doing Vs. On-theJob Training: Using Variation Induced by the EITC to Distinguish Between Models of Skill
Formation,” in Designing Inclusion: Tools to Raise Low-end Pay and Employment in Private
Enterprise, ed. by E. Phelps, pp. 74–130. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Heckman, J. J., L. J. Lochner, and P. E. Todd (2006): “Earnings Functions, Rates Of
Return And Treatment Effects: The Mincer Equation And Beyond,” in Handbook of the
Economics of Education, ed. by E. A. Hanushek, and F. Welch, vol. 1, chap. 7, pp. 309–453.
Elsevier.
Jacobson, L. S., R. J. LaLonde, and D. G. Sullivan (1993): “Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers,” The American Economic Review, 83(4), 685–709.
Kennan, J., and J. R. Walker (2011): “The Effect of Expected Income on Individual
Migration Decisions,” Econometrica, 79(1), 211–251.
Lemieux, T. (2006): “Increasing Residual Wage Inequality: Composition Effects, Noisy Data,
or Rising Demand for Skill?,” The American Economic Review, 96(3), 461–498.
Low, H., C. Meghir, and L. Pistaferri (2010): “Wage Risk and Employment Risk over
the Life Cycle,” American Economic Review, 100(4), 1432–1467.
McFadden, D. (1989): “A Method of Simulated Moments for Estimation of Discrete Response
Models Without Numerical Integration,” Econometrica, 57(5), 995–1026.
Meghir, C., and L. Pistaferri (2004): “Income Variance Dynamics and Heterogeneity,”
Econometrica, 72, 1–32.
Mincer, J., and B. Jovanovic (1981): “Labor Mobility and Wages,” in Studies in Labor
Markets, ed. by S. Rosen. University of Chicago Press.
Mortensen, D., and C. Pissarides (1994): “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 61(3), 397–415.
Nagypal, E. (2005): “Worker Reallocation over the Business Cycle: The Importance of Jobto-Job Transitions,” mimeo, Northwestern University.
Neal, D. (1995): “Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced Workers,”
Journal of Labor Economics, 13(4), 653–677.
Oddbjorn, R., and K. Roed (2006): “Do Business Cycle Conditions at the Time of Labour
Market Entry Affect Future Employment Prospects?,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(2), 193–210.
Oreopoulos, P., T. Von Wachter, and A. Heisz (2012): “The Short- and Long-Term Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
4(1), 1–29.
Parent, D. (1999): “Wages and Mobility: The Impact of EmployerProvided Training,” Journal of Labor Economics, 17(2), 298–317.
Parey, M. (2009): “Vocational Schooling versus Apprenticeship Training. Evidence from Vacancy Data,” mimeo, University of Essex.

39

Pavan, R. (2011): “Career Choice and Wage Growth,” Journal of Labor Economics, 29(3),
549–587.
Petrongolo, B., and C. Pissarides (2008): “The ins and outs of European unemployment,”
American Economic Review, 98, 256–262.
Rosen, S. (1972): “Learning and Experience in the Labor Market,” Journal of Human Resources, 7, 326–342.
Rosen, S. (1976): “A Theory of Life Earnin,” Journal of Political Economy, 84, S45–.
Ruhm, C. J. (1991): “Are Workers Permanently Scarred by Job Displacements?,” The American Economic Review, 81(1), 319–324.
Ryan, P. (2001): “The School-to-Work Transition: A Cross-National Perspective,” Journal of
Economic Literature, 39, 34–92.
Shimer, R. (2012): “Reassessing the ins and outs of unemployment,” Review of Economic
Dynamics, 15(2), 127–148.
Solon, G., R. Barsky, and J. A. Parker (1994): “Measuring the Cyclicality of Real
Wages: How Important is Composition Bias,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(1),
1–25.
Steedman, H., H. Gospel, and P. Ryan (1998): “Apprenticeship: A Strategy For Growth,”
CEP discussion paper No.CEPSP11.
Stock, J., and M. Watson (1999): “Business cycle fluctuations in US macroeconomic time
series,” in Handbook of macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and M. Woodford, vol. 1, pp.
3–64. Elsevier.
Sullivan, P. (2010): “A Dynamic Analysis of Educational Attainment, Occupational Choices,
and Job Search,” International Economic Review, 51(1), 289–317.
Taber, C. (2001): “The Rising College Premium in the Eighties: Return to College or Return
to Unobserved Ability?,” Review of Economic Studies, 68(3), 665–691.
Tauchen, G., and R. Hussey (1991): “Quadrature-Based Methods for Obtaining Approximate Solutions to Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models,” Econometrica, 59, 371–396.
Topel, R. (1991): “Specific Capital, Mobility, and Wages: Wages Rise with Job Seniority,”
Journal of Political Economy, 99(1), 145–176.
Topel, R., and M. Ward (1992): “Job Mobility and the Careers of Young Men,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 107(2), 439–479.
von Wachter, T., and S. Bender (2006): “In the Right Place at the Wrong Time: The Role
of Firms and Luck in Young Workers’ Careers,” American Economic Review, 96, 1679–1705.
Willis, R., and S. Rosen (1979): “Education and Self-Selection,” Journal of Political Economy, 87(5), S7–S36.
Winkelmann, R. (1996): “Training, Earnings and Mobility in Germany,” Konjunkturpolitik,
42, 275–298.

40

Wolpin, K. I. (1992): “The Determinants of Black-White Differences in Early Employment
Careers: Search, Layoffs,Quits, and Endogenous Wage Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 100(3), 835–560.

41

Table 1: Observed Quarterly Labor Market Transitions
Potential Experience (Years)
Labor Market Transitions
Unskilled
Skilled
0-5 5-10 10-20 0-5 5-10 10-20
Out of work to Out of work .88 .92
.95
.73 .81
.92
Out of Work to Work
.12 .07
.05
.27 .19
.08
Work to out of Work
.09 .05
.03
.03 .04
.02
Work to new Work
.04 .03
.02
.02 .04
.03
Work to same Work
.87 .92
.94
.95 .92
.95
Notes: results derived from IAB data, 1975-2004, aggregated at a
quarterly frequency.

Table 2: Proportion in different education tracks after secondary Education, by Year of
birth
Birth Cohorts
1960
1965
1970
Academic Track
20%
21%
24%
Apprenticeship Training
64%
67%
65%
No Post-Secondary Education
16%
12%
11%
Notes: results derived from IAB data, 1975-2004.

42

Table 3: Estimated parameters: variance of shocks, job destruction and job arrival rates
and mobility costs
Parameter

In Apprenticeship
Std dev initial match specific effect (σ0 )
0.264
(0.013)
Std dev innovation to match specific effect (σu )
0.023
(0.041)
Job offers and job destruction rates
Quarterly job destruction rate (δ)
if experience ≤ 4 years
if experience ∈ [4,6] years

-

if experience > 6 years

-

additional effect if business cycle high

-

Quarterly offer arrival rate when employed (πW )
if business cycle low, experience <6

0.0448
(0.0014)
0.471
(0.28)
-

if business cycle high, experience<6
if business cycle low, experience ≥6
if business cycle high, experience≥6
Quarterly offer arrival rate when unemployed (πU )
if business cycle low, experience=0

Unskilled
Workers
0.228
(0.052)
0.0251
(0.019)

0.0252
(8.4e-06)
0.04
(1.2e-05)
0.019
(1.1e-06)
-0.00249
(0.00065)

0.0792
(0.00073)
0.053
(0.033)
0.03
(6.4e-06)
-0.00353
(3.6e-05)

0.485
(0.0021)
0.912
(0.28)
0.498
(0.023)
0.924
(0.28)

0.738
(8.3e-07)
1
0.324
(0.055)
0.636
(0.055)

0.137
0.182
(5.2e-05) (0.00025)
if business cycle high, experience=0
0.16
0.192
(7.8e-05) (0.00073)
if business cycle low, experience=10
0.208
0.5
(5.8e-05)
(0.0016)
if business cycle high, experience=10
0.231
0.51
(6.4e-05)
(0.0016)
Note: Column ”In-Apprenticeship” refers to the period of training. a : as a percentage of lifetime
value at age 16. Asymptotic standard errors in parenthesis. Utility of leisure and the standard
deviation of mobility costs have been restricted to be common across all skill groups.

43

-

Skilled
Workers
0.249
(0.0066)
0.0131
(0.00662)

Table 4: Estimated parameters: wage equations
Parameter
Skilled
Unskilled
Log Wage Constant
3.83
(0.016)
3.68 (0.052)
Indicator Variable, ”In Training”
-0.98
(0.02)
Experience=0 yrs
0
0
Experience=2 yrs
0.0063 (0.015)
0.31
(0.03)
Experience=4 yrs
0.25
(0.017)
0.46 (0.028)
Experience=6 yrs
0.28
(0.018)
0.46 (0.063)
Experience=10 yrs
0.31
(0.021)
0.46 (0.052)
Experience=30 yrs
0.32
(0.037)
0.46 (0.095)
Tenure=0 yrs
0
0
Tenure=2 yrs
0.00011 (0.012)
0.02 (0.029)
Tenure=4 yrs
0.0099 (0.012) 0.026 (0.033)
Tenure=6 yrs
0.02
(0.011) 0.044 (0.055)
Tenure=20 yrs
0.042
(0.045) 0.067 (0.16)
Effect of high business cycle
0.0169 (0.0043) 0.0528 (0.02)
Note: Log wage is the dependent variable. The wage equation for skilled workers during and following training is allowed to differ only in the indicator for
apprenticeship training (and the variance of the shocks). Asymptotic standard
errors in parenthesis.

Table 5: The Life-cycle returns to apprenticeship training
Age 16
Age 19
OLS
7.2%
15.7%
ATE
3.8%
10.9%
ATE, excl. UI benefits
5.3%
11.6%
Note: ATE: Average Treatment Effect. Returns calculated over a horizon
of 40 years, and with a discount factor set at 0.95 annually. The numbers
displayed are the ratio of net present values of earnings.

Table 6: Annual wage growth, by skill levels
Unskilled
Skilled
Potential Experience
0-20
0-5
5-20
5-20
Baseline
3.8%
11% 0.71% 1.4%
No return to tenure
3.5%
10% 0.64% 1.4%
No evolution of firm-worker match 3.6%
11% 0.58% 1.4%
No return to experience
0.68% 0.83% 0.55%
1%
No job-to-job mobility
2.9% 9.6% 0.14% 0.5%
Note: Annual wage growth, conditional on working, calculated by simulating the
model over a horizon of 20 years.

44

3

3.5

Log Wage
4

4.5

5

0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1 .12 .14 .16 .18 .2
Log Wage Difference

Figure 1: Log Wage by skill group and the wage gain of skilled workers

0

5

10
15
Potential Experience (Years)

Unskilled Wage
Wage in Apprenticeship

45

20

25

Skilled Wage
Log Wage Difference

.5

Proportion Working
.6
.7
.8
.9

1

Figure 2: Proportion Working by skill

20

25

30

35

40

45

Age
Unskilled

Skilled

1

2

Number of Jobs
3
4

5

6

Figure 3: Mobility: Number of Jobs, by Skill Group

0

5

10
15
Potential Experience (Years)
Unskilled

46

Skilled

20

25

Figure 4: Annual Change in Log Wage
Between Firms

−.05

0

Average Change in Log Wage
0
.05

Average Change in Log Wage
.1
.2
.3

.1

.4

Within Firms

10
15
Potential Experience (Years)
Unskilled

20

25

0

5

10
15
Potential Experience (Years)

Skilled

Unskilled

0
500
1000
GDP deviation from trend

.1

1500

Figure 5: Wages and Business Cycles

−500

Log Wage Residual
−.2
−.1
0

5

−.3

0

1970

1980

1990
Year

Unskilled wage
GDP deviation from trend

2000

2010

Skilled wage
Recession

Note: GDP per capita US $, constant prices obtained from OECD. Wage data
derived from IAB sample. Residual log wages are obtained by projecting log
wages on potential experience and time trend.

47

Skilled

20

25

Figure 6: Observed and Predicted Employment, Wage and Standard deviation of Wage
Profiles
Unskilled
1

0.95

0.95

Proportion Working

Proportion Working

Skilled
1

0.9
0.85
0.8

Observed
Predicted

0.75
0.7
0.65
0.6
0.55
0.5
0

0.9
0.85
0.8

Observed
Predicted

0.75
0.7
0.65
0.6
0.55

5

10

15

0.5
0

20

5

Years of Potential Experience

4.8

4.8

4.6

4.6

4.4

4.4

4.2

Observed
Predicted

4
3.8

20

4.2

3.8
3.6

3.4

3.4

3.2

3.2
10

15

Observed
Predicted

4

3.6

5

15

Unskilled
5

Log Wage

Log Wage

Skilled
5

3
0

10

Years of Potential Experience

3
0

20

5

Years of Potential Experience

10

15

20

Years of Potential Experience

Figure 7: Change in Employment following a Recession
0.01

Change in Employment

Change in Employment

0.01
Recession

0
Skilled

−0.01

Unskilled

−0.02

−0.03
0

10

20

Recession

0

−0.01

−0.02

Unskilled
−0.03
0

30

Time (Years)

Skilled

10

20

Time (Years)

48

30

0.02

Change in Work Experience

Change in Work Experience

Figure 8: Change in Experience following a Recession
Recession

0
−0.02
Skilled

−0.04

Unskilled

−0.06
−0.08
−0.1
0

10

20

0.02
Recession

0
−0.02
−0.04

Skilled
Unskilled

−0.06
−0.08
−0.1
0

30

Time (Years)

10

20

30

Time (Years)

0.2

Skilled

Change in Firm Tenure

Change in Firm Tenure

Figure 9: Change in Firm Tenure following a Recession

Unskilled
0.1
0

Recession

−0.1
−0.2
0

10

20

30

0.2

Unskilled
0.1
Recession

0
−0.1
−0.2
0

Time (Years)

Skilled

10

20

30

Time (Years)

0

Recession

−0.05

Change in Log Earnings

Change in Log Earnings

Figure 10: Change in Earnings following a Recessiona

Skilled
Unskilled

−0.1

0

10

20

30

a

−0.05

−0.1

Skilled
Unskilled

0

Time (Years)

Recession

0

10

20

Time (Years)

Note: The figures display earnings, including zero income when not working.
49

30

1.06
Recession

1.04
Skilled
Unskilled

1.02

1
0

10

20

30

Change in ratio of High/Low
Productivity Individuals Working

Change in ratio of High/Low
Productivity Individuals Working

Figure 11: Change in Composition of Workers, along Unobserved Productivity Following
a Recessiona

Time (Years)

1.06
Recession

1.04
Skilled
1.02

Unskilled

1
0

10

20

30

Time (Years)

a

Note: The figures display the difference in the ratio of high versus low productivity
individuals who are working. The comparison is between two paths, without and with a
recession.

50

Appendix
A

Data: Sample Used for Estimation

We select all male individuals who are born between 1960 and 1972. Thus, we make sure
that no individual is older than 15 in 1975 (the minimum age at which post-secondary
labor market entry is possible), which is the first year of our data. We consider all
years between 1975 and 2004. We exclude all individuals who live in East-Germany.
We drop individuals who work in the agricultural industry, and individuals who work
in the family businesses. We restrict our sample to those who are not older than 23
when they enter the labor market the first time, and who enter the labor market with
only a lower secondary school education, who either enroll into apprenticeship training
directly, or who enter the labor market without further training.31

32

We further exclude

individuals with multiple apprenticeships (which is about 6% of the sample), and workers
who are still in training at the end of the observation window, or who have no valid wage
spells after apprenticeship training. We also exclude individuals who had a work spell
before starting apprenticeship training, and we drop individuals with unreasonably long
apprenticeship training periods (which we set to 1600 days). We restrict our analysis to
individuals with German citizenship, as individuals with non-German citizenship may
have acquired (part of) their education abroad.
The wage information in the data is the average daily wage for the length of the
working spell. A spell is at most 365 days long if the individual does not change firm,
as firms have to report yearly on their employees. If individuals change firm during the
calendar year, or exit into unemployment, we observe the average daily wage for the
period for which the individual has been in employment. Thus, every wage we observe
belongs to one particular worker-firm spell. We compute real wages in 1995 prices.
The precise distinction between individuals who enroll in a traditional apprenticeship
31

In Germany, children enter primary school at the age of about 6. Primary school takes 4 years. After
primary school, and at the age of 10, individuals decide whether to enter one of three secondary school
branches: lower secondary school (which takes another 5-6 years), intermediate secondary school (which
takes another 6 years), and higher secondary school (which takes another 9 years). For our analysis, we
concentrate on individuals who choose lower or intermediate secondary school. These two options do
not allow for direct access to university, and individuals typically enroll into apprenticeship training, or
enter the labor market directly.
32
As the comparison group of individuals who choose upper track secondary school, which we use to
implement our selection correction, we define all those individuals who enter the labor market either
with an upper secondary degree (with or without further training), and before the age of 23, or with
college- or university education, and before the age of 32.

51

scheme (”skilled workers”), and individuals who enter the labor market without further
training (”unskilled workers”), is as follows. We define as “skilled workers” all those
individuals who entered the labor market with a lower or intermediate secondary school
degree, who can be observed after entry on an apprenticeship training scheme for at least
24 months, and who transit to a “skilled” status afterwards.33 We define as “unskilled
workers” all those individuals who enter the labor market without further training, or
who have been on an apprenticeship training schemes for less than 7 months, without
obtaining a degree (i.e. dropouts). This group may include individuals who enrolled in
one-year vocational courses before entering the labor market – preparatory courses that
do not lead to vocational degrees. Thus, among our unskilled workers may be individuals
who did receive some preparatory training.
Another mode of entry, as discussed in Parey (2009), is attendance of 2-3 year vocational schools, which provide vocational training with unpaid work experience in specialized schools for a limited number of occupations.

34

These occupations are mainly

in female-dominated occupation groups, like caring and health-related occupations. In
our sample, these individuals constitute about 6% of individuals.35 In line with Parey
(2009), we find that the wage paths of this group are very similar to those of individuals
undergoing firm-based training. We thus include them in the group of skilled workers, assuming that the choice to undergo training at a full time school is equivalent to choosing
apprenticeship training in a firm.

B
B.1

Model and Numerical Solution
The value of unemployment.

The value of unemployment consists of a predetermined part and a stochastic shock ηit
reflecting changes in the utility of being out of work. Denoting the predetermined part

by Ua Si , Gt , Xit , wi(−1) , εi , where the subscript a denotes the age of the individual, we
33
For apprentices who finish their training within a calendar without changing firms, we do not observe
the date of graduation, neither can we distinguish the apprenticeship wage during that year from the
skilled worker wage. To compute the number of apprenticeship training months, we assign to these
individual 6 months of training. Further, when we compute wages after the apprenticeship period, we
discard these observations.
34
According to the Central Labor Office (Bundesagentur fuer Arbeit), firm based apprenticeship
schemes train for 541 occupations, while full-time colleges train for only 133 occupations.
35
The size of this group is smaller than in Parey (2009). One reason for this is that we consider only
the years up to 1996, where these school based vocational schemes were less frequent than in later years.

52

can write

Ua Si , Gt , Xit , wi(−1) , εi = log(γU wi(−1) ) + γ(Xit , Si , εi )

A




 
µi + Wa+1 Si , Gt+1 , Xit , Tit+1 = 0, κi0 , εi


 B
+βπitU E max 
Ua+1 Si , Gt+1 , Xit , wi(−1) , εi + ηit+1
+β(1 −

πitU )



EUa+1 Si , Gt+1 , Xit , wi(−1) , εi



(B1)

C

where we underline the variables over which we are taking expectations (because they
are unknown to the individual in period t) and where β is the discount factor.
In (B1) the first line of the right hand side (A) represents the within period value of
being out of work (up to the stochastic shock ηit ). This consists of the unemployment
insurance income plus a value for leisure. The lines denoted by (B) represent the expected
future value for the case where the worker gets a job offer, which happens with probability
πitU . In that case the worker will choose the best of taking the job offer or continuing
as an unemployed worker. The value of taking the job offer is equal to the sum of the
present value of the future flow of earnings defined below, Wa+1 (·), plus a (stochastic)
amenity µi . The final line (C) represents the case where the individual obtains no offer
and thus just has to continue out of work.

B.2

The value of employment.

Their value of employment is then given by:
Wa (Si , Gt , Xit , Tit , κit , εi ) = log(wit )

A

h


i
+βδit E Ua+1 Si , Gt+1 , Xit + 1, wit + ηit+1

B



+β (1 − δit ) πitW





Ua+1 Si , Gt+1 , Xit + 1, wit , εi + ηit+1




E max  Wa+1 Si , Gt+1 , Xit + 1, Tit + 1, κit + uit+1 , εi



µ̃i + Wa+1 Si , Gt+1 , Xit + 1, Tit+1 = 0, κi0 , εi







C






Ua+1 Si , Gt+1 , Xit + 1, wit , εi + ηit+1

  D
+β(1 − δit )(1 − πitW ) E max 
Wa+1 Si , Gt+1 , Xit + 1, Tit + 1, κit + uit+1 , εi
(B2)
The current value of work is just the wages wit . Following job destruction, which occurs
with probability δit the individual will receive the value of unemployment as shown in line
53

B. The group of lines marked C represent the events when the job is not destroyed and
the individual obtains an alternative job offer. In this case they have to choose between
becoming unemployed; remaining with the firm; or taking the alternative offer, which is
associated with the one off random switching cost µi of joining a new firm. The following
group of lines marked by D represent the expected value of a worker not being laid off
and not having access to an alternative offer. Given that a shock can occur to the match
specific effect, the worker may decide it is best to quit, in which case they receive the
value of unemployment. Otherwise they receive the value of working with the same firm,
at the updated wage.

B.3

The value of employment while in training.

Going back, earlier into the individual’s history, we consider choices available when
training. During apprenticeship (which lasts τA periods36 ) we assume that the training firm pays the worker only a fraction λA of his productivity as an unskilled worker
(w (Si = 0, Gt , Xit , Tit , κit , εi )), the reminder serving as payment for the general training
received. Reflecting the facts in the data, we do not allow the individual to experience
unemployment during apprenticeship, although they can decide to change firm if the
opportunity arises. Thus, during the apprenticeship training period (Xit < τ A ) the value
of work is:
WaA (Gt , Xit , Tit , κit , εi ) = log(λA · w (Si = 0, Gt , Xit , Tit , κit , εi ))
+βπA (Gt ) E max

+β[1 − πA (Gt )]

A


 !
A
Gt+1 , Xit + 1, Tit + 1, κit + uit+1 , εi
Wa+1
B

A
µ̃i + Wa+1
Gt+1 , Xit+1 , Tit+1 = 0, κ̃i0 , εi
A
EWa+1



Gt+1 , Xit + 1, Tit+1 , κit + uit+1 , εi



(B3)

C

where as before, the expectation operator E relates to the underlined variables, which
are unknown to the individual in period t.
Similarly to the value of working described above, the first line (A) is earnings while
training, (B) represents the part of the value due to the possibility of changing training
firms if an offer arrives (with probability πA ). As before there is a mobility cost associated
with the decision to join the alternative firm. Finally, line (C) represents the continuation
value for the case where no alternative training firm is available. While in the last
36

Apprenticeship courses last between two and three years. We equate τA to whatever is the actual
duration in the data.

54

period of apprenticeship the value function becomes as in equation (B2) with all options
available.

B.4

The time horizon and the terminal condition

We solve for the value functions at each age by backwards induction from retirement,
which occurs at 65 years of age, to the start of the labor market career when the apprenticeship choice is made at 16. At retirement the value is assigned to zero: in a
linear utility framework, such as ours, this is equivalent to assuming that individuals
finance retirement through their own savings out of their wages.37 Having a terminal
point beyond our observation window requires assumptions on the returns to experience
and tenure. Noting from the data that there is almost no wage growth beyond 11 years of
potential experience we imposed that the returns to experience and tenure are constant
between 10 and 30 years of actual experience.38 We then assume that there is no wage
growth beyond 30 years of experience and tenure respectively. The gain from this tight
specification is that we avoid having to use a separately parameterized terminal value
function. Further computational details can be found in Appendix C.

C

Computational Details

C.1

GDP growth and Markov transition matrix

To compute business cycles, we use the per capita West-German GDP expressed in
constant prices, obtained from the OECD for the period 1975-2009. We linearly detrend
the series and use transitions between above trend (good times) and below trend (bad
times). Table A1 presents the transition matrix for this first order Markov process,
estimated over our sample period.

C.2

Computing the Value Functions

The model is solved recursively backward, starting at age 65 and until age 16. We allow
the value function to depend on age as well as the other state variables.
We integrated out analytically as many state variables as possible (shocks to the value
of leisure (η), shocks to the cost of training ω, and shocks to cost of moving µ ). We
approximate the value functions by evaluating them at a number of discrete points in the
37
38

Note that the model uses gross wages, before any pension contributions.
Thus, extrapolating from our data which stops at 30 years of experience

55

state space and interpolating linearly in between. For experience and tenure the points
where we evaluate are 0, 2, 4, 6, 10 and 30 years of experience and 0, 2, 4, 6 and 30
years of tenure; this level of detail turned out to be sufficient. The other state variable
is the firm-worker match specific effect which evolves as a random walk while the worker
remains in the same job. We use 10 points on a grid which depends on skills and on
tenure to take into account the non-stationary nature of the process. More specifically,
given the assumptions made, the match effect is a normal variable with mean zero and
variance T σU (Skill)2 + σ0 (Skill)2 for an individual with T years of tenure. We use a
quadrature-based method as in the Tauchen and Hussey (1991) procedure to generate a
grid and transition matrices. We interpolate between the points.
The code was solved using parallel processing to increase speed.

D

The Fit of the Model

In this section, we present the fit of the model in detail in Tables A3 to A12. The tables
list all the moments used in the estimation, apart from the ones used to identify the
educational choices at age 10 and 16, as they involve more than 100 entries each and are
too long to display.

E

Additional Parameters

In Table A2 we display the parameters of the model which are associated with unobserved
heterogeneity. We model these two types of ability as a bivariate mass-point distribution
with two points of support, and allow for the possibility that the two dimensions of
unobserved heterogeneity are correlated. This results in four groups: individuals with
high ability (which we denote ”Type 3” and ”Type 4”) and individuals with high costs
of training (”Type 2” and ”Type 4”). As shown in Table A2, high ability individuals
and those with lower cost of education are more likely to become skilled workers. This
is because the returns to choosing a skilled career is higher.

56

Table A1: Quarterly transition matrix for below and above trend GDP
Below Trend in t+1 Above Trend in t+1
Below Trend in t
0.9302 (0.039)
0.069 (0.039)
Above Trend in t
0.075 (0.042)
0.925 (0.042)
Note: Note: Data source: OECD, GDP per capita, constant prices,
constant PPP, period 1975-2009. Asymptotic standard errors in parenthesis.

Table A2: Estimated parameters: unobserved heterogeneity
Parameter
Type 1 Type 2 Type 3 Type 4
Proportion in sample (πj )
0.21
0.2
0.21
0.38
Proportion skilled
0.98
0.83
0.99
0.87
Log wage constant, skilled worker(α0 ())
0
0
0.35
0.35
(0.023) (0.023)
Log wage constant, unskilled worker (α0 ())
0
0
0.55
0.55
(0.33)
(0.33)
Utility gain of training (−λ0 ())
483
0
483
0
(0.0228)
(0.0228)
Correlation between types
-0.15
a
Note: : as a percentage of the value of leisure for skilled workers. b : as a
percentage of lifetime value. Asymptotic standard errors in parenthesis.

Table A3: Goodness of Fit: Wage Level and Potential Experience

Apprentices
Observed Std Error Simulated
Potential Exp ∈ [0,2]
3.09
(0.002)
3.07
Potential Exp ∈ ]2,4]
3.78
(0.003)
3.78
Potential Exp ∈ ]4,6]
4.52
(0.002)
4.52
Potential Exp ∈ ]6,8]
4.62
(0.002)
4.64
Potential Exp ∈ ]8,10]
4.71
(0.003)
4.71
Potential Exp ∈ ]10,15]
4.75
(0.004)
4.74
Potential Exp ∈ ]15,30]
4.78
(0.005)
4.75
Business Cycle Good
0.0336
(0.002)
0.0315
Business Cycle Good, Pot. Exp>4 0.00819
(0.002)
0.0112

57

Non Apprentices
Observed Std Error Simulated
4.09
( 0.01)
4.12
4.37
(0.009)
4.37
4.5
(0.007)
4.5
4.55
(0.008)
4.54
4.58
( 0.01)
4.59
4.59
( 0.01)
4.61
4.58
( 0.02)
4.61
0.046
(0.009)
0.0459
-0.0106
(0.009)
0.0148

Table A4: Goodness of Fit: Proportion Working and Potential Experience

Observed
Potential Exp ∈ [0,2]
0.984
Potential Exp ∈ ]2,4]
0.907
Potential Exp ∈ ]4,6]
0.815
Potential Exp ∈ ]6,10]
0.876
Potential Exp ∈ ]10,15]
0.915
Potential Exp ∈ ]15,20]
0.926
Potential Exp ∈ ]20,40]
0.935
Business Cycle Good
0.0188
Business Cycle Good, Pot. Exp>4
-0.014

Apprentices
Std Error Simulated
(0.001)
0.995
(0.001)
0.903
(0.002)
0.842
(0.002)
0.889
(0.002)
0.923
(0.003)
0.92
(0.003)
0.921
(0.001)
0.011
(0.001)
-0.00349

Non Apprentices
Observed Std Error Simulated
0.76
(0.007)
0.792
0.751
(0.008)
0.719
0.786
(0.008)
0.761
0.847
(0.008)
0.85
0.901
( 0.01)
0.9
0.918
( 0.01)
0.934
0.952
( 0.01)
0.941
0.061
(0.007)
0.0545
-0.0633
(0.007)
-0.0489

Table A5: Goodness of Fit: Experience Levels and Potential Experience

Potential
Potential
Potential
Potential
Potential
Potential
Potential

Apprentices
Non Apprentices
Observed Std Error Simulated Observed Std Error Simulated
Exp ∈ [0,2]
0.942
(0.01)
0.875
0.765
(0.05)
0.779
Exp ∈ ]2,4]
2.68
(0.01)
2.82
2.19
(0.05)
2.31
Exp ∈ ]4,6]
3.98
(0.01)
4.56
3.6
(0.06)
3.85
Exp ∈ ]6,10]
6.07
(0.01)
7.15
5.88
(0.07)
6.31
Exp ∈ ]10,15]
9.73
(0.02)
11.3
9.63
(0.09)
10.2
Exp ∈ ]15,20]
14
(0.03)
15.9
14
( 0.1)
14.9
Exp ∈ ]20,40]
18.8
(0.04)
21.2
19.1
( 0.2)
20.3

Table A6: Goodness of Fit: Firm Seniority and Potential Experience

Observed
Potential Exp ∈ [0,2]
0.845
Potential Exp ∈ ]2,4]
2.27
Potential Exp ∈ ]4,6]
2.67
Potential Exp ∈ ]6,10]
3.48
Potential Exp ∈ ]10,15]
5.09
Potential Exp ∈ ]15,20]
7
Potential Exp ∈ ]20,40]
8.92
Business Cycle Good
-0.0111
Business Cycle Good, Pot. Exp>4
0.0814

58

Apprentices
Std Error Simulated
( 0.03)
0.872
( 0.03)
2.35
( 0.03)
2.6
( 0.03)
3.18
( 0.05)
4.77
( 0.06)
6.22
( 0.09)
7.4
(0.006)
-0.0518
( 0.02)
0.0833

Non Apprentices
Observed Std Error Simulated
0.866
(0.08)
0.832
2
(0.09)
1.97
2.8
(0.09)
2.6
4.03
( 0.1)
3.44
5.84
( 0.1)
4.77
7.85
( 0.2)
5.37
9.74
( 0.3)
5.74
-0.0813
(0.03)
-0.135
0.0905
(0.06)
0.17

Table A7: Goodness of Fit: Number of Firms and Potential Experience

Apprentices
Observed Std Error Simulated
Potential Exp ∈ [0,2]
1
( 0.01)
1.04
Potential Exp ∈ ]2,4]
1.13
( 0.01)
1.27
Potential Exp ∈ ]4,6]
1.56
( 0.01)
1.74
Potential Exp ∈ ]6,10]
2.32
( 0.02)
2.41
Potential Exp ∈ ]10,15]
3.2
( 0.02)
3.15
Potential Exp ∈ ]15,20]
3.91
( 0.03)
3.84
Potential Exp ∈ ]20,40]
4.62
( 0.05)
4.62
Business Cycle Good
0.00241
(0.004)
-0.00789
Business Cycle Good, Pot. Exp>4
0.0362
(0.007)
0.0387

Non Apprentices
Observed Std Error Simulated
0.91
(0.06)
1.13
1.56
(0.06)
1.46
2.14
(0.06)
1.83
2.89
(0.08)
2.38
3.86
( 0.1)
3.02
4.67
( 0.1)
3.74
5.5
( 0.2)
4.55
0.101
(0.02)
-0.0573
-0.0296
(0.03)
0.0472

Table A8: Goodness of Fit: Standard Deviations of Wages and Potential Experience

Potential
Potential
Potential
Potential
Potential
Potential

Exp
Exp
Exp
Exp
Exp
Exp

Observed
∈ [0,2]
0.337
∈ ]2,4]
0.485
∈ ]4,6]
0.312
∈ ]6,10]
0.301
∈ ]10,15]
0.334
∈ ]15,40]
0.31

Apprentices
Non Apprentices
Std Error Simulated Observed Std Error Simulated
(0.004)
0.339
0.489
( 0.01)
0.381
( 0.03)
0.501
0.4
(0.009)
0.395
(0.007)
0.332
0.353
(0.004)
0.402
(0.002)
0.288
0.35
(0.002)
0.399
(0.002)
0.272
0.377
(0.001)
0.383
(0.002)
0.276
0.323
(0.005)
0.387

59

Table A9: Goodness of Fit: Wages, Experience and Tenure

Observed
Exp ∈ ]2,4]
0.221
Exp ∈ ]4,6]
0.437
Exp ∈ ]6,8]
0.509
Exp ∈ ]8,10]
0.552
Exp ∈ ]10,15]
0.594
Exp ∈ ]15,40]
0.647
Tenure ∈ ]2,4]
0.00417
Tenure ∈ ]4,6]
0.0326
Tenure ∈ ]6,8]
0.039
Tenure ∈ ]8,10]
0.0473
Tenure ∈ ]10,40]
0.065
Business Cycle Good
0.0293
Business Cycle Good, Pot. Exp>4
0.0129
In Apprenticeship Training
-1.01
Constant
4.12

Apprentices
Std Error Simulated
( 0.002)
0.163
( 0.003)
0.434
( 0.003)
0.504
( 0.004)
0.542
( 0.004)
0.56
( 0.005)
0.573
(0.0009)
0.043
( 0.001)
0.0855
( 0.002)
0.118
( 0.002)
0.137
( 0.003)
0.171
( 0.002)
0.0355
( 0.002)
0.00668
(0.003)
-0.994
(0.003)
-0.994

Non Apprentices
Observed Std Error Simulated
0.256
(0.006)
0.25
0.339
(0.009)
0.346
0.365
( 0.01)
0.359
0.384
( 0.01)
0.375
0.397
( 0.01)
0.407
0.414
( 0.02)
0.405
0.0418
(0.004)
0.0369
0.0704
(0.005)
0.047
0.0778
(0.007)
0.057
0.0841
(0.008)
0.0802
0.0817
( 0.01)
0.0752
0.0432
(0.009)
0.0343
-0.0053
(0.009)
0.0264
4.15
(0.009)
0.0264

Table A10: Goodness of Fit: Standard Deviation of Wages, Experience and Tenure

Exp
Exp squared
Tenure
Tenure squared
Business Cycle Good
Business Cycle Good, Pot. Exp>4
In Apprenticeship Training
Constant

Observed
-0.0024
0.000123
-0.00332
9.49e-05
0.0156
-0.0306
0.00503
0.0963

60

Apprentices
Std Error
(0.0003)
( 1e-05)
(0.0002)
( 1e-05)
( 0.001)
( 0.001)
(0.001)
(0.001)

Simulated
-0.00404
0.000116
-0.00495
0.00016
0.0211
-0.0298
0.0214
0.126

Non Apprentices
Observed Std Error Simulated
-0.02
(0.001)
-0.000495
0.000689
(5e-05)
4.27e-05
-0.00683
(0.001)
-0.00257
0.000278
(5e-05)
6.61e-05
0.0184
(0.007)
0.00732
-0.0144
(0.007)
-0.00574
0.215
(0.006)
0.154

Table A11: Goodness of Fit: Wages Changes, Experience and Tenure

Apprentices
Observed Std Error
Exp
-0.022
(8e-05)
Exp squared
0.000709
(3e-06)
Tenure
-0.000376
(5e-05)
Tenure squared
1.19e-05
(3e-06)
In Apprenticeship Training -0.0911
(0.0004)
Constant
0.155
(0.0005)

Non Apprentices
Simulated Observed Std Error Simulated
-0.0139
-0.00354
(0.0001)
-0.00294
0.000419 0.000104
( 5e-06)
9.17e-05
0.00109
-0.00191
(0.0001)
-0.00062
-9.37e-05 8.73e-05
( 6e-06)
1.61e-05
-0.0534
0.113
0.032
(0.0008)
0.03

Table A12: Goodness of Fit: Standard Deviation of Wages Changes, Experience and
Tenure

Exp
Exp squared
Tenure
Tenure squared
In Apprenticeship Training
Constant

Observed
-0.00157
6.14e-05
-0.0159
0.000521
-0.0846
0.119

Apprentices
Std Error
(6e-05)
(3e-06)
(9e-05)
(3e-06)
(0.0005)
(0.0006)

61

Non Apprentices
Simulated Observed Std Error Simulated
0.00141
-0.00299
(0.0002)
-0.00054
-9.3e-05
0.000127
( 8e-06)
1.79e-05
-0.0113
-0.00155
(0.0002) -0.000314
0.000347
5e-05
( 7e-06)
7.66e-06
-0.0434
0.0835
0.0257
(0.001)
0.00974

