                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    CRIME AND PUNISHMENT AGAIN:
                       THE ECONOMIC APPROACH
                     WITH A PSYCHOLOGICAL TWIST




                        WilUam T. Dickens




                      Working Paper No. 1884




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             April 1986




I would like to thank Philip Bokovoy and Alan McArthur for research
assistance and helpful comments and Kevin Lang and an anonymous
referee for several suggested improvements.  I would also like to
thank the Institute of Industrial Relations at Berkeley for
generous research support. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #1884
                                                April 1986




                    Crime and Punishment Again:
          The Economic Approach with a Psychological Twist




                                ABSTRACT



Akerlof and Dickens (1982) suggested that in a model of criminal

behavior which considered the effects of
                                             cognitive dissonance,
increasing the severity of punishment could increase the crime

rate. This paper demonstrates that that conjecture was correct.

With cognitive dissonance, people may have to rationalize not

committing crimes under normal circumstances if punishment is

not severe. The rationalization may lead them to underestimate

the expected utility of committing crimes when opportunities

present themselves. If punishment is severe, then rationaliza-

tion may not be necessary and   people   may be more likely to
commit crimes when opportunities arise.




                                               William T. Dickens
                                               ER
                                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                               Carrbridge, MA 02138
 I.   Introduction


      For homo economus decisions are always easy. The tasks economic

 theorists confront him with are well defined optimization problems where a

 straightforward application of decision calculus gives a definite answer.

 For homo sapiens decision making is nowhere near as simple. Most decisions

 involve significant qualitative evidence which defies systematization. In

 the end we are almost always uncertain. After a decision is made we often

worry whether our judgment was good. Psychological studies of cognitive

 dissonance suggest that this worry is unpleasant and that we resolve this

worry by systematically altering our beliefs to convince ourselves that the

original decision was correct without doubt. Elliot Arronson (1979,

chapter 4) describes a number of these experiments.

      For those interested in the economic theory of crime one set of

experiments is particularly interesting. In those experiments children

were told not to play with a very desirable toy. One group was threatened

with severe punishment and another with mild punishment for disobedience.

The children were then allowed to play in a room containing the toy for

some time. Several weeks later the children were again put in the room

with the toy, only this time the threat of punishment was withdrawn. Those

who had been threatened with the more severe punishment proved more likely

to play with the forbidden toy than those threatened with mild punishment

[for example, see Jonathan Freedman (1965)]. The cognitive dissonance

interpretation is that those threatened with only mild punishment needed to

convince themselves that the toy was really not very desirable to make

themselves comfortable with their decision not to play with the toy. Those

who were threatened with severe punishment had no such need.
    Akerlof and Dickens (1982) conjecture that tn an economic model of

crime which incorporates cognitive dissonance, increasing punishment could

decrease compliance with the law.        This paper presents a model which

demonstrates that that conjecture was correct. The behavior is possible

because increasing punishment decreases the need to reduce cognitive

dissonance. When punishment is severe, psychic uncertainty is reduced and

people no longer need to develop internal justifications for law—abidin.g

behavior. Although increasing punishment will always lead to reduced crime

rates above some level ——   it   is possible that a minimum crime rate may he

achieved with relatively little punishment in the range in which people are

experiencing cognitive dissonance reactions.



II. The Model in Words


     At most times in people's lives crime probably doesn't pay. The

chance of apprehension is too high, the expected gain is too low, and/or

the knowledge of how to commit a crime is not there. But sometimes people

may be confronted with opportunities. A teenager may find out that a

friend makes big money working for a car theft ring. The same week that

teenager may come across an expensive car with the keys in the ignition..

Alternatively, a shopper may find his or herself with a very valuable item,

close to the door, with no salesperson in sight.

     If during normal times the advantages of not committing a crime are

not completely clear, people may be uncomfortable with their decisions to

be honest. For someone who is not a career criminal, the decision to

commit a crime involves a great deal of uncertainty. I-Tow will I feel after

I've committed the crime? Will      I   feel very guilty? What will my friends

think of me? What are the chances that I will       be caught? What   would the
                                                                                   3




 rest of my life be like if I were caught? The psychic cost of this

 uncertainty may lead people to change their beliefs to convince themselves

 that they have made the right decision without a doubt.

      Having modified their beliefs to make themselves comfortable with

 their decision not to commit crimes under normal circumstances,
                                                                        people may
be less likely to commit crimes when real opportunities come along. But,

 if the level of punishment for committing a crime is so severe that there

is no doubt in people's minds as to why they are not committing crimes

under normal circumstances, they need not develop any internal

justification for not committing crimes and may be more likely to engage in

criminal behavior if the opportunity arises.

     Unfortunately this logic is not conclusive. We cannot be certain that

people will not in some sense recognize this possibility and persist in

their discomforting beliefs in order to capture the valuable opportunity to

commit the crime if it arises. In fact, the analysis below shows that

people may do this but there will still be a range of punishments where

increasing punishment increases the crime rate.



III. A Formal Model


     People live two periods. In both periods they have the opportunity to

commit a crime. People choose whether or not to commit a crime to maximize

expected utility. Each individual's best estimate of the utility value of

the crime is v       .       In   the first period (correspondin.g to "normal

circumstances" in the discussion above), the probability of being

apprehended if one commits a crime is          p1 and the utility cost if one is

apprehended is   c       .   In   the second period one gets an "opportunity" to

commit a crime. The opportunity co'-'sists of a lower probability of
                                                                                     4




apprehension, p9         .    For the purpose of exposition it will be assumed that

p2 is a random variable described by a continuous distribution function
whose domain is the interval [p1,O1              .   It   will be assumed that at the

beginning of period 1 people know the form of the distribution but not

their draw from it. That they will discover at the beginning of period 2.

       This defines a simple model of a decision about criminal behavior.

Without any further complication it would yield the standard results that

                 v then no crimes will be committed in the first period.1 The
if p1c
crime rate in the second period would be equal to the probability that p2

<    v/c     .   Increasing   c   ,   the cost imposed by punishment, or changing the
distribution of p2 so that values less than v/c are less likely would

decrease the crime rate. Introducing consideration of cognitive dissonance

changes this.

           To bring cognitive dissonance into the model a few additional

assumptions are necessary. In its absence the decision to commit the crime

in the first period is independent of the decision to commit it in the

second. But, when cognitive dissonance is introduced, people's decisions

in the first period may influence their choice of beliefs. Since beliefs

formed in the first period will be assumed to affect behavior in the second

period, the two decisions will no longer be independent.               Following Akerlof

and Dickens (1982) it will be assumed that people have perfect foresight

about the nature of their cognitive dissonance reaction and the effects of

 changing their beliefs on their future behavior.               It will be assumed that

people take all this into account in deciding whether or not to commit the

 crime in the first period. It will be also be assumed that people may

 choose not to have a cognitive dissonance reaction if it doesn't increase

    their expected utility. This omniscience may seem incongruent with the
                                                                                  5




 notion of cognitive dissonance. Certainly cognitive dissonance is an

 unconscious reaction rather than a conscious decision. There are two

 lustifications for this approach. The first is that even though the

 reaction is unconscious, that does not mean that the consequences of a

 decision aren't in some sense foreseen and taken into account in making the

 tdecisiI Unconscious decisions are not necessarily irrational or

 short—sighted. Psychological theory views unconscious decisions as being,

 for the most part, functional (Simon, 1978, p. 3)2 The second

justification is simply that the exposition is easier if we begin with this

 assumption and then relax it in parts. This exercise is carried out in

section VI.

          Since the decision to commit a crime in the second period may depend

on the decision in the first period and since we are assuming people

foresee these effects, the decision to commit the crime in the first period

is based on the. sum of the expected utilities for the two periods. The

effects of cognitive dissonance on expected utility are implemented with

three additional assumptions. First, people can change their beliefs about

the value of the crime (v) between the two periods. They may want to do

this because of the second assumption ——     that   if they aren't sufficiently

sure of their decisions they will suffer a dissonance cost (s). To

implement the notion of "sufficiently sure" it will be assumed that if a

person does not commit the crime and the subjective expected utility in the

first period is not at least d utils greater than the subjective expected

utility if the crime was committed, then the dissonance cost will be

experienced. If the crime is committed, then the dissoance cost will be

experienced if the subjective expected utility isn't d units greater than
if   it   is not. Since whether the dissonance cost is experienced depends on
                                                                           6




differences in subjective, as opposed to true expected, utilities, people

can always avoid the dissonance cost by believing the value of the crime is

either high or low.

        Adding a psychic cost for uncertainty and allowing people to alter

their beliefs about the value of a crime may or may not affect the behavior

of the model.     If people can change their beliefs about the value of a

crime in period 1 without affecting their beliefs about the value in period

2, it would always be possible to make the utility maximizing choice of

committing the crime or not committing it in the first period and still

avoid the dissonance cost s         They could convince themselves that the

value of the crime was either very high or very low depending on whether

they committed the crime or didn't. In the second period they would be

free to make the utility maximizing choice again with correct beliefs about

v   .    The effects of enforcement on crime rates would be unchanged from the

model which did not take account of the psychological considerations.

        If, on the other hand, what people believe about v in the first

period affects what they believe about it in the second period, there may

be a cost to modifying one's beliefs —— "wrong" decisions in the second

period. For the rest of this paper we will adopt as the third assumption

that whatever one decides to believe about v in the first period must

also be what one believes in the second period and that people's actions in

the second period must be consistent with their beliefs. The justification

for this assumption comes from the motivation for the two—period model.

Period 1 represents normal circumstances and period 2 represents a

transient departure from them.       If beliefs are going to rationalize

behavior in the full range of normal circumstances they will necessarily he
 very general and are likely to extend to the situations of transient

 opportunity.

      Putting the above discussion together, and assuming that the

 probability of apprehension and the distribution of                    p2 are independent,
we have the following statement of the individual's decision problem:

      Choose whether or not to commit a crime ( cc                     for commit crime, nc
                                                            b
      for no crime) and beliefs about v            ,    (v   )   to   maximize.



     E(u) =
                 1v—pc1 if cc
                    o   otherwise + [v — cE(p2p2                 <    Lb
                                                                            Prob(p2 <
                                                                                        b
                                                                                            —



                               b —
             s    if cc and                < d         or
                                     p1c
                  if nc and           h
                              p1c
                                           <   d

             0 otherwise

The first term is the expected value of committing a crime in the first

period. The bracketted part of the second term is the expected value of

committing a crime in the second period and Prob(p                         yb/c)   is the

probability that the person will perceive the opportunity as worth taking.

The last term reflects the psychic costs of dissonance.

     If we have a group of people with the same original beliefs about v

the crime rate in the first period will be 100% if they commit the crime or

0 if they do not. In the second period the crime rate will be equal to

Prob(p2 <   yb/c)
                                                                                             8




IV.   Analysis     of the Model


      If   v   >         ,   people will maximize expected utility by committing the
                   p1c
crime in both periods. Since they always want to commit the crime in the

second period they can believe the crime is as worthwhile as necessary to

avoid the dissonanc.e cost.

      If the value of the crime is very low, so that v                    p1c — d   ,   it   is


clearly not worth committing in the first period. Further, since the value

of the crime is so small, there is no dissonance cost to believing the

truth and making optima]. decisions in the second period.

      It is only if p1c             v   >         — d   that the cognitive dissonance
                                            p1c
reaction may matter. The possibility that increasing the severity of the

punishment in this range may increase the crime rate can be demonstrated in

two steps. First, possible behavior can be broken down into four classes.

People may either believe the truth and suffer cognitive dissonance, or

convince themselves of something other than the truth. In either case they

may connit the crime in the first period or not. If they choose not to

commit the crime and avoid the dissonance cost by believing the value of

the crime is less than it is (setting               b < v    ),   it   can be shown that the

crime rate will increase if c is increased. Second, it can be shown that

there will always exist some values of c for which people will maximize
                                                                  — d < v
expected utility by not committing the crime and setting vb = p1c

Thus, it will always be the case that for some values of c                    the crime rate

will increase with the severity of punishment.

      To see that people who choose not to commit a crime and to believe
                                                     b
vb < v     to avoid the dissonance cost will choose v                   to equal p1c — d

note that
                                                                                                                             9




                                                                                   b                      b
           E(unc,vb                 v) =      {v         cE(p7!p2 <            — )}          Pr(p2
                                                                                                      <
                                    b                                         b
                                C
                   =    v                                    —
                            J   0
                                         p2)dp2                      Cj
                                                                          0

 (where             is the density function for                                              ).   The derivative of expected
                                                                                       p.7

 utility with respect to b is



                                    b
                                  v
                                v(—)                     v
                                                             byb
           aE(unc)                c              —               'c
                                  c                              c                                                       1




which is positive as long as                                          <   v   ——    the closer to the truth are one's
beliefs, the fewer mistakes one will make and the better off one will be.

So to maximize expected utility while avoiding the dissonance cost, people

will choose b as large as possible subject to the constraint that                                                      cp1 —
          d or vb =                         — d      .       In       this case the crime rate in the second
                                    cp1
period is equal to

          Pr(p2 <       yb/c)           =
                                            Pr(p2
                                                     <
                                                          p1
                                                                 -    d/e)
which is increasing in c                                 ,    so increasing the severity of punishment

raises the crime rate in the second period. It remains to be shown that

people will choose to behave this way in some situations.

          Consider a severity level of punishment of

                  c =       v +                  —
                                    d/p1
where          c is a small number. At this point the expected utility of someone

who does not commit the crime in the first period and believes b                                                   =

      —    d    to avoid the dissonance cost is
cp1


          E(ulnc,vb             v) =        [v   —
                                                     cE(p2p2
                                                                          <
                                                                              vb/c)]Pr(p2         <   yb/c)            (2)
                                                                                                                         10




For someone who does not commit the crime and believes the truth, expected

utility is


        E(ulnc,vh =       v)   =    [v    -
                                              cE(p2jp2
                                                             <
                                                                     v/cflPr(p2
                                                                                    <   v/c)   - d                     (3)



Since


         b
        v
               cp1 —d=v—p1E

by choosing E sufficiently small, thc difference                                         E(unc,vb        v) —

               =   v)                                                                          Thus for some
E(unc,vb                 can be made arbitrarily close to d                                .




range of values of c
                                         v+dIp1

                    b                             b =
        E(u nc,v          v) >      E(unc,v             v)

Next consider the case where someone commits the crime in the first period

and believes the truth. His or her expected utility is


                                         —                <                         <   v/C)   + v —         — d
        E(ulc,vb         v) =       [v        cE(p21p2            v/c)]Pr(p2                           p1c

                               b                                                                                       (4)
               = E(u nc,v =              v)    + v —
                                                        p1c
                                                                     .




Since v— p1c <            0     ,        E(ulnc,vb        v) > E(unc,vh                   v) implies

E(ujnc,v           v) > E(ujc,v = v)

        Finally, note that


             E(ujc,vb         v) =            — cE(p21p2 < vb/c)]Prp7 <                        fl + v —
                                                                                                             p1c
                                                                                                                   .   (5)


Once again, v — p1c < 0                         in this range. From equation (1) v = vb

                                                 [v -                       < v/c)Pr(p2 < v/c)]
maximizes the first term so                              cE(p2p9
         b                                                               Since by choosing c sufficiently
> E(u c,v           v) when c                   v+d/p1
                                                                 .




close to zero, E(ulnc,vb                        v) can be made arbitrarily close to

 [v -   cE(p2p2         < v/c)Pr(p2 < v/c)]                  ,       it   follows   that
                                                                                                     11




      E(unc,v            v) > E(UC,V          v)


 for some values of c <                        .   Thus for some range of values of c
                                     v+d/p1
 people will maximize expected utility by not committing the cririe and

 believing that the value of the crime is less than it is to avoid the

 dissonance cost. When people behave this way, increasing the severity of

 punishment increases the crime rate.



 V. An Example


     To illustrate these possibilities, consider the case where p2 is

uniformly distributed on the interval [p1,OJ                .       In   that case

     E(p2p2 < a) =              a

     Pr(p2 < a) = a/p1                         for 0 < a        1


     E(i ) =

     Using the quadratic formula and ruling out values which fall outside

the range (v/p1 ,
                          v+d/p1)


           =   s   + v + ci —   /(s+v+d)2—(v+d)2
                                p1

     and


     c —— v
                   — d + /(v—d)2+2(vd+d2)
                           2



where c* is the value of c for which E(ufnc,vb                            v) =             =
                                                                                 E(unc,v       vb)
and c is the value for which E(ulnc,v'°                  v) =       E(uc,vb      v)   .    Since
                                                                                                    12




E(uncv = v)                          =       v)        for vajues of c >           and E(ulc,v      v)
                    >
                        E(uc.,v                                            v/p1
           b       v) for values of c < v/p.                       ,   we need not consider such
    E(uc,v
behavior. If c' <           c       the top end of the range in which people commit the

crime in the first period is given by the value of c                              where E(ujc,vb    v)
             h =
=   E(unc,v        v)   which is



        2v + s +   /(2v+s)2—3v2
                    3p1

Figures la and b show expected utilities and crime rates for different

values of c for the case where the value of the crime (v) is fifty utils,

the dissonance cost (s) is ten utils, the probability of apprehension in

period 1 (p1) is .1, and the range of uncertainty (d) is 100. For c <
                                                                      593

the crime rate in both periods is 100%. At c = 593 the crime rate drops

to 84%. for 593 < c             <   1043          the crime rate declines from 84% to 48%. At

1043 the     crime rate drops again to 4% and then increases to 35% in the
range 1043 < c          <   1500         .        In    this range increasing p1 would also

increase the crime rate. Increasing the probability of apprehension in

period 2 would have the standard effect of decreasing the crime rate.

Above 1500 the crime rate declines, although c must be greater than

 12,500 before the crime rate WIll again drop below the previous minimum of

 4%.    If the range of uncertainty was wider, for example, if d was equal

 to 150, there would be a range (from c = 1250 to 2000) in which people

would maximize utility by not committing the crime in the first period and

 believing the crime would produce negative utility (vb <                            0).   In that case

    people will never commit the crime in the second period and the crime rate

 would be at a global minimum when c is in the range 1250 to 2000.
                                                                                      13



 Vi. Some Extensions


       What if people are unaware, when they are making decisions, that they

 may later have a cognitive dissonance reaction? In that case people will

 view the decision in the first period as independent of the decision in the

 second period and will never commit a crime in the first period if

 v <         .   What if people always have a cognitive dissonance reaction if
       p1c
 they are faced with a dissonance cost —— the decision is unconscious and

 short—sighted? In that case people do not have the option of believing the

truth if E(u*Jnc) -,      E(u*cc)   <   d    and will always have a dissonance
reaction in the range v/p1          c                .   As a re.sult, the range in
                                            v+d/p1
which the crime rate is increasing in the severity of punishment may be

wider. Allowing for uncertainty about other parameters complicates the

analysis but as long as people cannot eliminate the dissonance cost without

affecting their behavior, the possibility of more severe punishment

increasing crime rates would persist.

       The model presented above is sufficiently elaborate to show what types

of behavior are possible when we consider cognitive dissonance.            However,
if the model is to be used as the basis for empirical or prescriptive

studies, more work would need to be done. Differences between individuals

with respect to many of the parameters of the decision problem would need

to be introduced. To explore the question of the optimal choice of penalty

and probability of detection, the model would need to consider the welfare

consequences of the cognitive dissonance reaction. in a more realistic way.

In the model above there is no psychic cost incurred if one adopts beliefs

consistent with one's actions. In fact, maintaining incorrect beliefs may

also be costly and the choice of what to believe may involve trading off
                                                                             14




such costs, as well as the costs of incorrect decisions, for less psychic

uncertainty.



VII. Conclusion


     Given these qualifications what relevance does this analysis have for

policy? Its primary contribution is in providing another explanation for

some otherwise puzzling empirical results. Most studies indicate that

increasing the likelihood of punishment deters crime, but increased

punishment is not always associated with lower crime rates.        This is

Beyleveld's (1980, p. 306) conclusion after a survey of social science

research on deterrence. Several other explanations have been proposed, hut

they can only explain higher crime rates for specific crimes or higher

rates of recidivism.4 If future studies suggest that increasing punishment

does not reduce the number of first—time offenders, then cognitive

dissonance may be playing a role in determining the level of criminal

activity. If it is, then the most effective way to reduce criminal

activity is to reduce the number and the attractiveness of opportunities to

commit crimes. Trying to reduce the crime rate by increasing the severity

 of punishment could have disastrous consequences ——   it   could cause a leap

 in the crime rate as people are transformed from internally motivated law

 abiders into criminal opportunists.
                                         Footnotes

     *     I   would like to thank Phillip Bokovoy and Alan Mcrthur for research

           assistance and helpful comments and Kevin Lang and an anonymous

           referee for several suggested improvements.          I would also like to
           thank the Institute of Industrial Relations at Berkeley and the

          National Science Foundation for generous research support.

    1.    It is assumed here and elsewhere in this paper that a person will not

          commit a crime if the expected utility is
                                                          exactly equal to that if
          they do not commit the crime.

    2.    In economics we usually use the term rational to mean
                                                                making the best
          possible use of available information.
                                                      In this sense it is clear
          that many unconscious decision
                                           processes are as rational, if not more
         rational, than conscious processes.
                                                Milton Friedman's famous Story
         of the billiards player who
                                       makes perfect threecushion shots without
         formal analysis or the pilot who corrects the airplanes
                                                                 course with-
         out consciously considering the
                                           extremely complicated physics problem
         involved in the control of an aircraft are two examples. Just
                                                                       because
         we are not consciously aware of the way in which a judgment is made

         does not mean that the
                                  process didn't involve the best possible use of
         available informatior)


3        Note that the lower end of this
                                           range is not given by the solution to
         the quadratic since for values of     c < 1500   ,   E(unc,vb    v) =   1)


         Thus the lower end is the valuE ot          tor whii
         (unc,vL =       =0
                                                                       16




4   For exauipte, it   has   bog heo:              api(:a. 1urisrneri for
    murder   removes any incentive murderers may have for not repeating the

    crime. Jones and Stock (1981) argue that if punishment involves

    reducing social status and integration, more severe reductions of

    social status and integration may increase recidivism. Finally, Myers

    (1980) argues that if prisons serve as training grounds for criminal

    skills or if legitimate job opportunities diminish, longer prison

    terms may lead to higher recidivism rates.
                                                                            17.



                                   References


Akerlof, George A. and William T. Dickens, 1982, "The Economic

     Consequences of Cognitive Dissonance," American Economic Review,

     3, 307—319.


Aronson, Elliot, 1980, The Social Animal, 3rd ed. (W.H. Freeman, San

     Francisco).

Beyleveld, Deryck, 1980, A Bibliography on General Deterrence (Saxon

     House, Teakfield, England).

Freedman, Jonathan, 1965, "Long—term Behavioral Effects of Cognitive

     Dissonance, "Journal of Experimental Social Psycholo1, 2, 14—55.

Jones,   Stephen R.G. and James H. Stock, 1981, "Symbolic Interaction and

     Economic Exchange," mimeo, Berkeley, 1981.

Myers, Samuel L., 1980, "The Rehabilitation Effect of Punishment,"

     Economic Inquiry, 3, 353—366.

Simon, Herbert A., 1978, "Rationality as Process and Product of Thought,"

    American Economic Review, 2, 1—16.
True Expected Utility

                                E (1.JI cc, .jbj)
                                E(UICC, V=Vb)
                                E(UINC, V=Vb)
                                E(UJNC,   VVb)




                                           -
                                    I


                                                Cost (C)

 (in %)
  100


  84




   48

   33



    4
    0
                   593   1043      1500             Cost (C)
