                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     CONDITIONAL RISK PREMIA IN CURRENCY MARKETS AND OTHER ASSET
                                CLASSES

                                            Martin Lettau
                                           Matteo Maggiori
                                           Michael Weber

                                         Working Paper 18844
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18844


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




We thank George Constantinides, Eugene Fama, Kenneth French, Andrea Frazzini, Jens Jackwerth,
Yoshio Nozawa, Lasse Pedersen, Alexi Savov, Fan Yang, and Adrien Verdelhan for sharing their
data. We also thank for their useful comments the editor, Bill Schwert, an anonymous referee, Riccardo
Colacito (discussant), Harald Hau (discussant), Ralph Koijen (discussant), Toby Moskowitz, Tyler
Muir, Lasse Pedersen, David Sraer, Adrien Verdelhan (discussant) and seminar participants at UT
Austin, UC Berkeley, University of Chicago Booth Junior Faculty Symposium, Duke University, University
of Mannheim, University of Michigan, NBER Asset Pricing meeting, New York University, Princeton
University, University of Southern California, AQR, BlackRock, and the AEA, EFA, EEA and ESNAW,
SFS Finance Cavalcade meetings. Financial support from the Clausen Center and the Coleman Fung
Center at UC Berkeley are gratefully acknowledged. Maggiori also thanks the International Economics
Section, Department of Economics, Princeton University for hospitality during part of the research
process for this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Martin Lettau, Matteo Maggiori, and Michael Weber. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Conditional Risk Premia in Currency Markets and Other Asset Classes
Martin Lettau, Matteo Maggiori, and Michael Weber
NBER Working Paper No. 18844
February 2013, Revised September 2013
JEL No. F31,F34,G11,G12,G15

                                              ABSTRACT

The downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM) can price the cross section of currency returns. The market-beta
differential between high and low interest rate currencies is higher conditional on bad market returns,
when the market price of risk is also high, than it is conditional on good market returns. Correctly
accounting for this variation is crucial for the empirical performance of the model. The DR-CAPM
can jointly rationalize the cross section of equity, equity index options, commodity, sovereign bond
and currency returns, thus offering a unified risk view of these asset classes. In contrast, popular models
that have been developed for a specific asset class fail to jointly price other asset classes.


Martin Lettau                                        Michael Weber
Haas School of Business                              Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley                   545 Student Services Bldg. #1900
545 Student Services Bldg. #1900                     Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                              michael_weber@haas.berkeley.edu
and NBER
lettau@haas.berkeley.edu

Matteo Maggiori
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West Fourth Street, 9-98
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
matteo.maggiori@stern.nyu.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18844
1. Introduction

   Foreign exchange is a potentially risky investment and the debate on whether currency returns can be explained

by their association with risk factors remains ongoing. We find that the cross section of currency returns can be

explained by a risk model where investors are concerned about downside risk. High yield currencies earn higher

excess returns than low yield currencies because their co-movement with aggregate market returns is stronger

conditional on bad market returns than it is conditional on good market returns. We find that this feature of the

data is characteristic not only of currencies but also of equities, commodities, sovereign bonds and other test assets

thus providing a unified risk view of these markets.

   The carry trade in foreign exchange consists of investing in high yield currencies while funding the trade in

low yield currencies. This trading strategy has historically yielded positive returns because returns on high yield

currencies are higher than returns on low yield currencies. A number of explanations for this cross-sectional

dispersion have been advanced in the literature, varying from risk based to behavioral.

   We suggest a risk-based explanation by showing that the downside risk capital asset pricing model (DR-CAPM)

prices the cross section of currency returns. We follow Ang, Chen, and Xing [2], who study equity markets, by

allowing both the market price of risk and the beta of currencies with the market to change conditional on the

aggregate market return. Intuitively, the model captures the changes in correlation between the carry trade and

the aggregate market returns: the carry trade is more correlated with the market during market downturns than

it is during upturns.

   Correctly capturing the variations in betas and prices of risk is crucial to the empirical performance of the

DR-CAPM. It also clarifies why the unconditional CAPM does not explain the cross section of currency returns.

While high yield currencies have higher betas than lower yield currencies, the difference in betas is too small to

account for the observed spread in currency returns.

   We extend our results by testing the performance of the DR-CAPM jointly on currencies, various equity port-

folios, equity index options, commodities and sovereign bonds. The variations in betas and prices of risk in the

DR-CAPM can jointly capture the cross-sectional returns of all of these asset classes. This contrasts with the

inability of a number of asset-class-specific models to price asset classes other than the one for which they have

been built.

   The economic intuition behind our results is summarized in Figure 1. Across different asset classes such as

currencies, commodities, and equities, assets that have higher exposure to downside risk, that is assets that have

a higher downside beta (β ´ ), earn higher excess returns even when controlling for their CAPM beta (β).4 The

top panel of Figure 1 highlights this pattern in the data by plotting realized average excess returns versus the

corresponding asset loading on downside risk (β ´ ´ β). The positive relationship between expected returns and


   4 See   Sections 2-3 for the precise definition and estimation procedure of β and β ´ .


                                                                      1
downside risk is the crucial pattern behind the more formal econometric analysis of this paper. In contrast, the

bottom panel of Figure 1 shows why the CAPM cannot price the returns of these asset classes. Within each asset

class there is little dispersion in betas but a larger dispersion in realized returns. Across asset classes the CAPM

captures, at best, the average return of each asset class, but no strong systematic relationship appears.

   We compare the DR-CAPM with models based on principal component analysis (PCA) both within and across

asset classes. Within each asset class the DR-CAPM captures the cross-sectional dispersion in returns summarized

by the most important principal components. Across asset classes the DR-CAPM continues to capture expected

returns with only two fundamental factors, while a PCA-based model requires as many as eight factors to generate

similar explanatory power.

   This paper contributes to two strands of literature: the international finance literature on exchange rates and

currency returns and the asset pricing literature on the joint cross section of returns of multiple asset classes.

   Among a vast international finance literature, Lustig and Verdelhan [36] provide an explanation for the cross

section of currency returns based on the Durable Consumption CAPM (DC-CAPM). Burnside [9] and Lustig

and Verdelhan [37] discuss the association of currency returns with consumption growth. Burnside, Eichenbaum,

Kleshchelski, and Rebelo [10], Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo [12, 11], Burnside, Han, Hirshleifer, and Wang

[13] focus on explanations of the carry trade such as investor overconfidence and peso problems. Lustig, Roussanov,

and Verdelhan [35] (LRV) provide a model that employs the principal component analysis of currency returns. They

show that currencies that load more heavily on the first two principal components, approximated by the returns on

a dollar and carry trade portfolio respectively, earn higher excess returns on average. Menkhoff, Sarno, Schmeling,

and Schrimpf [40] link the carry trade factor to exchange rate volatility.

   Our contribution to this literature is to provide an explanation of currency returns based on the conditional

contemporaneous association of currency returns with a traditional risk factor, the market return. We not only rec-

oncile our findings with the more statistical factors used in the literature, but also show that currencies are affected

by the same aggregate risk that drives expected returns in other assets classes such as equities and commodities.

   A nascent literature is exploring the joint cross section of returns in multiple asset classes. Cochrane [18]

emphasized this research agenda, which aims to reconcile the discount factors in different asset classes. In his

American Finance Association presidential address he ponders: “What is the factor structure of time-varying

expected returns? Expected returns vary over time. How correlated is such variation across assets and asset

classes? How can we best express that correlation as factor structure? [...] This empirical project has just begun,

[...] but these are the vital questions.”

   In recent and ongoing research Asness, Moskowitz, and Pedersen [3], Frazzini and Pedersen [27], Koijen,

Moskowitz, Pedersen, and Vrugt [32] document that a number of cross-sectional phenomena such as value, carry,

momentum, and the slope of the unconditional-CAPM-based capital market line that were previously only docu-

mented for specific asset classes are actually pervasive across multiple asset classes. We contribute to this literature


                                                           2
by showing that the DR-CAPM can jointly reconcile the cross-sectional dispersion in returns across multiple asset

classes. We also explore the factor structure by comparing the model to several PCA-based models. We find that

PCA-based models tailored to a specific asset class are unable to price other asset classes, and that a PCA model

based on the joint cross-section of multiple asset classes overestimates the number of risk factors. We view our

results as a step in the research agenda emphasized by Cochrane [18].

    We stress that the purpose of this paper is not to suggest that the DR-CAPM is the “true” model of all asset

prices, nor is it to discourage the use of PCA to summarize patterns in asset returns. The purpose of this paper

is to show that the cross sectional variation in returns across asset classes can be captured by the association of

returns, both unconditionally and conditionally, with a traditional risk factor, the market return. For this purpose

and for completeness, we also report in Section 6.5 a number of assets that the the DR-CAPM does not price well.

    In a separate online appendix we provide a number of details, robustness checks, and extensions of our results

that are omitted in the main body of the paper, including a comparison of the DR-CAPM with PCA and co-skewness

models.


2. Carry Trade, Cross-Sectional and Market Returns

    We follow Ang et al. [2] in allowing a differentiation in unconditional and downside risk. This captures the idea

that assets that have a higher beta with market returns conditional on low realization of the market return are

particularly risky. The economic intuition underlying downside risk is simple: agents not only require a premium for

securities the more their returns covary with the market return, but also, and even more so, when securities covary

more with market returns conditional on low market returns. Markowitz [39] was among the first to recognize the

importance of downside risk, formalized in his “semi-variance”, in addition to his more canonical expected-return-

variance framework.5 While Ang et al. [2] motivate the above insight using the disappointment aversion model

of Gul [29] further extended by Routledge and Zin [44], a variety of models are potentially consistent with our

findings.6

    The main insight of this paper is that downside risk is a prevalent feature in many asset classes. We show

that expected returns in currency, equity, commodity, sovereign bond and option markets can be explained by a

simple beta that measures the downside risk of assets in these asset classes. To capture the relative importance of

     5 Markowitz [39][Ch. 9] notes that “variance is superior with respect to (computational) cost, (analytical) convenience, and famil-

iarity. (However), analyses based on semi-variance tend to produce better portfolios than those based on variance”.
     6 A variety of other asymmetrical CAPM models have been derived, for example: Leland [34] and Harvey and Siddique [30]. Adrian,

Etula, and Muir [1] test a model of financial constraints and leverage in which the discount factor loads on negative outcomes for
broker-dealer firms.




                                                                   3
downside risk we propose that expected returns follow:


                                   Erri s   “ βi λ ` pβi´ ´ βi qλ´       i “ 1, . . . , N ,                         (1)
                                                covpri , rm q
                                      βi    “                 ,
                                                 varprm q
                                                covpri , rm |rm ă δq
                                     βi´    “                        ,
                                                 varprm |rm ă δq

where ri is the log excess return of asset i over the risk-free rate, rm is the log market excess return, βi and βi´

are the unconditional and downside beta defined by an exogenous threshold (δ) for the market return, and λ and

λ´ are the unconditional and downside prices of risk, respectively. This empirical framework is flexible in allowing

variations both in the quantity and the price of risk while maintaining a parsimonious parametrization with a single

threshold δ.

   Note that the model reduces to the CAPM in the absence of differential pricing of downside risk from uncondi-

tional market risk: λ´ “ 0; or if the downside beta equals the CAPM beta: βi´ “ βi . As in the case of the CAPM,

the model also restricts the unconditional price of risk to equal the expected market excess return:


                                                        Errm s “ λ,                                                 (2)


because both the unconditional and downside beta of the market with itself are equal to 1.

   To clarify the terminology used in this paper, notice that we employ the concept of conditionality in the context

of contemporaneous realizations of states of the world: market return above or below a threshold. A part of the

asset pricing literature has instead applied similar terminology in the context of time variation of expected returns

and return predictability tests.

   We stress that while we do not allow for time variation in the betas or the prices of risk, our empirical method-

ology is consistent with some predictability in expected returns. Since we test our model on sorted portfolios that

capture a characteristic associated with expected returns, for example the interest rate differential, we allow for

predictability generated by variation over time in this characteristic. Cochrane [17] notes the similarity between

testing the model on sorted portfolios and testing the model on unsorted assets while allowing for time variation

in instruments that proxy for managed portfolios. Our procedure, however, does not allow variation in expected

returns through time for a fixed characteristic.

   For example, we capture the fact that the expected return for a specific currency pair varies through time as

the corresponding interest rate differential varies, but we do not allow for the expected return of a specific currency

pair to vary through time given a constant interest rate differential. Lustig et al. [35] similarly allow predictability




                                                              4
only through variation in the interest rate differential.7

    Finally, our model specification is similar to the one tested by Ang et al. [2] on equity portfolios. While

the present specification has the convenience of both nesting the CAPM and reducing the number of estimated

coefficients in the cross-sectional regression to the price of downside risk λ´ , we report in the appendix the estimates

for the specification in Ang et al. [2] for our benchmark test assets.


2.1. Data

    We use the bilateral currency returns dataset in Maggiori [38]; details of the data are included in the online

appendix and in the original reference. The data are monthly, from January 1974 to March 2010, and cover 53

currencies. We follow Lustig and Verdelhan [36] in defining a cross section of currency returns based on their

interest rate. We sort currencies into 6 portfolios, in ascending order of their respective interest rates.

    Since the dataset includes currencies for which the corresponding country has undergone periods of extremely

high inflation and consequently high nominal interest rates, we split the sixth portfolio into two baskets: 6A and

6B. Portfolio 6B includes currencies that belong to portfolio 6 and that have annualized inflation at least 10%

higher than US inflation in the same month.8

    We also use an alternative sorting that only includes developed countries’ currencies.9 In this case we sort the

currencies into 5 rather than 6 baskets, to take into account the overall reduced number of currencies.

    We calculate one-month bilateral log excess returns rt`1 as the sum of the interest differential and the rate of

exchange rate depreciation of each currency with the US dollar:


                                                       rt`1 “ i‹t ´ it ´ ∆st`1 ,


where i˚ and i are the foreign and US interest rate, and st is log spot exchange rate expressed in foreign currency

per US dollar.

    Figure 2 shows that the sorting produces a monotonic increase in returns from portfolios 1 to 6. Further

descriptive statistics are reported in Table 1. Portfolios 6A and 6B highlight the very different behavior of high

inflation currencies. The standard deviation of returns for portfolio 6B is almost double that of all other baskets.

Bansal and Dahlquist [4] note that the uncovered interest parity condition cannot be rejected for these currencies.


     7 It is in principle possible to allow both the concept of conditionality used in this paper and the time variation in betas and prices

of risk to co-exist within the same model. In the present context, this could be achieved by estimating time varying betas and lambdas.
Since this would require extracting additional information from a potentially limited number of observations for the downstate, we
opted to impose constant betas and lambdas through time. While we do not disregard the possibility of time varying parameters, we
view our model choice as conservative given the available data and stress that this restriction is routinely imposed on asset pricing
models especially when testing them on sorted portfolios.
     8 We view our results excluding the high inflation currencies as conservative since these noisy observations are eliminated. Our

results are robust to different threshold levels or to the inclusion of all the currencies in the 6th portfolio. The inflation data for all
countries is from the IMF International Financial Statistics.
     9 A country is considered developed if it is included in the MSCI World Equity Index.




                                                                     5
These findings and the general concern about the effective tradability of these currencies during periods of economic

turmoil lead us to present our benchmark results using only basket 6A and to provide robustness checks including

both basket 6 and 6B in the online appendix.

   For our benchmark results on the cross section of equity returns we use the six Fama & French portfolios sorted

on size and book-to-market for the period from January 1974 to March 2010. In additional results we also test

our model on the cross section of industry-sorted equity portfolios by Fama & French for the period from January

1974 to March 2010, on the CAPM-beta sorted equity portfolios of Frazzini and Pedersen [27] for the period from

January 1974 to March 2010, and on the equity index option return series by Constantinides, Jackwerth, and Savov

[20] for the period from April 1986 to March 2010.

   For the cross section of commodity returns we use five commodity-futures portfolios sorted by the commodity

basis for the period from January 1974 to December 2008 by Yang [46]. For the cross section of sovereign bonds we

use six sovereign-bond portfolios sorted by the probability of default and bond beta for the period from January

1995 to March 2010 by Borri and Verdelhan [6].

   For the “market” return we use the value-weighted CRSP US equity market log excess return for the period

January 1974 to March 2010. We use a broad US equity market return as the market return in our benchmark

results not only because it is the most commonly used return to test CAPM-like asset pricing models, but also to

conservatively avoid increasing the covariances between test assets and pricing factors by including our other test

assets, such as currencies and commodities, in our market index. Nonetheless, in robustness checks included in

the appendix we repeat our benchmark analysis using the MSCI World Market Equity Index returns and our own

“market index” built by merging all our test assets in a single index.

   Tables 2 and 3 provide summary statistics for the equity, equity index options, commodity futures and sovereign

bond portfolios returns. In Table 2, Panel A highlights the pattern that small and value stocks have higher returns;

Panel B highlights that futures on commodities that have low basis have higher returns; Panel C highlights that

sovereign bonds have higher returns whenever they have lower credit rating and/or higher CAPM betas. In Table 3,

Panel A highlights that equities that have high preformation CAPM-betas tend to earn (somewhat) lower returns;

Panel B creates a cross section by sorting equities on their industry classification; Panels C and D show that

portfolios that are short equity index put options and long call options earn higher returns the further the options

are out of the money and the shorter (longer) the maturity for puts (calls).


2.2. Conditional Correlations

   The central insight underlying our work is that the currency carry trade, as well as other cross-sectional strate-

gies, is more highly correlated with aggregate market returns conditional on low aggregate returns than it is

conditional on high aggregate market returns. This insight is supported by a growing empirical literature including

Brunnermeier, Nagel, and Pedersen [7], Burnside [8], Lustig and Verdelhan [37], Christiansen, Ranaldo, and Soed-


                                                         6
erlind [16], Mueller, Stathopoulos, and Vedolin [42] all of which find a state dependent correlation. In ongoing work,

Caballero and Doyle [14] and Dobrynskaya [22] highlight the strong correlation of the carry trade with market risk

during market downturns. Our paper differs from all previous studies both by providing systematic evidence over a

longer time period and larger sample of this state dependent correlation and by relating the resulting downside risk

to that observed in other asset classes such as equities, equity index options, commodities, and sovereign portfolios.

    We define the downstate to be months where the contemporaneous market return is more than one standard de-

viation below its sample average. A one standard deviation event is a reasonable compromise between a sufficiently

low threshold to trigger concerns about downside risk and a sufficiently high threshold to have a large number of

downstate observations in the sample. Our definition assigns 55 monthly observations to the downstate, out of 435

total observations in our sample. For robustness we test our model with different threshold levels as well as a finer

division of the state space into three rather than two states.10

    Table 4 shows that the carry trade is unconditionally positively correlated with market returns. As reported

in the third row of the table, the unconditional correlation is 0.14 and statistically significant for our benchmark

sample of currencies. Most of the unconditional correlation is due to the downstate: conditional on the downstate

the correlation increases to 0.33, while it is only 0.02 in the upstate.11 The table also confirms that this pattern is

robust to the exclusion of emerging markets and to various thresholds of inflation for the basket 6B.

    Figure 3 highlights this characteristic of the data by plotting the kernel-smoothed conditional correlation between

the carry trade and the market returns. The top panel shows that the correlation of high yield currencies with

the market returns is a decreasing function of market returns. The opposite is true for low yield currencies in the

middle panel. The bottom panel highlights that our results are not sensitive to the exact choice of threshold.


3. Econometric Model

    We estimate the model in (1) with the two-stage procedure of Fama and MacBeth [24]. In our model the first

stage consists of two time-series regressions, one for the entire time series and one for the downstate observations.

These regressions produce point estimates for the unconditional and downstate betas, β̂ and β̂ ´ , which are then

used as explanatory variables in the second stage. The second-stage regression is a cross-sectional regression of the

average return of the assets on their unconditional and downstate betas. In our estimation we restrict, following the

theory section above, the market price of risk to equal the sample average of the market excess-return. Therefore,

in the second-stage regression we estimate a single parameter: the downside price of risk λ´ .

   10 Thresholds of the sample average minus 0.5 or 1.5 standard deviations assign 118 observations and 27 observations to the downstate,

respectively.
   11 The upstate includes all observations that are not included in the downstate.




                                                                   7
    Formally, the first-stage regressions are:


                                rit   “ ai ` βi rmt ` it ,           @t P T,                                                       (3)

                                rit   “ a´    ´        ´
                                         i ` βi rmt ` it ,             whenever rmt ď r̄m ´ σrm ,                                  (4)


where r̄m and σrm are the sample average and standard deviation of the market excess return, respectively. The

second-stage regression is given by:


                                      r̄i “ β̂i r̄m ` pβ̂i´ ´ β̂i qλ´ ` αi ,    i “ 1, . . . , N ,                                  (5)


where r̄i and r̄m are the average excess returns of the test assets and the market excess-return respectively, αi are

pricing errors, and N is the number of test assets. Notice that by not including a constant in the second-stage

regression we are imposing that an asset with zero beta with the risk factors has a zero excess return.12

    While restricting the model so that the market return is exactly priced reduces the number of coefficients to be

estimated in the cross-sectional regression, it does not imply that the sample average market return is estimated

without noise. The average monthly log excess return of the value-weighted CRSP US equity market for the

sample period from January 1974 to March 2010 is 0.39% with a standard error of 0.23%.13 This corresponds to

an annualized log-excess return for the market of 4.68%, an estimate in the range of the values usually assumed to

calibrate the equity premium. To make clear that the unconditional market price of risk is imposed rather than

estimated in our cross-sectional regressions, we report its estimate with a star and do not report its standard error

in all tables of the paper. While restricting the market to be exactly priced is regarded as a conservative procedure,

we report in the appendix our benchmark results for currencies, commodities and equities without imposing this

restriction and note that in that case we recover an estimate of the price of unconditional market risk of 0.29 that

is similar to the sample average estimate of 0.32.


4. Empirical Results

4.1. Risk Premia: Currency

    We find that while the CAPM shows that currency returns are associated with market risk, it cannot explain the

cross section of currency returns because the CAPM beta is not sufficient to explain the cross sectional dispersion

in returns. The left panel of Figure 4 shows that the increase in CAPM beta going from the low yield portfolio

(portfolio 1) to the high yield portfolio (portfolio 6) is small compared to the increase in average returns for these


   12 In unreported results we estimated the model including a constant in the cross-sectional regression and verified that the constant

is not statistically significant.
   13 When estimating the model on sub-periods, we always impose that the average market return over that sub-period is priced exactly

by correspondingly adjusting the value of λ.


                                                                    8
portfolios. As it will shortly become evident, once the market price of risk of CAPM is pinned down by the average

market excess return, the CAPM fails to price these currency portfolios.

    The middle panel of Figure 4 shows that average currency returns are also strongly related to the downstate

beta. While this finding supports the importance of downside risk for currency returns, it is not per se evidence of

a failure of the CAPM because currencies that have a higher downstate beta do have a higher CAPM beta.

    However, the right panel of Figure 4 shows that the relative downstate beta, the difference between downstate

and unconditional beta, is also associated with contemporaneous returns. Currencies that have higher downstate

than unconditional betas are on average riskier and earn higher excess returns. We show in our benchmark

regressions that this state dependency is not fully captured by the CAPM beta.

    Figure 5 and Table 5 illustrate both the failure of the CAPM and the performance of the DR-CAPM. The top

panels of Figure 5 present the results employing all currencies, the bottom panels present the results employing

only currencies of developed countries. Since higher yield currencies have higher CAPM betas, they earn a higher

return on average. However, the CAPM beta does not fully capture the risk-return tradeoff: the spread in betas is

too small to account for the spread in currency returns. The failure is evident in the first column of Table 5, where

the CAPM cannot jointly price the market return and the cross section of currency returns producing a R2 of only

9%.14 Correspondingly, the left panels of Figure 5 show that the CAPM predicts almost identical returns for all

currency portfolios.

    In contrast, the DR-CAPM explains the cross section of currency returns. In the second column of Table 5, the

DR-CAPM explains 79% of the cross-sectional variation in mean returns even after imposing the restriction that

the market portfolio (included as a test asset) is exactly priced. The right quadrants of Figure 5 correspondingly

show that the test assets lie close to the 45 degree line. The estimated price of downside risk is positive (2.18) and

statistically significant.15 The model fits the returns of portfolios 2 to 6A with small pricing errors. The absolute

pricing error is on average 0.07% (in terms of monthly excess returns) across these portfolios. Portfolio 1, which

contains the low yield currencies, is priced with the biggest pricing error, ´0.2%.16 We also report the χ2 test that

all pricing errors in the cross-sectional regression are jointly zero. While both the CAPM and the DR-CAPM are

formally rejected with p-values of 0% and 0.04% respectively, we stress that the DR-CAPM produces a root mean

square pricing error (RMSPE) that is 40% smaller than that of the CAPM.17


  14 We   define the cross-sectional R2 as: R2 ” 1 ´ α̂1 α̂rN V arprqs´1 , where α̂ is the vector of pricing errors, V arprq is the variance of
the vector of test assets mean returns, and N is the number of test assets.
   15 The Fama MacBeth procedure does not automatically correct the second-stage regression standard errors for estimated regressors

from the first-stage. Given our separate first-stage regressions for the full sample and the downstate, the Shanken correction (Shanken
[45]) is not immediately applicable here. In the robustness section of this paper and in the appendix, we provide a number of checks
of the standard errors to minimize concerns about their reliability.
   16 Note that the pricing errors here and in all subsequent tables and references in the text are expressed in monthly percentage excess

returns, while the figures are annualized percentage excess returns. The pricing errors are defined as the difference between the actual
and model-predicted excess return, so that a positive price error corresponds to an under prediction of the return by the model.
   17 The test is under the null hypothesis of zero joint pricing errors, therefore the model is not rejected at the 5% confidence level if

the p-value statistic is higher than 5%.




                                                                      9
   Potential sources of concern about the reliability of our currency returns are sovereign default and international

capital restrictions. To alleviate these concerns, we test the DR-CAPM on a subsample of developed countries’

currencies. The results for this subsample of countries are also reported in Figure 5 and Table 5 and show that

the model performs equally well on these portfolios. The price of downside risk is 2.34 and is consistent with the

2.18 estimate obtained on the full sample. The R2 increases to 85%. We confirm on this subsample the pattern of

small DR-CAPM pricing errors for all portfolios except portfolio 1. The null hypothesis of zero joint pricing errors

cannot be rejected at the 5% confidence level with a p-value of the χ2 test of 8%. The RMSPE of 0.07 is more

than 50% smaller than the one produced by the CAPM on the same test assets.


4.2. Risk Premia: Other Asset Classes

   The conditional association of asset returns and the market portfolio and the variation in prices of risk is not

unique to currencies and is, in fact, shared by other asset classes. Providing a unified risk-based treatment of

expected returns across asset classes is both informative from a theoretical perspective and an important check of

the empirical performance of theoretical models.

   Figure 6 shows that equity, commodity, and sovereign bond portfolios’ expected returns are positively related to

these assets’ relative downside betas. In all three asset classes, assets that are more strongly associated with market

returns conditional on the downstate than unconditionally have higher average excess returns. This conditional

variation – which is not captured by the CAPM – is the central mechanism that underlies the performance of the

DR-CAPM across asset classes.

   We investigate next whether the DR-CAPM can jointly explain the cross section of currency and equity returns.

We add the six Fama & French portfolios sorted on book-to-market and size to the currency and market portfolios

as test assets. Figure 7 and Table 5 show that the DR-CAPM jointly explains these returns. The last column in

Table 5 shows that the estimated price of downside risk is consistent across asset classes but the estimate of 1.41 is

lower than that obtained on currencies alone (2.18).18 The model explains 71% of the observed variation in mean

returns, a noticeable increase over the 24% explained by the CAPM. Figure 7 shows that the largest pricing errors

occur for the small-growth equity portfolio (portfolio 7) in addition to the low-yield currency portfolio (portfolio

1). The average absolute pricing error on all other portfolios is 0.08%, while the pricing errors on the small-growth

equity portfolio and the low-yield currency portfolios are -0.2% and -0.47%, respectively. Section 6.6.2 provides

further details about the pricing of the small-growth equity portfolio. Both the CAPM and the DR-CAPM are

statistically rejected with p-values of the χ2 test of 0%, but the DR-CAPM produces a RMSPE 40% smaller than

the CAPM.

   A close analog to the currency carry trade is the basis trade in commodity markets. The basis is the difference

  18 If   the small-growth equity portfolio is excluded as a test asset, the estimated price of risk increases to 1.70.




                                                                      10
between the futures price and the spot price of a commodity. Among others, Yang [46] shows that commodities

with a lower basis earn higher expected returns (see Table 2 Panel B).19 We extend our results by adding the

commodity portfolios to the currency and equity portfolios. Figure 8 and Table 6 show that the same economic

phenomenon, the conditional variation of the quantity and price of market risk, underlies the variation in expected

returns in commodity markets. The fourth column in Table 6 shows that the estimated price of downside risk

(1.40) is essentially unchanged after the addition of the commodity portfolios to the currency and equity portfolios

studied above and is statistically significant. The model explains 74% of the cross sectional variation in returns

across these asset classes compared to a R2 of -17% for the CAPM. The biggest pricing error occurs for the

high-basis commodity portfolio (portfolio 11) in addition to the low-yield currency portfolio (portfolio 1) and the

small-growth equity portfolio (portfolio 12). The pricing errors for these three portfolios are -0.24%, -0.22%, and

-0.46%, respectively. The average absolute pricing error of all other portfolios included as test assets is 0.07%.

While both the CAPM and the DR-CAPM are again statistically rejected, the DR-CAPM produces a RMSPE

50% smaller than the CAPM.

    We investigate next whether sovereign bonds are priced by the DR-CAPM. We use the cross-sectional sorting

of sovereign bonds according to default probability and market beta in Borri and Verdelhan [6]. Figure 9 and

Table 7 confirm yet again the ability of the DR-CAPM to price multiple asset classes. An important caveat in this

case is that the data of Borri and Verdelhan [6] are only available over a relatively short sample period (January

1995 to March 2010), thus limiting the number of observations, particularly for our downstate. The shorter sample

produces noisier estimates of the prices of risk and different point estimates overall from our full sample. The sample

limitations impose caution in interpreting the positive performance of our model on sovereign bonds. Consequently,

we exclude these portfolios from the analysis in the rest of the paper.

    In our benchmark results for equity markets we employ the Fama & French book-to-market and size sorted

portfolios because they are among the most commonly tested equity cross sections. In addition, we document here

that the DR-CAPM can rationalize a number of other important cross sections in equity markets: the CAPM-beta

sorted cross section, the industry sorted cross section, and the equity index options cross section.

    In Figure 10 and Table 7 we analyze the performance of the DR-CAPM for the cross section of CAPM-beta

sorted equity portfolios of Frazzini and Pedersen [27] as well as for their “Betting Against Beta” (BAB) factor

for equity markets.20 The DR-CAPM has higher explanatory power than the CAPM for the joint cross section of

currency, commodity and beta-sorted equity returns with estimates of the market price of downside risk consistent

with those estimated on other cross sections. Notably the BAB factor has a 1.03% pricing error under the CAPM

that is almost seven times bigger than the 0.15% pricing error under the DR-CAPM.

  19 Also  see Gorton, Hayashi, and Rouwenhorst [28].
  20 The   BAB factor is built via a long position in low beta equities and a corresponding short position in high beta equities. See
original reference for details.




                                                                 11
    We have documented that for the cross-section of currencies, commodities and Fama & French portfolios the

CAPM under-predicts the returns and the downside risk factor is able to fill the gap between the CAPM predicted

returns and the actual returns in the data. Interestingly, for the beta-sorted portfolios CAPM over-predicts the

returns of the high-beta portfolios with respect to the low beta portfolios; a fact that Frazzini and Pedersen [27]

refer to as a “too flat” Capital Market Line in the data. The DR-CAPM in part corrects the over-prediction of the

CAPM because high-beta equities have a relatively lower downside risk exposure compared to low-beta equities.

For example, consider the BAB factor in the top panels of Figure 10: by construction it has a CAPM beta close

to zero, estimated at -0.05 and not statistically significant, and its riskiness is entirely captured by its downside

beta, estimated at 0.48 and statistically significant (see Panel A Table 10).21 Therefore, for the BAB portfolio the

CAPM implies an annualized expected excess return of -0.19%, while the DR-CAPM predicts a return of 10.3%

which is substantially closer to the actual average return of 12.13%.22 This result is consistent with the analysis

in Frazzini and Pedersen [27] who note that the BAB factor performs particularly poorly when the overall market

return is low, thus naturally generating a downside risk exposure.

    In Figure 11 and Table 7 we test the DR-CAPM on the industry-sorted equity portfolios of Fama & French

jointly with the currency and commodity portfolios. We consistently find that the DR-CAPM can rationalize these

test assets with a price of downside risk, here estimated at 1.36, similar to that estimated on other cross-sections.

The last column in Table 7 shows that the model explains 75% of the joint variation in returns of currencies and

equity industry portfolios with a substantial increase over the -32% explained by the CAPM.

    Finally, we investigate whether the DR-CAPM can rationalize option returns. Options, and in particular

portfolios short in put options written on the market index, are naturally exposed to downside risk. We test the

model on the cross-section of equity index (S&P 500) option returns in Constantinides et al. [20].23 Figure 12

and Table 8 present the results based on the cross-section of call and put options. The second column in Table 8

shows that the DR-CAPM not only captures 81% of the variation in expected returns across option portfolios, but

can also jointly rationalize this variation together with the returns of currencies and commodities (R2 of 74%, see

column four of the same table). This further confirms that the estimated value of the price of downside risk (λ´ )

is consistent across asset classes even when considering optionality features.

    In contrast, the CAPM cannot rationalize option returns. By construction the option portfolios have a CAPM

beta close to 1 (see Panels C-D Table 10), thus generating almost identical CAPM-predicted returns for all portfolios,

but have substantial variation in realized average excess returns (close to a 25% range).24 Almost all option


  21 Frazzini  and Pedersen [27] build the BAB factor to have zero CAPM beta. Small differences in the beta occur here because of the
use of a different index to proxy for the CAPM market portfolio as well as a different time period.
   22 The CAPM prediction is obtained by multiplying the beta times the market price of risk (-0.05*0.32*12=-0.19). Similarly the

DR-CAPM prediction is obtained by summing to the CAPM prediction the downside risk correction of pβ ´ ´ βqλ´ ˚ 12 “ p0.48 `
0.05q1.65 ˚ 12 “ 10.49.
   23 The cross section includes 18 portfolios of calls (9) and puts (9) sorted on maturity and in-the-moneyness. See original source for

portfolio construction details.
   24 Recall that Constantinides et al. [20] build the option portfolios by imposing that under the Black and Scholes assumptions they




                                                                   12
portfolios are accurately priced with small pricing errors with the exception of the 30-day maturity and 90%

moneyness put portfolio.25 Constantinides et al. [20] report that this portfolio is hard to price even for most

option-market-tailored asset pricing models and consider the possibility that liquidity issues might affect its pricing.

    We have shown that the DR-CAPM can rationalize a number of important asset classes and that the estimate

of the price of risk remains stable across different estimations. While this reduces concerns about the reliability of

estimates of λ´ , further quantitative implications of our empirical framework, for example about the magnitude

of λ´ , cannot be drawn without imposing a more structural theory on the model. We leave the development of a

structural theory to future work and only note here that λ´ is consistently estimated across a number of different

cross sections, asset classes and patterns in expected returns.26


5. Robustness

    An important verification of our results is to confirm the association of currency returns with downside market

risk. In Panel A of Table 9 we provide the first-stage estimates of the unconditional CAPM betas and the downstate

betas for the six currency portfolios. The CAPM betas are increasing from portfolio 1 to 6 and the spread in betas

between the first and last portfolio is statistically different from zero. The increase in betas, however, is small;

the beta of the first portfolio is 0.03 while the beta of the last portfolio is 0.11. The downstate betas highlight

the central mechanism of the DR-CAPM: conditional on below-threshold market returns, high yield currencies

(portfolio 6A) are more strongly related to market risk than low yield currencies (portfolio 1). In fact, we find that

while the downside beta of portfolio 6A (0.30) is larger than its unconditional beta (0.11), the opposite is true for

portfolio 1 with a downside beta of 0.02 and an unconditional beta of 0.03.

    Splitting the sample into the downstate picks up the conditional variation in currencies’ association with market

risk, but also reduces the variation available in each subsample to estimate the betas. Therefore, the standard errors

of the first-stage regressions that estimate downstate betas are wider than those of the corresponding regressions

for unconditional betas. We perform a number of robustness checks of our first-stage estimates and their impact

on the second-stage estimates.

    We perform two bootstrap tests to check the robustness of the main driver of our results: the different conditional

association of high yield and low yield currencies with the market excess-return. We first test whether high yield

currencies are more associated with market risk than low yield currencies conditional on the downstate under the
                      ´
null hypothesis that β6A ´ β1´ “ 0. We then test whether the different loading on risk of high and low yield


would have a CAPM beta of 1 with the S&P 500 index. The variation in CAPM betas reported here with respect to the original source
is due to the use of the value-weighted CRSP as a market index as well as a different time period for the sample.
   25 This is the shortest maturity and furthest out of the money portfolio in the sample.
   26 Ultimately, the quantitative importance of downside risk can also be linked to the rare disasters model of Barro [5]. Farhi and

Gabaix [26] develop a model of exchange rates in the presence of rare disasters and Farhi, Fraiberger, Gabaix, Ranciere, and Verdelhan
[25] and [31] evaluate rare disasters in currency markets in an option framework.




                                                                 13
                                                                 ´
currencies varies across states under the null hypothesis that pβ6A ´ β1´ q ´ pβ6A ´ β1 q “ 0. Figure 14 shows that

both nulls are strongly rejected with p-values of 0.26% and 2.47%, respectively, thus yielding statistical support for

our main economic mechanism.

   A second robustness check is to mitigate the concern that our second-stage regression employs potentially weak

estimated regressors from the first stage. Panel B in Table 9 reports the first-stage estimates for the six Fama &

French equity portfolios. Since these equity portfolios have a strong association with the overall equity market, the

betas are very precisely estimated even for the downstate. We then use the prices of risk estimated using only these

equity portfolios to fit the cross section of currencies. Table 11 reports in the first two columns that the DR-CAPM

can still explain 67% of the observed variation in currency returns and 71% of the variation in currency and equity

returns. The estimated price of downside risk is 1.27, statistically significant, and consistent with the estimate of

1.41 obtained on the joint sample of currencies and equities.27

   In the middle two columns of Table 11 we verify that our results are not altered by reasonable variations in

the threshold for the downstate. We vary our benchmark threshold for the market return of 1 standard deviation

below its sample mean to 0.5 and 1.5 standard deviations. In both cases we observe a consistent performance of

the model.

   Finally, we verify the sensitivity of our results to different thresholds for excluding currencies with high inflation.

We vary the inflation threshold from our benchmark of 10% above the annualized inflation of the US to 5% and

15%. The last two columns of Table 11 show that the lower threshold produces higher but noisier estimates of the

price of risk compared to the higher threshold. In both cases, however, the prices of risk are statistically significant

and the R2 are around 80%.

   Further robustness checks are provided in the online appendix. We verify that our results are robust to: using

only developed countries’ currencies, winsorizing the data, varying the inflation threshold for the last currency

portfolios, not imposing the restriction that the market return be exactly priced in sample, alternative measures of

the market index, estimating the model on a longer sample (and relative subsamples) for equity markets, and to

using the model specification in Ang et al. [2].


6. Factor Structure and PCA Based Models

   To further investigate the common factor structure in the joint cross-section of currencies, equities, and com-

modities we perform a principal component analysis (PCA) both on each asset class separately and on their joint

returns. This analysis allows us to compare the DR-CAPM to the asset class-specific PCA-based models that are

prevalent in the literature.

   27 This robustness check also minimizes concerns about the reliability of second-stage Fama-MacBeth standard errors due to the

presence of estimated regressors. Our results are little changed when employing first stage estimates that are very accurate.




                                                               14
6.1. Currency PCA Model

   For currencies, the PCA analysis leads to the model of Lustig et al. [35]. Consistent with their work, we report

in Panel A of Table 12 that the first two principal components account for 87% of the time series variation of

the interest-rate-sorted currency portfolios. The loadings of the first principal component reveal that it can be

interpreted as a level factor because it loads on the returns of all currency portfolios similarly. Analogously, the

loadings of the second principal component reveal that it can be interpreted as a slope factor because it loads on

the differential return when going from portfolio 1 to portfolio 6A. Intuitively, these two principal components can

be approximated by two portfolios: an equally weighted portfolio of all currencies in the sample against the dollar

and a carry trade portfolio created by a long position in portfolio 6 and a short position in portfolio 1. We refer to

these two portfolios as the dollar and carry portfolios, and denote their returns by RXcur and HMLcur respectively.

To confirm the intuition, Table 13 reports in the top left panel that the correlation between the first principal

component and the dollar portfolio is 100% and the correlation between the second principal component and the

carry portfolio is 95%.

   Table 14 presents the estimates of both the PCA-based linear model of Lustig et al. [35] and the DR-CAPM

on the cross-section of currency returns. The LRV model explains 64% of the cross sectional variation in currency

returns. The estimated price of risk is statistically significant for the carry portfolio but not for the dollar portfolio.

The model is statistically rejected by the χ2 test on the pricing errors with a p-value of 0%. Notice that it is the

slope factor, the carry portfolio, that carries most of the information relevant for the cross section. A model that

only includes the first principal component, the level factor or dollar portfolio, generates a R2 of only 4%. Similarly

to the DR-CAPM, the largest individual pricing error (-0.2%) for the LRV model is for the low-yield currency

portfolio (portfolio 1).

   The DR-CAPM captures the information contained in the principal components that is relevant for this cross

section. Intuitively, the DR-CAPM summarizes the two principal components because the unconditional market

return acts as a level factor while downside risk acts as a slope factor. To confirm this intuition, recall from

Table 9 Panel A that the unconditional market betas are relatively similar across currency portfolios, so that all

portfolios load similarly on the market. In contrast, the downside betas are more strongly increasing going from

portfolio 1 to portfolio 6, thus providing a slope factor. The top two panels in Table 13 confirm that the second

principal component (or the carry portfolio) is more highly correlated with the market portfolio in downstates (28%

correlation), thus loading on downside risk, than it is unconditionally (9% correlation). The DR-CAPM produces

a R2 of 73% and RMSPE of 0.10 that are similar to the R2 of 64% and RMSPE of 0.12 of the LRV model.


6.2. Equity PCA model

   The PCA on the cross-section of equities provided by the six Fama & French portfolios sorted on size and book-

to-market leads to the three factor model of Fama and French [23]. Panel B in Table 12 shows that the first three


                                                            15
principal components account for 98% of the time series variation of the size and book-to-market sorted portfolios.

The loadings of the first principal component reveal that it can be interpreted as a level factor because it loads

on the returns of all equity portfolios similarly. The loadings of the second and third principal components reveal

that they can be interpreted as two slope factors. The second principal component mainly loads on the differential

return when going from small portfolios (1 to 3) to big portfolios (4 to 6). The third principal component mainly

loads on the differential return when going from growth portfolios (1 and 4) to value portfolios (3 and 6). However,

notice that the interpretation is not as clear as it is for currencies (nor as it is for commodities below). For example,

the third principal component does not affect portfolio 2 and 5 in a way consistent with its interpretation as a

factor affecting the value-growth trade-off in returns.

    We approximate the first principal component with the market return and the next two principal components

by the Fama & French factors: the small-minus-big portfolio and the high-minus-low portfolio. We denote the

returns of these two portfolios as SMB and HMLf f , respectively. Table 13 shows in the middle left panel that the

first principal component is highly correlated with the market (95% correlation), the second principal component

is mainly related to the SMB return (80% correlation), and the third principal component is mainly related to

the HMLf f return (82% correlation). However, HMLf f and SMB returns are themselves correlated and therefore

do not correspond exactly to the two principal components that are by construction orthogonal to each other.

Correspondingly, we find that HMLf f is also correlated with the second principal component and SMB is correlated

with the third principal component.28

    Table 15 presents the estimates of both the PCA-based linear model of Fama and French [23] and the DR-

CAPM on the cross section of equity returns. The Fama & French three factor model explains 68% of the cross

sectional variation in returns. The estimated prices of risk are significant for the market and HMLf f but not for

SMB. The model is statistically rejected by the χ2 test on the joint pricing errors with a p-value of 0%. Notice that

the cross-sectional performance of the model is driven by the third principal component, which is approximated by

the HMLf f factor. A model based only on the first two principal components generates a R2 of ´4%.

    The DR-CAPM is unable to match the small-growth equity returns of portfolio 1 (pricing error of -0.45%) and

therefore produces a lower R2 (33%) than the Fama & French three-factor model. As noted by Campbell and

Vuolteenaho [15], it is typical in the literature to find that models cannot correctly price portfolio 1 and a number

of papers (Lamont and Thaler [33], D’Avolio [21], Mitchell, Pulvino, and Stafford [41]) have questioned whether its

return is correctly measured.29 In the last column of Table 15 we show that once we remove portfolio 1 from the

    28 The correlation between HML
                                     f f and SMB helps to rationalize why the interpretation of the equity principal components in terms
of mimicking portfolios is not as clear as it is for currencies or commodities. In the case of currencies and, as will shortly be illustrated,
in the case of commodities, the proxy portfolios of the two principal components are themselves almost uncorrelated. For example, the
correlation between RXcur and HMLcur is only 0.07.
    29 Note that these papers refer to portfolio 1 as the small-growth portfolio in the 25-portfolio sorting of Fama & French, while our

first portfolio is the small-growth portfolio in the 6-portfolio sorting of Fama & French. Our first portfolio, therefore, includes more
securities than those considered troublesome in the cited papers. In the appendix, however, we verify that the DR-CAPM mispricing
of the first portfolio in our setting is due to the securities that are part of the smallest growth portfolios in the 25-portfolio sorting.



                                                                     16
six Fama & French portfolios the DR-CAPM performance improves: the R2 increases to 90% and the hypothesis

of zero joint pricing errors cannot be rejected by the χ2 test at the 5% confidence level.

6.3. Commodity PCA model

    The PCA on the cross-section of commodities leads to the model of Yang [46]. Consistent with his work, we

report in Panel C in Table 12 that the first two principal components account for 75% of the time series variation

of the basis-sorted commodity portfolios. The loadings of the first principal component reveal that it can be

interpreted as a level factor because it loads on the returns of all commodity portfolios similarly. Analogously, the

loadings of the second principal component reveal that it can be interpreted as a slope factor because it loads on

the differential return when going from portfolio 1 to portfolio 5. Intuitively, these two principal components can

be approximated by two portfolios: an equally weighted portfolio of all commodities contained in the sample and a

basis trade portfolio created by a long position in portfolio 1 and a short position in portfolio 5. We refer to these

two portfolios as the commodity and basis portfolios and denote their returns by RXcom and HMLcom , respectively.

To confirm this intuition, the bottom left panel of Table 13 shows that the correlation between the first principal

component and the commodity portfolio is 100% and the correlation between the second principal component and

the basis portfolio is 95%.

    Table 16 presents the estimates of both the PCA-based linear model of Yang [46] and the DR-CAPM on the

cross-section of currency returns. The Yang model explains 87% of the cross sectional variation in expected returns.

The estimated price of risk is statistically significant for both the commodity and basis portfolios. The hypothesis

of zero joint pricing errors cannot be rejected by the χ2 test with a p-value of 50%. Notice that it is the slope

factor, the basis portfolio, that carries most of the information relevant for the cross section. A model that only

includes the first principal component, the level factor or commodity portfolio, generates a R2 of only 10%.

    The DR-CAPM captures the information contained in the principal components that is relevant for this cross

section. Intuitively, the DR-CAPM summarizes the two principal components because the unconditional market

return acts as a level factor, while downside risk acts as a slope factor. To confirm this intuition, recall from

Table 9 Panel C that the unconditional market betas are similar across commodity portfolios, so that all portfolios

load similarly on the market, while the downside betas are decreasing when going from portfolio 1 to portfolio 5,

thus providing a slope factor.30 The bottom two panels in Table 13 confirm that the second principal component

(or the basis portfolio) is more highly correlated with the market portfolio in down states (19% correlation), thus

loading on downside risk, than it is unconditionally (´5% correlation). The DR-CAPM produces a R2 of 82% and

RMSPE of 0.12 that are similar to the R2 of 87% and RMSPE of 0.10 of the Yang model. The hypothesis that the

DR-CAPM pricing errors are jointly zero cannot be rejected by the χ2 test with a p-value of 66%.


Our results, therefore are consistent with the previous evidence on small-growth stocks.
   30 Notice that for commodity portfolios the unconditional betas are almost increasing when going from portfolio 1 to portfolio 5, but

the effect is quantitatively small and dominated by the more strongly decreasing downside betas.


                                                                  17
   Having investigated the factor structure of each asset class separately, we conclude that for each asset class the

DR-CAPM has similar explanatory power to the PCA-model that is specifically designed for that asset class.31 We

emphasize that the underlying reason is that in each asset class the factor structure is composed of level and slope

factors that the DR-CAPM picks up with the market and downside risk factors, respectively.


6.4. PCA models across asset classes

   We now turn to investigate the factor structure of the joint cross section of currencies, equities, and commodities.

Figure 15 plots together the loadings of the principal component analysis performed on each asset class separately.

The left panel suggests that the first principal component in each asset class represents a joint level factor. The

right panel shows that the subsequent principal components of each asset class are common slope components.

   Tables 17 and 18 explore the predictive power of the PCA-based models analyzed above and the DR-CAPM

across asset classes. Table 17 estimates the models using the proxy portfolios, while Table 18 employs directly the

principal components. Each of the asset-class-specific models is unable to price the joint cross section. Both the

LRV model and the Yang model have negative R2 (-15% and -35%, respectively) and the Fama & French model has

a modest R2 of 35%. The LRV model estimates a significant price of risk for the carry portfolio and the estimate

increases to 0.99 from the 0.47 estimate obtained when using only currency portfolios as test assets. The price of

risk of the dollar portfolio remains statistically insignificant. The Yang model estimates a significant price of risk

for the commodity portfolio but not for the basis portfolio. The Fama & French model estimates a significant price

of risk only for the HMLf f portfolio. The point estimates for the prices of risk of the market, SMB, and HMLf f

portfolios are 0.28, 0.23, and 0.57, respectively; these point estimates are overall comparable to the 0.36, 0.19,

and 0.49 estimates obtained when using only the equity portfolios as test assets. The failure of asset-class specific

models to price other asset classes has induced a search for segmented theoretical models that could explain why

different stochastic discount factors are needed to price different asset classes. We view our DR-CAPM results as

suggesting that a unified view of risk markets is still possible.

   To obtain an explanatory power similar to the DR-CAPM, the PCA analysis suggests using between four and

eight principal components.32 A naive approach that simply adds principal components leads to using the first

eight principal components. The first two columns in Table 18 show that the resulting model must be discarded as

many of the estimated prices of risk are not statistically significant.

   A better model can be built using the information gleaned from the factor structure of each asset class. Since

most of the explanatory power for the cross-section of each asset class comes from a slope factor, it is intuitive to

suggest a model that only includes the slope factors of each asset class and a common level factor. The third and

  31 Withthe exception of the small-growth equity portfolio.
  32 Werefer here to the principal components obtained by performing the PCA on the joint returns of currencies, equities, and
commodities. Details of this PCA are reported in the appendix.




                                                             18
second to last columns in Tables 17 and 18 show that a model that uses the first and third principal components of

the equity portfolios, the second principal component of the currency portfolios and the second principal component

of the commodity portfolios or, alternatively, their mimicking portfolios (i.e. the market, HMLf f , carry and basis

portfolios) performs similarly to the DR-CAPM. The estimated prices of risk are statistically significant for all slope

component, or for their mimicking portfolios, but not for the level component or market return. This PCA-based

model generates a R2 of 59% and RMSPE of 0.19 when using the principal components and a R2 of 70% and

RMSPE of 0.16 when using the mimicking portfolios. The DR-CAPM performs similarly with a R2 of 74% and

RMSPE of 0.15 and is once again able to jointly summarize the information contained in all of these principal

components in just two factors.


6.5. Other Factor Structures and Further Research

    While the DR-CAPM is able to price returns in many important asset classes, it is not universally successful.

In this section we present results for asset classes for which the DR-CAPM is not successful: momentum portfolios,

corporate bonds and US Treasuries. Rather than estimating the full model, we plot the relationship of the downside

risk beta with average returns in the bottom panels of Figure 16, while the top panels show the relationship of

average returns with the standard CAPM beta.

    The left panels of Figure 16 show results for equity portfolios sorted on momentum.33 While the returns of

these portfolios appear to be unrelated to beta, they are broadly positively associated with downside beta with the

exception of the first momentum portfolio, which consists of small firms with very low recent returns. However,

the association with downside beta is not sufficiently strong for the DR-CAPM to fully capture the returns of the

momentum portfolios.

    The middle panel shows results for US corporate bonds.34 While the CAPM beta and the downside beta are

both positively associated with these portfolio returns, the spread in average returns is too small compared to the

spread in downside betas.

    The right panels in Figure 16 show that the DR-CAPM performs worst on returns of US Treasuries of various

maturities.35 While bond returns are positively associated with their unconditional beta, they are actually nega-

tively related to their downside beta. Cochrane and Piazzesi [19] have documented that the cross section of average

bond returns is in fact driven by a single factor that is not strongly associated with market returns. Figure 16

shows that the bond factor is also not driven by downside market risk.

   33 We use six US equity portfolios sorted on size and momentum by Fama & French and available on Ken French’s website. The

sample period is from January 1974 to March 2010.
   34 We use the monthly returns on the five corporate bond portfolios sorted annually on their credit spread by Nozawa [43]. The

sample period is from October 1975 to March 2010. Portfolio 1 is composed of the lowest credit spread bonds, portfolio 5 is composed
of the highest credit spread bonds. The 5 portfolios are obtained by equally weighting the 10 portfolios in the benchmark analysis of
Nozawa [43] into five baskets.
   35 We use the monthly bond returns in the Fama bond file of CRSP. The sample period is from January 1974 to March 2010.

Portfolios 1-5 are formed with bonds with maturities less than or equal to one to five years, respectively. Portfolio 6 is formed with
bonds with maturities less or equal than 10 years and portfolio 7 with bonds with maturities greater than 10 years.


                                                                 19
   Finally, we stress once more that our purpose was not to test a specific theoretical framework in the data, but

to document a novel pattern, the exposure to downside risk, across many asset classes. Consequently, the model

presented in Section 2 should not be regarded as a formal asset pricing model, but as an approximate reduced

model form for asset returns that is convenient to highlight the novel risk exposure in the data. We are aware

that the return data-generating-process, by the nature of its approximate form, will by construction misprice some

assets whose payoffs are connected with the threshold property. Similarly, we have been intentionally silent on the

deeper foundations of downside risk. It remains an open question for future research to derive models capable of

matching the strong empirical patterns highlighted in this paper as well as providing a structural interpretation to

the risk factors.


7. Conclusion

   We find that currency returns are associated with aggregate market risk, thus supporting a risk-based view

of exchange rates. However, we find that the unconditional CAPM cannot explain the cross section of currency

returns because the spread in currency beta is not sufficiently large to match the cross sectional variation in expected

returns. The downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM) explains currency returns because the difference in beta between

high and low yield currencies is higher conditional on bad market returns, when the market price of risk is also

high, than it is unconditionally.

   We also find that the DR-CAPM can jointly explain the cross section of currencies, equity, equity index options,

commodities and sovereign bond returns. We view these results as not only confirming the empirical performance

of the model but also as a first step in reconciling discount factors across asset classes. The performance of the

model across asset classes contrasts with the failure of models designed for a specific asset class in pricing other

asset classes.

   Our results open new avenues for future research. Given its demonstrated empirical relevance, it is important

to gain a deeper theoretical understanding of the sources and time variation of downside risk. It remains an open

question whether downside risk comes from preferences or from micro-founded constraints.




                                                          20
References

[1] Adrian, T., E. Etula, and T. Muir. Financial intermediaries and the cross section of asset returns. Journal of
   Finance, Forthcoming.

[2] Ang, A., J. Chen, and Y. Xing (2006). Downside risk. Review of Financial Studies 19 (4), 1191–1239.

[3] Asness, C., T. Moskowitz, and L. H. Pedersen (2012). Value and momentum everywhere. Journal of Finance,
   forthcoming.

[4] Bansal, R. and M. Dahlquist (2000). The forward premium puzzle: different tales from developed and emerging
   economies. Journal of International Economics 51 (1), 115–144.

[5] Barro, R. J. (2006). Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century. The Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 121 (3), 823–866.

[6] Borri, N. and A. Verdelhan (2011). Sovereign risk premia. Unpublished manuscript, MIT .

[7] Brunnermeier, M. K., S. Nagel, and L. H. Pedersen (2008). Carry trades and currency crashes. NBER Macroe-
   conomics Annual (23), 313–348.

[8] Burnside, C. (2011a). Carry trades and risk. National Bureau of Economic Research Working manuscript
   Series No. 17278.

[9] Burnside, C. (2011b). The cross section of foreign currency risk premia and consumption growth risk: Comment.
   American Economic Review 101 (7), 3456–3476.

[10] Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, I. Kleshchelski, and S. Rebelo (2011). Do peso problems explain the returns to
   the carry trade? Review of Financial Studies 24 (3), 853 –891.

[11] Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2009). Understanding the forward premium puzzle: A mi-
   crostructure approach. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (2), 127–154.

[12] Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2011). Carry trade and momentum in currency markets. Annual
   Review of Financial Economics 3 (1), 511–535.

[13] Burnside, C., B. Han, D. Hirshleifer, and T. Y. Wang (2011). Investor overconfidence and the forward premium
   puzzle. The Review of Economic Studies 78 (2), 523 –558.

[14] Caballero, R. and J. B. Doyle (2013). Carry trade and systematic risk: Why are FX options so cheap?
   Unpublished manuscript, MIT and Cornerstone Research.

[15] Campbell, J. and T. Vuolteenaho (2004). Bad beta, good beta. American Economic Review 94 (5), 1249–1275.

[16] Christiansen, C., A. Ranaldo, and P. Soederlind (2011). The time-varying systematic risk of carry trade
   strategies. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46 (4), 1107–1125.

[17] Cochrane, J. H. (2005). Asset Pricing: (Revised ed.). Princeton University Press.

[18] Cochrane, J. H. (2011). Presidential address: Discount rates. The Journal of Finance 66 (4), 1047–1108.

[19] Cochrane, J. H. and M. Piazzesi (2005). Bond risk premia. American Economic Review 95 (1), 138–160.

[20] Constantinides, G., J. Jackwerth, and A. Savov (2013). The puzzle of index option returns. Review of Asset
   Pricing Studies, Forthcoming.

[21] D’Avolio, G. (2002). The market for borrowing stock. Journal of Financial Economics 66 (2), 271–306.

[22] Dobrynskaya, V. (2013). Downside market risk of carry trades. Unpublished manuscript, London School of
   Economics.
[23] Fama, E. and K. French (1992). The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal of Finance 47 (2),
   427–465.

[24] Fama, E. F. and J. D. MacBeth (1973). Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests. Journal of Political
   Economy 81 (3), pp. 607–636.

[25] Farhi, E., S. P. Fraiberger, X. Gabaix, R. Ranciere, and A. Verdelhan (2012). Crash risk in currency markets.
   Unpublished manuscript, Harvard, NYU, IMF, and MIT .

[26] Farhi, E. and X. Gabaix (2008). Rare disasters and exchange rates. Unpublished manuscript, Harvard and
   NYU .

[27] Frazzini, A. and L. H. Pedersen (2012). Betting against beta. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

[28] Gorton, G. B., F. Hayashi, and K. G. Rouwenhorst (2013). The fundamentals of commodity futures returns.
   Review of Finance 17 (1), 35–105.

[29] Gul, F. (1991). A theory of disappointment aversion. Econometrica 59 (3), 667–686.

[30] Harvey, C. R. and A. Siddique (2000). Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests. The Journal of Fi-
   nance 55 (3), 1263–1295.

[31] Jurek, J. (2012). Crash-neutral currency carry trades. Unpublished manuscript, Princeton.

[32] Koijen, R., T. Moskowitz, L. H. Pedersen, and E. Vrugt (2012). Carry. Unpublished Manuscript, University
   of Chicago and NYU .

[33] Lamont, O. and R. Thaler (2003). Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in the tech stock carve-puts.
   Journal of Political Economy 111 (2), 227–268.

[34] Leland, H. E. (1999). Beyond mean-variance: Performance measurement in a nonsymmetrical world. Financial
   Analysts Journal 55 (1), pp. 27–36.

[35] Lustig, H., N. Roussanov, and A. Verdelhan (2011). Common risk factors in currency markets. Review of
   Financial Studies, forthcoming.

[36] Lustig, H. and A. Verdelhan (2007). The cross section of foreign currency risk premia and consumption growth
   risk. American Economic Review 97 (1), 89–117.

[37] Lustig, H. and A. Verdelhan (2011). The cross-section of foreign currency risk premia and consumption growth
   risk: Reply. American Economic Review 101 (7), 3477–3500.

[38] Maggiori, M. (2013). A note on currency returns. Unpublished manuscript, NYU .

[39] Markowitz, H. (1959). Portfolio Selection: Efficient Diversification of Investments. Wiley, Yale University
   press, 1970, Basil Blackwell, 1991.

[40] Menkhoff, L., L. Sarno, M. Schmeling, and A. Schrimpf (2012). Carry trades and global foreign exchange
   volatility. The Journal of Finance 67 (2), 681–718.

[41] Mitchell, M., T. Pulvino, and E. Stafford (2002). Limited arbitrage in equity markets. The Journal of
   Finance 57 (2), 551–584.

[42] Mueller, P., A. Stathopoulos, and A. Vedolin (2012). International correlation risk. Unpublished Manuscript,
   LSE and USC .

[43] Nozawa, Y. (2012). Corporate bond premia. Unpublished manuscript, The University of Chicago.

[44] Routledge, B. and S. Zin (2010). Generalized disappointment aversion and asset prices. The Journal of
   Finance 65 (4), 1303–1332.
[45] Shanken, J. (1992). On the estimation of beta-pricing models. Review of Financial Studies 5 (1), 1–55.

[46] Yang, F. (2010). Investment shocks and the commodity basis. Unpublished manuscript, Hong Kong University.
                                                                  Figure 1: Risk-Return Relations

                 15

                                                                    14
                                                             13
                 10
                                                                              7
   Mean Return




                                                 17
                                                             8
                  5                  16           6A
                        15           4                       9
                                                       12
                                 2           5
                                     3            11                                                               Currencies
                  0     10
                                                                                                                   Commodities
                             1                                                                                     F&F

                 −0.2            0                     0.2           0.4       0.6        0.8             1        1.2           1.4
                                                                  Relative Downside Beta β− − β


                 15

                                                                                                          14
                 10                                                                                       13
                                         7
   Mean Return




                                                                                                    17
                                                 8                                                   16
                  5                               6A
                                             9                                                                15
                                               5                                                                           12
                                         4
                                     3       2 10
                  0
                                             11
                                         1

                 −0.2            0                     0.2           0.4           0.6        0.8         1        1.2           1.4
                                                                                  Beta β

Risk-return relations for six currency portfolios monthly re-sampled based on the interest rate differential with the US, six Fama
& French equity portfolios sorted on size and book to market, and five commodity futures portfolios monthly re-sampled based
on basis. High inflation countries in the last currency portfolio are excluded. A country is considered to have high inflation if
it has annualized monthly inflation 10% higher than US inflation. The top panel plots the realized mean excess-return versus
the relative downside betas pβ ´ ´ βq. The bottom panel plots the realized mean excess-return versus the CAPM betas pβq.
The sample period is January 1974 to March 2010 for a total of 435 observations for the currency and equity portfolios, and
January 1974 to December 2008 for a total of 420 observations for the commodity portfolios.




                                                                                                    Student Version of MATLAB
                                        Figure 2: Characteristics of the 6 Currency Portfolios

                    15
         Mean [%]




                     5



                    −5
                                 1           2          3           4          5           6         6A          6B



                    20
         Std [%]




                    10


                     0
                                 1           2          3           4          5           6         6A          6B

                     1
Sharpe Ratio




                    0.5


                     0


               −0.5
                                 1          2          3         4        5           6       6A                 6B
                                      Portfolios Sorted on Interest Rate Differential with US: i?t − it

                    Annualized mean excess-returns, standard deviations and Sharpe ratios for six currency portfolios,
                    monthly re-sampled based on the interest rate differential with the US. High inflation countries in
                    the sixth portfolio are subdivided into basket 6B. A country is considered to have high inflation if it
                    has annualized monthly inflation 10% higher than US inflation. The sample period is January 1974
                    to March 2010 for a total of 435 observations.




                                                                                               Student Version of MATLAB
                                               Figure 3: Kernel-Smoothed Conditional Correlation

                                                     H ig h Interest R ate Differential Po rtfo lio : 6 A
         Co rrelatio n




                              0.2

                             0.15

                              0.1


                                                      Low Interest R ate Differential Po rtfo lio : 1
                              0.1                          State Cut−Off
Co rrelatio n




                       0.075


                             0.05
     R elative Frequ en cy




                                                               H isto g ram o f M arket R etu rn



                              0.1


                             0.05


                                    −10   −8    −6        −4        −2      0        2            4         6          8        10
                                                                     M arket retu rn

             Kernel smoothed estimate of the conditional correlation between different currency portfolios and the CRSP value-
             weighted (market) excess-return conditional on the market excess-return using a normal kernel. Top panel: correlation
             of the market excess-return with the high interest rate currencies (portfolio 6A). High inflation countries in the last
             portfolio are excluded. A country is considered to have high inflation if it has annualized monthly inflation 10% higher
             than US inflation. Middle panel: correlation of the market excess-return with the low interest rate currencies (portfolio
             1). Bottom panel: empirical distribution of market excess-returns. The red line indicates the state cut-off in the
             empirical analysis of one standard deviation below the mean of the market excess-return. The graphs have been cut on
             the left and right at -/+10% monthly market excess-return. The sample period is January 1974 to March 2010 for a
             total of 435 observations.
                                             Figure 4: Risk-Return Relations: Currencies

                                  6A                                                    6A                                  6A
                  4                                              4                                          4
   Mean Return




                                                  Mean Return




                                                                                             Mean Return
                                  5                                             4                                   4
                  2       4                                      2                  5                       2           5
                      3       2                                           2 3                                   2   3
                  0                                              0                                          0

                 −2                                             −2                                         −2
                          1                                           1                                         1
                      0   0.1 0.2      0.3                             0  0.1 0.2 0.3                 0  0.1 0.2 0.3
                          Beta β                                     Downside Beta β−        Relative Downside Beta β− − β

Risk-return relations for six currency portfolios (1-6A), monthly re-sampled based on the interest rate differential with the US.
High inflation countries in the last portfolio are excluded. A country is considered to have high inflation if it has annualized
monthly inflation 10% higher than US inflation. From left to right, the panels plot the realized mean excess-return versus the
CAPM betas (β), the downside betas pβ ´ q and the relative downside betas pβ ´ ´ βq. The sample period is January 1974 to
March 2010 for a total of 435 observations.
                                             Figure 5: Model Performance: Currencies


                                                         All Countries
                                     CAPM                                                                  DR–CAPM
                                                                                             6
                                6A            0
                                                                                                                                   0       6A
                 4
                                                                                             4
Actual Return




                                                                            Actual Return
                                 5                                                                                     5
                                         4
                 2                                                                           2
                                     2                                                                             4
                                                                                                               3
                                3                                                                          2
                 0                                                                           0

                −2                                                                          −2                                     All
                                1                                                                          1                       Market

                      −2       0     2     4                                                      −2      0      2    4                    6
                           Predicted Return                                                            Predicted Return
                                                      Developed Countries
                                     CAPM                                                                  DR–CAPM

                                                                                                                                       0
                 4                                0                                          4
                                5                                                                                              5
Actual Return




                                                                            Actual Return




                             4
                 2                                                                           2                             4

                                 3                                                                             3
                 0                                                                           0
                                                                                                       2
                                 2                                                                                         Developed
                −2          1                                                               −2             1               Market

                     −2       0      2      4                                                    −2       0      2      4
                           Predicted Return                                                            Predicted Return
Annualized mean excess-returns versus the predicted excess-returns in percent for the unconditional CAPM in the left panels
and the downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM) in the right panels. In the top panel, test assets are six currency portfolios (1-6A),
monthly re-sampled based on the interest rate differential with the US. High inflation countries in the last portfolio are excluded.
A country is considered to have high inflation if it has annualized monthly inflation 10% higher than US inflation. In the
bottom panel, test assets are five currency portfolios of developed countries. The market excess-return is included as a test
asset (0). The sample period is January 1974 to March 2010 for a total of 435 observations.




                                                                                                       Student Version of MATLAB
                                                                 Figure 6: Risk-Return Relations: Other Asset Classes

                                            F&F6                                              Commodities                                                     Sovereigns
                                                                                                                                                                           6
                              12                                                         12                                                      12
                Mean Return




                                                                           Mean Return




                                                                                                                                   Mean Return
                                                         3                                                                                                         5
                                                     2                                                    1
                               8                                                          8                                                       8           4
                                                 6                                                                                                                         3
                                         5                                                            2
                               4         4 1                                              4                                                       4            2
                                                                                                      3
                                                                                                                                                              1
                               0                                                          0   4   5                                               0
                    −0.3 −0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5                                     −0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6                                         0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3
                Relative Downside Beta β− − β                             Relative Downside Beta β− − β                            Relative Downside Beta β− − β

       Risk-return relations for the six Fama & French portfolios sorted on size and book-to-market (left panel), five commodity futures
       portfolios monthly re-sampled based on basis (middle panel), and six sovereign bond portfolios monthly re-sampled based on
       their probability of default and bond beta (right panel). The panels plot the realized mean excess-return versus the relative
       downside betas pβ ´ ´ βq. The sample period is January 1974 to March 2010 for a total of 435 observations for the equity
       portfolios, January 1974 to December 2008 for a total of 420 observations for the commodity portfolios, and January 1995 to
       March 2010 for a total of 183 observations for the sovereign bond portfolios.




                                                                 Figure 7: Model Performance: Currencies and Equities


                                                 CAPM                                                                                                     DR–CAPM
                                                     9                                                                                                                             9
                10                                       8                                                                    10                                               8
Actual Return




                                                                                                              Actual Return




                                             12                                                                                                  12
                                       6A    11                                                                                                 11
                 5                             0                                                                               5             6A    0
                                       5                     10                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                 Student Version
                                                             7                                                                            4 5 of MATLAB7
                                   4
                                     2                                                                                                   3
                                   3                                                                                                  2              Currencies
                 0                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                     Market
                                                                                                                                        1            F&F
                                   1
                                    0        5       10                                                                                           0        5       10
                                    Predicted Return                                                                                              Predicted Return
       Annualized mean excess-returns versus the predicted excess-returns in percent for the unconditional CAPM in the left panel
       and the downside risk CAPM
                               CAPM (DR-CAPM) in the right panel. Test assets are six currency DR–CAPM   portfolios (1-6A), monthly re-
       sampled based on the interest rate differential with the US as well as the six Fama & French equity portfolios sorted on size and
         10
       book-to-market (7-12). The market excess-return is included as a test asset (0). 10 High inflation countries in the last currency
                                         10
       portfolio are excluded. A country is considered to have high inflation if it has annualized monthly inflation 10%10   higher than
                                     8        12 1974 to March 2010 for a total of 435 observations.
       US inflation. The sample period is January
                                                                 9                                                             8                                          9            12
                                                             7       11                                                                                                 7
Actual Return




                                                                                                              Actual Return




                                                                 0                                                                                                          11
                 5                          6A                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                               5
                                         5                                                                                                                              6A
                                                                                                                                                              5
                                         4                                                                                                                4
                 0                     3 2                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                               0                                        Currencies
                                                                                                                                                          2
                                 Figure 8: Model Performance: Currencies, Equities, and Commodities


                                                 Currencies and Commodities
                                     CAPM                                                          DR–CAPM
                10                                                                         10
                     7                                                                                                  7
Actual Return




                                                                           Actual Return
                         8                                                                                8
                 5                                                                          5
                                 6A                                                                     6A
                         9                0                                                           5 0
                                 5                                                                            9
                     4                                                                            4
                             2
                     3                                                                          2 3    11
                 0               10                                                         0
                         11                                                                      10
                                                                                                  1
                     1
                      0         5                       10                                       0         5                 10
                     Predicted Return                                                           Predicted Return
                                               Currencies, Commodities and F&F
                                     CAPM                                                          DR–CAPM
                                                                                                                        14
                                     14
                10                                                                         10                      13
                     7               13                                                                           7
Actual Return




                                                                           Actual Return




                     8           17                                                                      8 17
                 5                        16                                                5          16
                         6A                                                                          15 0 6A
                      9     0
                               15                                                                         9   12
                         5    12                                                                   5
                     4                                       Currencies                          24
                       2
                     3 10                                    Market                             3     11
                 0                                                                          0
                         11                                  Commodities                        10
                                                                                                 1
                     1                                       F&F

                     0         5                   10                                           0         5             10
                     Predicted Return                                                           Predicted Return
Annualized mean excess-returns versus the predicted excess-returns in percent for the unconditional CAPM in the left panels
and the downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM) in the right panels for six currency portfolios (1-6A), monthly re-sampled based on
the interest rate differential with the US, five commodity futures portfolios monthly re-sampled based on basis (labelled 7-11)
as well as the six Fama & French portfolios sorted on size and book-to-market (12-17). The market excess-return is included
as a test asset (0). High inflation countries in the last currency portfolio are excluded. A country is considered to have high
inflation if it has an annualized monthly inflation of 10% higher than US inflation. The sample period is January 1974 to
December 2008 for a total of 420 observations.




                                                                                                Student Version of MATLAB
                              Figure 9: Model Performance: Currencies, Equities, and Sovereign Bonds


                                                Currencies and Sovereigns
                                  CAPM                                                               DR–CAPM
                15                                                                         15                              12
                              12
                         11
                                                                                                                 11
Actual Return




                                                                           Actual Return
                10                                                                         10
                         10
                              9                                                                                10     9
                 5       8        0                                                         5              0
                     6A                                                                                      8
                                                                                                           6A
                     4 7                                                                        4          7
                     3 52                                                                             35
                 0                                                                          0        2
                                                                                                    1
                     1
                     0      5      10              15                                           0      5      10                15
                      Predicted Return                                                           Predicted Return
                                             Currencies, Sovereigns and F&F
                                  CAPM                                                               DR–CAPM
                15                                                                         15                         12
                              12
                         11                                                                                    11
                             15                                                                               15
Actual Return




                                                                           Actual Return




                10                                                                         10
                             14                                                                              14
                         10
                            9                                                                              10
                              17                                                                                 9
                                                                                                     16 18 17
                 5       6A 18 0                                                            5          0
                            8 16                                                                     6A
                         5                                  Currencies                                    8
                     4
                                                            Market
                                                                                                4        7 13
                     3 7           13                                                               35
                 0    2                                     Sovereigns                      0      2
                                                            F&F                                   1
                     1
                     0      5      10              15                                           0      5      10                15
                      Predicted Return                                                           Predicted Return
Annualized mean excess-returns versus the predicted excess-returns in percent for the unconditional CAPM in the left panels
and the downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM) in the right panels for six currency portfolios (1-6A), monthly re-sampled based on
the interest rate differential with the US, six sovereign bond portfolios monthly re-sampled based on their probability of default
and bond beta (7-12) as well as the six Fama & French portfolios sorted on size and book-to-market (13-18). The market
excess-return is included as a test asset (0). High inflation countries in the last currency portfolio are excluded. A country is
considered to have high inflation if it has an annualized monthly inflation of 10% higher than US inflation. The sample period
is January 1995 to March 2010 for a total of 183 observations.




                                                                                                Student Version of MATLAB
                          Figure 10: Model Performance: Currencies, Commodities, and Beta-sorted Equities


                                           Currencies, Commodities and BAB
                               CAPM                                                                           DR–CAPM
                     12                                                                                                             12
                10                                                                              10
                      7                                                                                                                   7
Actual Return




                                                                                Actual Return
                      8                                                                                                8
                 5        6A 0                                                                   5                         6A
                                                                                                                   0
                       9                                                                                      45
                      42 5                                   Currencies
                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                           9
                      3 10                                   Market                                           3 11
                 0                                                                               0   10
                        11                                   Commodities
                                                                                                          1
                      1                                      BAB

                          0       5       10                                                              0       5       10
                          Predicted Return                                                                Predicted Return
                                Currencies, Commodities and Beta-sorted Equities
                               CAPM                                          DR–CAPM
                                                                                                                                    13
                            12   13                                                                                                      12
                               14 15
                10                                                                              10                                  14
                      7                                                                                                        15             7
Actual Return




                                                                                Actual Return




                                  16                                                                                   16

                      8                                                                                                 8
                 5         6A 0                                                                  5                          6A
                                                                                                                   0
                       9                                                                                      45
                      4 5                                    Currencies
                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                            9
                         2                                   Market                                                11
                 0    3 10                                                                       0   10       3
                        11                                   Commodities
                                                                                                          1
                      1                                      Beta−Sorted

                          0        5       10                                                             0        5       10
                          Predicted Return                                                                Predicted Return
      Annualized mean excess-returns versus the predicted excess-returns in percent for the unconditional CAPM in the left panels
      and the downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM) in the right panels for six currency portfolios (1-6A), monthly re-sampled based on
      the interest rate differential with the US, five commodity futures portfolios monthly re-sampled based on basis (7-11) as well
      as the betting against beta factor (12) in the top panels and five portfolios sorted on CAPM beta (12-16) in the bottom panels.
      The market excess-return is included as a test asset (0). High inflation countries in the last currency portfolio are excluded.
      A country is considered to have high inflation if it has an annualized monthly inflation of 10% higher than US inflation. The
      sample period is January 1974 to December 2008 for a total of 420 observations.




                                                                                                          Student Version of MATLAB
                       Figure 11: Model Performance: Currencies, Commodities, and Industry Portfolios


                                CAPM                                                                        DR–CAPM
                10                                                                                10
                      7                                                                                                      7

                                  12                                                                                 8 12
Actual Return




                                                                                  Actual Return
                       8                                                                                         15
                 5           13 15                                                                 5              13
                           6A                                                                                        6A 16
                       9       0 16                                                                             5 0
                          5    14                                                                      14            9
                      4                                                                                 24
                        2                                     Currencies
                      3 10                                                                             3   11
                 0                                            Market                               0
                        11                                    Commodities                              10
                                                                                                        1
                      1                                       Industry

                       0         5                     10                                               0         5                10
                      Predicted Return                                                                 Predicted Return
       Annualized mean excess-returns versus the predicted excess-returns in percent for the unconditional CAPM in the left panel
       and the downside risk CAPM
                                CAPM (DR-CAPM) in the right panel. Test assets are six currency DR–CAPM portfolios (1-6A), monthly re-
       sampled based on the interest rate differential with the US, five commodity futures portfolios monthly re-sampled based on basis
         10
       (7-11) as well as the five Fama & French industry portfolios (7-11). The market10 excess-return is included as a test asset (0).
                                         10
       High inflation countries in the last currency portfolio are excluded. A country is considered to have high inflation
                                                                                                                          10 if it has
                                     8
       annualized monthly inflation 10% higher12  than US inflation. The sample period is January 1974 to December 2008 for
                                        9                                                                             9      8 a12total
       of 420 observations.          7 11
                                                                                                                     7
Actual Return




                                                                                  Actual Return




                                       0                                                                                11
                 5         6A                                                                                       0
                                                                                                   5
                          5                                                                                          6A
                                                                                                                5
                          4                                                                                 4
                 0        3 2                                                                           3
                                                                                                   0                  Currencies
                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                      Market
                                                                                                        1
                       1                                                                                              Carry

                        0        5                     10                                               0         5              10
                      Predicted Return                                                                 Predicted Return
                     Figure 12: Model Performance: Currencies, Commodities, and Equity Index Options


                                                                 Options
                             CAPM                                                                          DR–CAPM
                20                                                                                 20

                15                                                                                 15
Actual Return




                                                                                   Actual Return
                10                                                                                 10

                 5                                                                                  5

                 0                                                                                  0



                     0         10                      20                                               0         10                 20
                     Predicted Return                                                                   Predicted Return
                                         Currencies, Commodities and Options
                             CAPM                                                                          DR–CAPM
                20                                                                                 20

                15                                                                                 15
Actual Return




                                                                                   Actual Return




                10                                                                                 10
                                                               Currencies
                 5                                             Market                               5
                                                               Commodities
                 0                                             Puts                                 0
                                                               Calls

                     0    5    10   15                 20                                               0    5    10   15             20
                     Predicted Return                                                                   Predicted Return
      Annualized mean excess-returns versus the predicted excess-returns in percent for the unconditional CAPM in the left panels
      and the downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM) in the right panels for six currency portfolios, monthly re-sampled based on the
      interest rate differential with the US, five commodity futures portfolios monthly re-sampled based on basis as well as 18 portfolios
      of call and put options on the S&P 500 with maturities between 30 and 90 days and moneyness between 90 and 110. The
      market excess-return is included as a test asset. High inflation countries in the last currency portfolio are excluded. A country
      is considered to have high inflation if it has an annualized monthly inflation of 10% higher than US inflation. The sample
      period is April 1986 and to March 2010 for a total of 288 observations and to December 2008 for a total of 273 observations
      when the commodity portfolios are included.




                                                                                                        Student Version of MATLAB
                              Figure 13: Model Performance: Currencies, Commodities, and Equity Index Puts


                                                                Puts
                                  CAPM                                                                       DR–CAPM
                20   12                                                                        20
                                                                                                                         12

                                                                                               15
Actual Return




                                                                               Actual Return
                15
                                                                                                                         15
                     15
                                                                                               10
                10
                                                                                                        13
                         18                                                                                     18
                    13                                                                                16
                    16                                                                          5 14 0 19
                 5 19 0                                                                               20
                   14 17                                                                           17
                      20
                       5      10     15              20                                                 5      10    15       20
                         Predicted Return                                                               Predicted Return
                                             Currencies, Commodities and Puts
                                  CAPM                                                                       DR–CAPM
                20                                                                             20
                          12
                                                                                                                     12
                15                                                                             15
Actual Return




                                                                               Actual Return




                                                                                                                 15
                10        15                                                                   10
                     7                                                                                               7
                    8     18                                                                                8    18
                 5  6 5913 16                               Currencies
                                                                                                5      5136 16 9
                                                                                                     4
                    4 19 0                                  Market                                  3200 19
                    2 310
                       17 14                                Commodities
                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                  17 10
                         20                                                                          211
                 0 11                                       Puts                                0   1
                   1
                     0      5     10   15             20                                            0      5     10   15       20
                         Predicted Return                                                               Predicted Return
       Annualized mean excess-returns versus the predicted excess-returns in percent for the unconditional CAPM in the left panels
       and the downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM) in the right panels for six currency portfolios (1-6A), monthly re-sampled based
       on the interest rate differential with the US, five commodity futures portfolios monthly re-sampled based on basis (7-11) as
       well as nine portfolios of put options on the S&P 500 with maturities between 30 and 90 days and moneyness between 90 and
       110 (12-20). The market excess-return is included as a test asset (0). High inflation countries in the last currency portfolio
       are excluded. A country is considered to have high inflation if it has an annualized monthly inflation of 10% higher than US
       inflation. The sample period is April 1986 and to March 2010 for a total of 288 observations and to December 2008 for a total
       of 273 observations when the commodity portfolios are included.




                                                                                                        Student Version of MATLAB
                    Figure 14: Bootstrapped Distribution: Currencies Relative Downstate Betas

                                                                                          −
                          −
                         β6A − β1−                                                      (β6A − β1− ) - (β6A − β1 )
900                                                                   900

800                                                                   800

700                                                                   700

600                                                                   600
      0.0026                                                                  0.0247
500                                                                   500

400                                                                   400

300                                                                   300

200                                                                   200

100                                                                   100

  0                                                                      0
 −0.2          0        0.2        0.4        0.6        0.8            −0.2           0          0.2          0.4         0.6
                                                                                                           ´
Bootstrapped distribution of the difference in downstate betas of the last and first currency portfolios, β6A ´β1´ in the left panel,
and the difference in downstate minus unconditional betas of the last and first currency portfolios, (β6A ´ β1´ ) - (β6A ´ β1 ),
                                                                                                            ´

in the right panel. High inflation countries in the last currency portfolio are excluded. A country is considered to have high
inflation if it has an annualized monthly inflation of 10% higher than US inflation. We employ a smoothed bootstrap scheme
consisting of re-sampling empirical residuals and adding zero centered normally distributed noise using 20,000 iterations.




                                                                                           Student Version of MATLAB
                             Figure 15: PCA Loadings: Currencies, Equities, and Commodities
            1                                                                 1
                                               PC_cur1                                                                     PC_cur2
           0.8                                                               0.8
                                               PC_com1                                                                     PC_com2
           0.6                                 PC_ff1                        0.6                                           PC_ff2
           0.4                                                               0.4                                           PC_ff3

           0.2                                                               0.2
Loading




                                                                  Loading


            0                                                                 0
          −0.2                                                              −0.2
          −0.4                                                              −0.4
          −0.6                                                              −0.6
          −0.8                                                              −0.8
           −1                                                                −1
                 1   2        3       4           5        6                       1   2       3       4           5         6
                              Portfolio                                                        Portfolio
   Loadings of the principal component analysis for six currency portfolios, monthly re-sampled based on the interest rate differen-
   tial with the US, five commodity futures portfolios monthly re-sampled based on basis as well as the 6 Fama & French portfolios
   sorted on size and book-to-market. The PCA is performed separately on the portfolios of each asset class. The left panel plots
   the loadings of the first principal components of each asset class: P Ccur1 , P Cf f 1 , and P Ccom1 for currencies, equities, and
   commodities respectively. The right panel plots the loadings of the second principal component for currencies (P Ccur2 ), the
   second principal component for commodities (P Ccom2 ), and the second and third principal components for equities (P Cf f 2 ,
   P Cf f 3 ). High inflation countries in the last currency portfolio are excluded. A country is considered to have high inflation if
   it has an annualized monthly inflation of 10% higher than the US. The sample period is January 1974 to March 2010 for a
   total of 435 observations for currencies and equities and to December 2008 for a total of 420 observations for the commodity
   portfolios.




                                                                                           Student Version of MATLAB
                            Figure 16: Risk-Return Relations: T-Bills, Equity Momentum, and Corporate Bonds

                                                             Unconditional Beta



                             Momentum                                    Corporate Bonds                          Fama Bonds
                 12            3                                   12                                       12
   Mean Return




                                                     Mean Return




                                                                                              Mean Return
                  8          2                                      8                                        8
                         6
                                                                                  5                                            7
                  4     5                                           4                                        4            56
                                 4                                                                                      4 3
                                                                          3 4                                           2
                                     1
                  0                                                 0    1 2                                 0           1
                       0.95 1.15 1.35                                −0.05 0.15 0.35                           −0.25 −0.05 0.15
                      Unconditional Beta β                          Unconditional Beta β                      Unconditional Beta β



                                                                    Downside Beta


                             Momentum                                    Corporate Bonds                          Fama Bonds
                 12                           3                    12                                       12
   Mean Return




                                                     Mean Return




                                                                                              Mean Return




                  8                      2                          8                                        8
                             6
                                                                                      5
                  4          5                                      4                                        4     7 6
                        4                                                     4                                     5 43
                                                                        3                                                2
                                          1
                  0                                                 0      1 2                               0           1
                       0.95 1.15 1.35                                   −0.05 0.15 0.35                        −0.25 −0.05 0.15
                       Downside Beta β−                                  Downside Beta β−                       Downside Beta β−


Risk-return relations for the 6 Fama & French portfolios sorted on size and momentum (left panels), five corporate bond
portfolios annually re-sampled based on their credit spread by Nozawa [43] (middle panels), and seven zero coupon US Treasury
bonds (right panels). The top panels plot the realized mean excess-return versus the CAPM beta (β), while the bottom panels
plot the downside betas pβ ´ q. The sample period is January 1974 to March 2010 for a total of 435 observations for the equity
portfolios, October 1975 to March 2010 for a total of 414 observations for the commodity portfolios, and January 1974 to
March 2010 for a total of 183 observations for the US Treasury bond portfolios.




                                                                                            Student Version of MATLAB
                                             Table 1: Currency Portfolios
Annualized sample means, standard deviations and Sharpe ratios for the interest rate differentials, spot exchange rate
changes, excess returns and carry trade baskets for six currency portfolios, monthly re-sampled based on the interest
rate differential with the US. High inflation countries in the sixth portfolio are subdivided into basket 6B. A country
is considered to have high inflation if it has annualized monthly inflation 10% higher than US inflation. The sample
period is January 1974 to March 2010 for a total of 435 observations.


              Int. Rate Diff.         Low        2       3       4       5      High      6A       6B
                                                    Interest Rate Differential: i‹ ´ i
              Mean                   -2.79     -0.56 1.11 2.97 5.59 22.01 12.58                   36.02
              Std                    0.62       0.55 0.55 0.63 0.88 7.43              3.76        20.10

                                                           Spot Change: ∆sj
              Mean                   -0.27     -1.36   0.42 0.62 2.72 14.87               7.64    21.96
              Std                    7.63       7.56   7.70 7.19 8.11 10.27              11.30    15.87

                                                              Excess   Returns
              Mean                   -2.52      0.79   0.69    2.35    2.87 7.14         4.94     14.06
              Std                    7.73       7.64   7.76    7.21    8.13 10.54        10.73    19.93
              Sharpe Ratio           -0.33      0.10   0.09    0.33    0.35 0.68         0.46      0.71

                                                       High minus Low: rxj ´ rx1
              Mean                              3.31   3.21 4.87 5.38 9.66       7.45             16.14
              Std                               4.59   5.43 5.30 6.17 10.50 10.31                 20.23
              Sharpe Ratio                      0.72   0.59 0.92 0.87 0.92       0.72              0.80
                    Table 2: Equity, Commodity Futures, and Sovereign Bond Portfolios
Annualized sample means, standard deviations and Sharpe ratios for portfolios of stock excess returns, commodity
futures and sovereign bond returns. Panel A reports the statistics for the six Fama & French portfolios sorted on
size and book-to-market. Panel B reports the statistics for 5 commodity futures portfolios monthly re-sampled based
on basis. Panel C reports the statistics for 6 sovereign bond portfolios monthly re-sampled based on the probability of
default and bond beta. The sample period is January 1974 to March 2010 for a total of 435 observations in the upper
panel, January 1974 to December 2008 for a total of 420 observations in Panel B and January 1995 to March 2010
for a total of 183 observations in the lower panel.


                                             Panel A. Six Fama & French Portfolios
                Size                                Small                           Big
                Book-to-Market            Low      Medium       High      Low      Medium       High
                Portfolio                  1         2           3         4         5           6
                Mean                      3.23       9.80       11.51    3.94        5.66        6.78
                Std                       24.55      18.86      19.53    17.18      15.76       16.64
                Sharpe Ratio              0.13       0.52        0.59    0.23        0.36        0.41



                                             Panel B. Commodity Futures Portfolios
                Basis                     Low          2          3         4        High
                Mean                      9.18       5.70       3.59     0.32       -0.13
                Std                       18.50      15.65      16.38    15.58      17.34
                Sharpe Ratio              0.50       0.36       0.22     0.02       -0.01



                                                 Panel C. Sovereign Bond Portfolios
                Bond Beta                           Low                             High
                Credit Rating             Low      Medium       High      Low      Medium       High
                Portfolio                  1         2           3         4         5           6
                Mean                      2.28       4.43       6.80      7.45      11.32       14.77
                Std                       9.51       10.96      16.36     9.27      11.68       19.56
                Sharpe Ratio              0.24       0.40       0.42      0.80       0.97        0.75
               Table 3: Beta-sorted Equities, Industry, and Equity Index Options Portfolios
Annualized sample means, standard deviations and Sharpe ratios for portfolios of stock excess returns, industry and
put and call option excess returns. Panel A reports the statistics for the 5 beta sorted stock portfolios and a betting
against beta factor (BAB). Panel B reports the statistics for the 5 Fama & French industry portfolios. Panel C and
D report the statistics for 9 put and call option portfolios on the S&P 500 with maturities between 30 and 90 days
and moneyness between 90 and 110, respectively. The sample period is January 1974 to March 2010 for a total of 435
observations in Panels A and B and April 1986 to March 2010 for a total of 288 observations in Panels C and D.


                             Panel A. CAPM-Beta Sorted Equity Portfolios
  Portfolio                 Low           2         3           4       High      BAB
  Mean                     12.40       13.20      12.06      12.05      10.46     11.97
  Std                      14.47       18.08      20.17      23.23      30.16     12.18
  Sharpe Ratio              0.86        0.73       0.60       0.52       0.35      0.98



                              Panel B. Fama & French Industry Portfolios
  Industry              Consumer       Man.      HiTech     Health     Other
  Portfolio                1            2          3          4          5
  Mean                      6.20       5.60       3.88       5.27       4.68
  Std                      16.43       15.66      20.95      17.88      18.95
  Sharpe Ratio              0.38       0.36       0.19       0.29       0.25



                                       Panel C. Equity Index Put Option Portfolios
  Expiration                 30         30          30         60        60        60        90       90        90
  Moneyness                  90         100        110         90        100       110       90      100       110
  Portfolio                   1          2          3           4         5         6         7       8         9
  Mean                     19.92       6.93       3.55       12.16      5.94      3.07     7.26     5.05      3.31
  Std                      22.39       17.79      15.82      21.23      17.61     16.09    20.57    17.60     16.22
  Sharpe Ratio              0.89       0.39       0.22        0.57      0.34      0.19     0.35     0.29      0.20


                                       Panel D. Equity Index Call Option Portfolios
  Expiration                 30         30          30         60        60        60        90       90        90
  Moneyness                  90         100        110         90        100       110       90      100       110
  Portfolio                   1          2          3           4         5         6         7       8         9
  Mean                      0.64       -2.31      -5.05       0.78      -1.76     -4.42    1.09     -0.54     -2.25
  Std                      14.76       14.37      13.60      14.61      14.42     14.00    14.45    14.34     14.41
  Sharpe Ratio              0.04       -0.16      -0.37       0.05      -0.12     -0.32    0.08     -0.04     -0.16
                   Table 4: Conditional Correlations: Carry Trade and Market Returns
Correlations between the carry trade factor and CRSP value-weighted (market) excess-return. The correlation are com-
puted unconditionally, in the upstate and downstate as well as for various inflation thresholds. Newey-West standard
errors are reported in parentheses. Downstates are all months in which the market return is more than one standard
deviation below its sample mean. The upstate includes all observations that are not included in the downstate. The
sample period is January 1974 to March 2010 for a total of 435 observations.


                                                            all     downstate      upstate
                                                           0.12         0.26         0.05
                        all countries
                                                          (0.04)       (0.19)       (0.06)

                                                           0.08         0.28         0.00
                        excl high inflation (5%)
                                                          (0.04)       (0.22)       (0.05)

                                                           0.14         0.33         0.02
                        excl high inflation (10%)
                                                          (0.05)       (0.19)       (0.05)

                                                           0.15         0.41         0.02
                        excl high inflation (15%)
                                                          (0.05)       (0.22)       (0.05)

                                                           0.23         0.31         0.10
                        developed countries
                                                          (0.07)       (0.15)       (0.06)
                                             Table 5: Estimation of Linear Pricing Models: Currencies and Equities

Prices of risk, Fama&MacBeth standard errors in parentheses, χ2 statistics testing for joint significance of pricing errors, root mean squared pricing errors (RMSPE), the
number of observations T and the cross sectional R2 s for the unconditional CAPM and the downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM). In the two left columns, test assets are six
currency portfolios, monthly re-sampled based on the interest rate differential with the US. High inflation countries in the last currency portfolio are excluded. A country
is considered to have high inflation if it has annualized monthly inflation 10% higher than US inflation. The next two columns use five currency portfolios of developed
countries as test assets and the rightmost two columns add the six Fama & French portfolios sorted on size and bool-to-market to the six currency portfolios. The market
excess-return is included as a test asset. The sample period is January 1974 to March 2010 for a total of 435 observations. Starred estimates impose the restriction that
the market excess-return is exactly priced and consequently no standard errors are reported.

                                                    All Currencies             Developed Currencies            Currencies and Equities
                                                CAPM       DR-CAPM             CAPM        DR-CAPM             CAPM         DR-CAPM
                                                      ‹             ‹                ‹             ‹                 ‹
                                λ                0.39          0.39             0.39           0.39             0.39            0.39‹

                                λ´                              2.18                           2.34                             1.41
                                                               (0.77)                         (1.05)                           (0.40)

                                χ2               42.28         24.60            22.36          9.81            114.54           63.39
                                p-val            0.00%         0.04%            0.10%         8.09%             0.00%           0.00%
                                RMSPE             0.19          0.09             0.15          0.07              0.26            0.16
                                R2               8.77%        78.74%           34.74%        85.32%            24.31%          71.41%
                                T                 435           435              435           435               435             435
                              Table 6: Estimation of Linear Pricing Models: Currencies, Equities, Commodities and Sovereigns

Prices of risk, Fama&MacBeth standard errors in parentheses, χ2 statistics testing for joint significance of pricing errors, root mean squared pricing errors (RMSPE), the
number of observations T and the cross sectional R2 s for the unconditional CAPM and the downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM). In the left two columns, test assets are
six currency portfolios, monthly re-sampled based on the interest rate differential with the US and five commodity futures portfolios, monthly re-sampled based on basis.
High inflation countries in the last currency portfolio are excluded. A country is considered to have high inflation if it has annualized monthly inflation 10% higher than
US inflation. The next two columns add the six Fama & French portfolios, sorted on size and book-to-market. The next two columns use the six currency portfolios and
six sovereign bond portfolios, monthly re-sampled based on the probability of default and bond beta as test assets. The rightmost two columns add the six Fama & French
portfolios, sorted on size and book-to-market. The market excess-return is included as a test asset. The sample period is January 1974 to December 2008 for a total of 420
observations in the left four columns and January 1995 to March 2010 for a total of 183 observations in the right four columns. Starred estimates impose the restriction
that the market excess-return is exactly priced and consequently no standard errors are reported.

                                                                     Equities,                                                                    Equities,
                  Currencies, and Commodities              Currencies, and Commodities              Currencies, and Sovereigns            Currencies and Sovereigns
                  CAPM             DR-CAPM                 CAPM             DR-CAPM                 CAPM           DR-CAPM                CAPM          DR-CAPM
  λ                 0.32‹             0.32‹                 0.32‹              0.32‹                 0.41‹             0.41‹               0.41‹            0.41‹

  λ´                                   1.47                                     1.40                                   0.53                                  0.56
                                      (0.53)                                   (0.38)                                 (0.21)                                (0.21)

  χ2               52.66              28.24                 128.27             64.48                 40.26             39.68               88.31            86.54
  p-val            0.00%             0.30%                  0.00%             0.00%                  0.01%            0.01%                0.00%           0.00%
  RMSPE             0.30               0.11                  0.31               0.15                  0.41              0.22                0.38             0.22
  R2              -42.93%            80.69%                -17.38%            73.52%                -20.81%           65.80%              -22.66%          57.10%
  T                 420                420                   420                420                   183               183                 183              183
                    Table 7: Estimation of Linear Pricing Models: Currencies, Commodities, Beta-sorted and Industry-sorted Equities

Prices of risk, Fama&MacBeth standard errors in parentheses, χ2 statistics testing for joint significance of pricing errors, root mean squared pricing errors (RMSPE), the
number of observations T and the cross sectional R2 s for the unconditional CAPM and the downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM). In the left two columns, test assets are six
currency portfolios, monthly re-sampled based on the interest rate differential with the US, five commodity futures portfolios, monthly re-sampled based on basis as well as
a betting against beta (BAB) factor. High inflation countries in the last currency portfolio are excluded. A country is considered to have high inflation if it has annualized
monthly inflation 10% higher than US inflation. The next two columns use five portfolios sorted on CAPM beta instead of the BAB factor. The rightmost two columns add
the five Fama & French industry portfolios to the currency and commodity portfolios. The market excess-return is included as a test asset. The sample period is January
1974 to December 2008 for a total of 420 observations. Starred estimates impose the restriction that the market excess-return is exactly priced and consequently no standard
errors are reported.

                                               BAB,                             Beta-sorted Equities,                    Industry-sorted Equities,
                                   Currencies, and Commodities               Currencies, and Commodities               Currencies, and Commodities
                                    CAPM             DR-CAPM                  CAPM            DR-CAPM                  CAPM             DR-CAPM
                                          ‹                  ‹                      ‹                  ‹                     ‹
                   λ                 0.32               0.32                   0.32               0.32                  0.32                0.32‹

                   λ´                                    1.65                                     1.78                                      1.36
                                                        (0.35)                                   (0.39)                                    (0.45)

                   χ2               91.04               28.49                 102.75              41.85                 62.11              38.96
                   p-val            0.00%              0.47%                  0.00%              0.04%                  0.00%             0.01%
                   RMSPE             0.40                0.12                  0.39                0.19                  0.26               0.11
                   R2              -58.66%             86.45%                -12.10%             74.55%                -32.80%            75.02%
                   T                 420                 420                   420                 420                   420                420
  Table 8: Estimation of Linear Pricing Models: Currencies, Commodities, and Equity Index Options

Prices of risk, Fama&MacBeth standard errors in parentheses, χ2 statistics testing for joint significance of pricing
errors, root mean squared pricing errors (RMSPE), the number of observations T and the cross sectional R2 s for the
unconditional CAPM and the downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM). In the left two columns, test assets are 18 portfolios
of call and put options on the S&P 500 with maturities between 30 and 90 days and moneyness between 90 and 110.
The right two columns add six currency portfolios, monthly re-sampled based on the interest rate differential with
the US and five commodity futures portfolios monthly re-sampled based on basis. High inflation countries in the last
currency portfolio are excluded. A country is considered to have high inflation if it has annualized monthly inflation
10% higher than US inflation. The sample period is April 1986 and to March 2010 for a total of 288 observations and
to December 2008 for a total of 273 observations when the commodity portfolios are included. Starred estimates impose
the restriction that the market excess-return is exactly priced and consequently no standard errors are reported.

                                                                        Currencies,
                                              Options              Commodities and Options
                                    CAPM        DR-CAPM            CAPM          DR-CAPM
                                          ‹             ‹                ‹
                    λ                0.40          0.40             0.29             0.29‹

                    λ´                              1.14                             1.13
                                                   (0.27)                           (0.27)

                    χ2              162.72        162.63           211.95           211.89
                    p-val            0.00%         0.00%            0.00%            0.00%
                    RMSPE             0.44          0.21             0.39             0.20
                    R2              18.90%        81.43%           -1.89%           74.45%
                    T                 288           288              273              273
    Table 9: Betas of First-Stage Times-Series Regressions: Currencies, Equities, and Commodities
First-stage time series unconditional and downstate betas with OLS standard errors in parentheses for portfolios of
currency, stock and commodity (excess-) returns. Panel A reports these statistics for six currency portfolios, monthly
re-sampled based on the interest rate differential with the US. Panel B reports the statistics for the six Fama & French
portfolios sorted on size and book-to-market. Panel C reports the statistics for 5 commodity futures portfolios monthly
re-sampled based on the commodity basis. High inflation countries in the last currency portfolio are excluded. A country
is considered to have high inflation if it has annualized monthly inflation 10% higher than US inflation. The sample
period is January 1974 to March 2010 for a total of 435 observations in Panel A and B and January 1974 to December
2008 for a total of 420 observations in Panel C.


                                                  Panel A. Six Currency Portfolios
          Int. Rate Diff.           Low           2          3          4          5         High       6A
          β                         0.03        0.06        0.04      0.08       0.10        0.10      0.11
          SEOLS                    (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)    (0.02)     (0.02)      (0.03)    (0.03)
          β´                        0.02        0.04        0.04      0.10       0.17        0.18      0.30
          SEOLS                    (0.10)      (0.10)      (0.09)    (0.08)     (0.10)      (0.10)    (0.13)



                                              Panel B. Six Fama & French Portfolios
          Size                                 Small                            Big
          Book-to-Market            Low       Medium       High       Low      Medium        High
          Portfolio                  1          2           3          4         5            6
          β                         1.31        1.01        1.00      1.01       0.89        0.87
                                   (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)    (0.01)     (0.02)      (0.02)

          β´                        1.47        1.28        1.34      0.90       0.92        0.96
                                   (0.11)      (0.12)      (0.14)    (0.05)     (0.08)      (0.13)



                                             Panel C. Commodity Futures Portfolios
          Basis                     Low           2          3          4        High
          β                         0.03        0.09        0.11      0.13       0.10
                                   (0.06)      (0.05)      (0.05)    (0.05)     (0.05)

          β´                        0.53        0.33        0.35      0.10       0.23
                                   (0.26)      (0.23)      (0.25)    (0.20)     (0.25)
Table 10: Betas of First-Stage Times-Series Regressions: CAPM-beta Sorted, Industry, and Equity Index Option
Portfolios
      First-stage time series unconditional and downstate betas with OLS standard errors in parentheses for portfolios of
      equity and equity index options excess returns. Panel A reports these statistics for five CAPM-beta sorted equity
      portfolios. Panel B reports the statistics for the five Fama & French industry portfolios. Panel C and D report the
      statistics for 9 put and call option portfolios on the S&P 500 with maturities between 30 and 90 days and moneyness
      between 90 and 110, respectively. The sample period is January 1974 to March 2010 for a total of 435 observations in
      Panels A and B, April 1986 to March 2010 for a total of 288 observations in Panels C and D.


                               Panel A. CAPM-beta Sorted Equity Portfolios
       Portfolio             Low           2          3          4       High      BAB
       β                     0.69        0.93       1.04       1.20      1.46      -0.05
                            (0.03)      (0.03)     (0.03)     (0.03)    (0.05)    (0.04)

       β´                    0.99        1.18       1.25       1.26      1.34      0.48
                            (0.10)      (0.11)     (0.10)     (0.11)    (0.13)    (0.15)

                                   Panel B. Fama & French Industry Portfolios
       Industry           Consumer       Man.     HiTech      Health    Other
       Portfolio             1            2         3           4         5
       β                     0.90        0.85       1.15       0.82      1.04
                            (0.02)      (0.02)     (0.03)     (0.04)    (0.02)

       β´                    1.01        0.90       0.92       0.81      1.12
                            (0.10)      (0.09)     (0.14)     (0.15)    (0.10)

                                           Panel C. Equity Index Put Option Portfolios
       Expiration             30           30       30          60         60        60       90         90        90
       Moneyness              90          100       110         90        100       110       90        100        110
       Portfolio               1           2         3          4          5         6         7         8          9
       β                     1.10        0.98       0.89       1.08      0.98      0.91      1.06       0.98      0.91
                            (0.05)      (0.03)     (0.02)     (0.04)    (0.03)    (0.02)    (0.04)     (0.03)    (0.02)

       β´                    1.54        1.01       0.75       1.50      1.00      0.79      1.44       1.00      0.81
                            (0.24)      (0.13)     (0.08)     (0.18)    (0.12)    (0.08)    (0.16)     (0.12)    (0.09)

                                           Panel D. Equity Index Call Option Portfolios
       Expiration             30           30       30          60         60        60       90         90        90
       Moneyness              90          100       110         90        100       110       90        100        110
       Portfolio               1           2         3          4          5         6         7         8          9
       β                     0.82        0.74       0.48       0.81      0.76      0.59      0.80       0.76      0.66
                            (0.02)      (0.03)     (0.04)     (0.02)    (0.03)    (0.04)    (0.02)    (0.032)    (0.03)

       β´                    0.43        0.28       0.0.7      0.42      0.30      0.20      0.42       0.30      0.20
                            (0.08)      (0.11)     (0.16)     (0.08)    (0.11)    (0.14)    (0.07)     (0.10)    (0.14)
                                                                       Table 11: Model Robustness
Prices of risk, Fama&MacBeth standard errors in parentheses, root mean squared pricing errors (RMSPE), the number of observations T and the cross sectional R2 s for
the downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM). Test assets are six currency portfolios, monthly re-sampled based on the interest rate differential with the US, and the six Fama &
French portfolios, sorted on size and book-to-market where indicated. High inflation countries in the last currency portfolio are excluded. A country is considered to have
high inflation if it has annualized monthly inflation 10% higher than US inflation. In the left two columns, market prices of risk are estimated based only on the six Fama &
French portfolios and the market excess-return. The reported standard errors correspond to this estimation. The estimated prices of risk are then used to fit the six currency
portfolios or the six currency portfolios and the Fama & French portfolios jointly. The next two columns vary the downstate cutoff. Downstate in the low (high) threshold
specification are all months in which the market returns is more than 1.5 (0.5) standard deviations below its sample mean. The rightmost two columns vary the inflation
cutoff. A country is considered to have high inflation if is has annualized monthly inflation 5% (15%) higher than US inflation. The market excess-return is included as
a test asset. The sample period is January 1974 to March 2010 for a total of 435 observations. Starred estimates impose the restriction that the market excess-return is
exactly priced and consequently no standard errors are reported.

                                                    Currencies
                                   Currencies      and Equities             Currencies            Currencies             Currencies         Currencies
                                                                         Low Downstate        High Downstate            5% Inflation      15% Inflation
                                      Equity Prices of Risk                Threshold             Threshold               Threshold         Threshold
                   λ                   0.39‹            0.39‹                  0.39‹                 0.39‹                  0.39‹              0.39‹

                   λ´                  1.27             1.27                   1.95                  2.72                    2.55              2.13
                                      (0.45)           (0.45)                 (0.49)                (0.84)                  (0.94)            (0.60)

                   χ2                                                          23.38                 16.27                  23.94              25.21
                   p-val                                                       0.07%                 1.24%                  0.05%              0.03%
                   RMSPE              0.12             0.16                     0.15                  0.09                   0.09               0.09
                   R2                66.62%           70.99%                  47.16%                77.76%                 80.20%             80.99%
                   T                   435              435                     435                   435                    435                435
                            Table 12: PCA: Currencies, Equities, and Commodities
Loadings (PC1-(5)6) and percentage of the total variance explained by each principal component of a principal com-
ponents analysis on the covariance matrix of: Panel A, six currencies portfolios (Cur-PF1 – Cur-PF6A), monthly
re-sampled based on the interest rate differential with the US. High inflation countries in the last currency portfolio
are excluded. A country is considered to have high inflation if it has annualized monthly inflation 10% higher than US
inflation. Panel B, the six Fama & French portfolios (FF-PF1 – FF-PF6), sorted on size and book-to-market. Panel
C, five commodity futures portfolios (Com-PF1 – Com-PF5), monthly re-sampled based on basis. The sample period
is January 1974 to March 2010 in Panels A and B for a total of 435 observations, and to December 2008 in Panel C
for a total of 420 observations.


                                   Panel A. PCA Currency Portfolios
                                                      PC1           PC2           PC3
                             Cur-PF1                  -0.39          0.25          0.55
                             Cur-PF2                  -0.40          0.20          0.37
                             Cur-PF3                  -0.41          0.20         -0.05
                             Cur-PF4                  -0.38          0.16         -0.15
                             Cur-PF5                  -0.41          0.19         -0.73
                             Cur-PF6A                 -0.45         -0.89          0.04
                             Explained               68.78%       17.76%         5.03%


                               Panel B. PCA Fama & French Portfolios
                                                      PC1           PC2           PC3
                             FF-PF1                   -0.54          0.59          0.26
                             FF-PF2                   -0.43          0.18         -0.27
                             FF-PF3                   -0.43          0.07         -0.54
                             FF-PF4                   -0.35         -0.21          0.71
                             FF-PF5                   -0.33         -0.48          0.11
                             FF-PF6                   -0.34         -0.58         -0.24
                             Explained               86.37%        6.98%         4.73%


                                  Panel C. PCA Commodity Portfolios
                                                      PC1           PC2           PC3
                             Com-PF1                  -0.49          0.72          0.41
                             Com-PF2                  -0.43          0.13         -0.46
                             Com-PF3                  -0.48         -0.02         -0.28
                             Com-PF4                  -0.39         -0.34         -0.38
                             Com-PF5                  -0.44         -0.59          0.63
                             Explained               59.99%       15.08%        10.45%
                                                       Table 13: Correlations: Currencies, Equities, and Commodities


Top panel: correlations between market excess return (Mrkt), dollar and carry currency portfolio returns (RX cur and HML cur) and the first two principal components of six currency
portfolios sorted on the interest differential (PC cur1 and PC cur2), monthly re-sampled based on the interest rate differential with the US. High inflation countries in the last currency
portfolio are excluded. A country is considered to have high inflation if it has annualized monthly inflation 10% higher than US inflation.. Middle panels: three Fama & French portfolio
returns (Mrkt, SMB and HML ff ) and the first three principal components of the six Fama & French portfolios sorted on size and book-to-market (PC ff1, PC ff2 and PC ff3). Bottom
panels: market excess return (Mrkt), commodity and basis portfolio returns (RX com and HML com) and the first two principal components of five commodity futures portfolios sorted
on basis (PC com1 and PC com2). The left panels report unconditional correlations while the right panels condition on the downstate. Downstates are all months in which the market
return is more than one standard deviation below its sample mean. The sample period is January 1974 to March 2010 for a total of 435 observations in the top and middle panels and
to December 2008 for a total of 420 observations in the bottom panels.


                                                       All States                                                                 Down States

                          Mrkt     RX cur       HML cur        PC cur1       PC cur2                   Mrkt     RX cur       HML cur        PC cur1       PC cur2

        Mrkt               1.00       0.17         0.14          -0.17         -0.09                   1.00        0.17         0.33          -0.17         -0.28
        RX cur            0.17        1.00         0.07          -1.00         0.02                     0.17       1.00          0.13         -1.00         -0.06
        HML cur            0.14      0.07          1.00          -0.09         -0.95                    0.33      0.13          1.00          -0.15         -0.97
        PC cur1           -0.17      -1.00        -0.09           1.00         0.00                    -0.17      -1.00         -0.15          1.00          0.08
        PC cur2           -0.09       0.02        -0.95           0.00          1.00                   -0.28      -0.06         -0.97          0.08          1.00

                          Mrkt       SMB         HML ff         PC ff1        PC ff2      PC ff3       Mrkt       SMB         HML ff         PC ff1        PC ff2      PC ff3

        Mrkt               1.00       0.25        -0.33          -0.95         -0.15        0.23        1.00       0.45          0.00         -0.91          0.01       -0.16
        SMB                0.25      1.00         -0.23          -0.48          0.80       -0.36        0.45       1.00          0.02         -0.64          0.66       -0.44
        HML ff            -0.33      -0.23        1.00           0.24          -0.51       -0.82       0.00       0.02          1.00          -0.27         -0.66       -0.90
        PC ff1            -0.95      -0.48        0.24           1.00           0.00        0.00       -0.91      -0.64         -0.27         1.00          -0.02       0.49
        PC ff2            -0.15      0.80         -0.51          0.00           1.00        0.00       0.01        0.66         -0.66         -0.02          1.00        0.30
        PC ff3             0.23      -0.36        -0.82          0.00           0.00        1.00       -0.16      -0.44         -0.90         0.49           0.30        1.00

                          Mrkt     RX com      HML com        PC com1       PC com2                    Mrkt     RX com HML com PC com1 PC com2

        Mrkt               1.00       0.11        -0.05          -0.11         -0.08                   1.00       0.20          0.19          -0.20         0.21
        RX com            0.11        1.00         0.05          -1.00         -0.02                   0.20        1.00          0.07         -1.00          0.04
        HML com           -0.05       0.05         1.00          -0.07          0.95                    0.19       0.07         1.00          -0.09          0.95
        PC com1           -0.11      -1.00        -0.07           1.00         0.00                    -0.20      -1.00         -0.09          1.00         -0.05
        PC com2           -0.08      -0.02         0.95          0.00           1.00                    0.21       0.04         0.95          -0.05          1.00
                          Table 14: Estimation of Linear Pricing Models: Currencies

Prices of risk, Fama&MacBeth standard errors in parentheses, χ2 statistics testing for joint significance of pricing
errors, root mean squared pricing errors (RMSPE), the number of observations T and the cross sectional R2 s for
various factor models and the downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM). The three leftmost columns present models based
on the first three principal components of the test assets (PC1, PC2 and PC3). The fourth column presents the dollar
and carry portfolio returns of Lustig and Verdelhan [36] (RXcur and HMLcur ). Test assets are six currency portfolios,
monthly re-sampled based on the interest rate differential with the US. High inflation countries in the last portfolio are
excluded. A country is considered to have high inflation if it has annualized monthly inflation 10% higher than US
inflation. The sample period is January 1974 to March 2010 for a total of 435 observations. Starred estimates impose
the restriction that the market excess-return is exactly priced and consequently no standard errors are reported.


                                              PC1        PC2         LRV       DR-CAPM
                            PC1               -0.33      -0.33
                                             (0.23)     (0.23)

                            PC2                          -0.32
                                                        (0.12)

                            PC3


                            RXcur                                    0.13
                                                                    (0.09)

                            HMLcur                                   0.47
                                                                    (0.15)

                            λmarket                                                0.39‹


                            λ´                                                     2.18
                                                                                  (0.77)

                            χ2               43.24      36.05       25.14          24.60
                            p-val            0.00%      0.00%       0.00%          0.02%
                            RMSPE             0.19       0.14        0.12           0.10
                            R2               4.47%     50.07%      63.71%         73.04%
                            T                 435        435         435            435
                           Table 15: Estimation of Linear Pricing Models: Equities

Prices of risk, Fama&MacBeth standard errors in parentheses, χ2 statistics testing for joint significance of pricing
errors, root mean squared pricing errors (RMSPE), the number of observations T and the cross sectional R2 s for
various factor models and the downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM). The three leftmost columns present models based
on the first three principal components of the test assets (PC1, PC2 and PC3). The fourth column presents the three
Fama & French portfolio returns (Mrkt, SMB and HML ff ). Test assets are the six Fama & French portfolios sorted
on size and book-to-market. The last column excludes the small growth portfolio. The sample period is January 1974
to March 2010 for a total of 435 observations. Starred estimates impose the restriction that the market excess-return
is exactly priced and consequently no standard errors are reported.


                                    PC2        PC3        F&F       DR-CAPM         DR-CAPM
                                                                                     excl port 1
                   PC1              -1.37      -1.37
                                   (0.60)     (0.60)

                   PC2              -0.25      -0.25
                                   (0.17)     (0.17)

                   PC3                         -0.51
                                              (0.14)

                   Mrkt                                    0.36
                                                          (0.23)

                   SMB                                     0.19
                                                          (0.15)

                   HML ff                                  0.49
                                                          (0.15)

                   λmarket                                              0.39‹           0.39‹


                   λ´                                                   1.27             1.61
                                                                       (0.45)           (0.43)

                   χ2              55.58      42.15       41.77         33.83            9.43
                   p-val           0.00%      0.00%       0.00%         0.00%           5.12%
                   RMSPE            0.25       0.14        0.14          0.20            0.07
                   R2             -3.57%     67.25%      68.27%        32.93%          90.48%
                   T                435        435         435           435             435
                        Table 16: Estimation of Linear Pricing Models: Commodities

Prices of risk, Fama&MacBeth standard errors in parentheses, χ2 statistics testing for joint significance of pricing
errors, root mean squared pricing errors (RMSPE), the number of observations T and the cross sectional R2 s for
various factor models and the downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM). The three leftmost columns present models based
on the first three principal components of the test assets (PC1, PC2 and PC3). The fourth column presents the
commodity and basis portfolio returns of Yang [46] (RXcom and HMLcom ). Test assets are five commodity futures
portfolios, monthly re-sampled based on basis. The sample period is January 1974 to December 2008 for a total of 420
observations. Starred estimates impose the restriction that the market excess-return is exactly priced and consequently
no standard errors are reported.


                                             PC1         PC2        Yang      DR-CAPM
                           PC1               -0.73       -0.73
                                            (0.41)      (0.41)

                           PC2                           0.60
                                                        (0.20)

                           PC3


                           RXcom                                    0.31
                                                                   (0.18)

                           HMLcom                                   0.83
                                                                   (0.28)

                           λmarket                                                0.32‹


                           λ´                                                     1.42
                                                                                 (0.57)

                           χ2                9.33       0.68        2.37          2.42
                           p-val            5.34%      87.84%      49.90%        65.98%
                           RMSPE             0.27       0.05        0.10          0.12
                           R2              10.41%      96.83%      87.14%        81.61%
                           T                 420         420         420           420
Table 17: Estimation of Linear Pricing Models: Currencies, Equities, and Commodities (Mimicking Portfolios)
   Prices of risk, Fama&MacBeth standard errors in parentheses, χ2 statistics testing for joint significance of pricing
   errors, root mean squared pricing errors (RMSPE), the number of observations T and the cross sectional R2 s for
   various factor models and the downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM). The leftmost column presents the model based on
   the dollar and carry portfolio returns of Lustig and Verdelhan [36] (RXcur and HMLcur ). The second column presents
   the model based on the commodity and basis portfolio returns of Yang [46] (RXcom and HMLcom ). The third column
   presents a model based on the three Fama-French factors (Mrkt, SMB and HML ff ). The next two columns present
   models based on combinations of the portfolio returns in the previous three columns. Test assets are six currency
   portfolios, monthly re-sampled based on the interest rate differential with the US, the six Fama & French portfolios
   sorted on size and book-to-market and five commodity futures portfolios, monthly re-sampled based on basis. The sample
   period is January 1974 to December 2008 for a total of 420 observations. Starred estimates impose the restriction that
   the market excess-return is exactly priced and consequently no standard errors are reported.

                                                                   Curmim     Curmim
                                                                   Commim     Commim
                                  Curmim     Commim      FFmim      FFmim      FFmim      DR-CAPM
                   RXcur            0.19                             0.10
                                   (0.11)                           (0.10)

                   HMLcur           0.99                             0.42        0.50
                                   (0.37)                           (0.15)      (0.16)

                   RXcom                       0.43                  0.31
                                              (0.19)                (0.18)

                   HMLcom                      0.54                  0.83        0.91
                                              (0.31)                (0.28)      (0.29)

                   Mrkt                                   0.28       0.31        0.40
                                                         (0.23)     (0.23)      (0.24)

                   SMB                                    0.23       0.18
                                                         (0.16)     (0.16)

                   HML                                    0.57       0.49        0.49
                                                         (0.18)     (0.15)      (0.17)
                   λmarket                                                                   0.32‹


                   λ´                                                                         1.40
                                                                                             (0.38)


                   χ2              113.18     120.09     107.48      84.30      87.49        64.48
                   p-val           0.00%      0.00%      0.00%      0.00%      0.00%        0.00%
                   RMSPE            0.32       0.34       0.24       0.12       0.16          0.15
                   R2             -14.96%    -35.22%     35.29%     82.37%     69.50%       73.52%
                   T                420        420         420        420        420          420
           Table 18: Estimation of Linear Pricing Models: Currencies, Equities, and Commodities
Prices of risk, Fama&MacBeth standard errors in parentheses, χ2 statistics testing for joint significance of pricing
errors, root mean squared pricing errors (RMSPE), the number of observations T and the cross sectional R2 s for
various factor models and the downside risk CAPM (DR-CAPM). The two leftmost columns present models based on
the first eight principal components of the test assets (PC1 – PC8). The third column presents a model based on the
first two principal components of the currency portfolios (PC cur1 and PC cur2). The fourth column presents a model
based on the first two principal components of the commodity portfolios (PC com1 and PC com2). The fifth column
presents a model based on the first three principal components of the stock portfolios (PC ff1 – PC ff3). The sixth and
seventh columns present models based on combinations of the principal components in the previous three columns. Test
assets are six currency portfolios, monthly re-sampled based on the interest rate differential with the US, the six Fama
& French portfolios sorted on size and book-to-market and five commodity futures portfolios, monthly re-sampled based
on basis. The sample period is January 1974 to December 2008 for a total of 420 observations. Starred estimates
impose the restriction that the market excess-return is exactly priced and consequently no standard errors are reported.

                                                                               PC cur    PC cur
                                                                               PC com    PC com
                              PC7       PC8      PC cur    PC com     PC ff     PC ff     PC ff     DR-CAPM
        PC1 / PC cur1          -1.32    -1.32     -0.55                          -0.27
                              (0.60)   (0.60)    (0.28)                         (0.24)

        PC2 / PC cur2          0.55     0.55      -0.73                          -0.28      -0.29
                              (0.40)   (0.40)    (0.27)                         (0.12)     (0.12)

        PC3 / PC com1          0.08     0.08                 -0.97               -0.72
                              (0.23)   (0.23)               (0.42)              (0.41)

        PC4 / PC com2          -0.57    -0.57                0.35                0.60       0.59
                              (0.20)   (0.20)               (0.23)              (0.20)     (0.20)

        PC5 / PC ff1           -0.24    -0.24                          -1.26     -1.22      -1.26
                              (0.18)   (0.18)                         (0.60)    (0.60)     (0.60)

        PC6 / PC ff2           0.22     0.22                           -0.21     -0.25
                              (0.16)   (0.16)                         (0.17)    (0.17)

        PC7 / PC ff3           0.10     0.10                           -0.63     -0.52      -0.58
                              (0.15)   (0.15)                         (0.18)    (0.14)     (0.18)

        PC8                             -0.60
                                       (0.14)

        λmarket                                                                                        0.32‹


        λ´                                                                                              1.40
                                                                                                       (0.38)


        χ2                   111.56     93.14    123.01     118.39   107.72     91.80      97.69       64.48
        p-val                0.00%      0.00%    0.00%      0.00%    0.00%     0.00%      0.00%       0.00%
        RMSPE                 0.19       0.12     0.33       0.34     0.24      0.12       0.19         0.15
        R2                   59.08%    83.03%   -28.62%    -35.32%   36.07%    83.62%     59.48%      73.52%
        T                      420       420      420        420       420       420        420         420
