                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DO ACQUISITIONS RELIEVE TARGET FIRMS’ FINANCIAL CONSTRAINTS?

                                             Isil Erel
                                            Yeejin Jang
                                        Michael S. Weisbach

                                        Working Paper 18840
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18840


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




Isil Erel and Michael Weisbach are Fellows of the National Center for the Middle Market at the Fisher
College of Business, Ohio State University, and acknowledge the Center’s support for this research.
We would like to thank Heitor Almeida, Bo Becker, Murillo Campello, Serdar Dinc, Mara Faccio,
Joan Farre-Mensa, Antonio Galvao, Cam Harvey, Jerry Hoberg, Byoung-Hyoun Hwang, Andrew
Karolyi, Berk Sensoy, René Stulz, Tracy Wang, Jun Yang, two referees, as well as seminar participants
at Amsterdam, Boston College, Brandeis, Cornell, Michigan, Minnesota, Northeastern, Ohio State,
Purdue, and UBC Winter Finance Conference for helpful suggestions. We received excellent research
assistance from Jongsik Park. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Isil Erel, Yeejin Jang, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Acquisitions Relieve Target Firms’ Financial Constraints?
Isil Erel, Yeejin Jang, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 18840
February 2013
JEL No. G32,G34

                                                ABSTRACT

Managers often claim that an important source of value in acquisitions is the acquiring firm’s ability
to finance investments for the target firm. This claim implies that targets are financially constrained
prior to being acquired and that these constraints are eased following the acquisition. We evaluate
these predictions on a sample of 5,187 European acquisitions occurring between 2001 and 2008, for
which we can observe the target’s financial policies both before and after the acquisition. We examine
whether target firms’ post-acquisition financial policies reflect improved access to capital. We find
that the level of cash target firms hold, the sensitivity of cash to cash flow, and the sensitivity of investment
to cash flow all decline significantly, while investment significantly increases following the acquisition.
These effects are stronger in deals that are more likely to be associated with financing improvements.
These findings are consistent with the view that acquisitions ease financial frictions in target firms.


Isil Erel                                               Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance                                   Department of Finance
Ohio State University                                   Fisher College of Business
832 Fisher Hall                                         Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue                                        2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210                                      Columbus, OH 43210
erel@fisher.osu.edu                                     and NBER
                                                        weisbach.2@osu.edu
Yeejin Jang
Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
810 Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
Jang_122@fisher.osu.edu
1. Introduction

        In a world with imperfect capital markets, firms will sometimes face financial constraints and

have to forego valuable investment opportunities. In this situation, an acquisition can potentially mitigate

these constraints if an acquirer’s access to capital enables the target to undertake an increased number of

positive net present value investments. Being part of a larger organization subsequent to an acquisition

can improve financing both through better direct access to capital markets, and also by the possibility of

reallocations of capital across divisions (see e.g., Stein (2003)). Practitioners often justify acquisitions by

this logic, claiming that they can better expand the target’s operations because of the acquirer’s internally

generated cash flow and ability to raise capital externally. 1 Yet, despite the enormous literature on

mergers and acquisitions, the extent to which acquisitions lower financial constraints in practice is

unknown.

        Perhaps the reason why financial constraints in target firms have not been evaluated empirically

is that the implications of such constraints concern the financial policies of the target firm and the way in

which they change following the firm’s acquisition. Evaluating these predictions requires financial data

on target firms both before and after the acquisition. For the U.S., such data are not publicly available.

However, most European countries require disclosure of financial data for subsidiaries, so it is possible to

observe the financial statements of targets both before and after they are acquired, as long as the target

remains an independent subsidiary following the acquisition.

        Because of this disclosure requirement, we are able to construct a sample of 5,187 European

acquisitions occurring from 2001 to 2008, each of which became a wholly owned subsidiary subsequent

to the acquisition. This sample contains both domestic (63%) and cross-border (37%) deals, and

acquisitions by both public (36%) and private (64%) firms. Most of the targets (97.4%) are private firms;

71.6% are independent firms while the remaining targets are subsidiaries of other firms prior to the



1
  For example, the Financial Times reported that AstraZeneca and Glaxo SmithKline were looking to acquire
smaller biotech companies during the Financial Crisis because they were better able to fund those companies’
investments than potential targets could do on their own. (Financial Times, September 25, 2009)


                                                      1
acquisition. We measure the target firms’ cash and investment policies both before and after the

acquisition, and evaluate the extent to which the acquisition led to improved access to capital.

         To assess whether financial constraints are mitigated by acquisitions requires one to measure

constraints in a particular target firm both before and after being acquired. While there are many ways to

measure financial constraints, particularly useful ones come from observation of managers’ own actions

to address their financial position. When access to capital markets is imperfect, value maximization will

lead managers to adopt financial policies that ensure that the most important investments will continue to

be financed. One such policy is to hold more cash on the balance sheet, so cash holdings should be higher

when managers believe they face financial constraints.2 In addition, when faced with financial constraints,

the literature has argued that the effect of a firm’s incremental cash flow on investment and also on cash

holdings should be higher (see Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988) and Almeida, Campello and

Weisbach (2004)).3 Therefore, a decline in the target’s cash holdings, investment-cash flow sensitivities,

and cash-cash flow sensitivities following an acquisition would suggest that the target’s financial

constraints are reduced when a target is acquired.

         We use these measures to evaluate the extent to which target firms are financially constrained

prior to being acquired, and that these constraints are reduced subsequent to the acquisitions. The results

suggest that target firms are indeed constrained prior to the acquisition, and that the constraints are

lessened after the firms are acquired. In particular, we find that cash holdings, normalized by assets,

decline by approximately 1.5% for an average target firm following being acquired. The sensitivity of

cash to cash flow declines significantly from a positive 10.4% to close to zero, which implies that the

target firm goes from being constrained to unconstrained (see Almeida, Campello and Weisbach (2004)).

Finally, there is a statistically significant decline in the sensitivity of investment to cash flow, with the

2
  This argument dates to Keynes (1936) and has been developed and confirmed empirically in a recent literature
beginning with Opler, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (1999). For a practitioner’s take on this argument see
Passov (2003), who argues that precautionary considerations are relevant even for companies like Pfizer, which at
the time this article was written, had a AAA bond rating.
3
  The issue of measuring financial constraints is controversial and each measure has limitations, which are discussed
below in Section 2.5. Our approach is to use alternative measures in the hope that any concerns about one measure
are alleviated by the fact that using other measures leads to similar results.


                                                         2
magnitude of the post-acquisition sensitivity being less than half of the pre-acquisition coefficient. All

these results are consistent with the view that acquisitions mitigate financing constraints, potentially

providing a source of value by enabling target firms to improve their investment policy.

        An implication of the financing view of acquisitions is that investment should rise following the

acquisition. The results suggest that investment does increase for target firms in our sample. Controlling

for other factors, investment as a fraction of total assets increases by between 1.56% and 2% following

the acquisition, which is a substantial effect given that the mean (median) investment ratio is 6.4% (3.4%)

for targets before the acquisition.

        If the estimated declines in cash holdings and the sensitivities of investment and cash to cash flow

reflect the easing of financial constraints because of the acquisition, then these declines should be larger

following acquisitions that are more likely to increase the ability of firms to finance investment. For

example, the decline in cash holdings and sensitivities should be larger following acquisitions of

independent firms than following acquisitions of subsidiaries of other firms. Consistent with this

prediction, we find that, for independent targets, their cash-to-asset ratio decreases by 1.8%, the cash flow

sensitivity of cash decreases by 8.2%, and the investment sensitivity of cash flow decreases by 5.2%.

Each of these declines is statistically significantly different from zero. We do not find significant changes

in the cash-to-asset ratio or either sensitivity when the target firm is a subsidiary of another firm. Overall,

these findings are consistent with independent targets being more financially constrained than subsidiary

targets prior to being acquired.

        Furthermore, we expect these declines to be larger when targets are smaller. Consistent with this

logic, the reduction in cash-to-asset ratio is statistically significant only for the subsample of the smaller

targets, with an estimated decline of 2.4% for the bottom tercile of firms ranked by asset size. The cash

flow sensitivities of cash and investment also declines by 7.3% and 7.8%, respectively, after the

acquisition for this subsample of firms. For the largest tercile of firms, there are no significant declines for

any of these variables. These cross-sectional patterns suggest that our estimates of changes in constraints

are largest in those targets a priori most likely to be constrained.


                                                       3
        Overall, the results suggest that managers of acquired firms change their financial policies in a

manner consistent with their becoming less financially constrained following the acquisition. Target firms

hold less cash, save less cash out of incremental cash flows, their investment tends to be less correlated

with cash flows, and they increase the quantity of investments after they are acquired. These effects are

larger when the target is most likely to be constrained prior to the acquisition. Presumably, the parent’s

cash flows as well as the parent’s access to capital markets allow the target firm to manage its financial

position more efficiently. These results are consistent with the view that one motive for acquisitions is the

value created due to the relaxation of financial constraints.

        This paper contributes to a long line of research on the motives for mergers and acquisitions.

Early work in this area documented value increases associated with mergers, taking the form of stock

price increases as well as improved earnings for the combined firm relative to the pre-merger levels.4

Once the gains’ existence had been established, much attention was paid to their sources. For a long time,

the presumed source was efficiency gains. But not until plant-level data on production efficiency was

available, was the existence of efficiency gains verified empirically. 5 In addition, the literature has

documented relatively small transfers to shareholders from other stakeholders such as employees, the

government, and consumers.6 In terms of sources of gains arising from inefficiencies, the dramatic stock

price increases of the 1990s prompted much work on price inefficiency as a motive.7 Yet, there has been

surprisingly little work on the role of improvements in financing efficiencies as a source of merger gains.8



4
  See Jensen and Ruback (1983) for a survey of the early merger event studies, and Healy, Palepu, and Ruback
(1992), who document that accounting performance increases following mergers of large public firms.
5
  See especially Schoar (2002) and Maksimovic, Phillips, and Prabhala (2011) for evidence on post-merger plant-
level efficiency improvements. Hoberg and Phillips (2010) also document evidence of the product market synergies
through a text-based analysis of product market language in 10-K filings.
6
  See Shleifer and Summers (1988) and Pontiff, Shleifer and Weisbach (1990) for discussion and evidence of
transfers from employees through wage cuts and pension reversions, and Auerbach and Reishus (1988) and Hayn
(1989) for transfers from the government through the tax system.
7
  See Shleifer and Vishny (2003) and Rhodes-Kropf, Robinson and Viswanathan (2005).
8
  Three exceptions are Mantecon (2008), Almeida, Campello, and Hackbarth (2011), and Liao (2011). Mantecon
uses a sample of private targets acquired shortly after filing for an IPO and examines the role of uncertainty, which
limits their access to external financing, in explaining the wealth effects to the acquirers. Almeida, Campello, and
Hackbarth make similar arguments to ours applied to acquisitions of firms in financial difficulties, and Liao focuses
on the financing role of acquisitions of partial stakes in firms.


                                                         4
        Our paper is also related to the literature on the way firms transfer resources within firms through

internal capital markets. Stein (1997) argues that even if access to capital markets does not improve by

combining divisions into firms, investment efficiency can be improved by reallocating investment across

divisions. Since there are likely to be improvements in direct capital access when firms are combined, the

overall effect of combining firms on investment efficiency is potentially substantial. 9 The empirical

literature has spent much attention to comparing the values of diversified and single-segment firms, as

well as the nature of cross-subsidization inside diversified firms. However, this literature has been

criticized because divisions do not combine randomly into firms, and its empirical results could

potentially be a consequence of nonrandom selection rather than of internal capital markets.10 Our results,

while also coming from nonrandom combinations of companies, are potentially cleaner than those in the

internal capital markets literature, since we can follow the same firms as both separate entities and as a

part of new parents. Importantly, we can observe the financial management policies before and after they

are acquired.

        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the way in which we

constructed a sample of European firms for which we could observe financial management practices both

before and after the acquisition, presents some statistics on this sample, and discusses conceptual and

practical issues involved in measuring financial constraints. Section 3 presents the tests of how cash levels,

cash and investment sensitivities with cash flow, and investment levels change when a firm is acquired.

Section 4 compares the extent to which financial constraints are reduced in different kinds of acquisitions.

Section 5 analyzes possible explanations for the decline in targets’ financial constraints post acquisitions.

Section 6 presents robustness checks that address alternative interpretations of our results, while Section 7

concludes.



9
  But not necessarily. Scharfstein and Stein (2000) present a model in which combining firms can create inefficient
rent-seeking, and Ozbas and Scharfstein (2010) provide empirical support for this notion.
10
   See Berger and Ofek (1995) and Lang and Stulz (1994) for evidence on valuation differences, Shin and Stulz
(1998) for evidence on cross-subsidization between divisions, and Campa and Kedia (2002) and Chevalier (2004)
for the case that these results are a consequence of selection rather than internal capital markets.


                                                        5
2. Measuring Financial Constraints in Acquired Firms

2.1. Data Availability

        To evaluate the way in which financial constraints are affected by acquisitions, it is important to

have access to a sample of acquisitions for which one can measure both the existence of constraints prior

to a potential acquisition, and also the way in which these constraints change following the acquisition.

There are a number of approaches that have been proposed to evaluate the magnitude of financial

constraints, most of which depend on access to financial data on the firm. Measuring the change in this

magnitude requires financial data for target firms both before and after the acquisition. Constructing a

sample of acquisitions containing such data is not straightforward for a number of reasons.

        Before being acquired, targets are either independent firms or subsidiaries of other companies. If

the target is free standing and also is publicly traded, disclosure requirements in all countries ensure that

financial data on the firm is publicly available. However, vast majority of targets are private and/or

subsidiaries of other corporations (see Ellis, Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz (2011), Erel, Liao, and

Weisbach (2012) and Netter, Stegemoller, and Winoki (2011)). Given that it is impossible to get financial

data for privately held firms or subsidiaries of public ones in the United States, estimating the extent to

which acquisitions mitigate financial constraints would be difficult using U.S. data.11

        Gathering financial data on the targets subsequent to the acquisition is even more problematic. In

the U.S., acquirers often integrate targets with their existing assets. Indeed, if operational synergies are the

driving force behind the acquisition, then it is plausible that optimal use of these synergies will lead to

integration of the two firms. Even if the assets are not integrated operationally, in the U.S., their financial

data sometimes is consolidated with that of the rest of the acquiring firm. If financial statements are

consolidated at the parent firm level, it is impossible to identify financial data from only the former

target’s assets, since it will be combined with the financial data from the new parent’s other assets.


11
  There are recently available databases assembled through accounting firms on privately held U.S. firms such as
Sageworks. However, in these databases, firms are generally anonymous, which would preclude matching targets to
acquirers. See Asker, Farre-Mensa, and Ljungqvist (2011) and Farre-Mensa (2011) for more information on these
data and examples of their use.


                                                       6
2.2. European Financial Data

         In contrast to the U.S., most European countries require firms to report financial data publicly on

an unconsolidated basis, even if they are privately held.12 Thus for most targets, it is possible to acquire

financial data prior to the acquisition, even if the firm is a subsidiary of another firm prior to being

acquired. These data are accessible through the Amadeus database. Using this database, we construct a

sample of acquisitions of European firms where target firms are operated as subsidiaries of their new

parents following the acquisitions.13

         A potential concern is whether we can correctly track the target firm’s assets after they are

acquired. One possibility is that the parent combines some of its other assets with those of the target firm

and keeps them together organizationally in a subsidiary that appears to an outsider to consist of only the

target firm’s assets. Therefore, we include in our final sample only targets whose number of employees or

size as measured by total assets (if the data on number of employees is missing) does not change more

than 100%.14

2.3. Sample Construction

         We start with a sample of European acquisitions taken from the Zephyr database. We rely on

Zephyr rather than the more commonly used SDC, because both Zephyr and Amadeus are provided by a

common data vendor, Bureau Van Dyck, and therefore share identifiers. Because of the common firm

identification, it is possible to match acquisitions from Zephyr to financial data from Amadeus more

accurately than it would be if one were to match SDC to Amadeus. In addition, Zephyr’s coverage of

private-firm acquisitions is better than SDC’s.


12
   There are some exceptions such as Switzerland, where not all private firms (except for banks and insurance
companies) are required to file. Also, filing requirements are not uniform across countries. For example, in the U.K.,
firms are not required to report sales data. Furthermore, in some countries, subsidiaries in the smallest size category
are not obligated to report their financials so we drop all subsidiaries in this size category from our sample.
13
   European firms can be targets of non-European acquirers. In such an acquisition, we generally cannot track the
acquirer’s financials post-acquisition but can usually track the target’s. Consequently, we include all the acquisitions
of European targets, but for some analysis where the acquirer’s financial information is needed, we restrict our
sample to acquisitions with European firms as both acquirers and targets.
14
   This change is measured by comparing average of the first available two years prior to the acquisition to the
average of the first available two years following it. We find qualitatively similar results when we only utilize firms
whose number of employees or size changes by less than 10%. We present these results in Appendix Table A4.


                                                           7
         Amadeus is structured so that each firm has a maximum of ten observations, generally occurring

between 2000 and 2009 in our sample.15 To allow for an acquisition to have financial information for at

least a year before and after the deal, we restrict the sample to those acquisitions occurring between 2001

and 2008, leaving one to eight years before and after an acquisition. We also require target firms to be

from countries with at least 10 acquisition targets in this time period, eliminating a total of 74 deals with

targets from Cyprus, Iceland, Luxembourg, Macedonia, Lithuania, Malta, Moldova, Serbia, and Slovenia.

We exclude deals where the target is a financial firm, as well as restructurings, privatizations, LBOs, and

exits from private equity deals. We also drop firms with less than 10 employees, with asset size less than

$1 million, and without data on fixed assets for at least one year before and after the acquisition. We end

up with a sample consisting of 5,187 deals with acquirers from 64 countries from all over the world and

targets from 25 European countries.

2.4. Sample Characteristics

         Amadeus provides a variety of financial data on our sample firms; however, it does not contain

data on capital expenditures, which is important for understanding financial constraints. Therefore, we

follow Becker and Sivadasan (2010) and Chung (2011) and estimate capital expenditures as the change in

fixed assets plus depreciation, all of which are normalized by total assets. To reduce the effect of outliers

in our data set, we trim accounting variables other than leverage at the top and bottom 1% of the

distribution.16 In addition, we restrict our sample to firms with leverage (normalized by assets) between

zero and one.

         Table 1 presents statistics on the acquisition sample. Most deals are small, with a median target

asset size of roughly $7.5 million. However, the size distribution is skewed, with a mean asset size of

about $67.7 million, more than eight times the median. Almost two-thirds (63.0%) of the deals are

domestic and almost three-fourths (71.6%) have independent targets (not subsidiaries of another firm).

15
   When we accessed the data set utilized in this paper, the last year fully covered was 2009. Firms that were alive in
2009 have data starting in 2000. However, for the firms that disappear from the sample before 2009, Amadeus keeps
the data of their last ten years, as well. For example, a firm that disappeared from the sample in 2006 potentially has
data available back to 1997.
16
   The results are similar if we winsorize rather than trim all accounting variables.


                                                          8
The vast majority (97.4%) of the acquisitions involve private targets and 36.1% of the deals are by

publicly-traded acquirers. The number of deals increases over time until 2007, and declines with the

Financial Crisis in 2008. The average deal size is larger in the earlier years of the sample, a mean of

$125.5 million in 2002 compared to $38.3 million in 2007. Combined with the lower number of deals in

the early part of the sample, this pattern suggests that the sampling process becomes less restrictive over

time, so that more (smaller) deals are included.

        This table highlights that the target firms in our sample are quite small, and are likely to be firms

for which an acquisition is a relatively attractive source of relieving financial constraints. As a

comparison, between 2001-2008, the SDC database contained 1,872 European IPOs. The mean ($358m)

and median ($20m) values of assets of these IPOs were more than twice our sample mean and medians.

The small size of our firms relative to those that go public suggests that the vast majority of our sample

could not have gone public, and were also likely to be too small to access the public debt markets.

        Appendix Table A1 contains the distribution of the countries of the target firms in the sample.

Almost 30% of the deals (1,527) are for U.K. targets. France has the second most, with 748, and eight

different countries each have between 200 and 350 targets. The U.K. also has the largest average sized

target, with a mean asset value of $114.2 million; however, there are also a lot of very small U.K. targets,

which can be seen by the median asset size of U.K. targets being only $6.8 million.

        Table 2 presents statistics on the accounting variables of the targets and acquirers in our sample,

each computed as the average of the two years prior to the acquisition.17 To calculate these statistics, we

use data from unconsolidated statements for the target and from consolidated statements for the acquirers.

Not surprisingly, targets are substantially smaller than acquirers, with mean (median) target asset size of

$67.7 million ($7.5 million) and acquirer asset size of $2,438.8 million ($172.90 million). Targets also

hold more cash as a fraction of their assets, with a mean of 12.2%, compared to the mean of 9.8% for the

acquirers. Targets have lower investment-to-asset ratio (mean of 6.4%) than do acquirers (mean of 12%).

17
  Since some acquirers are not from Europe, and hence not contained in the Amadeus data set and some others make
multiple acquisitions but are only included once in Table 2, the number of acquirers for which we have accounting
data is substantially smaller than the corresponding number of targets.


                                                       9
        For target firms, cash holdings decline following the acquisitions, as both the mean and median

cash holdings are higher in the two years before the acquisition compared with the holdings after the

acquisition. In addition, the median gross investment to asset ratio declines after the acquisition. However,

it is difficult to draw inferences from this table. Secular trends as well as the changing composition of

firms in the sample are likely to mask the incremental effect the acquisition has on these variables. To

evaluate the effect of acquisitions on firms’ financial policies, it is important to hold firm composition

constant over time and to control for other factors statistically.

2.5. Measuring Financial Constraints

        Financial constraints occur when financial frictions cause firms to deviate from their first-best

investments. When firms are constrained, the availability and pricing of financing in addition to a

potential investment’s value will determine the projects a firm will choose to undertake.18

        Discussion of financial constraints goes back at least to Keynes (1936), who argued that because

of financial market frictions, firms hold cash as a precaution against potential future financial constraints.

Firms’ optimal cash holdings will be determined by equating the incremental holding cost of cash with

the expected benefit in terms of improved investment coming from avoiding potential financing

constraints. Consequently, firms’ cash holdings should be positively related to the degree to which firms

expect to face financial constraints in the future. A large empirical literature beginning with Opler,

Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (1999) has confirmed that, consistent with Keynes’ prediction, cash

holdings are largely explained by a firm’s ability to access capital markets.

         A particularly controversial measure of financial constraints was introduced by Fazzari, Hubbard

and Petersen (1988), and involves estimating the sensitivity of a firm’s investment to its cash flow. The

idea is that with frictionless capital markets, investments should be a function of the value of the firm’s

investment opportunities and independent of the firm’s financial position. However, if there are financial

constraints, then a firm will choose among projects, being able to undertake more of them when financing


18
  Tirole (2006) provides a number of models in which constraints occur because of contracting difficulties, either
because of moral hazard or asymmetric information reasons.


                                                       10
is more available, in particular, when there is an increase in the firm’s cash flows. Empirically, Fazzari,

Hubbard and Petersen (1988) and many others have documented a robust relation between a firm’s cash

flows and its investments. These authors interpret their findings as consistent with financing constraints

being an important factor in determining corporate investments.19

        An alternative approach to measuring financing constraints was suggested by Almeida, Campello,

and Weisbach (2004), and involves estimating a firm’s propensity to save cash from incremental cash

flows. In the Almeida, Campello and Weisbach model, unconstrained firms invest at the first-best level,

so incremental cash flows do not have any real effects on the firm’s investments. However, a firm facing

financial constraints will choose to allocate additional cash flows to increase their investments both today

and in the future, so cash holdings to finance future incremental investment should increase with their

cash flows. Consequently, the fraction of cash retained by a firm from incremental cash flows reflects

management’s own view as to whether the firm is likely to face financial constraints in the future. While

the investment sensitivity of cash flow measures the effect of constraints on today’s investment, the cash

sensitivity reflects management’s assessment of future constraints. Almeida, Campello and Weisbach find

empirical evidence suggesting that the cash flow sensitivity of cash is strongly related to other measures

of financial constraints in a sample of large, publicly-traded U.S. firms.20

        Several papers estimate loadings of financial variables on apparent constraints to construct easily

constructed indices of constraints that can be used more broadly. In particular, Lamont, Polk, and Saa-

Requejo (2001) estimate the factors that predict the firms which Kaplan and Zingales (1997) classify as

constrained, leading to the “KZ index”. Whited and Wu (2006) use an Euler equation approach from a


19
   Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988) has spawned a huge literature, both debating its methodological approach,
and also using the investment cash flow relation to test for financial constraints in particular settings (see for
example Hoshi, Kashyap and Scharfstein (1991) and Becker and Sivadasan (2010)). Important critiques of the
investment/cash flow method are Kaplan and Zingales (1997), Erickson and Whited (2000), Gomes (2001), Alti
(2003), and Moyen (2004). In contrast, Rauh (2006) and Almeida and Campello (2007) argue that even in a setting
where the measurement issues these papers focus on is not relevant, cash flows nonetheless affects investment, so
investment cash flow sensitivities can be good measures of financial constraints despite these papers’ critiques.
20
   Other authors have also used the cash flow sensitivity of cash and found it related to other measures of financial
constraints. See for example Sufi (2009), Yun (2009), Hadlock and Pierce (2010), Farre-Mensa (2011) and
Ostergaard, Sasson, and Sorensen (2011). However, this approach too is not without its critics; see Riddick and
Whited (2009).


                                                         11
structural model of investment to create the “WW Index”. Both indices are estimated using data on

publicly traded U.S. firms using Compustat data.

        However, even on publicly traded U.S. firms, Hadlock and Pierce (2010) find that both the KZ

and WW indices are dominated by a simple index of firm age and size. We cannot use the Hadlock-Pierce

size-age index for our analysis of acquisitions since, after the acquisition, the target firm becomes a part

of a larger entity and hence its size goes up. So, according to the Hadlock-Pierce index, all target firms

become less constrained post acquisitions. Other constraints measures that have been discussed in the

literature, such as the existence of a bond rating and membership in a keiretsu (Hoshi, Kashyap and

Scharfstein (1991)), are obviously not relevant for small, private European companies. Unfortunately,

Amadeus does not contain data on dividends, so we cannot use a measure of constraints based on dividend

payouts.

        Consequently, given that firms in our sample are substantially smaller than Compustat firms and

they are mostly privately held, we do not use measures of financial constraints that can be calculated for

relatively larger and/or public firms only. The measures we use, the level of cash (normalized by a firm’s

assets), the investment to cash flow sensitivity, and the cash to cash flow sensitivity, are each motivated

by theory that is equally valid in all countries and for both public and private firms. Our goal is not to take

a stand on which measure of financial constraints is the most accurate. Rather, our hope is that by using

three different measures, we can estimate whether acquisitions appear to reduce financial constraints in

target firms, as well as the extent to which the effect is robust across alternative measures.



3. Estimates of Acquisitions’ Impact on Targets’ Financial Constraints

3.1. The Effect of Acquisitions on the Cash Holdings of Target Firms

        We estimate multivariate models predicting aspects of firms’ financial policies likely to be

associated with financial constraints. We evaluate whether these policies change when the firm is

acquired, controlling for other potentially relevant factors. The first such policy we consider is the level of

cash holdings. If the precautionary demand for holding cash decreases when financial constraints are


                                                      12
eased by an acquisition, then we should observe that, holding other factors constant, firms’ cash holdings

decline after they are acquired. To test this hypothesis, we estimate equations predicting the quantity of

cash, normalized by the firm’s total assets.

        We estimate the following specification:

                 Cash/Assets = a + b AFTER + c Controls + e                                       (1)

AFTER is a binary variable that takes on a value of one after the acquisition. In all equations, we exclude

the firm-year observations at the deal completion year. We include fixed effects for the target firm to

control for time-invariant firm characteristics omitted in regressions. All specifications also include year

dummies to control for changing macroeconomic conditions. In addition, we add three country-level

variables, total private credit to GDP, stock market capitalization to GDP, and nominal GDP growth in

local currencies, to control for variation in external financing availability. Finally, we also include firm-

level controls that vary across specifications. We estimate this equation on the entire panel of firm-years

for which we have data both before and after the acquisition.

        We present estimates of this equation in the first four columns of Table 3. In Column (1), we

include only total assets and total assets squared as firm-level variables, since there are some firm-level

variables missing for some countries because of differences in reporting requirements. In Column (2), we

add the firm’s cash flow to total assets as a control, dropping Dutch firms from the analysis since firms

from Netherlands do not have cash flow data on Amadeus.21 Column (3) includes ROA but not cash flow

since these variables are highly correlated, which, because of data availability, allows us to include Dutch

but not Russian firms. In Column (4), we add the number of employees, leverage, and sales growth,

which potentially could be related to the firm’s growth opportunities. In this final equation, the number of

firms declines substantially because data on some items are missing for firms from Denmark, Ireland,




21
  Depreciation, which is one of the components of cash flow, is missing for all Russian firms in Amadeus. We
replaced these missing values with zeros and therefore used nonmissing profit/loss values for Russian firms as their
cash flows. For robustness, we re-estimate our equations eliminating Russian target firms from the sample with
almost identical results.


                                                        13
Netherlands, Russia, and the U.K. In all equations, standard errors are corrected for clustering of

observations at the firm level.

         The estimates in the cash equations in the first panel of Table 3 are consistent with the view that

target firms reduce their cash holdings after being acquired. The coefficient on the dummy variable

indicating that a firm-year is after the acquisition is between -.0135 and -.0173, implying a drop of

between 1.35% and 1.73% in the cash to assets ratio following the acquisitions. In all specifications, this

decline is statistically significantly different from zero. Cash/Assets has a mean of 12.2% and a median of

6.4% before the acquisition. Relative to the sample mean, the regression coefficients imply that following

an acquisition, there is about an 11% drop in cash holdings by target firms. These multivariate results

confirm the pattern suggested by the univariate comparisons in Table 2, that cash holdings decline after a

target is purchased.

         One explanation for the drop in cash holdings in target firms following being acquired is that

financial constraints are relieved in the target firms following the acquisition. However, an alternative

explanation for this finding is that companies move their treasury functions centrally, so that they

effectively hold the target firm’s cash in the new parent firms. To evaluate this possibility, we re-estimate

the equations from Panel A of Table 3 using the acquirer’s cash holdings as a dependent variable, and

report them in Panel B in Table 3. We calculate these acquirer holdings using the 1,215 acquirers for

which we have consolidated financial data, so that they reflect the cash in the entire acquiring firm. 22

Inconsistent with the view that cash is moved from the target to the new parent following the acquisition,

we find that cash holdings at the acquiring firm decline after the acquisition. This result holds on both the

full sample of acquisitions and also on the subsample (not reported) in which the target’s assets are at

least 25% of the acquirer’s assets.

         The reduction in acquirer’s cash could occur because, by adding the target firm’s assets to the

acquirer’s, the acquirer has a lower precautionary demand for holding cash. In other words, in some states


22
  In a previous draft, we presented estimates of these equations using unconsolidated financial data on acquirers, so
that they reflect only the parent’s financials. The results were similar to those reported here.


                                                         14
of the world, the acquirer will be able to rely on the cash flows generated by the former target’s assets.

Alternatively, it is possible that the acquirers’ cash could decline because some of it is used to pay for the

acquisition rather than because of a change in financial policy.

        To evaluate this alternative explanation, we calculate an “adjusted” measure of cash, which

equals to the reported cash for the acquiring firm plus the price that the acquirer paid for the target firm,

for the subsample of acquisitions for which the deal value is available on Zephyr. We then re-estimate the

equations in Panel B of Table 3, adjusting acquirer unconsolidated cash holdings for the acquisition itself

by “adding back” the cash paid for the target firm. This approach overstates the effect of acquisitions on

acquirer’s cash, since not all deals were paid for entirely by cash. Nonetheless, the estimates, presented in

Appendix Table A2, indicate that there is a decline in acquirer’s cash of a similar magnitude to that

documented in Panel B of Table 3. The decline in acquirer’s cash following the acquisition does not

appear to be driven by the amount paid for acquisition itself, and instead the decline likely occurs because

the target’s assets help insure the acquirer against bad states of the world. The fact that cash goes down in

both targets and also acquirers suggests that the decline in the quantity of cash kept by the target is not

merely a transfer to the new parent.

3.2. The Cash Flow Sensitivity of Cash.

        Almeida, Campello and Weisbach (2004) suggest that one could measure financial constraints

through the way firms save cash from incremental cash flow. In the Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach

model, constrained firms save a positive fraction of incremental cash flows as cash to finance future

investments; however, there is no reason for unconstrained firms to adjust their savings’ behavior, since

their investments are already at the first-best levels. Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach (2004), as well as

a number of other papers, document that estimates of the sensitivity of cash holdings to incremental cash

flows are highly correlated with other measures of financial constraints. Therefore, the change in the cash

flow sensitivity of cash around the time of the acquisition should reflect changes in financial constraints

occurring at that time.




                                                     15
        To estimate the change in the cash flow sensitivity of cash at the time of the acquisition, we use a

specification similar to the equations presented in Table 3, with two changes. First, the dependent variable

is the change in cash holdings over total assets. Second, in addition to cash flow divided by assets, we

include this variable interacted with a dummy indicating whether the firm-year was after the acquisition.

In this specification, the coefficient on cash flow divided by assets represents the cash flow sensitivity of

assets before the acquisition, and the sum of this coefficient and the coefficient on cash flow interacted

with the “after acquisition” dummy variable represents the sensitivity after the acquisition.

        We present estimates of this equation in Columns (1) and (2) of Table 4. To evaluate whether the

target firms were constrained before being acquired, we focus on the coefficients on cash flow. These

coefficients are all positive and statistically significantly different from zero. In the Column (1), where we

include country-level controls, firm-level size controls as well as firm and year fixed effects, the

coefficient on the uninteracted cash flow term (representing the pre-acquisition sensitivities) is .074, and

is .104 when we include other controls but lose firms from Denmark, Ireland, Netherlands, Russia and

U.K. from the sample in Column (2). As a rough comparison, Almeida, Campello and Weisbach (2004)

estimate similar equations on a sample of large, publicly-traded U.S. firms, and find a statistically

significant coefficient of .05 or .06 for their constrained subsamples and estimates close to zero for the

unconstrained subsamples. Even though the studies use vastly different samples, our estimates for the pre-

acquisition target firms are remarkably close to those reported by Almeida, Campello, and Weisbach. The

fact that the coefficients are close between the two papers suggests that the tests are picking up a common

phenomenon, likely the existence of financial constraints.

        The coefficients on the “After” dummy interacted with cash flow are negative, indicating that the

cash flow sensitivity of cash declines following the acquisition. The magnitudes of the coefficients on this

interaction term are -.059 and -.093, almost the opposite of the coefficients indicating the cash flow

sensitivity before the acquisition. The sum of the coefficients on cash flow and on cash flow interacted

with the “After” measures the existence of constraints following the acquisition. In these equations, these

sums are very close to, and not statistically different from, zero. These results on the cash flow sensitivity


                                                     16
of cash suggest that target firms appear to be financially constrained prior to being acquired but

essentially unconstrained after being acquired. 23

3.3. The Investment Sensitivity of Cash Flow.

        Starting with Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988), a large literature has estimated the

sensitivity of investment to cash flow, and has used this estimated sensitivity as a measure of financial

constraints. The idea is that if a firm is unconstrained, then a firm should undertake all value-increasing

investments regardless of the firm’s financial condition. However, if the firm faces constraints, then the

projects it will undertake will be rationed, and an increase in cash flow will allow it to take more projects.

Therefore, we should observe a relation between a firm’s investment and its cash flow if the firm is

financially constrained.

        To estimate the cash flow sensitivity of investment, we use the same specification as for the cash

flow sensitivity of cash with investment, normalized by assets, as the dependent variable. We report

estimates of this equation in Columns (3) and (4) of Table 4. In each specification, the coefficient on cash

flow is positive and statistically significant, suggesting that before the acquisition, the targets were indeed

financially constrained. However, the coefficients on cash flow interacted with the after-acquisition

dummy are negative and statistically significantly different from zero, which implies that the cash flow

sensitivity of investment is lowered following the acquisition.24

        The usual interpretation of this result, following Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988), is that

financial constraints are eased at the time of the acquisition. This interpretation is subject to the standard

critique of the investment/cash flow literature, that cash flow is likely to be correlated with investment

opportunities, so that the sensitivity between investment and cash flow could reflect investment




23
  The estimates are similar if we exclude firm fixed effects or include industry and/or country fixed effects.
24
  Most estimates of investment-cash flow sensitivity control for lagged values of the investment, since investment
tends to be auto-correlated. Given the way our data was constructed, we do not include the lagged investment since
we measure investment, the dependent variable, as the change in fixed assets plus depreciation, so measurement
error in lagged assets would lead to a mechanical relation between our estimates of current and lagged investment.


                                                       17
opportunities rather than financial constraints.25 Nonetheless, given that the results are in line with those

for cash levels and cash/cash flow sensitivities, we view them as additional evidence that is consistent

with the view that acquisitions lower financing constraints.

3.4. The Quantity of the Target Firm’s Investments.

        Financial constraints lead firms effectively to apply a higher cost of capital than they would in

frictionless markets. Therefore, if acquisitions ease financial constraints, being acquired will lead target

firms to evaluate investment opportunities using a lower cost of capital, and consequently undertake more

of them. This logic, which is formalized in models such as Almeida, Campello and Weisbach (2004), is

often used by managers to justify acquisitions, who argue that acquirers can more efficiently finance

investments for the target than it could independently.

         In Table 5, we report equations predicting investment (normalized by assets), using

specifications similar to those presented for cash in the first panel. In each equation, the coefficient

indicating if a firm-year is after the acquisition is positive, and is statistically significantly different from

zero in all specifications. In addition, the magnitude of the coefficient is large economically. The

coefficients are all between 0.0156 and 0.0201, implying that investment increases by 1.5% to 2% of

assets following the acquisition. Since the mean investment to asset ratio is 6.4% and the median is 3.4%

during the year before the acquisition, these estimates suggest that the acquisition increases the mean

firm’s investment by 23% to 31% and the median firm’s by 44% to 59%.

        The increase in the target’s investment following the acquisition is consistent with lower financial

constraints leading to a lower cost of capital being applied to investment projects. However, it is also

consistent with operational synergies improving investment opportunities. It is likely that both effects

combine to explain the observed increase in investment following acquisitions.

        If the increase in investment reflects reductions in constraints, as well as synergies, then the

combined value of the acquirer and target should increase. The vast majority of our targets are private, so


25
  This idea was originally suggested by Poterba (1988) in his published discussion of Fazzari, Hubbard and
Petersen, and was developed further by Erickson and Whited (2000) and Alti (2003).


                                                       18
it is impossible to measure value changes for these firms. However, 36 percent of the acquirers are

publicly-traded, so we can measure the acquirer’s stock-price reaction to these acquirers. For this

subsample of deals with public acquirers the average abnormal stock price reaction is 1.5% for three days

and 2.3% for 21 days around the merger announcement date, both of which are statistically significantly

different from zero at the 1% level. This finding is consistent with the notion that value is created in these

deals. It is also consistent with the view that acquirers can make acquisitions at a discount because of the

private targets’ illiquidity or due to uncertainty about their valuation. [See Koeplin, Sarin and Shapiro

(2000) or Ellis, Moeller, Schlingemann and Stulz (2011) for more discussion of acquisitions of private

companies.]



4. Within-Sample Comparisons

        The estimates presented to this point suggest that acquisitions are associated with declines in cash

holdings, the sensitivity of cash holdings with respect to cash flow, and the sensitivity of investment to

cash flow, as well as an increase in the quantity of investment for the acquired firms in our sample. These

findings suggest that the acquisitions in our sample led to a reduction in financial constraints in the target

firms. If an increase in the availability and a reduction in the cost of finance were indeed the reason for

these results, we would expect that they would be strongest for those acquisitions for which the reduction

in financial constraints is likely to be highest. We evaluate this prediction here.

4.1. Independent firms vs. Subsidiaries of other firms

        An important distinction concerns whether, prior to the acquisition, the target firms are

independent firms (71.6% of the sample) or subsidiaries of other firms (28.4%). If being acquired and

becoming part of a larger organization helps to relieve financial constraints, then going from being

independent to becoming a subsidiary should relieve them more than if a firm changes from being a

subsidiary of one firm to a subsidiary of another.

        To evaluate this hypothesis, we re-estimate the equations from Tables 3, 4, and 5, for the

subsamples of deals in which the target is an independent firm and those for which it is a subsidiary. In


                                                      19
Panel A of Table 6, we report one equation for the level of cash holdings, the cash flow sensitivity of cash,

and the cash flow sensitivity of investment, and the quantity of investments. The specifications follow

Column (2) in Table 3, Columns (1) and (3) in Table 4, and Column (2) in Table 5, not reporting the

coefficients on the size variables and two country-level controls to save space. The results indicate that

for independent targets, there is a statistically significant 1.8% decline in the quantity of cash, a 8.2%

decline in the cash flow sensitivity of cash, and a 5.2% decline in the investment sensitivity of cash.

However, the corresponding estimated changes are not statistically significant for targets that are

subsidiaries. We can reject the cross-equation restriction that the declines are equal for acquisitions of

independent firms and subsidiaries for the decline in cash holdings and cash flow sensitivity of cash, but

not in the investment sensitivity of cash. These estimates suggest that the declines in the measures of

constraints are largest in acquisitions of independent firms, consistent with the view that they reflect

reductions in financing constraints and not some other factor.

        The one variable for which the effect of an acquisition is similar regardless of the target firm’s

status is the quantity of investments. The estimates in Table 6 indicate that the quantity of investments

increases by about the same amount for both types of targets (1.7% for independent targets, 2.1% for

subsidiary targets). These positive effects likely occur because the increase in investments following the

acquisitions contains some operational synergies that are present, regardless of whether the target was

independent or a subsidiary prior to being acquired.

4.2. Target Firm Size.

        Hadlock and Pierce (2010) present evidence suggesting that, to a first approximation, a firm’s

size is a reasonable proxy for the likelihood it faces financial constraints. Therefore, it seems plausible

that, if the above results reflect acquisitions relaxing financial constraints, then they should be stronger for

deals in which the targets are smaller. To test this hypothesis, we re-estimate our main equations from

earlier tables on subsamples based on the size of the target, measured by the average of the total assets in

U.S. dollars over two years immediately prior to the acquisition.




                                                       20
        In Panel B of Table 6, we divide the sample of acquisitions into terciles based on the size of the

target firm and re-estimate our equations for the bottom and top terciles. We report one equation for cash

holdings, the cash flow sensitivity of cash, the cash flow sensitivity of investment, and the quantity of

investment using the same specifications as in Panel A. The results suggest that the reduction in cash

holdings is statistically significant only for the subsample of the smaller targets, with an estimated

reduction in cash to asset ratios of 0.242%. In addition, the cash flow sensitivities of cash flow to both

investment and cash are larger in magnitude and statistically significantly different from zero for the

smaller target subsample but not the larger target one. We test the cross-equation restriction that the

differences between the declines in cash levels, and both sensitivities are larger for the smaller targets; the

results indicate that the declines in cash holdings are significantly larger for the smallest tercile than for

the largest one. However, the tests fail to reject the hypotheses that the sensitivities are statistically

significantly different between these subsamples. Finally, the investment to assets ratio increases

significantly both for the smaller and larger targets following the acquisitions, suggesting that acquisitions

of both sets of targets are associated with synergies. These results are consistent with the view that

smaller targets are more likely than larger targets to have financial constraints mitigated through being

acquired.



5. Acquirer Constraints and Cross-Subsidization

        We have documented that financial constraints in target firms, measured through these firms’

own financial management policies, appear to decline after they are acquired. These constraints could

decline for two reasons. First, being part of a larger organization could improve the ability of the target

firms to raise capital, either because it lowers the underlying friction causing the constraints, or because

the acquirers’ other assets combined with those of the targets’ lower the risk to a potential lender. Second,

there could be transfers within combined firms that effectively lower the constraints faced by the target

firms after the acquisition.




                                                      21
         If there are transfers, there are two possibilities:           First, post-acquisition firms could be

unconstrained, meaning that because of the existence of internal capital markets they can invest at the first

best level. Second, the post-acquisition firms could be constrained and there could be transfers of funds

across units that are value increasing (or possibly decreasing) as characterized in Stein (1997) or

Scharfstein and Stein (2000).

         If the post acquisition firms are unconstrained, then the post-acquisition sensitivities of

investment and cash to cash flow should be zero. If they are constrained, then for the acquired division

(and other divisions as well), the sensitivities should be positive but lower than the pre-acquisition

sensitivities. To see why, think about the Stein (1997) equilibrium, which illustrates how incremental

cash flows could be allocated in a constrained firm: In this equilibrium, each division invests from its

cash flow plus or minus transfers to or from the parent. So if there is an incremental shock to a division’s

cash flow, then they keep that amount, minus whatever fraction goes to headquarters and the other

divisions. To assess whether the logic of the Stein (1997) model provides an explanation for the reduction

in constraints we observe in our target firms, we test two of the model’s implications: First, whether the

combined firm is in fact constrained; and second, whether there are transfers across units within the firm.

5.1. Measuring Acquiring Firm Constraints.

         To measure the extent to which acquirers face financial constraints, we estimate cash-cash flow

and investment-cash flow sensitivities for the acquirers in our sample, both before and after the

acquisition. We estimate these equations using consolidated financial data from 986 acquirers, each of

which includes all subsidiaries including the target firm following the acquisition. 26 We report estimates

of the cash-cash flow and investment-cash flow sensitivities for these acquirers in Table 7.

         The coefficients for the cash-cash flow and investment-cash flow sensitivities in Table 7 are all

positive, which suggests that the acquirers are financially constrained. When we do not control for the

number of employees, sales growth and leverage in Columns 1 and 3, the coefficients indicate that both


26
   The results are similar if we use unconsolidated financial data on acquirers that do not reflect the target firm’s
financials post-acquisition.


                                                         22
sensitivities are statistically significantly positive prior to the acquisitions. After the acquisitions, the

estimates in Column 1 indicate that there is a decline in the cash-cash flow sensitivity by about half,

which is difficult to interpret because neither the decline nor the post-acquisition sensitivity is

significantly different from zero.     The investment-cash flow sensitivity increases a small amount

following the acquisition (Column 3) but this increase is not statistically significant. The post-acquisition

sensitivity of investment to cash flow is positive and statistically significant in the specification presented

in Column 3. However, neither sensitivity is statistically significantly different from zero when we control

for the number of employees, sales growth and leverage in Columns 2 and 4. Overall, these results

provide fairly weak evidence suggesting that acquirers are constrained before the acquisitions, and it is

difficult to draw inferences about whether acquirers are constrained following them.

5.2. Post-Acquisition Cross-Subsidization

        To test the hypothesis that transfers across subsidiaries of the new parent are the source of the

reduction in financial constraints, we estimate equations similar to those reported in Shin and Stulz (1998).

The idea is that if there is cross-subsidization, the cash flows of one part of the firm are, to some extent,

transferred to fund investments in other parts of the firm. Empirically, this argument suggests that cash

flows in the rest of the combined firm should affect investment in the former target. We test this idea

using the following specification:


Cashi,j/Assetsi = a + b1 CFi + b2 CFi ×AFTER + b3 CFnot i + b4 CFnot i ×AFTER + c Controls + e (2)


where CFi is the cash flow from the target firm in year i, and CFnot i is the cash flows from the acquiring

firm’s assets other than those coming from the target firm (calculated by subtracting the target’s cash

flows from the acquiring firm’s post-acquisition consolidated cash flows).

        Table 8 contains estimates of this equation. These estimates indicate that the sensitivity of the

target’s cash holdings and investment to acquirer’s cash flow (excluding the target’s cash flow post

acquisition) is not economically or statistically significantly different from zero. These results are not

consistent with the notion of cross-subsidization from acquiring to target firms.


                                                      23
         The results in Table 8 calculate the acquirer’s non-target cash flows as those from the acquirer’s

consolidated financial statements minus the target’s cash flows, which are taken from the unconsolidated

financial statements. However, if there is cross-subsidization, cash flows from larger subsidiaries or from

subsidiaries with larger sales growth are potentially more likely to be transferred to the target firm

subsequent to the acquisitions. To examine this idea, we utilize historical updates (old DVDs) of the

Amadeus data to identify other subsidiaries of the acquiring firms within two years following the

acquisitions. We are able to gather data on such subsidiaries and their cash flows before and after the

acquisitions for a subsample of 1,369 of targets.

         We provide estimates of the sensitivity of the target firm’s cash or investment to its own cash

flows as well as to the asset-weighted or sales-growth-weighted cash flows of the other subsidiaries of the

acquiring firm in Appendix Table A3. These estimates confirm the results from Table 8, and suggest that

other subsidiaries’ cash flows do not affect cash or investment behavior in the target firms. Consequently,

cross-subsidization does not appear to be the explanation for the changes in cash and investment policies

we observe in target firms subsequent to their being acquired.

5.3. Diversifying vs. Related Acquisitions

         The issues we consider are similar to those in the internal capital market literature. However, an

important difference between our findings for acquisitions and the empirical internal capital markets

literature is that our arguments apply to both diversifying and related acquisitions, while the internal

capital markets literature focuses on whether diversification leads to efficient or inefficient cross-

subsidization. Zephyr provides acquirer and target industry classification for 3,465 of the 5,187 deals in

our sample. Of these 3,465 deals, 1,902 are in different industries and the remaining 1,563 are in related

ones, using a common two-digit primary SIC code to define related industries.27 While all of our deals are

to some degree diversifying since they are kept in separate subsidiaries following the acquisition,

presumably the ones in different industries diversify the firm more.


27
  We rely on Zephyr rather than Amadeus for industry classifications because its classifications are done at the time
of the acquisition while those in Amadeus are done at the time the data is downloaded.


                                                         24
         Panel A of Appendix Table A4 presents estimates of our equations for diversifying and related

mergers separately. In each subsample, following the acquisitions, there are declines in the level of cash,

as well as the sensitivities of cash to cash flow and of investment to cash flow. All are statistically

significantly different from zero except cash holdings for the diversifying subsample and investment-cash

flow sensitivities for the same industry subsample. For all three variables, we cannot reject the hypothesis

that the coefficients are equal to one another across subsamples. It appears that the reduction in financial

constraints occurs in both diversifying and same industry mergers.28



6. Potential Concerns

6.1. Cross-Country Differences

         One possible concern with our analysis is that the main sample includes cross-border deals, for

which we cannot completely control for institutional differences across countries. For example, countries

differ in their restrictions on firms’ abilities to move cash from a local subsidiary to a foreign parent, as

well as many aspects of their tax system. We do not have data on the exact treatment of subsidiaries’ cash

across countries. However, in Panel A of Table 9, we re-estimate the equations from Tables 3, 4, and 5

including the difference in corporate tax rates as a control, and find similar results to those reported above.

One difference is that the change in the investment ratio is still positive but no longer statistically

significant. If we, however, include other firm level controls as in the specification in Column (4) of

Table 5, this coefficient is significant at the 5% level.29

         In addition, we re-estimate these equations on the subsample including only domestic acquisitions

since these deals are not subject to these international concerns. We report these estimates in Panel B of

Table 9. The estimated coefficients that reflect constraints are similar to the earlier ones using the entire

sample and they are all statistically significantly different from zero at least the 5% level. These results


28
   An important caveat is that we have information on only the main industry of the acquirer or the target. Therefore,
we identify diversifying mergers with potential error since we do not know whether other subsidiaries within the
acquirer are in the same industry as the target.
29
   We do not report that specification to save space but it is available from the authors on request.


                                                         25
suggest that the results reported above do not occur because of international factors affecting cross-border

acquisitions.

6.2. Matched Sample of Firms that were Not Acquired

         While we have documented changes in the financial policies of target firms consistent with

constraints being relieved, it is impossible to know definitively whether these policies would have

changed even if the target firms had not been not acquired. We can, however, observe the policies of

firms that were not acquired but are similar to the target firms. Presumably, any unobservable factors

unrelated to the acquisition that could have affected financial policies in the target would have affected

financial policies in these similar firms as well. Therefore, estimating whether the target firms’

acquisitions coincided with changes in the financial policies of the matched firms provides a “placebo”

test of whether there are other factors we do not control for that influence financial policies at the target

firms.

         To construct a sample of firms similar to the target firms, we match each target firm with the firm

on Amadeus from the same country and two-digit industry code as the target firm with as close as a book

value of assets as possible one year prior to the acquisition. We require that the matching firm has

nonmissing financial data for at least one year before and one year after the merger, and has assets no

more than 20% different from that of the target firm prior to the merger. We are able to find matched

firms meeting these criteria for 5,012 of the target firms in our sample.

         For our placebo test, we estimate equations similar to those in Tables 3, 4 and 5 on the sample of

matched firms rather than target firms. We present these estimates in Table 10. The results in this table

are in sharp contrast to those for the target firms. The estimates in the first column do predict a decline in

cash for the matching firms, but it is less than one-tenth of that for the target firms (.11% compared to

1.4%) and is not statistically significantly different from zero. While there is a significant increase in

investment for the target firms, there is a significant decrease in investment for the matched firms. Both

the cash flow sensitivities of cash and of investment are significantly positive for the matched firms prior

to the “acquisition”. However, neither sensitivity declines significantly for the matched firms like they do


                                                     26
for the target firms. Overall, the placebo tests imply that the matched firms do not experience any of the

changes in the financial policies indicative of a decline in financial constraints.

        Finally, we re-estimate the equations from Tables 3, 4 and 5 using the combined samples of target

and matched firms. In each equation, the “after” dummy is set equal to one only if the firm is a target firm

and the year is subsequent to the acquisition, and always equals zero for the matching firms. The results,

presented in Appendix Table A5, are very similar to those reported in Tables 3, 4 and 5: Cash levels

decline and investment increases following the acquisition. In addition, both the cash flow sensitivities of

cash and of investment are significantly positive prior to the acquisition, and both decline significantly

following it.

6.3. Managerial Risk Aversion

        One possible explanation for our findings is that target managers could be replaced at the time of

the acquisition by less risk-averse ones. Equivalently, if target managers are not replaced following the

acquisition, they could behave in a less risk-averse manner because their ownership declines when their

firms are acquired. We cannot evaluate this hypothesis directly, since we do not know the identity of the

managers of our firms. If acquisitions did lead to less risk-averse managers, the implications would be

similar to acquisitions lowering financial constraints, since less risk-averse managers would likely apply

lower discount rates to investment projects and act as if they were less financially constrained.

        We can test this possibility indirectly, however, since changes in managers’ risk aversion is likely

to be a function of changes in the firm’s ownership distribution. Shareholders of the target are likely to be

more risk averse, because of their lack of diversification, relative to the shareholders of the acquiring

company. If so, and if the control change is associated with a reduction in risk aversion, the change in

ownership could lead to the observed change in financial management policies we have documented.

        Using data on ownership, we utilize the change in insider ownership of target firms as a proxy for

the risk aversion of managers reflected in their lack of diversification. To do so, we create a variable

designed to measure the “independence” of a firm, which takes a value of zero if a company has a

shareholder with a total (direct or indirect) ownership of over 50%; one if a company has no shareholder


                                                      27
with more than 50% but has one or more shareholders with an ownership percentage of above 25%; two if

none of the shareholders have more than 25% of direct or total ownership; and three if a company is

publicly-traded and have missing independence indicator as defined above. We calculate this variable for

up to two years before and after the acquisition for our targets whenever the data is available. 30

         Unfortunately, this variable is available for only a subset of our targets.31 Nevertheless, we could

identify targets for which we observe either no change in their independence level (1,066 targets) or a

decrease in their independence levels (111 targets). In Panel B of Appendix Table A4, we present our

main results for this subsample of 1,177 targets, for which there is likely no increase in risk aversion. Our

results remain similar to those reported elsewhere in the paper despite the significant drop in the number

of observations. In the same Panel B of Appendix Table A4, we also present results for a larger

subsample of targets, for which we exclude acquisitions of private targets by public acquirers. Again, the

results remain similar to those reported elsewhere in the paper. These findings suggest that the paper’s

main findings do not reflect cases in which managers’ risk aversion is likely to have decreased following

the acquisitions; instead, they likely occur because of reductions in financial constraints in target firms.

6.4. Changes in Target Size

         A potential issue of concern is that even if Amadeus calls a subsidiary of a new parent the same

name and gives it the same identifier as a pre-acquisition firm, the assets of the subsidiary could be

nonetheless different. Such differences in assets could occur if the new parent reallocates assets, either

moving some of the target’s assets to another part of the firm, adding some of the parent’s other assets to

the target, or even potentially both adding and subtracting assets from the target simultaneously. While

this issue could only explain the results if the errors were systematic and we know of no reason why they




30
   We repeated the analysis comparing the “independence” level of the target and the acquirer up to two years before
the acquisition and get similar results. However, the statistical significance on some cash or investment sensitivity
results disappears due to a substantial drop in the number of observations because of missing acquirer data.
31
   The current version of the Amadeus data set includes only the latest available information on firms’ ownership
information. We used 2002, 2005, and 2008 versions of the database to acquire historical information on
shareholders of a subsample of our targets.


                                                         28
would be, it still would be comforting to know that the assets in the subsidiaries are basically the same as

those in the original target firm.

        In Appendix Table A6, we re-estimate our equations eliminating observations where the number

of employees changes by more than 10% in the two years following the acquisition. This criterion is

much more strict than the one we used to construct the main sample, in which the number of employees

could change by up to 100% with the firm remaining in the sample. Nonetheless, the results are similar to

those reported in Tables 3, 4, and 5, except that the reduction in investment-cash flow sensitivity is not

statistically significantly different from zero. These tests suggest that dramatic changes in the assets of

target firms following the acquisition are not an important determinant of our results.

6.5. Changes in in the Book Value of Assets

        Another potential issue of concern is that there could be changes in the book value of the target

firm’s assets around the time of acquisitions, affecting the regressions reported above. Assets could

change if the acquisitions involve stepping up the assets’ basis, or if the acquisitions are associated with

high growth, as suggested by the finding that acquisitions are followed by higher investment. Since we

use the book value of assets to scale many of the variables we use throughout the analyses, we want to

ensure that the findings we report are driven by the changes in cash holdings and investment and not by

changes in the book value of assets.

        To address this concern, we first re-estimate our equations eliminating the year immediately

following the acquisition from the estimation as well as the year of the acquisition (which is not included

in any equation reported in the paper). Eliminating these observations ensures that any accounting (or

other) changes occurring because of these changes are not the explanation for our results. We report the

specifications used in Tables 3, 4, and 5 in Appendix Table A7. The results reported in these tables are

similar to those reported in Tables 3, 4 and 5.

        Second, we reestimate the equations scaling all variables by assets in the year prior to the

acquisition, rather than the value of assets contemporaneously. We report these equations in Appendix

Table A8. Again, the results are similar to those reported in Tables 3, 4, and 5. The results in Appendix


                                                     29
Tables A7 and A8 strongly suggest that the findings reported above are driven by the changes in cash and

investment as a function of financial constraints, and not by changes in the book value of assets that are

used to normalize these variables.

6.6. Potential Selection Issues.

          One potential selection concern comes from the way in which Amadeus is constructed and our

sampling process. Amadeus has a maximum of ten years of data per firm, so for our sample, firms

typically have data from 2000-2009.32 Our data construction process uses all available firm-years in our

analysis. This process maximizes our sample size, but leads to an unbalanced structuring of the before-

acquisition and after-acquisition observations. In particular, an acquisition later in the sample period will

have a larger number of pre-acquisition observations while an acquisition earlier in the sample period will

have a larger number of post-acquisition observations.

          While we do not know of any particular bias this selection process will cause in our results, and

we do include year-specific fixed effects that will adjust for any specific macroeconomic shocks, we

would like to ensure that this admittedly unusual data construction procedure is not somehow an

important determinant of our results. Therefore we re-estimate the equations presented in Tables 3, 4 and

5 using several alternative samples. First, we restrict the sample to firm-years no more than three years

away from the acquisition, and present these results in Panel A of Appendix Table A9. Second we restrict

the sample to firm-years no more than five years away from the acquisition and present those results in

Panel B of Appendix Table A9. The estimates reported in all panels of Appendix Table A9 are similar to

those reported in Tables 3, 4, and 5. Therefore, the basic conclusion that financial constraints decline

around the time of acquisitions does not appear to be driven by the sampling approach used in our main

tables.




32
  For firms that disappeared prior to 2009, Amadeus keeps earlier data. For example, if a firm disappeared from
Amadeus in 2004, it could potentially have data starting in 1995. We have generally followed the rule of “keep and
use all data” but have re-estimated all equations using just post-2000 data with almost identical results to those
reported in the paper.


                                                       30
7. Conclusion

        Managers often justify acquisitions with the logic that they can add value to targets by facilitating

the target’s ability to invest efficiently. If being acquired leads to a reduction in financial constraints, then

the target firm effectively faces a lower cost of capital, and is potentially able to undertake more valuable

investments. However, examining this view empirically is difficult, since for most acquisitions, one

cannot observe data on target firms on subsequent to being acquired. Because of disclosure requirements

in European countries, we are able to construct a sample of European acquisitions containing financial

data on target firms both before and after the acquisitions. We use this sample to test the hypothesis that

target firms’ financial constraints are lowered subsequent to acquisitions.

        Our approach is to evaluate whether the financial management decisions of target firms change

when their firm is acquired in ways consistent with their becoming less financially constrained. Theory

suggests that financial constraints should lead managers to increase cash holdings, to increase the cash

flow sensitivity of cash as well as the cash flow sensitivity of investment, and to decrease investment. If

constraints are eased when a firm is acquired, then these effects should be reversed. In our sample, we

document that subsequent to an acquisition, managers do in fact lower their cash holdings, lower the

sensitivity of cash holdings to cash flow, lower the sensitivity of investment to cash flow, and increase the

quantity of their investments. These results are consistent with the view that financial constraints are

lowered for target firms when they are acquired. Lowering these constraints can lead target firms to

undertake more positive net present value investments, and consequently provide a potential motive for

the acquisition.

        We document that these effects are most important in deals for which one would expect financial

constraints to be relatively important. In particular, the reduction in financial constraints appears to be

more important for targets that were independent firms prior to the acquisition and for smaller targets. In

addition, the reduction in financial constraints occurs in both diversifying and same-industry acquisitions.

This cross-deal pattern of empirical results suggests that they reflect reductions in financial constraints

rather than other factors.


                                                       31
        It seems likely that financial synergies resulting from reductions in financial constraints could

motivate some acquisitions, or even induce managers to take value-decreasing acquisitions. While we

emphasize that while a reduction in financial constraints could potentially be a factor leading to

acquisitions, it is not likely to be the only factor. Substantial evidence indicates that operational synergies

and wealth transfers are also important determinants of acquisitions. From our results, it is impossible to

quantify the relative importance of financing motivations compared to other factors. Doing so would

greatly add to our understanding of why certain firms combine with others.




                                                      32
                                             References


Almeida, Heitor, and Murillo Campello, 2007, “Financial Constraints, Asset Tangibility, and Corporate
Investment,” Review of Financial Studies, 20, 1429-1460.

Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, and Dirk Hackbarth, 2011, “Liquidity Mergers,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 102, 526-558.

Almeida, Heitor, Murillo Campello, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2004, “The Cash Flow Sensitivity of
Cash,” The Journal of Finance, 59, 1777-1804.

Alti, Aydogan, 2003, “How Sensitive is Investment to Cash Flow When Financing is Frictionless?” The
Journal of Finance 58-2, 707-722.

Asker, John, Joan Farre-Mensa, and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2011, “Comparing the Investment Behavior of
Public and Private Firms,” Working Paper, NYU.

Auerbach, Alan, and David Reishus, 1988, “The Impact of Taxation on Mergers and Acquisitions,” in
Mergers and Acquisitions, edited by Alan J. Auerbach. University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

Beck, Thortsen, and Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, 2009, “Financial Institutions and Markets Across Countries
and over Time: Data and Analysis,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 4943

Becker, Bo, and Jagadeesh Sivadasan, 2010, “The Effect of Financial Development on the Investment
Cash Flow Relationship: Cross-Country Evidence from Europe,” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis &
Policy 10, no. 1.

Berger, P. G., and Ofek, E., 1995, “Diversification's effect on firm value,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 37(1), 39-65.

Campa, J., and S. Kedia, 2002, “Explaining the diversification discount,” Journal of Finance
57:1731−1762.

Chevalier, Judith, 2004, “What do we know about cross-subsidization? Evidence from merging firms,”
Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy 4, Iss. 1, Article 3.

Chung, Ji-Woong, 2011, “Leveraged Buyouts of Private Companies,” Working Paper, Chinese University
of Hong Kong.

Duchin, R., 2010, “Cash holdings and corporate diversification”, The Journal of Finance 65, 955-992.

Ellis, Jesse, Sara Moeller, Frederik Schlingemann, and Rene Stulz, 2011, “Globalization, Governance,
and the Returns to Cross-Border Acquisitions,” Dice Working Paper 2011-1, Ohio State University.

Erel, Isil, Rose C. Liao, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2012, “Determinants of Cross-Border Mergers and
Acquisitions,” The Journal of Finance, 67, 1045-1082.

Erickson, Timothy, and Toni M. Whited, 2000, “Measurement Error and the Relation Between
Investment and Q,” Journal of Political Economy 108, 1027-1057.



                                                  33
Farre-Mensa, Joan, 2011, “Why are most firms privately held?” Working Paper, Harvard Business School.

Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce P. Petersen, 1988, “Financing Constraints and
Investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 141-195.

Gomes, Joao, 2001, “Financing Investment,” American Economic Review, 95, 1263-1285.

Hadlock, Charles, and Joshua Pierce, 2010, “New Evidence on Financial Constraints: Moving Beyond the
KZ Index,” Review of Financial Studies, 23, 1909-1940.

Hayn, Carla, 1989, “Tax Attributes as Determinants of Shareholder Gains in Mergers and Acquisitions,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 121-153.

Healy, Paul, Krishna Palepu, and Richard S. Ruback, 1992, “Does Corporate Performance Improve After
Mergers?” Journal of Financial Economics 31, 135-175.

Hoberg, G., and Phillips, G., 2010, “Product market synergies and competition in mergers and
acquisitions: A text-based analysis,” Review of Financial Studies, 23(10), 3773-3811.

Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap, and David Scharfstein, 1991, “Corporate Structure, Liquidity, and
Investment: Evidence from Japanese Industrial Groups,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, 33-60.

Jensen, Michael C. and Richard S. Ruback, 1983, “The Market for Corporate Control: The Scientific
Evidence,” Journal of Financial Economics, 11, 5-50.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Luigi Zingales, 1997, “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide Useful
Measures of Financial Constraints?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 159-216.

Keynes, 1936, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, McMillan: London.

Koeplin, Sarin and Shapiro, 2000, “The Private Company Discount,” Journal of Applied Corporate
Finance, 12: 94-101.

Lang, L.H.P., and R. Stulz, 1994, “Tobin’s q, Corporate Diversification, and Firm Performance,” Journal
of Political Economy 102:1248−1280.

Liao, Rose C., 2011, “What Drives Corporate Block Acquisitions: The Case for Financial Constraints,”
Working Paper, Rutgers University.

Lamont, Owen, Christopher Polk, and Jesus Saa-Requejo, 2001, “Financial Constraints and Stock
Returns,” Review of Financial Studies 14-2, 529-554.

Maksimovic, Vojislav, Gordon Phillips, and N. R. Prabhala, 2011, “Post-merger restructuring and the
boundaries of the firm,” Journal of Financial Economics 102, 317-343

Mantecon, Thomas, 2008, An Analysis of the Implications of Uncertainly and Agency Problems on the
Wealth Effects of Acquirers of Private Firms, Journal of Banking and Finance 32, 892-905.

Moyen, Nathalie, 2004, “Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities: Constrained versus Unconstrained Firms,”
Journal of Finance 59-4, 2061-2092.


                                                  34
Netter, Jeffry, Mike Stegemoller, and M. Babajide Wintoki, 2011, “Implications of Data Screens on
Mergers and Acquisitions: A Large Sample Study of Mergers and Acquisitions from 1992-2009,” Review
of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Opler, Tim, Lee Pinkowitz, René M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 1999, “The Determinants and
Implications of Corporate Cash Holdings,” Journal of Financial Economics 52, 3-46.

Ostergaard, Charlotte, Amir Sasson, and Bent Sorensen, 2011, “The Marginal Value of Cash, Cash Flow
Sensitivities, and Bank-Finance Shocks in Nonlisted Firms,” Working Paper, BI Norwegian Business
School.

Ozbas, O., and Scharfstein, D. S., 2010, “Evidence on the dark side of internal capital markets”, Review of
Financial Studies 23(2), 581-599.

Passov, Richard, 2003, “How Much Cash Does your Company Need?” Harvard Business Review,
November, 1-8.

Pontiff, Jeffrey, Andrei Shleifer, and Michael S. Weisbach, 1990, “Reversions of Excess Pension Assets
After Takeovers,” Rand Journal of Economics 21, 600-613.

Poterba, James M., 1988, “Comment on ‘Financing Constraints and Investment’,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 200-204.

Rauh, Joshua D., 2006, “Investment and Financing Constraints: Evidence from the Funding of Corporate
Pension Plans,” The Journal of Finance 61-1, 33-72.

Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew, David T. Robinson, and S. Viswanathan, 2005, Valuation waves and merger
activity: The empirical evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 77, 561-603.

Riddick, Leigh A., and Toni M. Whited, 2009, “The Corporate Propensity to Save,” The Journal of
Finance, 64, 1729-1766.

Scharfstein, D. S., and J. Stein, 2000, “The dark side of internal capital markets: Segmental rent seeking
and inefficient investments,” Journal of Finance 55, 2537–2564.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Lawrence Summers, 1988, “Breach of Trust in Hostile Takeovers,” in Mergers and
Acquisitions, edited by Alan J. Auerbach. University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny, 2003, “Stock Market Driven Acquisitions,” Journal of Financial
Economics, 70, 295-311.

Schoar, Antoinette, 2002, “Effects of corporate diversification on productivity,” The Journal of Finance
57, 2379-2403.

Shin, H., and René M. Stulz, 1998, “Are internal capital markets efficient?” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 113:531−552.

Stein, Jeremy, 1997, “Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate Resources,” The
Journal of Finance, 52, 111-133.



                                                    35
Stein, Jeremy, 2003, “Agency Information and Corporate Investment,” in G. M. Constantinides, M.
Harris, and R. Stulz (eds.), Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Elsevier/North-Holland, Amsterdam.

Sufi, Amir, 2009, “Bank Lines of Credit in Corporate Finance: An Empirical Analysis,” Review of
Financial Studies, 22(3), 1057-1088.

Tirole, Jean, 2006, The Theory of Corporate Finance, Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ.

Whited M., Toni, and Guojun Wu, 2006, “Financial Constraints Risk,” Review of Financial Studies, 19-2,
531-559.

Yun, Hayong, 2009, “The Choice between Corporate Liquidity and Corporate Governance,” Review of
Financial Studies, 2009, Vol. 22, No. 4, pp.1447–1475.




                                                  36
Table 1. Statistics on the acquisition sample across time
This table displays statistics on European targets from 2001 to 2008. The sample includes acquisitions of European
targets, reported by the Zephyr database, with at least one year of financial data available (in Amadeus) before and
after the acquisition. Financial firms, firms with less than 10 employees, and firms with the total asset size less than
1 Million USD are excluded. The table presents the characteristics of acquisitions tabulated by the deal completion
year. The total assets of target firms are the averages of the last two years before the merger. Statistics in the last
four columns are as of the last fiscal year-end before the deal is completed. Variable definitions are provided in the
Data Appendix.


                               Target’s Total Assets before
    Deal                          the Acquisition (USD
  Completion                             Million)              Domestic     Independent       Private       Public
    Year         No of Deals       Mean           Median       Deals (%)    Targets (%)     Targets (%)   Acquirer (%)
    2001             228          76.850          7.233         62.95          72.81           95.18         46.05
    2002             393         125.500          7.665         59.07          69.72           96.69         44.27
    2003             429          57.448          7.528         61.20          62.47           97.20         29.37
    2004             603          78.870          7.952         62.35          69.98           97.18         38.47
    2005             768          94.849          8.628         63.53          67.97           97.40         36.72
    2006             999          49.298          7.210         60.20          68.77           97.70         35.34
    2007            1270          38.377          7.270         65.51          77.48           97.72         34.96
    2008             497          83.230          7.453         67.58          78.47           97.59         31.59
    Total           5187          67.716          7.578         63.05          71.58           97.36         36.11




                                                          37
Table 2. Summary statistics on the financial variables of the targets and acquirers
This table presents summary statistics for the accounting variables of the targets and acquirers as averages of the last
two years before and after the acquisition. All firm-level data are from Amadeus. Statistics are based on
unconsolidated financial statements for the targets and consolidated financial statements for the acquirers. Variable
definitions are provided in the Data Appendix. Total assets are in USD Million. We assess the differences in means
using the mean difference test and medians using the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test. The symbols ***, **, and *
denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.


                                                                          Target
                                                Before                                            After
                                Obs.        mean         sd      median            Obs.     mean          sd       median
Total Assets                    5187       67.716     622.835     7.578            5187    88.993      945.946    9.717***
Number of Employees             4121      282.901    1741.023    76.500            4363   256.792     1919.958   69.000***
Cash/Total Assets               5002        0.122      0.145      0.064            4936   0.103***      0.127     0.054***
Gross Investment/Total Assets   4148        0.064      0.107      0.034            4484     0.062       0.118     0.027***
Cash Flows/Total Assets         4305        0.077      0.139      0.082            4413   0.068**       0.151     0.073***
ROA                             4126        0.110      0.154      0.109            4270   0.093***      0.168     0.094***
Sales Growth                    2464        0.133      0.344      0.068            2663     0.131       0.433     0.058***
Leverage                        4541        0.577      0.229      0.594            4341   0.552***      0.241     0.564***

                                                                      Acquirer
                                                Before                                            After
                                Obs.       mean         sd      median             Obs.      mean         sd    median
Total Assets                    1429     2438.834   11215.136   172.891            1504   3394.176* 14144.267 281.863***
Number of Employees             1318     7837.190   23942.573   885.000            1404   9114.769 29737.385 1057.250***
Cash/Total Assets               1406       0.098      0.100      0.063             1492    0.077***     0.077  0.050***
Gross Investment/Total Assets   1144       0.120      0.146      0.081             1029    0.099**      0.152  0.059***
Cash Flows/Total Assets         1262       0.079      0.072      0.078             1344    0.067***     0.071  0.069***
ROA                             1352       0.096      0.075      0.089             1423    0.083***     0.071  0.078***
Sales Growth                    807        0.201      0.425      0.108              725    0.133**      0.387  0.080***
Leverage                        1385       0.492      0.180      0.494             1475    0.523***     0.178  0.528***




                                                          38
Table 3. The effect of acquisitions on cash holdings of target and acquirer firms
This table presents estimates of equations predicting cash holding normalized by total assets, for target firms in
Column (1) through (4) and acquirer firms in Column (5) through (8). AFTER is a dummy variable that equals one
(zero) for the years after (before) an acquisition. The estimates are based on unconsolidated data for the targets and
consolidated data for the acquirers. The definition and sources of other variables are provided in the Data Appendix.
Firm and year fixed effects are included in all equations. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations
at the target-firm level and associated standard errors are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.


                               (1)        (2)        (3)           (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)           (8)
                                         Panel A: TARGET                               Panel B: ACQUIRER

AFTER                      -0.0173*** -0.0139*** -0.0135*** -0.0145***      -0.0164*** -0.0136*** -0.0140***    -0.0077
                             (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.005)         (0.004)    (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.006)
Ln(Total Assets)             0.0304     0.0160     0.0151     0.0514          -0.0155    -0.0270    -0.0318      0.0495
                             (0.022)    (0.023)    (0.027)    (0.039)         (0.023)    (0.025)    (0.024)     (0.044)
Ln(Total Assets)2           -0.0012*    -0.0008     -0.0008      -0.0016     -0.0000     0.0002    0.0004       -0.0012
                             (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.001)       (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.001)   (0.001)       (0.001)
Cash Flow/Total Assets                 0.0931***                0.0637***              0.0924***               0.1120***
                                         (0.008)                  (0.015)                (0.026)                 (0.040)
ROA                                                0.0945***                                       0.0490*
                                                     (0.008)                                       (0.030)
Ln(Number of Employees)                                     -0.0140***                                      -0.0113
                                                              (0.005)                                       (0.008)
Sales Growth                                                  -0.0004                                       -0.0078
                                                              (0.003)                                       (0.006)
Leverage                                                    -0.0892***                                    -0.1050***
                                                              (0.011)                                       (0.032)
Private Credit/GDP         -0.0239*** -0.0183**    -0.0162* -0.0202*        -0.0284** -0.0284** -0.0271** -0.0358*
                             (0.008)   (0.009)      (0.009)   (0.012)         (0.011)  (0.013)   (0.012)    (0.019)
Market Cap/GDP                0.0007    0.0015      -0.0040   -0.0039        0.0161**  0.0163*   0.0148*     0.0159
                             (0.005)   (0.005)      (0.006)   (0.009)         (0.008)  (0.009)   (0.008)    (0.017)
GDP Growth                   -0.0028   -0.0042       0.0317    0.1171         -0.0393  -0.0886   -0.0739    -0.1978
                             (0.015)   (0.015)      (0.041)   (0.071)         (0.075)  (0.064)   (0.060)    (0.174)
Constant                     -0.0600    0.0411       0.0616   -0.1830        0.4757** 0.5435** 0.5876**     -0.2503
                             (0.178)   (0.189)      (0.221)   (0.329)         (0.225)  (0.242)   (0.240)    (0.454)

Observations                 34,378     29,018      27,793       11,941       9,662      8,252      8,895        3,128
R-squared                     0.607      0.628       0.623        0.672       0.648      0.660      0.664        0.740




                                                           39
Table 4. The effect of acquisitions on the cash-cash flow and investment-cash flow
sensitivities of target firms
This table presents estimates of equations in which the dependent variables are the changes in the ratio of cash
holdings to total assets in Column (1) through (2), and gross investment normalized by total assets in Column (3)
through (4). AFTER is a dummy variable that equals one (zero) for the years after (before) an acquisition. We also
include its interaction with cash flows to examine the change in the sensitivities subsequent to the acquisitions. The
definition and sources of other variables are provided in the Data Appendix. Target-firm and year fixed effects are
included in all regressions. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the target-firm level and
associated standard errors are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels.



                                            (1)             (2)                 (3)              (4)
         Dependent Variable                 ∆(Cash/Total Assets)            Gross Investment/Total Assets

         AFTER                           -0.0138***        -0.0104**          0.0218***        0.0247***
                                           (0.003)          (0.004)             (0.004)          (0.006)
         Cash Flow/Total Assets          0.0741***        0.1036***           0.0818***        0.0713**
                                           (0.013)          (0.025)             (0.016)          (0.028)
         AFTER x Cash Flow               -0.0590***       -0.0929***          -0.0436**         -0.0563*
                                           (0.017)          (0.029)             (0.018)          (0.033)
         Ln(Total Assets)                  -0.0277          -0.0251             0.0134           -0.0058
                                           (0.019)          (0.031)             (0.037)          (0.057)
         Ln(Total Assets)2                0.0010*           0.0009             0.0007           0.0019
                                          (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.001)          (0.002)
         Ln(Number of Employees)                            -0.0020                           -0.0196***
                                                            (0.004)                             (0.007)
         Sales Growth                                       -0.0030                           0.0310***
                                                            (0.004)                             (0.005)
         Leverage                                           -0.0098                             0.0224*
                                                            (0.009)                             (0.013)
         Private Credit/GDP               -0.0036           0.0025             -0.0163          -0.0222
                                          (0.007)           (0.008)             (0.010)         (0.015)
         Market Cap/GDP                   -0.0048           -0.0107            -0.0117          -0.0064
                                          (0.006)           (0.009)             (0.008)         (0.012)
         GDP Growth                       -0.0192           0.0421            0.1330***         0.1183
                                          (0.021)           (0.063)             (0.042)         (0.138)
         Constant                         0.2055            0.1906             -0.2733          -0.2925
                                          (0.161)           (0.269)             (0.302)         (0.466)

         Observations                      23,668           11,632             25,591            12,138
         R-squared                          0.159            0.195              0.320             0.368




                                                         40
Table 5. The effect of acquisitions on investments of target firms
This table presents estimates of equations in which the dependent variables are gross investment normalized by total
assets. AFTER is a dummy variable that equals one (zero) for the years after (before) an acquisition. The definition
and sources of other variables are provided in the Data Appendix. Target-firm and year fixed effects are included in
all regressions. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the target-firm level and associated
standard errors are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels.


                                                     (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)
                  Dependent Variable :                       Gross Investment/Total Assets

                  AFTER                          0.0161*** 0.0184*** 0.0156*** 0.0201***
                                                   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.005)
                  Ln(Total Assets)                 0.0187    0.0087    0.0006   -0.0140
                                                   (0.036)   (0.037)   (0.040)   (0.056)
                  Ln(Total Assets)2                0.0006         0.0009     0.0012      0.0021
                                                   (0.001)        (0.001)    (0.001)     (0.002)
                  Cash Flow/Total Assets                        0.0587***               0.0411**
                                                                  (0.011)                (0.019)
                  ROA                                                       0.0218**
                                                                             (0.010)
                  Ln(Number of Employees)                                      -0.0203***
                                                                                  (0.007)
                  Sales Growth                                                  0.0308***
                                                                                  (0.005)
                  Leverage                                                       0.0232*
                                                                                  (0.012)
                  Private Credit/GDP              -0.0159   -0.0166   -0.0144    -0.0214
                                                   (0.010)   (0.010)   (0.010)    (0.015)
                  Market Cap/GDP                  -0.0092   -0.0108   -0.0032    -0.0057
                                                   (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.008)    (0.012)
                  GDP Growth                     0.1222*** 0.1299*** 0.2229***    0.1141
                                                   (0.042)   (0.042)   (0.072)    (0.139)
                  Constant                        -0.3169   -0.2272   -0.2712    -0.2155
                                                   (0.292)   (0.302)   (0.327)    (0.463)

                  Observations                     27,322         25,591     24,434      12,138
                  R-squared                         0.315          0.319      0.330       0.367




                                                           41
Table 6. Subsamples of target firms
This table presents estimates of equations from Tables 3, 4, and 5 for subsamples based on target-firm characteristics. Panel A examines subsamples of
independent targets and targets as subsidiaries of other firms. Panel B divides the sample of acquisitions into terciles based on the size of the target firm
(calculated as the average of assets for the last available two years). The dependent variables are cash holdings normalized by total assets in Columns (1) and (5),
changes in cash holdings in Column (2) and (6), and gross investment normalized by total assets in Columns (3), (4), (7), and (8). The regression specifications
follow Column (2) in Table 3, Columns (1) and (3) in Table 4, and Column (2) in Table 5. The coefficients on size variables and two country-level variables are
not reported to save space. AFTER is a dummy variable that equals one (zero) for the years after (before) an acquisition. We also include the interaction of
AFTER with cash flows to examine the change in the sensitivities post acquisitions. The definition and sources of other variables are provided in the Data
Appendix. Target-firm and year fixed effects are included in all regressions. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the target-firm level
and associated standard errors are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

Panel A. Independent vs. Subsidiary targets
                                  (1)             (2)          (3)                (4)                (5)             (6)           (7)               (8)
                                                    INDEPENDENT                                                         SUBSIDIARY
    Dependent Variable :      Cash/Asset     ∆(Cash/Asset)  Inv/Asset          Inv/Asset         Cash/Asset     ∆(Cash/Asset)   Inv/Asset         Inv/Asset

AFTER                         -0.0183***      -0.0135***      0.0215***       0.0170***            -0.0030        -0.0129**       0.0227***      0.0212***
                                (0.004)         (0.004)        (0.005)         (0.004)             (0.006)         (0.005)         (0.007)        (0.007)
Cash Flow/Total Assets         0.0995***       0.0903***      0.0899***       0.0609***           0.0761***       0.0417**        0.0609**       0.0488**
                                (0.010)         (0.018)        (0.019)         (0.013)             (0.013)         (0.016)         (0.029)        (0.021)
AFTER x Cash Flow                             -0.0822***      -0.0520**                                            -0.0092         -0.0251
                                                (0.021)        (0.022)                                             (0.028)         (0.034)
Constant                        -0.0587          0.2649        -0.0361          0.0244             0.1505          -0.1216       -1.3396***      -1.3195***
                                (0.208)         (0.198)        (0.383)          (0.382)            (0.413)         (0.308)         (0.500)         (0.500)

Observations                    20,569          16,777          18,129          18,129              8,449           6,891           7,462           7,462
R-squared                        0.634           0.167           0.331           0.330              0.608           0.143           0.299           0.299




                                                                                42
Panel B. Target Size
                             (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)            (6)           (7)         (8)
                                           SMALL (bottom 1/3)                                     LARGE (top 1/3)
   Dependent Variable :   Cash/Asset   ∆(Cash/Asset)   Inv/Asset   Inv/Asset   Cash/Asset   ∆(Cash/Asset)   Inv/Asset   Inv/Asset

AFTER                     -0.0242***    -0.0207***     0.0274***   0.0204***    -0.0032      -0.0080**      0.0151**    0.0145**
                            (0.007)       (0.007)       (0.008)     (0.007)     (0.005)       (0.004)        (0.007)     (0.006)
Cash Flow/Total Assets     0.1199***     0.1177***     0.0905***   0.0462**    0.0555***       0.0245       0.0816***   0.0767***
                            (0.015)       (0.028)       (0.027)     (0.019)     (0.012)       (0.016)        (0.031)     (0.022)
AFTER x Cash Flow                        -0.0729**     -0.0777**                              -0.0340        -0.0098
                                          (0.032)       (0.031)                               (0.025)        (0.034)
Constant                   -0.5883         0.7212      -2.1973**   -2.0904**   0.5494**       -0.0537         0.1910     0.1915
                           (1.077)        (0.960)       (1.076)     (1.065)     (0.276)       (0.230)        (0.580)     (0.581)

Observations                8,059         6,422          7,156       7,156      10,813         8,921          9,450       9,450
R-squared                   0.628         0.208          0.341       0.340       0.591         0.118          0.301       0.301




                                                                    43
Table 7. The effect of acquisitions on the cash-cash flow and investment-cash flow
sensitivities of acquirer firms
This table presents estimates of panel equations in which the dependent variables are the changes in the ratio of the
acquirer’s cash holdings to total assets in Column (1) through (2) and the acquirer’s gross investment normalized by
total assets in Column (3) through (4). AFTER is a dummy variable that equals one (zero) for the years after (before)
an acquisition. The definition and sources of other variables are provided in the Data Appendix. Acquirer-firm and
year fixed effects are included in all regressions. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the
acquirer-firm level and associated standard errors are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

                                             (1)             (2)                 (3)              (4)
         Dependent Variable                  ∆(Cash/Total Assets)            Gross Investment/Total Assets

         AFTER                             0.0041           0.0013             -0.0287**        -0.0339**
                                           (0.006)          (0.007)             (0.013)          (0.016)
         Cash Flow/Total Assets           0.0864**          0.0845              0.1232*           0.0734
                                           (0.035)          (0.056)             (0.065)          (0.102)
         AFTER x Cash Flow                 -0.0482          -0.0676              0.0252           0.0312
                                           (0.046)          (0.056)             (0.087)          (0.111)
         Ln(Total Assets)                  0.0194           0.0224               0.0096          0.1550*
                                           (0.024)          (0.031)             (0.087)          (0.094)
         Ln(Total Assets)2                 -0.0006           -0.0005            0.0019           -0.0007
                                           (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.002)          (0.003)
         Ln(Number of Employees)                            -0.0088*                            -0.0449**
                                                             (0.005)                             (0.017)
         Sales Growth                                        -0.0094                           0.1098***
                                                             (0.007)                             (0.023)
         Leverage                                            0.0033                               0.0545
                                                             (0.022)                             (0.058)
         Private Credit/GDP                -0.0040           -0.0109            0.0052            0.0231
                                           (0.012)           (0.015)            (0.029)          (0.034)
         Market Cap/GDP                    -0.0159           0.0000             -0.0293          -0.0521
                                           (0.012)           (0.012)            (0.024)          (0.032)
         GDP Growth                        -0.1140           0.0801             0.2900            0.4159
                                           (0.096)           (0.185)            (0.245)          (0.505)
         Constant                          -0.1619           -0.1746            -0.5516        -2.4146***
                                           (0.245)           (0.337)            (0.848)          (0.874)

         Observations                       5,531             3,113              5,610            3,110
         R-squared                          0.177             0.194              0.352            0.385




                                                         44
Table 8. Cross-subsidization between target and acquirer firms subsequent to the
acquisition
This table presents estimates of equations in which the dependent variables are the changes in the ratio of the target
firm’s cash holdings to total assets in Column (1) through (2) and changes in the target firm’s gross investment
normalized by total assets in Column (3) through (4). AFTER is a dummy variable that equals one (zero) for the
years after (before) an acquisition. Target Cash Flow is the cash flow of the target firm and Acquirer Cash Flow is
the consolidated cash flow of the acquiring minus the cash flow coming from the target firm. The definition and
sources of other variables are provided in the Data Appendix. Target-firm and year fixed effects are included in all
regressions. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the acquirer-firm level and associated
standard errors are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% levels.

                                               (1)            (2)                   (3)            (4)
                                                    Target                               Target
       Dependent Variable                     ∆(Cash/Total Assets)            Gross Investment/Total Assets

       AFTER                               -0.0178***         -0.0230**         0.0203**           0.0195
                                             (0.007)           (0.009)            (0.008)          (0.013)
       Target Cash Flow                    0.0814***          0.0873**          0.1063***          0.0758
                                             (0.026)           (0.041)            (0.037)          (0.056)
       AFTER x Target Cash Flow              -0.0329           -0.0533          -0.0890**        -0.1200**
                                             (0.034)           (0.048)            (0.041)          (0.061)
       Acquirer Cash Flow                    0.0026*           -0.0398            0.0015          -0.0409
                                             (0.001)           (0.048)            (0.002)          (0.067)
       AFTER x Acquirer Cash Flow            0.0304             0.0270           -0.0124           0.0075
                                             (0.020)           (0.052)            (0.027)          (0.077)
       Ln(Total Assets)                      -0.0103           -0.0730           0.1367*           0.0744
                                             (0.049)           (0.063)            (0.078)          (0.086)
       Ln(Total Assets)2                     0.0004             0.0020           -0.0028          -0.0003
                                             (0.001)           (0.002)            (0.002)          (0.003)
       Ln(Number of Employees)                                  0.0072                            -0.0197
                                                               (0.009)                             (0.012)
       Sales Growth                                             0.0089                           0.0279***
                                                               (0.009)                             (0.010)
       Leverage                                                -0.0164                             0.0408
                                                               (0.020)                             (0.028)
       Private Credit/GDP                    -0.0208           -0.0182           -0.0038          -0.0125
                                             (0.015)           (0.017)           (0.022)           (0.026)
       Market Cap/GDP                        -0.0197           -0.0274            0.0015          -0.0092
                                             (0.014)           (0.018)           (0.015)           (0.021)
       GDP Growth                            0.0034            -0.0094           0.2669*          0.2845*
                                             (0.098)           (0.127)           (0.147)           (0.165)
       Constant                              0.1229             0.7035          -1.4575**         -1.0381
                                             (0.416)           (0.548)           (0.639)           (0.715)

       Observations                           5,599            3,055              6,028             3,171
       R-squared                              0.203            0.243              0.396             0.424




                                                         45
Table 9. Acquisitions and financial constraints: International considerations
This table presents estimates of equations from Tables 3, 4, and 5, with the difference in corporate tax rates between target and acquiring countries as an
additional control variable in Panel A and using the sample of domestic targets only in Panel B. The dependent variables are cash holdings normalized by total
assets in Column (1) and (5), gross investment normalized by total assets in Column (2), (4), (6), and (8), and changes in cash holdings in Column (3) and (7).
The definition and sources of variables are provided in the Data Appendix. Year fixed effects are included in Panel A and target-firm and year fixed effects are
included in Panel B. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the target-firm level and associated standard errors are in parentheses. The
symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

                                   (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)                 (5)            (6)            (7)              (8)
                                      Panel A. Difference in corporate tax rates                                 Panel B. Domestic targets
Dependent Variable             Cash/Asset ∆(Cash/Asset)       Inv/Asset       Inv/Asset          Cash/Asset    ∆(Cash/Asset)   Inv/Asset         Inv/Asset

AFTER                          -0.0189***       -0.0042**        0.0061*         0.0011          -0.0194***      -0.0174***      0.0262***      0.0212***
                                 (0.004)         (0.002)         (0.003)         (0.003)           (0.004)         (0.004)         (0.005)        (0.005)
Cash Flow/Total Assets         0.1499***       0.0562***       0.1008***       0.0686***         0.0875***       0.0605***       0.0921***      0.0587***
                                 (0.011)         (0.009)         (0.013)         (0.009)           (0.011)         (0.016)         (0.021)        (0.015)
AFTER x Cash Flow                              -0.0415***      -0.0600***                                         -0.0520**      -0.0626**
                                                 (0.013)         (0.016)                                           (0.022)         (0.024)
Ln(Total Assets)               -0.0977***         0.0043         0.0033         0.0012             -0.0026        -0.0572**        0.0671         0.0585
                                 (0.013)         (0.005)         (0.012)        (0.012)            (0.031)         (0.023)         (0.051)        (0.051)
Ln(Total Assets)2              0.0023***         -0.0001         0.0000          0.0001            -0.0003       0.0018***         -0.0007        -0.0005
                                 (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)           (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.002)        (0.002)
Private Credit/GDP              -0.0113*         0.0032         -0.0019         -0.0020            -0.0187         0.0075         -0.0261*       -0.0264*
                                 (0.006)         (0.003)         (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.012)         (0.009)         (0.014)        (0.014)
Market Cap/GDP                 0.0355***         -0.0037        -0.0020         -0.0017            0.0020         -0.0066          -0.0057        -0.0044
                                 (0.006)         (0.002)         (0.005)         (0.005)           (0.007)         (0.007)         (0.010)        (0.010)
GDP Growth                       0.0071        -0.1176***      0.1901***       0.1910***           -0.0131        -0.0416         0.1017*        0.0985*
                                 (0.079)         (0.038)         (0.068)         (0.068)           (0.017)         (0.026)         (0.055)        (0.055)
Diff_Corptax                   -0.1070***        -0.0075         0.0320          0.0317
                                 (0.029)         (0.009)         (0.020)         (0.020)
Constant                       1.0299***         -0.0422        -0.0123          0.0098            0.2274         0.4656**       -0.8408**       -0.7604*
                                 (0.115)         (0.041)         (0.101)         (0.100)           (0.250)         (0.199)        (0.417)         (0.415)

Observations                     22,450          18,317          19,968          19,968            17,831          14,525          15,776         15,776
R-squared                         0.085           0.007           0.016           0.015             0.630           0.159           0.320          0.319




                                                                              46
Table 10. Placebo test: Matched sample
This table presents estimates of our basic regressions in Table 3, Table 4, and Table 5 using the sample of industry-
size-country matched firms. For each target firm, we find a matched firm on Amadeus from the same country and
two-digit industry code that had the closest total assets at the year prior to the acquisition. We require that the
matching firm has non-missing financial data for at least one year before and one year after the merger. We drop the
matched firms for which the difference in total assets between the target and matched firms is above 20% of the
target firm’s total assets. The dependent variables are cash holdings normalized by total assets in Column (1), gross
investment normalized by total assets in Column (2) and (4), and changes in cash holdings in Column (3). AFTER is
a dummy variable that equals one (zero) for the years after (before) an acquisition of target firms to which the firm is
matched. The definition and sources of variables are provided in the Data Appendix. Firm and year fixed effects are
included. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the firm level and associated standard errors
are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

                                              (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)
           Dependent Variable:             Cash/Asset      ∆(Cash/Asset)      Inv/Asset         Inv/Asset

           AFTER                             -0.0011           0.0019          -0.0032          -0.0060*
                                              (0.003)          (0.004)          (0.004)          (0.003)
           Cash Flow/Total Assets           0.1199***        0.1220***        0.0679***        0.0509***
                                              (0.011)          (0.019)          (0.018)          (0.014)
           AFTER x Cash Flow                                  -0.0347          -0.0344
                                                               (0.023)          (0.021)
           Ln(Total Assets)                  0.0375            0.0178         0.0837**          0.0809**
                                             (0.024)           (0.027)          (0.035)          (0.034)
           Ln(Total Assets)2                 -0.0012*          -0.0004          -0.0012          -0.0012
                                              (0.001)          (0.001)           (0.001)          (0.001)
           Private Credit/GDP               -0.0195**          -0.0103          -0.0019          -0.0018
                                              (0.009)          (0.007)           (0.009)          (0.009)
           Market Cap/GDP                      0.0037           0.0019          -0.0097          -0.0092
                                              (0.005)          (0.006)           (0.007)          (0.007)
           GDP Growth                          0.0207           0.0316         0.1306***        0.1275***
                                              (0.017)          (0.027)           (0.040)          (0.040)
           Constant                           -0.1769          -0.1827        -1.0053***       -0.9772***
                                              (0.199)          (0.224)           (0.287)          (0.287)

           Observations                      26,202            18,439           23,149           23,149
           R-squared                          0.717             0.154            0.358            0.358




                                                          47
Appendix Table A1. Statistics on characteristics of acquisitions across targets’ countries
This table displays statistics on European targets from 2001 to 2008. The sample includes acquisitions of European
targets, reported by the Zephyr database, with at least one year of financial data available (in Amadeus) before and
after the acquisition. Financial firms, firms with less than 10 employees, and firms with the total asset size less than
1 Million USD are excluded. The table presents the characteristics tabulated by the countries with at least 10 target
firms in our sample period. The total assets of target firms are the averages of the last two years before the merger.
Statistics in the last four columns are as of the last fiscal year-end before the deal is completed. Variable definitions
are provided in the Data Appendix.


                                         Target’s Total Assets before
                                            the Acquisition (USD
                                                   Million)             Domestic    Independent     Private       Public
Target Country             No of Deals       Mean           Median      Deals (%)   Targets (%)   Targets (%)   Acquirer (%)
AUSTRIA                         22          13.495           6.670       36.36         54.55        100.00         50.00
BELGIUM                        248          29.653           8.252       49.79         75.40         98.79         31.85
BULGARIA                        14          10.142           6.184       16.67         71.43         85.71         21.43
CROATIA                         28          15.956           9.327       57.14         64.29         96.43         35.71
CZECH REPUBLIC                  52          70.786          12.523       31.37         78.85         96.15         38.46
DENMARK                        100          25.982           7.726       43.00         72.00        100.00         31.00
ESTONIA                         17           7.031           3.644       58.82         47.06        100.00         23.53
FINLAND                        215          58.198           4.532       64.49         65.58         98.14         27.44
FRANCE                         748          45.271           7.365       67.17         68.32         97.86         35.03
GERMANY                        286          71.027          12.390       43.82         60.49         98.60         40.21
GREECE                          19          16.533           9.612       76.47         63.16         89.47         68.42
IRELAND                         21           9.742           5.172       52.38         85.71        100.00         23.81
ITALY                          282          69.915          20.927       60.29         65.96         99.29         36.88
LATVIA                          25           6.306           3.891       28.00         80.00         96.00         16.00
NETHERLANDS                    252          43.137           6.340       59.04         69.05         97.62         24.21
NORWAY                         182          31.894           5.224       57.47         78.57         94.51         34.62
POLAND                          74          38.969          10.908       38.89         66.22         95.95         52.70
PORTUGAL                        62          40.755          14.514       45.16         66.13         98.39         32.26
ROMANIA                         21          48.785           6.612       28.57         80.95        100.00         38.10
RUSSIAN FEDERATION             317          96.890           8.200       87.13         76.66         94.01         23.97
SLOVAKIA                        13          12.333           6.279       15.38         84.62         84.62         46.15
SPAIN                          343          35.608          10.450       69.32         69.97         98.83         24.78
SWEDEN                         305          27.908           5.500       57.62         67.54         95.08         40.33
UKRAINE                         14          22.511           4.521       71.43         78.57        100.00          7.14
UNITED KINGDOM                1527         114.276           6.865       70.38         76.56         97.38         43.94
Total                         5187          67.716           7.578       63.05         71.58         97.36         36.11




                                                             48
Appendix Table A2. The effect of acquisitions on the cash holdings of acquirer firms
adjusted for the deal value
This table presents estimates of our basic regressions in Panel B of Table 3 but adjusts the dependent variable (the
ratio of cash holdings of acquirer firms) for the deal value in the year after the acquisition by adding the deal value
to cash holdings. The observations without deal value information are dropped from the sample. AFTER is a dummy
variable that equals one (zero) for the years after (before) an acquisition. The definition and sources of other
variables are provided in the Data Appendix. Acquirer-firm and year fixed effects are included in all regressions.
Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the acquirer-firm level and associated standard errors
are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

                                            (1)                  (2)               (3)              (4)
       Dependent Variable:                         Acquirer's Cash Holdings adjusted for Deal Value

       AFTER                             -0.0126*             -0.0123          -0.0131*            -0.0122
                                          (0.007)             (0.008)           (0.007)            (0.014)
       Ln(Total Assets)                  -0.0537*            -0.0764**        -0.1032**            -0.0866
                                          (0.032)             (0.034)           (0.043)            (0.095)
       Ln(Total Assets)2                  0.0014*            0.0020**          0.0029**            0.0027
                                          (0.001)              (0.001)          (0.001)            (0.002)
       Cash Flow/Total Assets                                0.0930***                            0.1545**
                                                               (0.030)                             (0.068)
       ROA                                                                     0.0861**
                                                                                (0.043)
       Ln(Number of Employees)                                                                     -0.0088
                                                                                                   (0.011)
       Sales Growth                                                                                -0.0093
                                                                                                   (0.008)
       Leverage                                                                                   -0.0763*
                                                                                                   (0.044)
       Private Credit/GDP               -0.0504***          -0.0526***        -0.0569***           -0.0440
                                          (0.018)             (0.020)           (0.019)            (0.028)
       Market Cap/GDP                     0.0217              0.0110            0.0172             -0.0203
                                          (0.016)             (0.018)           (0.019)            (0.036)
       GDP Growth                         0.0045              -0.0070           0.0033             0.0688
                                          (0.037)             (0.042)           (0.083)            (0.133)
       Constant                          0.6222**            0.8548**         1.0502***            0.8609
                                          (0.306)             (0.332)           (0.403)            (0.940)

       Observations                        3,716                3,262            3,181              1,304
       R-squared                           0.552                0.571            0.561              0.655




                                                           49
Appendix Table A3. Cross-subsidization between target and other size-weighted (sales-growth-weighted) subsidiaries after the
acquisition
This table presents estimates of equations in which the dependent variables are the changes in the ratio of the target firm’s cash holdings to total assets in Column
(1) through (4) and changes in the target’s gross investment normalized by total assets in Column (5) through (8). AFTER is a dummy variable that equals one
(zero) for the years after (before) an acquisition. Target Cash Flow is the cash flow of the target firm only and Size-weighted (Sales-growth-weighted) Non-
Target Cash Flow is the asset-weighted (sales-growth-weighted) cash flows of the other European subsidiaries of the acquiring firm. The definition and sources
of other variables are provided in the Data Appendix. Target-firm and year fixed effects are included in all regressions. Standard errors are corrected for
clustering of observations at the acquirer-firm level and associated standard errors are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.

                                                                     (1)           (2)         (3)           (4)       (5)        (6)         (7)          (8)
              Dependent Variable                                              Target ∆(Cash/Total Assets)                Target Gross Invesment/Total Assets

              AFTER                                                -0.0113*      -0.0045     -0.0110     -0.0030     0.0158** 0.0305*** 0.0263*** 0.0337***
                                                                    (0.007)      (0.010)      (0.008)    (0.011)      (0.008)   (0.011)   (0.009)   (0.011)
              Target Cash Flow                                     0.0649**     0.1209**    0.1109***   0.1266**    0.0803*** 0.0844** 0.0971*** 0.1089**
                                                                    (0.030)      (0.055)      (0.038)    (0.059)      (0.028)   (0.043)   (0.032)   (0.043)
              AFTER x Target Cash Flow                              -0.0468     -0.1024*    -0.0953**   -0.1076*      -0.0187  -0.0371   -0.0087    -0.0503
                                                                    (0.037)      (0.061)      (0.043)    (0.065)      (0.033)   (0.054)   (0.041)   (0.057)
              Size-Weighted Non-target Cash Flow                     0.0398      -0.0068                               0.0222   0.0481
                                                                    (0.058)      (0.076)                              (0.057)   (0.092)
              AFTER x Size-weighted Non-target Cash Flow            -0.0056       0.0642                               0.0760   0.0195
                                                                    (0.076)      (0.089)                              (0.083)   (0.106)
              Sales-growth-weighted Non-target Cash Flow                                      0.0134     -0.0057                          0.0210     0.0309
                                                                                             (0.020)     (0.021)                          (0.021)   (0.022)
              AFTER x Sales-growth-weighted Non-target Cash Flow                              0.0067      0.0141                         -0.0252    -0.0341
                                                                                             (0.026)     (0.030)                          (0.032)   (0.032)
              Ln(Total Assets)                                     -0.0489       -0.0514     -0.0627     -0.0748       0.0524  -0.0403    0.0737    -0.0453
                                                                   (0.037)       (0.054)     (0.042)     (0.057)      (0.073)   (0.111)   (0.092)   (0.116)
              Ln(Total Assets)2                                     0.0018        0.0019     0.0021*      0.0026      -0.0006   0.0029   -0.0011     0.0031
                                                                   (0.001)       (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.002)      (0.002)   (0.003)   (0.003)   (0.004)
              Ln(Number of Employees)                                            -0.0032                 -0.0033              -0.0245**            -0.0211*
                                                                                 (0.007)                 (0.007)                (0.012)             (0.012)
              Sales Growth                                                       -0.0028                 -0.0010              0.0287***           0.0285***
                                                                                 (0.008)                 (0.008)                (0.009)             (0.009)
              Leverage                                                           -0.0265                 -0.0243               0.0400*             0.0466**
                                                                                 (0.018)                 (0.019)                (0.021)             (0.022)
              Private Credit/GDP                                   -0.0139      -0.0274*     -0.0223    -0.0305*      -0.0018   0.0034   -0.0079    -0.0076
                                                                   (0.012)       (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.016)      (0.019)   (0.027)   (0.022)   (0.030)
              Market Cap/GDP                                       -0.0041       -0.0166     -0.0035     -0.0178      -0.0002   0.0064    0.0040     0.0122
                                                                   (0.013)       (0.019)     (0.016)     (0.020)      (0.014)   (0.023)   (0.017)   (0.025)
              GDP Growth                                            0.0173        0.0503      0.0216      0.0094       0.1730   0.1592    0.1502     0.0776
                                                                   (0.057)       (0.108)     (0.080)     (0.133)      (0.111)   (0.258)   (0.155)   (0.295)
              Constant                                              0.3497        0.4128      0.4867      0.5924      -0.6928  -0.0731   -0.9035    -0.0424
                                                                   (0.324)       (0.480)     (0.363)     (0.505)      (0.604)   (0.914)   (0.763)   (0.957)

              Observations                                          6,564         3,300       4,936         3,057    7,225       3,469       5,320       3,221
              R-squared                                             0.170         0.208       0.180         0.230    0.348       0.389       0.356       0.400




                                                                                      50
Appendix Table A4. Subsamples of target firms
This table presents estimates of some equations from Tables 3, 4, and 5 for subsamples based on target-firm characteristics. Panel A compares subsamples of
diversifying acquisitions and acquisitions within the same industry, where the industry is classified at the time of acquisition. In columns (1)-(4) of Panel B, we
present results for a subset of targets whose independence level either does not change or decreases (becoming more closely held) post acquisitions. In Columns
(5)-(8) of Panel B, we present results excluding the subset of acquisitions where the acquirer is a public firm and the target is a private firm. The dependent
variables are cash holdings normalized by total assets in Columns (1) and (5), changes in cash holdings in Column (2) and (6), and gross investment normalized
by total assets in Columns (3), (4), (7), and (8). The regression specifications follow Column (2) in Table 3, Columns (1) and (3) in Table 4, and Column (2) in
Table 5. The coefficients on size variables and two country-level variables are not reported to save space. AFTER is a dummy variable that equals one (zero) for
the years after (before) an acquisition. We also include the interaction of AFTER with cash flows to examine the change in the sensitivities post acquisitions. The
definition and sources of other variables are provided in the Data Appendix. Target-firm and year fixed effects are included in all regressions. Standard errors are
corrected for clustering of observations at the target-firm level and associated standard errors are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.


Panel A. Diversifying vs. Same Industry Acquisition
                                  (1)            (2)         (3)                  (4)                (5)            (6)         (7)                  (8)
                                                  DIVERSIFYING                                                     SAME INDUSTRY
   Dependent Variable :       Cash/Asset    ∆(Cash/Asset) Inv/Asset           Inv/Asset          Cash/Asset    ∆(Cash/Asset) Inv/Asset           Inv/Asset

AFTER                          -0.0080       -0.0255***      0.0290***        0.0216***          -0.0211***       -0.0202**      0.0340***       0.0304***
                                (0.007)        (0.007)         (0.008)          (0.007)            (0.008)         (0.008)         (0.010)         (0.009)
Cash Flow/Total Assets        0.0984***      0.0782***       0.1105***        0.0692***          0.1072***       0.0711***       0.0907***       0.0724***
                                (0.013)        (0.021)         (0.025)          (0.018)            (0.017)         (0.027)         (0.031)         (0.025)
AFTER x Cash Flow                             -0.0540*       -0.0855***                                          -0.0891***       -0.0402
                                               (0.028)         (0.030)                                             (0.034)         (0.034)
Constant                       0.1087          0.4412          -0.3993         -0.2895             0.1517           0.3078        -0.4233         -0.3952
                               (0.344)         (0.288)         (0.487)         (0.488)             (0.413)         (0.324)         (0.658)        (0.656)

Observations                    10,329          8,416           9,088           9,088              8,298           6,739           7,306           7,306
R-squared                        0.637          0.175           0.347           0.345              0.661           0.178           0.323           0.323




                                                                                51
Panel B. Changes in Ownership in Targets
                            (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)         (5)            (6)             (7)        (8)
                                Targets with No Increase in Independence                             Private Acquirers
  Dependent Variable :   Cash/Asset ∆(Cash/Asset)      Inv/Asset      Inv/Asset   Cash/Asset   ∆(Cash/Asset)    Inv/Asset   Inv/Asset

AFTER                    -0.0164**       -0.0081      0.0263***      0.0226***    -0.0173***    -0.0158***     0.0241***    0.0212***
                           (0.007)        (0.006)       (0.008)        (0.008)      (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.005)      (0.005)
Cash Flow/Total Assets   0.1032***      0.0792***     0.0666**        0.0369*     0.0856***     0.0708***      0.0754***    0.0560***
                           (0.018)        (0.022)       (0.034)        (0.021)      (0.010)       (0.015)        (0.021)      (0.015)
AFTER x Cash Flow                       -0.0572**      -0.0485                                  -0.0701***      -0.0387*
                                          (0.027)       (0.036)                                   (0.021)        (0.023)
Constant                  0.2415         -0.1474       -0.4272        -0.3657      0.0765         0.3106*        -0.5355     -0.4948
                          (0.419)         (0.290)       (0.492)       (0.490)      (0.231)        (0.188)        (0.372)     (0.371)

Observations               7,407          6,094          6,659         6,659       18,936         15,441         16,672      16,672
R-squared                  0.596          0.129          0.327         0.327        0.634          0.156          0.312       0.312




                                                                       52
Appendix Table A5. Pooled regressions including both target and matched firms
This table presents estimates of equations from Tables 3, 4, and 5 using a sample of both target firms and their
industry-size-country matched firms. Matched firms are firms with the closest total assets at the year prior to the
acquisition on Amadeus from the same country and two-digit industry code. All matching firms have non-missing
financial data for at least one year before and one year after the merger and must have a difference in total assets of
less than 20% with the target’s total assets, or else the observation is dropped. The dependent variables are cash
holdings normalized by total assets in Column (1), gross investment normalized by total assets in Column (2) and
(4), and changes in cash holdings in Column (3). For target firms, AFTER is a dummy variable that equals one (zero)
for years after (before) an acquisition of target firms to which the firm is matched. For matched firms, AFTER
equals zero for all years. The definition and sources of variables are provided in the Data Appendix. Firm and year
fixed effects are included. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the firm level and
associated standard errors are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% levels.

                                           (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
       Dependent Variable:              Cash/Asset       ∆(Cash/Asset)        Inv/Asset          Inv/Asset

       AFTER                            -0.0155***        -0.0103***          0.0093***         0.0071***
                                          (0.003)           (0.002)             (0.003)           (0.003)
       Cash Flow/Total Assets           0.1010***         0.0882***           0.0665***         0.0551***
                                          (0.007)           (0.010)             (0.011)           (0.009)
       AFTER x Cash Flow                                  -0.0743***          -0.0308**
                                                            (0.015)             (0.015)
       Ln(Total Assets)                   0.0248            -0.0074            0.0423*            0.0401
                                          (0.017)           (0.016)             (0.025)           (0.025)
       Ln(Total Assets)2                 -0.0009*             0.0004           -0.0001            -0.0000
                                          (0.000)             (0.000)          (0.001)            (0.001)
       Private Credit/GDP               -0.0192***            -0.0056          -0.0094            -0.0095
                                          (0.007)             (0.005)          (0.007)            (0.007)
       Market Cap/GDP                     0.0031              -0.0018         -0.0098*           -0.0094*
                                          (0.004)             (0.004)          (0.005)            (0.005)
       GDP Growth                         0.0085              0.0005         0.1282***          0.1270***
                                          (0.011)             (0.017)          (0.030)            (0.030)
       Constant                           -0.0558             0.0250         -0.6295***         -0.6080***
                                          (0.139)             (0.138)          (0.210)            (0.210)

       Observations                       54,381              41,427           48,025             48,025
       R-squared                           0.673               0.156            0.333              0.333




                                                         53
Appendix Table A6. The effect of Acquisitions on Cash Holdings, Investment, and their Sensitivities – Robustness on the
sample
This table presents estimates of equations from Tables 3, 4, and 5 after eliminating target firms where the number of employees changes by more than
10% (or total assets changes by more than 10% if number of employees is missing) in the two years following the acquisition. The dependent variables
are cash holdings normalized by total assets in Column (1) and (2), changes in cash holdings in Column (3) and (4), and gross investment normalized by
total assets in Column (5), (6), (7), and (8), and. The definition and sources of variables are provided in the Data Appendix. Target-firm and year fixed
effects are included in all regressions. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the target-firm level and associated standard errors
are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
                                      (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)             (5)            (6)             (7)           (8)
 Dependent Variable                     Cash/Asset                  ∆(Cash/Asset)                   Inv/Asset                      Inv/Asset

AFTER                           -0.0104*** -0.0103*           -0.0137*** -0.0114**          0.0250***    0.0195***        0.0234***    0.0185***
                                  (0.004)   (0.006)             (0.004)    (0.005)            (0.005)      (0.007)          (0.004)      (0.006)
Cash Flow/Total Assets          0.0933*** 0.0714***           0.0721*** 0.0908***           0.0698***     0.0552*         0.0565***    0.0478**
                                  (0.009)   (0.017)             (0.015)    (0.023)            (0.019)      (0.032)          (0.013)      (0.022)
AFTER x Cash Flow                                               -0.0266   -0.0616*           -0.0253      -0.0133
                                                                (0.021)    (0.032)            (0.022)      (0.037)
Ln(Total Assets)                  0.0510*      0.0162           0.0058     -0.0232            0.0255      -0.0016          0.0231       -0.0037
                                  (0.031)      (0.050)          (0.023)    (0.039)            (0.050)      (0.075)         (0.050)      (0.074)
Ln(Total Assets)2                -0.0018**     -0.0005          0.0000       0.0009           0.0004       0.0016          0.0004        0.0017
                                  (0.001)      (0.001)          (0.001)      (0.001)          (0.002)      (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.002)
Ln(Number of Employees)                       -0.0116**                      -0.0031                      -0.0133*                      -0.0134*
                                               (0.006)                       (0.005)                       (0.008)                       (0.008)
Sales Growth                                    0.0009                       -0.0027                     0.0293***                     0.0294***
                                               (0.004)                       (0.005)                       (0.006)                       (0.006)
Leverage                                     -0.0847***                      -0.0100                     0.0369***                     0.0370***
                                               (0.013)                       (0.010)                       (0.013)                       (0.013)
Private Credit/GDP                -0.0117      -0.0116          0.0029       0.0153          -0.0044       -0.0177         -0.0046       -0.0176
                                  (0.011)      (0.015)          (0.008)      (0.011)          (0.012)      (0.017)          (0.012)      (0.017)
Market Cap/GDP                    -0.0043      -0.0010          -0.0059      -0.0144         -0.0107       -0.0017         -0.0102       -0.0016
                                  (0.006)      (0.009)          (0.007)      (0.010)          (0.009)      (0.013)          (0.009)      (0.013)
GDP Growth                        0.0020      0.1923**          -0.0167      0.0827         0.1541***      0.0655         0.1524***      0.0653
                                  (0.017)      (0.077)          (0.024)      (0.071)          (0.053)      (0.110)          (0.052)      (0.110)
Constant                          -0.2411       0.0857          -0.0910      0.1630          -0.4977       -0.3365         -0.4742       -0.3172
                                  (0.254)      (0.429)          (0.196)      (0.338)          (0.410)      (0.621)          (0.410)      (0.615)

Observations                      18,427        7,968           15,021        7,774           16,173        8,085           16,173       8,085
R-squared                          0.628        0.674            0.148        0.169            0.297        0.351            0.296       0.351



                                                                                 54
Appendix Table A7. The effect of Acquisitions on Cash Holdings, Investment, and their Sensitivities – Excluding the
observations one year after the acquisition
This table presents estimates of equations from Tables 3, 4, and 5 after eliminating firm-year observations one year after the acquisition. The dependent
variables are cash holdings normalized by total assets in Column (1) and (2), changes in cash holdings in Column (3) and (4), and gross investment
normalized by total assets in Column (5), (6), (7), and (8). The definition and sources of variables are provided in the Data Appendix. Target-firm and
year fixed effects are included in all regressions. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at the target-firm level and associated
standard errors are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
                                      (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)              (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)
 Dependent Variable                      Cash/Asset                ∆(Cash/Asset)                     Inv/Asset                  Inv/Asset

AFTER                           -0.0152*** -0.0105             -0.0031       0.0019       0.0276***    0.0302***       0.0241***    0.0253***
                                  (0.005)   (0.007)             (0.004)      (0.006)        (0.006)      (0.008)         (0.005)      (0.008)
Cash Flow/Total Assets          0.0948*** 0.0676***           0.0626***    0.1119***      0.0987***    0.0977***       0.0755***    0.0658***
                                  (0.010)   (0.018)             (0.016)      (0.032)        (0.021)      (0.035)         (0.014)      (0.024)
AFTER x Cash Flow                                             -0.0434**    -0.0913**       -0.0457*      -0.0627
                                                               (0.021)      (0.038)         (0.024)      (0.043)
Ln(Total Assets)                  0.0129       0.0827*         -0.0127      -0.0058         -0.0157      -0.0520        -0.0207       -0.0611
                                  (0.024)      (0.046)         (0.021)      (0.037)         (0.043)      (0.067)        (0.043)       (0.066)
Ln(Total Assets)2                 -0.0007    -0.0025*          0.0004       0.0002          0.0015       0.0029          0.0016       0.0032
                                  (0.001)     (0.001)          (0.001)      (0.001)         (0.001)      (0.002)         (0.001)      (0.002)
Ln(Number of Employees)                     -0.0141**                       -0.0053                    -0.0152**                    -0.0159**
                                              (0.006)                       (0.005)                      (0.008)                      (0.008)
Sales Growth                                  0.0040                        -0.0031                    0.0327***                    0.0326***
                                              (0.004)                       (0.006)                      (0.007)                      (0.007)
Leverage                                   -0.0904***                       -0.0063                      0.0220                       0.0234
                                              (0.014)                       (0.011)                      (0.015)                      (0.015)
Private Credit/GDP               -0.0226**    -0.0208          -0.0046      0.0000         -0.0082      -0.0120         -0.0083      -0.0107
                                  (0.011)     (0.015)          (0.008)      (0.010)         (0.012)      (0.018)         (0.012)      (0.018)
Market Cap/GDP                     0.0046     -0.0028          -0.0001      -0.0099        -0.0149      -0.0058         -0.0138      -0.0052
                                  (0.006)     (0.011)          (0.006)      (0.010)         (0.009)      (0.014)         (0.009)      (0.014)
GDP Growth                        -0.0036     0.1071           -0.0131      0.0799        0.1575***      0.1945        0.1550***      0.1878
                                  (0.020)     (0.084)          (0.027)      (0.081)         (0.047)      (0.147)         (0.046)      (0.147)
Constant                           0.0677     -0.4391          0.1077       0.0654         -0.1130       0.1419         -0.0638       0.2268
                                  (0.205)     (0.392)          (0.182)      (0.320)         (0.358)      (0.556)         (0.357)      (0.549)

Observations                       19,464       8,083          15,776        7,875          17,192        8,266          17,192        8,266
R-squared                           0.624       0.675           0.175        0.212           0.338        0.386           0.337        0.385



                                                                               55
Appendix Table A8. The effect of Acquisitions on Cash Holdings, Investment, and their Sensitivities – Robustness on
Scaling by Total Assets
This table presents estimates of equations from Tables 3, 4, and 5 scaling all variables by assets in the year prior to the acquisition, rather than the value
of assets contemporaneously. The dependent variables are cash holdings normalized by total assets in Column (1) and (2), changes in cash holdings in
Column (3) and (4), and gross investment normalized by total assets in Column (5), (6), (7), and (8). The definition and sources of variables are
provided in the Data Appendix. Target-firm and year fixed effects are included in all regressions. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of
observations at the target-firm level and associated standard errors are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the
1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
                                      (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)              (7)            (8)
 Dependent Variable                       Cash/Asset                  ∆(Cash/Asset)                     Inv/Asset                       Inv/Asset

AFTER                             -0.0084**     -0.0134**          0.0013         0.0031         0.0334***     0.0269***        0.0293***     0.0208***
                                    (0.004)       (0.006)          (0.004)        (0.006)          (0.005)       (0.008)          (0.005)       (0.007)
Cash Flow/Total Assets            0.1085***     0.1039***        0.0898***      0.1407***        0.0561***     0.0923***        0.0324***     0.0611***
                                    (0.010)       (0.022)          (0.015)        (0.027)          (0.016)       (0.028)          (0.012)       (0.021)
AFTER x Cash Flow                                                -0.0420**     -0.0915***        -0.0428**      -0.0607*
                                                                   (0.019)        (0.034)          (0.020)       (0.033)
Ln(Total Assets)                  0.2577***     0.3084***        0.0925***       0.0824*          -0.0212        -0.0545         -0.0227        -0.0606
                                    (0.028)       (0.055)          (0.024)        (0.044)          (0.039)       (0.059)         (0.039)        (0.059)
                   2
Ln(Total Assets)                 -0.0059***     -0.0064***       -0.0022***       -0.0019        0.0031***      0.0043**        0.0031***       0.0045**
                                   (0.001)        (0.002)          (0.001)        (0.001)          (0.001)       (0.002)          (0.001)        (0.002)
Ln(Number of Employees)                         -0.0159***                     -0.0139***                      -0.0139**                       -0.0146**
                                                  (0.005)                         (0.005)                        (0.006)                         (0.006)
Sales Growth                                      -0.0015                        0.0126**                       0.0116**                        0.0118**
                                                  (0.004)                         (0.005)                        (0.005)                         (0.005)
Leverage                                        -0.0617***                         0.0098                         0.0212                          0.0213
                                                  (0.013)                         (0.011)                        (0.014)                         (0.014)
Private Credit/GDP                  -0.0031      -0.0324**         -0.0163*       -0.0094         -0.0031        -0.0186         -0.0035         -0.0182
                                    (0.011)       (0.015)           (0.009)       (0.013)         (0.012)        (0.016)         (0.012)         (0.016)
Market Cap/GDP                    -0.0129**       -0.0072         -0.0141**       -0.0137          0.0050         0.0107          0.0060          0.0111
                                    (0.006)       (0.011)           (0.007)       (0.010)         (0.007)        (0.011)         (0.007)         (0.011)
GDP Growth                         0.0420**       0.1692*           -0.0106        0.0589          0.0807        -0.0604          0.0800         -0.0617
                                    (0.019)       (0.097)           (0.028)       (0.099)         (0.052)        (0.120)         (0.052)         (0.121)
Constant                         -2.5035***     -3.0679***       -0.8902***     -0.7703**         -0.4807        -0.2069         -0.4578         -0.1405
                                    (0.236)       (0.475)           (0.205)       (0.369)         (0.317)        (0.481)         (0.318)         (0.480)

Observations                        27,878         9,948           19,733         8,465           20,814          8,688           20,814         8,688
R-squared                           0.609          0.679           0.197          0.263           0.395           0.423           0.394          0.423


                                                                                  56
Appendix Table A9. The effect of Acquisitions on Cash Holdings, Investment, and their Sensitivities – Robustness on “AFTER”
dummy
This table presents estimates of equations with different definitions of the AFTER dummy, the dependent variable. We restrict the sample only to three years
(Panel A) or five years (Panel B) immediately before and after the acquisition. The dependent variables are cash-to-assets ratio in Column (1) and (2), changes in
cash holdings in Column (3) and (4), and gross investment-to-assets ratio in Column (5), (6), (7), and (8), and. The definition and sources of variables are
provided in the Data Appendix. Target-firm and year fixed effects are included in all regressions. Standard errors are corrected for clustering of observations at
the target-firm level and associated standard errors are in parentheses. The symbols ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels.
Panel A. Three years before and after the acquisition
                                   (1)        (2)               (3)         (4)             (5)               (6)        (7)               (8)
Dependent Variable                   Cash/Asset                  ∆(Cash/Asset)                    Inv/Asset                    Inv/Asset

AFTER                          -0.0187*** -0.0213***        -0.0271*** -0.0231***       0.0247*** 0.0314***          0.0194***      0.0255***
                                 (0.004)    (0.006)           (0.005)    (0.007)          (0.005)   (0.008)            (0.005)        (0.007)
Cash Flow/Total Assets         0.0859*** 0.0556***          0.0774*** 0.1027***         0.0814*** 0.0711**           0.0433***        0.0303
                                 (0.010)    (0.020)           (0.017)    (0.032)          (0.020)   (0.030)            (0.014)        (0.022)
AFTER x Cash Flow                                           -0.0591*** -0.1025***       -0.0680*** -0.0729**
                                                              (0.021)    (0.036)          (0.021)   (0.034)
Ln(Total Assets)                 0.0394      0.0379           -0.0255    -0.0325          0.0029    -0.0491            -0.0070        -0.0652
                                 (0.040)     (0.058)          (0.032)    (0.053)          (0.057)   (0.093)            (0.057)        (0.092)
Ln(Total Assets)2                -0.0014      -0.0010        0.0009       0.0011          0.0015         0.0037        0.0018         0.0041
                                 (0.001)      (0.002)        (0.001)      (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.003)       (0.002)        (0.003)
Ln(Number of Employees)                     -0.0181***                    -0.0029                       -0.0159*                     -0.0174*
                                              (0.006)                     (0.006)                        (0.009)                      (0.009)
Sales Growth                                  -0.0022                     -0.0022                      0.0234***                    0.0233***
                                              (0.004)                     (0.005)                        (0.006)                      (0.006)
Leverage                                    -0.0829***                    -0.0030                        0.0113                       0.0130
                                              (0.014)                     (0.012)                        (0.017)                      (0.017)
Private Credit/GDP               -0.0209      -0.0188         -0.0102     -0.0044         -0.0117        -0.0154       -0.0120        -0.0138
                                 (0.014)      (0.018)         (0.011)     (0.015)         (0.015)        (0.022)       (0.015)        (0.022)
Market Cap/GDP                   0.0023       -0.0101        -0.0180*    -0.0254*         0.0022         -0.0117       0.0041         -0.0107
                                 (0.009)      (0.014)         (0.010)     (0.015)         (0.012)        (0.019)       (0.012)        (0.019)
GDP Growth                       -0.0131      0.1969*         -0.0026     0.0290          0.0589         -0.1363       0.0503         -0.1435
                                 (0.029)      (0.108)         (0.031)     (0.113)         (0.057)        (0.183)       (0.057)        (0.182)
Constant                         -0.1274      -0.0848         0.2245      0.3145          -0.4322        -0.1081       -0.3356        0.0407
                                 (0.328)      (0.495)         (0.272)     (0.453)         (0.468)        (0.761)       (0.466)        (0.749)

Observations                     18,883       8,135           16,381       7,957          17,629          8,256        17,629          8,256
R-squared                         0.662       0.702            0.238       0.281           0.392          0.457         0.391          0.457



                                                                               57
Panel B. Five years before and after the acquisition
                             (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)               (6)      (7)               (8)
Dependent Variable             Cash/Asset             ∆(Cash/Asset)                Inv/Asset                  Inv/Asset

AFTER                     -0.0159*** -0.0154***   -0.0153*** -0.0113**    0.0275*** 0.0307***        0.0231***     0.0251***
                            (0.003)    (0.005)      (0.004)    (0.005)      (0.004)   (0.006)          (0.004)       (0.006)
Cash Flow/Total Assets    0.0869*** 0.0616***     0.0767*** 0.1038***     0.0904*** 0.0792***        0.0607***     0.0427**
                            (0.009)    (0.016)      (0.014)    (0.027)      (0.017)   (0.028)          (0.012)       (0.019)
AFTER x Cash Flow                                 -0.0677*** -0.1002***   -0.0551*** -0.0683**
                                                    (0.018)    (0.030)      (0.019)   (0.033)
Ln(Total Assets)           0.0216     0.0393        -0.0302    -0.0397      0.0131    -0.0303         0.0059         -0.0415
                           (0.026)    (0.042)       (0.021)    (0.035)      (0.041)   (0.062)         (0.041)        (0.061)
Ln(Total Assets)2          -0.0009     -0.0011     0.0011*     0.0013      0.0009     0.0027          0.0010     0.0030
                           (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.002)         (0.001)    (0.002)
Ln(Number of Employees)              -0.0156***                -0.0012              -0.0186***                 -0.0197***
                                       (0.005)                 (0.004)                (0.007)                    (0.007)
Sales Growth                           0.0004                  -0.0024              0.0302***                  0.0300***
                                       (0.003)                 (0.004)                (0.005)                    (0.005)
Leverage                             -0.0869***                -0.0037                0.0164                     0.0174
                                       (0.012)                 (0.010)                (0.013)                    (0.013)
Private Credit/GDP         -0.0163     -0.0197     -0.0079     -0.0036     -0.0119    -0.0141         -0.0123    -0.0132
                           (0.010)     (0.013)     (0.007)     (0.009)      (0.011)   (0.015)          (0.011)   (0.015)
Market Cap/GDP             0.0034      -0.0013     -0.0086     -0.0132     -0.0129    -0.0107         -0.0116    -0.0096
                           (0.007)     (0.010)     (0.007)     (0.010)      (0.009)   (0.014)          (0.009)   (0.014)
GDP Growth                 -0.0048     0.1492*     -0.0223     0.0530     0.1299***   0.1710         0.1252***   0.1661
                           (0.022)     (0.083)     (0.025)     (0.076)      (0.045)   (0.153)          (0.045)   (0.154)
Constant                   -0.0177     -0.1017     0.2426      0.3344      -0.4085    -0.1264         -0.3384    -0.0221
                           (0.218)     (0.356)     (0.185)     (0.304)      (0.340)   (0.507)          (0.340)   (0.502)

Observations               25,504      10,923      21,674      10,647      23,416         11,106      23,416         11,106
R-squared                   0.639       0.679       0.175       0.209       0.333          0.389       0.333          0.388




                                                                   58
Data Appendix
This table contains descriptions and the sources of variables used in our analyses. Country-level
and firm-level variables are measured at the annual frequency. Deal-level items are measured as
of the last fiscal year-end before the deal is completed.
Variable                              Description
                                          Panel A. Country-level variables

Private Credit/GDP                    Private credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions to GDP
                                      (Source: Beck and Demirgüç-Kunt (2009), updated as of April 2010. The raw
                                      data used in this paper are from IMF's International Financial Statistics)
Market Cap/GDP                        Value of listed shares to GDP (Source: Beck and Demirgüç-Kunt (2009),
                                      updated as of April 2010. The raw data used in this paper are from IMF's
                                      International Financial Statistics)
                                      Annual percentage nominal growth rate of GDP in local currencies (Source:
GDP Growth                            World Bank)
Diff_Corptax                          The difference in corporate income tax rates between target’s and acquirer's
                                      countries (Source: OECD)

                                    Panel B. Deal-level variables (Source: Zephyr)

Domestic/Cross-border Deals           A deal is domestic (cross-border) if the target and acquiring firms are from
                                      the same nation (different nations).
Independent/Subsidiary Target         A given target firm is coded as an independent one if it is not a subsidiary of
                                      another firm.
Public/Private Target (Acquirer)      Target (acquirer) is a public firm if is listed or delisted.
Financial Target                      Target is a financial firm if its primary industry classification (NAICS) is 52
                                      or 53 (or first digit of US SIC code is 6 if NAICS code is missing).
Same_Industry                         Target is in a same industry as the acquiring firm if their first 2 digits of the
                                      primary US SIC code are the same.

                                   Panel C. Firm-level variables (Source: Amadeus)

Total Assets                          Book value of assets = Fixed assets (FIAS) + Current assets (CUAS)
Ln(Total Assets)                      Natural logarithm of total assets converted into US dollars.
Number of Employees                   The number of employees (EMPL)
Cash/Total Assets                     Cash and cash equivalents (CASH) / Total Assets
Gross Investment/Total Assets         [Fixed assets - lagged Fixed assets + Depreciation (DEPRE)]/ Total Assets
Cash Flows/Total Assets               Cash flows (CF) / Total assets
∆(Cash/Total Assets)                  Cash flows/Total Assets - lagged (Cash flows/Total Assets)
ROA                                   EBITDA(EBTA) / Total Assets
Sales Growth                          (Sales (TURN) - Lagged Sales)/Lagged Sales
Leverage                              [Long term debt (LTDB) + Current liabilities (CULI)] / Total Assets




                                                          59
