                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     GROUP LENDING WITH HETEROGENEOUS TYPES

                                               Li Gan
                                         Manuel A. Hernandez
                                            Yanyan Liu

                                         Working Paper 18847
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18847


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2013




We thank Alan de Brauw, Arun Chandrasekhar, Carlos Martins-Filho, Eduardo Nakasone, Annabel
Vanroose, Ruth Vargas-Hill and seminar participants at the Winter Meetings of the Econometric Society
and IFPRI for their helpful comments. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the CGIAR
Research Program on Policies, Institutions and Markets. We also thank the staff of the Center for Economics
and Social Studies, particularly Prof. S. Galab, for their support and collaboration in making the data
available. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Li Gan, Manuel A. Hernandez, and Yanyan Liu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Group Lending with Heterogeneous Types
Li Gan, Manuel A. Hernandez, and Yanyan Liu
NBER Working Paper No. 18847
February 2013
JEL No. C35,O16

                                            ABSTRACT

Group lending has been widely adopted in the past thirty years by many microfinance institutions as
a means to mitigate information asymmetries when delivering credit to the poor. This paper proposes
an empirical method to address the potential omitted variable problem resulting from unobserved group
types when modeling the repayment behavior of group members. We estimate the model using a rich
dataset from a group lending program in India. The estimation results support our model specification
and show the advantages of relying on a type-varying method when analyzing the probability of default
of group members.


Li Gan                                            Yanyan Liu
Department of Economics                           Market, Trade, and Institutions Divisions
Texas A&M University                              IFPRI
College Station, TX 77843-4228                    Washington, DC 20006-1002
and NBER                                          y.liu@cgiar.org
gan@econmail.tamu.edu

Manuel A. Hernandez
Markets, Trade, and Institutions Division
IFPRI
Washington, DC 20006-1002
m.a.hernandez@cgiar.org
1 Introduction
Since the establishment of Grameen Bank in Bangladesh in the mid-seventies, microfinance has
boomed. As of December 2010, 3,652 microfinance institutions reported reaching over 205
million clients worldwide, and every two out of three borrowers were among the poorest when
they took their first loan (Maes and Reed 2012). Such expansion can be partly attributed to the
widely adopted practice of group lending in microfinance programs. In contrast to individual
lending, group lending with joint liability grants a loan to a group of borrowers, and the whole
group is liable for the debt of any individual member in the group.2 This practice allows
microfinance programs to rely mainly on information advantages among group members, rather
than on financial collateral, to mitigate information asymmetries between lenders and potential
borrowers. Given that the poor often lack appropriate financial collateral, group lending
programs provide a feasible way of extending credit to poor people who are usually kept out of
traditional banking systems.
           Despite its rapid growth, there is an ongoing debate on whether group lending programs
are sustainable and able to achieve and maintain sound repayment performance while serving
poor borrowers, without the support of third parties such as international organizations.
Armendariz and Morduch (2005) show, for example, that Grameen Bank has experienced losses
close to eighteen percent of their outstanding loans over the period 1985-1996 after properly
adjusting for their portfolio size. It is also often argued that the high transaction costs faced by
micro finance institutions in identifying and screening their clients, processing applications and
collecting repayments keep interest rates high and prevent them from reaching new clients and
expanding their operations (Armendariz and Morduch 2004; Shankar 2006; Field and Pande
2008). Understanding the factors affecting repayment performance, which may vary by
(unobserved) group types, are thus of great policy relevance. In particular, more accurate risk
scoring tools can help to overcome information asymmetries by aiding lending institutions to
better classify their potential clients and understand the factors driving their behavior, further
promoting the development and sustainability of microcredit markets.
           This paper contributes to the ongoing debate and to the literature by more explicitly
dealing with the unobserved group heterogeneity. In particular, we make three contributions to
the literature. First, the paper develops a basic framework with both peer selection and moral

2
    Joint liability is one of the most common varieties of group loan contracts.

                                                             2
hazard that shows how joint liability can lead to the coexistence of different group types, which
implies the necessity to account for these group heterogeneities when modeling repayment
behavior in group lending. Second, the paper proposes and applies an empirical model to
explicitly deal with the problem of unobserved group heterogeneity. The paper discusses the
identification and conducts a test on the specification of the empirical model proposed. Finally,
the estimation results of the mixture model are more informative than standard probabilistic
models about the potential factors driving repayment behavior, which may differ by group type,
and the results are further shown to attain a higher predictive power.
        In most group lending programs, individuals voluntarily form a group based on a set of
common characteristics, which are generally observed by peers but not by lenders (and
econometricians). This peer selection in the group formation process helps to lessen adverse
selection as individuals screen each other when forming groups. On this matter, Ghatak (1999,
2000) and van Tassel (1999) show that in a context of individuals with heterogeneous risk types
and asymmetric information (where borrowers know each other’s type but lenders do not), group
lending with joint liability will lead to the formation of relatively homogenous groups of either
safe or risky borrowers.3 The intuition behind is that while a borrower of any type prefers a safe
partner because of lower expected joint-liability payments, safe borrowers value safe partners
more than risky partners because they repay more often. This positive assortative matching is
supported by empirical evidence in Ahlin (2009), who also finds that borrowers will anti-
diversify risk within groups in order to lower their chances of facing liability for group members.
        However, in a similar manner as self-selection, peer selection creates an omitted variable
problem in the empirical literature on repayment behavior (Karlan 2007). The omitted variables
may include, for example, the risk type, entrepreneurial spirit, economic opportunities, solidarity,
reciprocity and trust among group members, which affect repayment performance and are likely
correlated with the indicators generally used to account for group heterogeneity and social ties
when modeling repayment behavior. Yet, different from the omitted variable problem due to

3
  In contrast, Armendariz de Aghion and Gollier (2000) suggest that non assortative matching equilibrium can exist
in the case where a borrower knows her own type but has no ex-ante information about the other borrowers’ types.
Guttman (2008) indicate that negative assortative matching is possible if a riskier borrower can provide side-
payments to get a safer peer. However, side-payments are usually infeasible when the group is relatively large. And
group members often know each other well enough because groups are typically formed by people living in the
same geographical area or in contiguous areas. In fact, the information advantage (local information) of group
members over lenders is one of the main factors to justify the idea of group lending over individual lending.


                                                         3
self-selection, the omitted variable problem due to peer selection has largely been overlooked in
the literature (Hermes and Lensink 2007). Most of the empirical studies that explore
determinants of repayment in group lending programs treat the group as a decision maker and
employ single-agent choice models to examine how different group characteristics, including
proxies for social ties, affect the group repayment performance (e.g., Sharma and Zeller 1997;
Zeller 1998; Wydick 1999; Paxton et al. 2000; Hermes et al. 2005; Ahlin and Townsend 2007;
Cull et al. 2007).
        In addition, groups may also differ in their effort levels and/or effectiveness of peer
monitoring and peer pressure among members, which is also unobserved by lenders and have
direct implications on the observed repayment performance of group members. Besides
mitigating adverse selection through peer screening, group lending helps alleviate moral hazard
behavior and enforce repayment because members can more closely monitor each other’s use of
loans and exert pressure to prevent deliberate default.4 The success of peer monitoring and peer
pressure efforts across groups may be further correlated with peer screening because individuals
are more likely to select safe borrowers who are also less costly to monitor and less likely to
deliberately default. Overall, group-level unobservables may result from a combination of factors,
which include endogenous group formation due to ex-ante peer selection and ex-post peer
monitoring and pressure efforts.
        We propose and implement an empirical method to address the potential omitted variable
problem in group lending resulting from unobserved types. We use a mixture model to explicitly
account for unobserved group types when modeling the repayment behavior of group members.
In the model, individuals make repayment decisions based on their unobserved group type as
well as on observable individual and loan characteristics. Average member characteristics and
other group and village characteristics help, in turn, to identify the group types. We further allow
the marginal effects in the repayment equation to vary across types. We estimate the model using
a rich dataset from a group lending program in Andhra Pradesh in India.5 While the type-varying
groups in the empirical model may be explained by peer selection and variations (if any) in peer
efforts and the effectiveness of peer monitoring and enforcement rules, as well as by other


4
  See, e.g., Stiglitz (1990), Varian (1990), Banerjee et al. (1994), Armendariz de Aghion (1999) and Chowdury
(2005) for theoretical models showing how group lending with joint liability may help solving moral hazard and
monitoring problems.
5
  Group loans account for 93% of the microfinance in India (Shankar 2006).

                                                        4
unobserved factors like social cohesion, disentangling these effects is beyond the scope of the
study.6
          The estimation results support our model specification and show the advantages of
relying on this method when analyzing the probability of default of group members. The model
clearly distinguishes two group types: a first group type where members are more inclined to
fulfill their credit obligations and a second group type where members are more inclined to
default. We also provide evidence supporting that the group types are not simply identified by
the functional form of the proposed model. We further find important differences in the marginal
effects of the different individual and loan characteristics included in the repayment equation,
which suggests that the underlying factors driving repayment behavior may differ across group
types. In addition, the type-varying model shows a higher predictive performance than standard
probabilistic models.
          The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 further discusses the
implications of group lending with joint liability and heterogeneous types using a simple model
of adverse selection and moral hazard. Section 3 describes in detail the group lending program
considered for the study and the data. Section 4 presents the empirical model used to account for
the potential omitted variable problem resulting from unobserved group types when modeling the
repayment behavior of group members. Section 5 reports and discusses the estimation results.
Section 6 concludes.


2 A simple model of group lending with peer selection and moral hazard
Ghatak (1999, 2000) and van Tassel (1999) develop models that describe how joint liability with
heterogeneous types and local information can lead to positive assortative matching through peer
selection. We extend Ghatak (1999) base model by taking into account both peer selection and
moral hazard. In particular, we allow individuals to differ on their risk type (creditworthiness)
and on their level of effort.
          Assume borrowers are risk-neutral and endowed with one risky project, which requires
one unit of capital. Individuals have no initial wealth and must borrow the required amount of

6
  For a formal evaluation of ex-post peer effects on individual repayment behavior, refer to Karlan (2007) and Li et
al. (2012). Karlan (2007) exploits a unique quasi-random group formation process to isolate peer selection and
examine the impact of monitoring and enforcement on repayment; Li et al. (2012) estimate a structural model that
takes into account interactions across group members and incorporates group-level unobservables as random effects.

                                                         5
capital. Further assume that there are two types of borrowers: risky individuals of type a and
safe individuals of type b .7 The probability of success of borrower i 's project ( k i ) depends on

her inherent probability of success ( pi  0 ) determined by her risk type and on her effort level

( ei  0 ), where i  a, b . In particular, a risky type borrower has a success probability of

ka  pa  ea and a safe type has a success rate of kb  pb  eb , with pa  pb and 0  k a , k b  1 .

Without loss of generality, if the project is successful the output takes the value of Y and 0
otherwise.
         In the presence of local information, all borrowers know each other’s risk type, but the
outside lender (bank) does not. Following Ghatak (1999), in the absence of financial collateral
the bank requires potential borrowers to form groups of size two where both members are jointly
liable for each other. The bank offers to each group the joint liability contract (r , q ) , where
r  0 is the gross interest rate and q  0 is the liability payment. Hence, r is the payment made
by the individual who succeeds and q is the additional payment made by the individual when
she succeeds and her partner fails. A borrower who fails pays the bank nothing. The expected
payoff for type i borrower matched with type j borrower is, then, given by


            E ij  ( pi  ei )Y  ( pi  ei )r  q( pi  ei )(1  p j  e j )  1 / 2ei2                 (1)


where the disutility of the effort is captured by  1 / 2ei2 , with parameter   0 .
         We assume a non-cooperative game setting where each borrower maximizes her own
expected payoff E ij with respect to her effort ei . We solve the maximization problem in

Appendix B. The main results are summarized below:
    1.        A borrower's optimal effort level ( eij , i  a, b ) is higher if she is a safe type and/or if
                                                                   
              her partner is a safe type. That is, ebb  eab  eba  eaa .
    2.        A borrower prefers a safe partner to a risky partner, despite of her own type. That is,
              E bb
                 
                     E ba
                         
                            and E ab
                                   
                                       E aa
                                           
                                              .

7
  In this model, we assume that the type refers to the riskiness of borrowers, but the type could also refer to other
factors associated with the creditworthiness of borrowers like their entrepreneurial spirit, reciprocity, solidarity, trust
or level of responsibility. In the empirical setup below, the group types may aggregate all these factors.

                                                            6
   3.      Joint liability with varying risk types and effort levels leads to a single equilibrium of
           positive assortative matching in group formation. More specifically,
            E bb
               
                   E ba
                       
                           E ab
                               
                                   E aa
                                       
                                          . The net expected loss for a safe borrower of having a
           risky partner compared to having a safe partner is higher than the next expected gain
           of a risky borrower of having a safe partner compared to having a risky partner. As
           noted by Ghatak (1999), this equilibrium condition is similar to the optimal sorting
           property in Becker (1993), such that borrowers not in the same group should not be
           able to form a group without making one or both of them worse off.
        The second and third results above are consistent with the results from Ghatak (1999).
The intuition behind is that while a borrower of any type prefers a safe partner because of lower
expected joint-liability payments, safe borrowers value safe partners more than risky borrowers
because safe partners repay more often their loans and are more likely to realize the gains of
having a safe partner. By allowing the probability of success to also depend on the effort level of
borrowers, we additionally find that groups of safe partners will exhibit a higher effort, which
translates into further higher repayment probabilities. This result reinforces the notion of a
separating equilibrium in that borrowers of the same type will pair together and safe pairs will
show an even higher likelihood of repayment than risky pairs.
        We also allow for a cooperative game setting where each borrower maximizes the total
payoff of her group with respect to her effort. We obtain the same key results of the non-
cooperative game: a single equilibrium with positive assortative matching where groups of safe
partners exhibit a higher effort than groups of risky partners. The derivation under this
alternative setup is detailed in Appendix B.
        Thus, a simple framework with peer selection and moral hazard helps to show how joint
liability can lead to a separating equilibrium with the coexistence of two opposed groups: a
group of safe borrowers with a higher probability of repayment (success) reinforced by higher
effort levels, and a group of risky borrowers with a lower probability of repayment and lower
efforts. The coexistence of different group types, driven by unobserved factors like risk and
effort levels, implies the necessity to account for potential group types when modeling
repayment behavior in group lending. Certainly, there are mechanisms other than joint liability
through which group lending without financial collateral can lead to higher or lower repayment
rates and varying group types; for example, the unobserved informal risk-sharing and social

                                                  7
cohesion among group members.8 The empirical method proposed below is flexible enough to
allow for varying group types driven by a wide set of factors, which are not necessarily
observable and may shape the repayment behavior of a group.


3 Data


3.1 Background and Data
The groups under study are located in Andhra Pradesh in India.9 They are organized following a
new self-help groups (SHG) model promoted by the World Bank, which targets poor women in
rural areas. The model combines savings generation and micro-lending with social mobilization.
In particular, women who generally live in the same village or habitat voluntarily form SHGs
with the understanding of a joint liability mechanism. A typical SHG consists of 10-20 members
who meet regularly to discuss social issues and activities. During the group meetings each
member also deposits a small thrift payment into a joint bank account. Once enough savings
have been accumulated, group members can apply for internal loans that draw from the
accumulated savings at an interest rate to be determined by the group. After the group establishes
a record of internal savings and repayment, it becomes eligible for loans through a commercial
bank or program funds. This process of internal savings and repayments helps members to
further screen each other as some individuals may leave the group prior to obtaining a formal
loan.
        The group as a whole, then, borrows from a commercial bank or program funds where all
group members are held jointly liable for the debts of each other. The group generally allocates
the loan to its members on an equal basis, and the group is not eligible for further loans unless it
has made full repayment.10 The loans may be used for labor activities or consumption smoothing.
Groups also have the option of implementing non-lending programs with the support of the
program funds such as in-kind credit for subsidized rice, marketing and insurance programs.
        In this study, we focus on the first “expired” loan borrowed from commercial banks by
each group. An “expired” loan refers to a loan that had passed its due date by the time the survey

8
  For empirical evidence on this matter see Gine and Karlan (2009) and Feigenberg et al. (2011).
9
  Andhra Pradesh is the fourth largest state in India by area and the fifth largest by population.
10
   Naturally, a woman who maintains a good record and ends in a group where not all members fulfill their loan
obligations, may join another group in the future.

                                                        8
was conducted. In Andhra Pradesh, commercial banks carry out microfinance activities in non-
overlapped territories, so groups located in contiguous villages borrowed from the same bank.
        The sample includes 1,110 different group loans which were allocated to a total of 12,833
women. The data are from a SHG survey conducted between August and October 2006 in eight
districts in Andhra Pradesh, which were chosen to represent the state’s three macro-regions
(Rayalaseema, Telangana, and Coastal AP).11 The SHG survey contains socioeconomic
characteristics of group members (households) such as education background, housing condition,
land and livestock ownership, occupation, and caste. It also includes group characteristics such
as age, meeting frequency of members and programs and services available within the group.
More importantly, the survey directly recorded from SHG account books the information on all
loans that were taken between June 2003 and June 2006. The information includes the terms of
each loan, the members the loan was allocated to, and how much of the loan had been repaid by
each member at the time of the survey.12
        The SHG survey was complemented with a previous village survey that covered all the
villages from which the SHGs were sampled. From the village survey, we construct four
indicators to account for the economic environment of the sample groups. These indicators
include availability of financial institution, public bus, telephone and post office.
        Table 1 presents descriptive statistics of our full sample.13 The top panel (Panel 1) reports
member characteristics based on 12,833 observations while the bottom panel (Panel 2) reports
group and loan characteristics based on 1,110 observations. Approximately twenty-three percent
of the group members are literate and thirty-one percent belong to a scheduled tribe or scheduled
caste. Around six percent of the members are disabled or have family members who are disabled.
About sixty-five percent of households own some land, and thirty-three percent live in pucca
houses, twenty-two percent in kutcha houses, and the other forty-five percent live in semi-pucca
houses.14 Similarly, about sixty-one percent are agricultural laborers who do not own land or


11
   The eight districts are Srikahulam, Adilabad, Anantapur, Kadapa, Warangal, Nalgonda, Nellore, and
Visakhapatnam.
12
   The survey instrument included a separate section where the allocation of loans to members (member loans) was
recorded. See Li et al. (2012) for further details on how the information on group loans and member loans was
matched together.
13
   A detailed description of the variables used in the analysis is provided in Table A.1 in Appendix A.
14
   A pucca house has walls and roofs made of burnt bricks, stones, cement concrete, and timber while a kutcha house
uses less sophisticated materials such as hays, bamboos, mud, and grass. A semi-pucca house uses a combination of
materials from the other two types.

                                                        9
own such a small amount of land that they have to provide agricultural labor for others, twenty
percent are self-employed agricultural workers, and the rest have other occupations (such as
those self-employed and employed in non-agricultural sectors and housewives). The table also
indicates that eighty percent of the group members in our sample fully repaid their loan by its
due date (i.e. not defaulted). Figure A.1 in Appendix A further plots a histogram of the
percentage of the loan repaid by each member. It follows that most of the data points are
clustered at the endpoints, which supports the discrete treatment of the repayment (default)
behavior in the empirical model.
           Turning to the group and loan characteristics, the groups range from seven to twenty
members and have close to thirteen members on average. The groups are from all of the three
macro-regions in the state: about forty-five percent are located in Telangana, twenty-six percent
in Rayalaseema, and the remaining twenty-nine percent in Coastal AP. The average group age is
six years and roughly in nine of every ten groups the members meet on a regular basis (at least
monthly). About twenty-eight percent of the groups have a food credit program (in-kind credit
for subsidized rice), fifteen percent have a marketing program, and twenty-five percent have an
insurance program. The group loan was allocated on average to twelve members and the average
loan size received by a member is 3,338 rupees (about US67 dollars). The annual rate of interest
is about 12.8 percent, which is much lower than the prevailing rate of moneylenders in India.
The average duration of a loan is roughly one year and the majority of loans (ninety-six percent)
required the groups to make repayments at least monthly.


3.2 Preliminary Analysis
A first look at the data is indicative of a separating equilibrium with apparently two group types.
Table 2 shows that in more than 9 out of every 10 groups in our sample, either all of the
members do not default or all of them default. In particular, in 76% of the groups (848 out of
1,110 groups) all of the group members fully repaid their loans or never defaulted and in another
17% of the groups (188 groups) all of the members defaulted. As discussed earlier, this
repayment behavior may result from a combination of elements such as positive assortative
matching (“matching likes”) in group formation, in a context of joint liability, heterogeneous
types and asymmetric information between borrowers and lenders.15 Recall that under the SHG

15
     See Ahlin (2009) for a formal test on homogenous risk-matching in group lending.

                                                         10
model, groups have an initial period of internal savings and repayment, which also serves as an
extended (ex-ante) screening period prior to applying for a commercial loan. This initial period
also promotes social interaction among members, which may result in stronger social ties among
them (see also Feigenberg et al. 2011). The observed pattern may also reflect variations (if any)
in the level of effort and effectiveness of peer monitoring and peer pressure across groups, which
may be correlated with peer screening. The theoretical model developed above indicates that
groups composed of safe borrowers will also exhibit a higher level of effort than groups
composed of risky borrowers. Hence a preliminary look at the data suggests the existence of
mainly two group types: a “responsible” group of apparent “low risk” individuals with probably
high efforts and/or effective monitoring and enforcement rules and strong social cohesion, and an
“irresponsible” group of apparent “high risk” individuals with probably low efforts and/or
ineffective monitoring and enforcement rules and lack of social cohesion.16
         There is also the possibility of external factors, like a negative weather shock, affecting
the likelihood of repayment of all members in a group, which generally live close to one another
and perform similar labor activities. However, groups where all members defaulted in our
sample are not concentrated at a particular location, which reduces the possibility of specific
weather shocks or other contextual factors explaining inter-group variation on default behavior.
In particular, Figure A.2 shows that villages with a high proportion of groups where all members
default are well dispersed across the eight districts of our sample in Andhra Pradesh.17 In
addition, the estimation results presented below indicate that the variables included in the
repayment equation (individual and loan characteristics) have a differentiated effect on the
likelihood of default by group type, which further supports the existence of type-varying groups.
         To further examine the possibility of homogenous sorting among groups, Table A.2
reports the number of groups in which the intra-group variance is less than or equal to the overall
variance considering all groups in the same village and mandal for different borrower



16
   The existence of the mixed group (7% of our group sample) suggests that the observed defaults are not necessarily
strategic defaults. If some members fail to repay some installments, the other members still have the incentive to
repay on time because they do so in hope that the delinquent borrowers will repay their installments on a future date.
In addition, individuals that maintain a good repayment record are more likely to join a “better” group in the future
(if necessary). Formally addressing the dynamic aspects of installment repayments is beyond the scope of our paper.
17
   For areas with available weather data (rainfall) and vegetation information (Normalized Difference Vegetation
Index or NDVI) during the period of analysis, we also did not find any significant correlation between these
measures and default behavior.

                                                         11
characteristics.18 The characteristics include literacy, household characteristics, land ownership,
occupation and caste. The results show that individuals with similar observable characteristics
appear to group together. On average, in 70-72% of the cases the intra-group variance for a given
characteristic is smaller than the intra-village or intra-mandal variance. There is a relatively
higher degree of homogeneity among group members in terms of belonging to a scheduled tribe
or caste and being self-employed agricultural worker, and a lower level of homogeneity in terms
of literacy.
        Overall, a preliminary look at the data is indicative of the coexistence of different types
of groups in our sample. This suggests the necessity to allow for potential unobserved group
types when examining repayment behavior in group lending.


4 Empirical Model
This section develops an empirical model to address the potential omitted variable problem in
group lending with unobserved types. We use a mixture model to explicitly account for
unobserved group types when evaluating the repayment behavior of individual members. The
unobserved types may result from peer selection as well as from variation in the level of effort
and effectiveness of peer monitoring and pressure and other unobserved factors like social
cohesion. The probability of default is conditional on the unobserved type and depends on
observable individual and loan characteristics, while average member characteristics and other
group and village characteristics (observed by lenders) may help to identify the group type the
individual belongs to.
        Let the default behavior of individual i in group j be given by


                             Dij  1(  X ij 1  C j  2  T j*  u ij  0)                       (2)


where Dij is the observed binary outcome, i.e. Dij equals one if the individual defaults (i.e. does

not fully repay her loan) and equals zero otherwise,  is a constant, X ij is a vector of

observable individual characteristics, C j is a vector of loan characteristics, T j* is the unobserved


18
  The comparisons exclude all villages (150 out of 457) and mandals (3 out of 97) where there is only one group in
the village or mandal. A mandal is the equivalent to a sub-district in India and comprises several villages.

                                                        12
group type which is likely correlated with X ij (and C j ), and u ij is an error term. On the

correlation between X ij and T j* , we can think, for example, of a proxy for the social ties of an

individual, included in X ij and potentially correlated with the social ties of her peers (who

generally live in the same neighborhood), which partly describe T j* .

       If group heterogeneity is solely based on observables, the observed group characteristics
( Z j ) like average member characteristics and other group controls, including social ties, would

be sufficient to identify the group types, and Z j could be used as a proxy for T j* to estimate

equation (2) using a standard probabilistic regression (e.g., Probit, Logit). However, the
unobserved group type is more accurately characterized by both observable and unobservable
factors such that T j*  Z j   W j   j , where W j is unobserved, Z j and W j are potentially

correlated, and  j is an error term. Following the previous example, a proxy for the social ties or

connections of a group, included in Z j , is likely correlated with the unobserved economic

opportunities and entrepreneurial spirits of the group members, which are comprised in W j and

further affect repayment.
       Hence a standard probabilistic regression of equation (2) with only Z j in the right-hand

side will result in an omitted variable bias as W j will be embedded in the error term. Another

option is to incorporate the unobserved group component or type as fixed effects in a conditional
logit model. Yet, a fixed-effects logistic regression mainly exploits within-group variation and
will drop all groups without intra-group differences in default behavior (i.e. more than 90 percent
of our sample). Further, the observed factors affecting repayment performance may vary by
group type.
       To address this potential omitted variable problem we propose an alternative model,
where group heterogeneity can be captured by allowing groups to be one of two types with a
specific probability. In particular, we assume that T j* can take two possible values, T jH if the

group is “responsible” and T jL if the group is “irresponsible”. In broader terms, we can think of

the first group as a group mainly composed by “safe” borrowers with effective monitoring and
enforcement efforts and high reciprocity and solidarity among members, and of the second group


                                                  13
as a group of “risky” borrowers with less effective monitoring and enforcement efforts and low
reciprocity and solidarity among members. We could easily relax this assumption to allow for a
wider set of types (based on different combination of factors) but our data seems to support a
two-type model. In particular, we also estimated a three-type model but the two-type model
provides a better fit based on the Schwarz Bayesian Information Criterion (SBIC).19
           Then, the repayment behavior of individual i in group j is given by


                     1( H  X ij 1, H  C j  2, H  u ij , H  0) if T j*  T jH
               Dij                                                                 L .                  (3)
                       1( L  X ij 1, L  C j  2, L  u ij , L  0) if T j  T j
                                                                              *




In this specification, the effect of T j* is absorbed by the constant terms  H and  L , and

Cov ( X ij , u ij )  0 . We further allow for varying coefficients across group type, which permits to

capture varying effects of different factors on repayment behavior by type.20
           The probability of being in type-H group ( T j*  T jH ) can be further modeled as


               Pr(T j*  T jH )  Pr( X j  1  G j  2  v j  0)                                        (4)


where X j is a vector of average characteristics of group members, G j is a vector of group and

village controls ( G j ), and v j is an error term.21 Hence while the individual characteristics of

each group member ( X ij ) help us to approximate their default probability, the average

characteristics of all group members ( X j ) can help us to identify their group type. The member

characteristics considered for the analysis include literacy, land ownership, housing condition,
occupation and caste.22 Thus, while belonging to a certain caste, for example, may directly affect


19
   The SBIC of the two-type model is 0.838 versus 0.849 of the three-type model. Further, the predicted probability
of being in the potential third type group is close to zero.
20
   This flexibility is similar to Gan and Hernandez (2013) who allow for varying coefficients across potential
collusive and non-collusive regimes when modeling the pricing and occupancy rate behavior of hotels under a
switching regression framework.
21
   The underlying assumption is that the probability of being a certain group type varies with some observable
characteristics; in this case with X j and Gj.
22
     This type of personal information is also generally disclosed during credit application processes.

                                                              14
the likelihood of repayment, the percentage of members belonging to a similar caste (included in
X j ) can serve as a proxy for social ties within the group, which will also have an indirect effect

in the probability of default.23 We also account for loan characteristics ( C j ) in the repayment

equation (e.g., loan amount, interest rate, length, repayment frequency) and we use other group
and village controls ( G j ) to help us identify the group type (e.g., age, number of members,

location, access to programs and services).
        Note that since T j* is likely determined by both observable ( X j , G j ) and unobservable

( W j ) characteristics, the parameters in equation (4) may not be consistently estimated. However,

the fact that we do not observe W j does not result in inconsistent estimates of the parameters in

the repayment equation (3); we only require some but not full information about T j* to identify

the parameters in the repayment equation. Intuitively, the identification is similar to that
underlying a two-stage least squares (2SLS) procedure, where the consistency of the 2SLS
estimations does not require the consistency of the first-stage regression. Mahajan (2006) refers
to ( X j , G j ) as instrumental-like variables (ILV). Henry et al. (2010) study the identification of

this type of model. They conclude that the current model is fully identifiable if ( X j , G j ) are

conditionally independent of the errors in equation (3). Gan et al. (2011) also provide a
discussion on the identification condition.
        Formally, the key identifying assumption in the proposed model is that conditional on the
group type, both observable and unobservable factors that characterize T j* are not related to the

probability of defaulting. That is,


         Pr( Dij  1 | T j*  T jH , X j , G j ,W j )  Pr( Dij  1 | T j*  T jH ) .            (5)




23
  Particularly, we generate a variable of percentage members belonging to the leading caste (defined as the caste
with the largest number of members in the group) to capture social ties. Unfortunately we do not have more detailed
information, like number of relatives, to more accurately control for social ties within the group.

                                                             15
Consequently, any association between X j , G j and W j and the probability of defaulting is

solely driven by the association between these former variables and the probability of being of a
certain group type.
           The unconditional probability of default can, in turn, be written as


Pr( Dij  1)  Pr( Dij  1, T j*  T jH )  Pr( Dij  1, T j*  T jL )
                                                                                                                 (6a)
                 Pr( Dij  1 | T j*  T jH ) Pr(T j*  T jH )  Pr( Dij  1 | T j*  T jL ) Pr(T j*  T jL ).


Similarly,


Pr( Dij  0)  Pr( Dij  0 | T j*  T jH ) Pr(T j*  T jH )  Pr( Dij  0 | T j*  T jL ) Pr(T j*  T jL ).      (6b)


           If we further assume that the error terms in equations (3) and (4) have a F () and J ()
cumulative distribution function (cdf), respectively, the log likelihood for individual i in group j
is given by


ln lij  Dij ln[ F ( H  X ij 1, H  C j  2, H ) J ( X j  1  G j  2 )
           F ( L  X ij 1, L  C j  2, L )(1  J ( X j  1  G j  2 ))]
                                                                                                                 (7)
           (1  Dij ) ln[1  F ( H  X ij 1, H  C j  2, H ) J ( X j  1  G j  2 )
           F ( L  X ij 1, L  C j  2, L )(1  J ( X j  1  G j  2 ))].


We approximate F () and J () with a logistic cdf.24


5 Results
We now turn to our estimation results. For comparison purposes, we first report the results using
a standard probabilistic regression model, which does not account for unobserved types when
modeling the likelihood of default. Table A.3 presents the parameter estimates (and standard



24
     We also estimated the model using a normal cdf and obtained qualitative similar results.

                                                                 16
errors) of a Probit model using three alternative specifications.25 The first model only accounts
for member and loan characteristics. Although most of the coefficients of the member
characteristics generally have the expected signs, in the sense that the variables associated with a
low (high) economic status are positively (negatively) correlated with the probability of default,
they are generally not statistically significant at conventional levels. We only observe a positive
and significant correlation between the probability of default and belonging to a scheduled caste.
The loan characteristics, in turn, show a higher correlation with repayment behavior. A larger
loan amount, higher interest rate, longer duration and lower repayment frequency are all
associated with a higher probability of default.
        The second model adds average (leave-me-out) member characteristics and other group
and village controls, which are intended to account for contextual factors that could also affect an
individual’s repayment decision. While the positive correlation between the probability of
default and belonging to a scheduled caste disappears, a higher proportion of members of a
scheduled caste in the group is associated with a lower repayment probability; the other member
characteristics (and the corresponding group averages) remain not significant. The effects of
most of the loan characteristics also remain intact. Several of the other group and village controls
exhibit an important association with the probability of default. In particular, having a marketing
and insurance program in the group, frequent meetings between group members, and the
existence of a financial institution in the village, are all positively correlated with the probability
of repayment. In contrast, members of groups with a food program, which is distinctive of poorer
groups, show a higher probability of default. Finally, in smaller groups (less than thirteen
members), an additional member in the group decreases the individual probability of default
probably due to stronger peer monitoring and pressure effects while in larger groups (thirteen
members or more) occurs the contrary as coordination, monitoring and enforcement efforts are
probably more difficult to become effective in considerably large groups.
        While in the first and second model we account for the potential correlation in the
repayment decision among group members by clustering the error term by group, in the third
model we explicitly control for the potential within-group correlation by estimating a Probit
model with random effects. The inclusion of the random group term in the estimated regression


25
 We use a Probit model because it provides a better fit and performance than a Logit and a linear probability model.
Details are available upon request.

                                                        17
although improves the model fit (the within-group correlation is also highly significant), it does
not improve the model performance discussed below. Most of the effects of the explanatory
variables also remain similar.26
         As noted above, however, all these models do not account for the unobserved group-type
component, embedded in the error term of the repayment equation and potentially correlated
with some of the explanatory variables. Table 3 shows the estimation results of the alternative
mixture model proposed, which explicitly accounts for unobserved group types when modeling
the default behavior of group members. The model allows for two group types (type H and type
L) and the repayment decision is conditional on the unobserved type, where the marginal effects
of the member and loan characteristics may vary by type. The average member characteristics
and other group and village controls, in turn, help to identify the group type.
         Several important patterns emerge from the table. First, the conditional probability of
default is considerably different between the two group types, as reported at the bottom of the
table. More specifically, the estimated probability of default conditional on being in a group of
type-H individuals is 9.5 percent versus 62.8 percent in a group of type-L individuals. Hence the
model clearly distinguishes two group types: one type (type H) likely composed of “responsible”
individuals with probably high levels of effort and/or effective monitoring and enforcement rules
who are more likely to repay their loans, and a second type (type L) composed of “irresponsible”
individuals with probably low levels of effort and/or less effective monitoring and enforcement
rules who are less likely to repay their loans. Similarly, the average probability of being a type-H
group is roughly 80 percent in our sample and, interestingly, groups where all members pay back
their loan exhibit a higher probability of being a type-H group than other groups.27 In particular,
in groups where none of the members defaulted the likelihood of being a type-H group is 82.9
percent versus 76.4 percent in groups where some members defaulted and 66.9 percent in groups
where all members defaulted. These results further support the identification of seeming
“responsible” and “irresponsible” groups by our model.
         An analysis of the factors used to describe the probability of being in a type-H group also
indicates that “responsible” groups are more likely characterized, for example, by women who

26
   In this third model, individuals in groups with a higher proportion of disabled members in the household are also
expected to fully repay their loans and group age is positively correlated with the probability of default (up to groups
of eleven years old).
27
   Recall that in our raw data we observe full repayment by all members in 76% of the groups and in another 17% of
the groups all members default.

                                                          18
are literate, own some portion of land, live in semi-pucca houses, are related to agricultural
activities and belong to a scheduled tribe but not necessarily to a leading caste. Similarly,
“responsible” groups are more likely to hold frequent meetings between its members, have a
marketing and insurance program but not a food credit program for its members, and have access
to additional services in the village such as a financial institution and telephone. Microfinance
institutions should probably look for these characteristics when trying to identify potential
“responsible” groups and/or areas where to operate or expand. Holding frequent meetings appear
to be particularly important, as we further detail below. This is in line with other studies that
suggest that, besides facilitating peer monitoring and enforcement, frequent group meetings may
directly increase social contact and reduce lending risks (Gine and Karlan 2009; Feigenberg et al.
2011).28 The existence of other programs in the group (like marketing and insurance programs),
could also stimulate social cooperation and strengthen social ties, in addition to providing
additional services to members, thereby increasing the risk-sharing among members.29
         Figure A.3 provides additional support to the correct identification of “responsible” and
“irresponsible” groups by our model, based on the observed behavior patterns in the data. For
example, the probability of being a type-H (“responsible”) group is positively correlated with the
proportion of literate women in the group; a closer look at the data shows that effectively among
groups with more than half of the women in the group literate, there is a higher proportion of
groups with no members defaulting (82 percent) and a lower proportion of groups with all
members defaulting (13 percent), as compared to groups with less than half of the women literate
(76 and 17 percent). The differences are more pronounced when comparing the distribution of
intra-group default behavior between groups with high and low frequency meetings. Among
groups that at least hold monthly meetings, which is also distinctive of type-H groups, the
proportions of groups with no members defaulting and all members defaulting are 80 and 14
percent; among groups that hold less than monthly meetings, the corresponding proportions are
48 and 41 percent. Similar patterns are observed when comparing groups with and without
marketing programs and a financial institution in the village, which are also correlated with the
likelihood of being a type-H group in the model. These findings suggest that several of the

28
   Gine and Karlan (2009) find that groups with stronger social networks are less likely to experience default
problems after removing joint liability. Feigenberg et al. (2011) show that repeated interactions can facilitate
cooperation by allowing individuals to sustain reciprocal economic ties.
29
   Fearon et al. (2009) and Feigenberg et al. (2011) also show, in different settings, the importance of community
development programs to encourage social cohesion.

                                                         19
factors included in the type-probability equation indeed help to identify potential group types and,
in particular, that the types in the model are not purely identified by functional form.
         Another important pattern that emerges from Table 3 is the difference in direction,
magnitude and statistical significance of several of the parameter estimates in the default
equation between the two group types. This suggests that the factors driving individual
repayment behavior may vary by type. Table 4 shows the conditional marginal effects for the
different individual and loan characteristics included in the repayment equation after accounting
for group type.30 We do not observe major changes in the probability of default among type-H
group members after a change in most of the individual covariates; being a self-employed
agricultural worker and living in pucca houses decrease the probability of default by roughly
three and one percentage point, while owning some portion of land increases the likelihood of
defaulting by less than one percent. Among type-L group members, in contrast, being a self-
employed agricultural worker increases the probability of default by 14 percentage points; being
an agricultural laborer also substantially increases the likelihood of defaulting by 29 percentage
points, as well as belonging to a scheduled caste (31 percentage points). Owning some portion of
land or living in either pucca or kacha houses (relative to semi-pucca houses), in turn, decrease
the probability of default by 8-16 percentage points.
         Regarding the loan covariates, monthly (or higher) repayment frequencies and an
additional member receiving a loan decrease, for example, the likelihood of defaulting by three
and 0.2 percentage points among type-H group members; among type-L group members, the
corresponding decrease is of 26 and five percentage points. An increase in the loan amount,
interest rate and loan duration also results in a much higher increase in the probability of default
among type-L group members than among type-H group members.
         These varying effects by type can help lenders to better assess their clients and
understand the factors driving their behavior. Owning some portion of land, housing conditions,
labor activities and belonging to a scheduled tribe seem to matter among type-L groups, in
contrast to type-H groups where the effects (if any) are much more limited. The loan
characteristics are also more relevant for type-L groups than for type-H groups. These
differences further have important policy implications and can help lending institutions to reduce

30
  The normal-based confidence intervals reported for the estimated marginal effects are based on 200 bootstrap
replications and are biased-corrected. Although not reported, the bootstrap means are very similar to the estimated
marginal effects, which support the bootstrap procedure implemented.

                                                         20
their transaction costs. Field and Pande (2008), for example, point out the important tradeoff
between imposing higher repayment frequencies (a standard practice among microfinance
institutions to encourage fiscal discipline and reduce default risk) and the substantial increase in
transaction costs of installment collection. The authors find that switching to lower frequency
repayment schedules could allow lenders to significantly reduce their transaction costs with
virtually no increase in client default, particularly among first-time borrowers. Our results
suggest that the fiscal discipline imposed by frequent repayment is critical among groups
suspected (or with a higher probability) of being type-L groups, but not on type-H groups where
less costly repayment schedules could be implemented; the cost savings are likely higher than the
(marginal) increase in the default rate in this type of groups. Encouraging longer term
investments through higher loan terms also seems more reasonable among type-H groups, which
could improve the borrowers’ repayment capacity in the long run (in a similar way as a more
flexible repayment schedule).
         The parameter estimates in the two-type model are also different from those obtained
under a standard probabilistic regression, which does not allow for unobserved consumer types.
To better appreciate these differences, Table 5 reports the unconditional marginal effects on the
probability of default for all the variables included in the regression analysis for the Probit and
two-type model specifications.31 In the full two-type model (last column), the average member
characteristics and other group and village characteristics affect the likelihood of defaulting
through the probability of being in a type-H group or “responsible” group. A direct comparison
between the full Probit model and the two-type model reveal that the two models produce
different marginal effects.32 For example, being an agricultural laborer or belonging to a
scheduled caste increases the overall probability of default by roughly four percentage points in
the two-type model (all else equal), while in the Probit model the change in the probability is not
significant; a similar pattern is observed for the condition of living in pucca houses or being self-
employed agricultural workers, which decrease the overall probability of default by three and
one percentage points in the type-varying model and are not significant in the Probit model.
Similarly, monthly (or higher) repayment frequencies will decrease the likelihood of defaulting

31
   The marginal effects of the Probit model with random effects, excluded from the table, are qualitatively similar
(although smaller) to those of the full Probit model. For comparison purposes, the confidence intervals of the
marginal effects for all models were derived using 200 bootstrap replications.
32
   Note that the marginal effects decrease as we move across the two Probit-model specifications, for the variables
they can be compared.

                                                         21
by six percentage points in the two-type model and by seven percentage points in the Probit
model, while an additional year in the length of the loan will increase the likelihood of defaulting
by four percentage points in the first model and by more than eight percentage points in the
second model. Interestingly, an additional member in a group seems to increase the probability
of default in the type-varying model while in the Probit model is the converse, at least in smaller
groups; it seems that the stronger peer monitoring and pressure effects do not necessarily
outweigh the higher coordination costs of having additional members in the group.
            From the two models, however, it is also clear the importance of frequent meetings
among group members, for individuals to not fall behind in their loan repayments (probably
resulting in better peer monitoring and pressure and/or higher social interactions). In particular,
in groups where members meet at least on a monthly basis, the individual probability of default
is 30 percentage points lower in the Probit model and 45 percentage points lower in the type-
varying model than in groups where members meet less frequently. Both models also suggest the
importance of promoting marketing and insurance programs among group members, which are
negatively correlated with defaulting, and the inverse for subsidized food credit programs, which
are also distinctive of poorer groups. The existence of a financial institution and a telephone in
the village is also highly correlated with a positive repayment behavior under the two models.
            Overall, the results indicate the importance of having a flexible, type-consistent model,
which allows for varying effects by type and provides better insight about the possible factors
affecting the members’ repayment behavior. The proposed model can also help lenders to better
identify and screen their potential clients, as we further discuss below.


5.1 Model Identification
Next, we further evaluate the identification of our empirical model. As noted above, a formal
implication of the type-varying model is that we require some but not full information about the
factors describing group heterogeneity ( T j* ) to identify the parameters in the main repayment

equation.33 Our model setup allows for both the presence of observable ( X j , G j ) and

unobservable ( W j ) characteristics. Hence, even a subset of the observed factors used to identify



33
     See also Gan et al. (2011) for further details.

                                                       22
the group types may produce consistent estimates of the parameters in the main repayment
equation.
       Tables A.4 through A.6 report the estimation results of the two-type model when
excluding different subsets of the variables used to identify the type-H group. In particular, we
separately exclude the average member characteristics, group size and age, group programs, if
group has frequent meetings, group location, and village characteristics. We observe that the
coefficients of both the individual and loan characteristics, included in the repayment equation,
are generally not much sensitive to the inclusion or exclusion of different variables in the group-
type equation. In our full sample estimations in Table 3, for example, the coefficients for self-
employed agricultural worker is -0.593 (0.184) among type-H groups and 1.173 (0.266) among
type-L groups, while the coefficients for interest rate is 0.083 (0.013) among type-H groups and
0.277 (0.034) among type-L groups. When excluding different subsets of variables in the group-
type equation, the corresponding coefficients fluctuate between -0.521 (0.113) – -0.644 (0.074),
0.979 (0.317) – 1.451 (0.331), 0.082 (0.013) – 0.094 (0.011), and 0.234 (0.040) – 0.284 (0.039).
The Hausman tests reported in Table A.7 further indicate that in most cases there are not
systematic differences between the coefficients in the repayment equation of the baseline model
and the corresponding coefficients in these alternative specifications, at least at a 5 percent level
of significance. This exercise provides additional support for the robustness of the mixture model
proposed.


5.2 Predictive Performance
We now analyze whether allowing for different group types yields better out-of-sample
predictions for the probability of default. We want to examine if the proposed type-varying
model has a higher predictive power than standard probabilistic methods, which can further help
to reduce information asymmetries in micro lending and aid lenders to correctly identify and
select their current and future clients (groups). To conduct the performance assessment, we
follow a standard cross-validation procedure and randomly partition our dataset into a design
sample for model estimation (60% of the observations) and a test sample for further analysis (40%
of the observations). The partition is conducted at the group level and both samples maintain the
population proportions of default and non-default actions.



                                                 23
         Table 6 provides performance indicators for the different models estimated.34 The
indicators include the average predicted default probability, the mean square predicted error and
several performance indicators based on converting the estimated default probabilities to a binary
regime prediction using the standard 0.5 rule (i.e. if the estimated default probability is greater or
equal to 0.5 the individual is predicted to default, while if the estimated probability is less than
0.5 the individual is predicted to not default). For the two-type model, the performance
assessment is based on two alternative calculations of the probability of default. Generally
speaking, a lender could evaluate granting a loan based on the estimated unconditional
probability of default or based on the conditional probability of default, depending on the
likelihood of being in a group of a certain type. Hence different mixtures for estimating the
probability of default could be used.
     The two approaches considered are:


     (1) A “naïve” type-consistent approach that only uses the unconditional probability of default
         such that,


         Pr( Dij  1)  F ( H  X ij 1, H  C j  2, H ) J ( X j  1  G j  2 )
                        F ( L  X ij 1, L  C j  2, L )(1  J ( X j  1  G j  2 )).


     (2) A “conservative” type-consistent approach which takes into account the likelihood of
         being in a type-H group. In particular,


                         F ( H  X ij  1, H  C j  2, H )                                if P̂r (T j*  T jH ) in upper quintile
                        
                         F ( H  X ij  1, H  C j  2, H ) J ( X j  1  G j  2 )
         Pr( Dij  1)  
                          F ( L  X ij  1, L  C j  2, L )(1  J ( X j  1  G j  2 )) if P̂r(T j  T j ) in 2nd - 4th quintile
                                                                                                        *      H

                         
                          F ( L  X ij 1, L  C j  2, L )                                if P̂r(T j*  T jH ) in lower quintile




34
  The results are based on 200 repeated 60-40% partitions. The results are also not sensitive to alternative data
partitions (70-30% and 50-50%).

                                                             24
           where P̂r(T j*  TJH ) is the estimated probability of being in a type-H group.35


           As shown in the table, the “naive” approach produces a mean default probability (19.9%)
closer to the observed sample mean of 21% than the full Probit model (18.6%) and the
“conservative” approach (23.7%). The “naïve” and “conservative” approach also report a lower
mean squared prediction error than the Probit model (0.145 and 0.156 versus 0.159). The two
type-consistent approaches also show a higher overall predictive performance based on
McFadden et al. (1977) standard measure.36 In particular, the “naïve” approach has a predictive
performance of 76.4% and the “conservative” approach has a predictive performance of 76%
versus 74.7% of the Probit model. The poorer performance of the Probit model is largely
explained by its lower correct default classification rate (i.e. identification of “bad” borrowers):
17.2% versus 21.9% of the “naïve” approach and 31.3% of the “conservative” approach.
Regarding the correct non-default classification rate (i.e. identification of “good” borrowers), the
Probit model performs better than the “conservative” approach, but poorer than the “naïve”
approach.
           An alternative way to evaluate the out-of-sample performance consists in examining the
number of “good” clients the model rates as “bad” (Type I error) and the number of “bad” clients
the model rates as “good” (Type II error) for varying cutoff values of the probability of default.
In Table 6, we used the standard 0.5 rule for the performance assessment. Figures 1 and 2
compare the percentage of “good” borrowers rejected and the percentage of “bad” borrowers
accepted across the Probit, “naïve” and “conservative” type-consistent approaches for different
cutoff values. In the case of Type I errors, the “naive” approach and the Probit model outperform
the “conservative” approach for most of the cutoff values. More specifically, for cutoff values
above 0.1 the lending institution will do better in identifying “good” clients by relying on the
“naïve” approach or Probit model. In the case of Type II errors, however, both the “naïve” and
“conservative” approach outperform the Probit model for basically the entire range of cutoff
values, and for values above 0.3 the “conservative” approach has a considerably higher (and

35
  This approach is in line with Gan and Mosquera (2008) who examine unobserved consumer types in the
Ecuadorian credit card market.
     McFadden et al. (1977) overall performance measure is equal to p11  p 22  p12  p 21 , where p ij is the ijth
36                                                                                    2      2


entry (expressed as a fraction of the sum of all entries) in the 2x2 confusion matrix of actual versus predicted (0,1)
outcomes using the 0.5 rule.

                                                           25
increasing) performance than the “naïve” approach. For sufficiently lenient acceptance rules
(cutoff values above 0.5), the differences in the percentage of “bad” accepted between the
“conservative” approach and the other models are in the order of 10-23 percentage points.
       Hence, we generally attain a higher predictive power when allowing for unobserved
group types when modeling the probability of default of group members, as compared to a
standard probabilistic regression model. If the lending institution is more interested in
minimizing the number of “bad” clients (classified as “good” by the model), the lender should
probably follow a “conservative” approach, while if the lender is more interested in identifying
“good” clients (classified as “bad” by the model) it should follow a “naïve” approach; the Probit
model will also perform well for the latter. Yet, for more lenient acceptance rules using a “naïve”
approach or Probit model will also result in a much higher acceptance rate of “bad” clients
relative to the “conservative” approach. For example, for a cutoff value of 0.4 the “naïve”
approach outperforms the “conservative” approach by three percentage points in terms of the
rejection rate of “good” clients, while the “conservative” approach outperforms the “naïve”
approach by a similar degree in terms of the acceptance rate of “bad” clients; but for a cutoff
value of 0.6, the “naïve” approach outperforms the “conservative” approach by four percentage
points when identifying “good” clients, while the “conservative” approach outperforms the
“naïve” approach by fourteen percentage points when identifying “bad” clients.


6 Concluding Remarks
This paper proposes an empirical model to address the potential omitted variable problem
resulting from group lending with unobserved types. We use a mixture model to explicitly
account for group types when modeling the repayment behavior of group members. In the model,
individuals make repayment decisions based on their unobserved group type as well as on
observable individual and loan characteristics. Average member characteristics and other group
and village characteristics help, in turn, to identify the group types. We also allow the marginal
effects in the repayment equation to vary across types.
       The estimation results support our model specification and show the advantages of
relying on a type-consistent method when examining the probability of default of group
members. First, the model clearly distinguishes two group types: an apparent “responsible”
group with a low probability of default among group members and another “irresponsible” group

                                                 26
with a high probability of default. Second, we find important differences in the marginal effects
of the different individual and loan characteristics included in the repayment equation across
group types. Third, the type-varying model shows a higher predictive performance than standard
probabilistic models. From a policy perspective, our model helps to better understand the
underlying factors driving repayment behavior, which appear to differ across groups. These
differences can aid lenders when designing loan contracts for different “types” of clients.
Similarly, the model can help to attenuate information asymmetries in micro lending by aiding
lenders to correctly classify their potential clients. A more accurate risk scoring tool is essential
to reduce the high transaction costs faced by micro finance institutions. It can also prevent
including potential “bad” borrowers and excluding “good” borrowers from sensitive microcredit
markets in developing regions.
       Finally, it is worth noting that the analysis has focused on a two-type model given the
nature of our data. The apparent two types may result from a combination of factors, including
peer selection, peer monitoring and pressure and other unobserved factors like social cohesion,
but disentangling these effects is beyond the scope of the study. Certainly, there can be a wider
set of types in other contexts, and the proposed method can be easily adapted to allow for
additional types. Considerably increasing the number of types, however, may require imposing
restrictions on the value of the coefficients in the repayment equation (for example, not
necessarily allowing for different marginal effects across all types) in order to avoid a highly
parameterized model, which could be difficult to estimate in practice. Our analysis also follows a
discrete treatment of the repayment decision given the observed behavior of most of the
borrowers in the sample (either full repayment or no payment). Yet, the model can be adapted to
examine instead the percentage of loan repaid by members. Future research should further
attempt to incorporate dynamic aspects in the repayment decision of members under a type-
varying setting.




                                                  27
References

Ahlin, C. (2009). Matching for credit: risk and diversification in Thai microcredit groups.
BREAD Working Paper No. 251, December.

Ahlin, C. and Townsend, R.M. (2007). Using repayment data to test across models of joint
liability lending. Economic Journal 117: F11-F51.

Armendariz de Aghion, B. (1999). On the design of a credit agreement with peer monitoring.
Journal of Development Economics 60: 79-104.

Armendariz de Aghion, B. and Gollier, C. (2000). Peer group formation in an adverse selection
model. Economic Journal 110: 632-643.

Armendariz de Aghion, B. and Morduch, J. (2004). Microfinance: Where do we stand? In
Goodhart, Ch. (Ed.) Financial development and economic growth: Explaining the links. Palgrave
Macmillan, Basingstoke, UK.

Armendariz de Aghion, B. and Morduch, J. (2005). The economics of microfinance. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.

Banerjee, A., Besley, T. and Guinnane, T. (1994). Thy neighbor’s keeper: the design of a credit
cooperative with theory and a test. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109: 491-515.

Becker, G. (1993). A Treatise on the Family. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Chowdury, P.R. (2005). Group lending: sequential financing, lending monitoring and joint
liability. Journal of Development Economics 77: 415-439.

Cull, R., Demirguc-Kunt, A. and Morduch, J. (2007). Financial performance and outreach: A
global analysis of leading microbanks. Economic Journal 117: F107-F133.

Fearon, J.D., Humphreys, M. and Weinstein, J.M. (2009). Can development aid contribute to
social cohesion after civil war? Evidence from a field experiment in post-conflict Liberia.
American Economic Review 99: 287-219.

Feigenberg, B., Field, E. and Pande, R. (2011). The economic returns to social interaction:
Experimental evidence from microfinance. Working Paper.

Field, E. and Pande, R. (2008). Repayment frequency and default in microfinance: Evidence
from India. Journal of the European Economic Association 6: 501-509.

Gan, L. and Hernandez, M.A. (2013). Making friends with your neighbors? Agglomeration and
tacit collusion in the lodging industry. Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.




                                                28
Gan, L., Huang, F. and Mayer, A. (2011). A simple test of private information in the insurance
markets with heterogeneous insurance demand. NBER Working Paper 16738, January.

Gan, L. and Mosquera, R. (2008). An empirical study of the credit market with unobserved
consumer types. NBER Working Paper 13873, March.

Ghatak, M. (1999). Group lending, local information, and peer selection. Journal of
Development Economics 60: 27-50.

Ghatak, M. (2000). Screening by the company you keep: joint liability lending and the peer
selection effect. Economic Journal 110: 601-631.

Ghatak, M. and Guinnane, T. (1999). The economics of lending with joint liability: theory and
practice. Journal of Development Economics 60: 195-228.

Gine, X. and Karlan, D. (2009). Group versus individual liability: Long term evidence from
Philippine microcredit lending groups. Working Paper.

Guttman, J.M. (2008). Assortative matching, adverse selection, and group lending. Journal of
  Development Economics 87: 51–56.

Henry, M., Kitamura, Y. and Salanie, B. (2010). Identifying finite mixtures in econometric
models. Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper #1767.

Hermes, N. and Lensink, R. (2007). The empirics of microfinance: What do we know? Economic
Journal 117: 1-10.

Hermes, N., Lensink, R. and Mehrteab, H. (2005). Peer monitoring, social ties and moral hazard
in group lending programmes: evidence from Eritrea. World Development 33: 149-169.

Karlan, D. (2007). Social connections and group banking. Economic Journal 117: 52-84.

Li, S., Liu, Y. and Deininger, K. (2012). How important are endogenous peer effects in group
lending? Estimating a static game of incomplete information. Journal of Applied Econometrics,
forthcoming.

Maes, J. and Reed, L. (2012). State of the microcredit summit campaign report 2012. Microcredit
Summit Campaign.

Mahajan, A. (2006). Identification and estimation of regression models with misclassification.
Econometrica 74: 631-665.

McFadden, D., Puig, C. and Kirschner, D. (1977). Determinants of the long-run demand for
electricity. Proceedings of the American Statistical Association (Business and Economics
Section): 109-117.



                                               29
Paxton, J., Graham, D. and Thraen, C. (2000). Modeling group loan repayment behavior: New
insights from Burkina Faso. Economic Development and Cultural Change 48: 639-655.

Shankar, S. (2006). Transaction costs in group micro credit in India: Case studies of three
microfinance institutions. Centre for Microfinance, Institute for Financial and Management
Research Working Paper, August.

Sharma, M. and Zeller, M. (1997). Repayment performance in group-based credit programs in
Bangladesh: An empirical analysis. World Development 25: 1731-1742.

Stiglitz, J. (1990). Peer monitoring and credit markets. World Bank Economic Review 4: 351-366.

van Tassel, E. (1999). Group lending under asymmetric information. Journal of Development
Economics 60: 3-25.

Varian, H. (1990). Monitoring agents with other agents. Journal of Institutional and Theoretical
Economics 146: 153-174.

Wydick, B. (1999). Can social cohesion be harnessed to repair market failure? Evidence from
group lending in Guatemala. Economic Journal 109: 463-475.

Zeller, M. (1998). Determinants of repayment performance in credit groups: The role of
program design, intragroup risk pooling, and social cohesion.” Economic Development and
Cultural Change 46: 599-620.




                                               30
Table 1
Summary statistics
Variable                                                    Mean     Std. Dev.   Min     Max
Panel 1: Individual characteristics (12,883 observations)
 If defaulted                                                 0.20        0.40    0.00     1.00
 If literate                                                  0.23        0.42    0.00     1.00
 If disabled member in household                              0.06        0.24    0.00     1.00
 If owns land                                                 0.65        0.48    0.00     1.00
 If lives in pucca house                                      0.33        0.47    0.00     1.00
 If lives in kacha house                                      0.22        0.42    0.00     1.00
 If self-employed agricultural worker                         0.20        0.40    0.00     1.00
 If agricultural laborer                                      0.61        0.49    0.00     1.00
 If belongs to scheduled tribe/caste                          0.31        0.46    0.00     1.00
 If belongs to leading caste                                  0.92        0.27    0.00     1.00
Panel 2: Group and loan characteristics (1,110 groups)
Average member characteristics
 % literate                                                   0.22        0.21    0.00     0.94
 % disabled member in household                               0.05        0.10    0.00     0.94
 % own land                                                   0.59        0.31    0.00     0.95
 % live in pucca house                                        0.32        0.31    0.00     0.95
 % live in kacha house                                        0.21        0.26    0.00     0.95
 % self-employed agricultural worker                          0.18        0.30    0.00     0.95
 % agricultural laborer                                       0.56        0.36    0.00     0.95
 % belong to scheduled tribe/caste                            0.31        0.43    0.00     1.00
 % belong to leading caste                                    0.91        0.14    0.36     1.00
Other group and village characteristics
 Age of group (years)                                         6.44        2.49    1.00    25.00
 If group has food credit program                             0.28        0.45    0.00     1.00
 If group has marketing program                               0.15        0.35    0.00     1.00
 If group has insurance program                               0.25        0.43    0.00     1.00
 If group meets at least monthly                              0.89        0.31    0.00     1.00
 If located in Telangana                                      0.45        0.50    0.00     1.00
 If located in Rayalaseema                                    0.26        0.44    0.00     1.00
 If located in Coastal AP                                     0.29        0.45    0.00     1.00
 Number of group members                                     12.52        2.37    7.00    20.00
 If financial institution in village                          0.34        0.47    0.00     1.00
 If public bus in village                                     0.66        0.48    0.00     1.00
 If telephone in village                                      0.75        0.43    0.00     1.00
 If post office in village                                    0.63        0.48    0.00     1.00
Loan characteristics
 Amount of loan (rupees)                                     3,338       2,685    400    25,000
 Number of members with loan                                 11.61        3.24    2.00    20.00
 Annual interest rate (%)                                    12.83        3.10    6.00    25.00
 Length of loan (years)                                       1.11        0.46    0.17     5.00
 If repayment at least monthly                                0.96        0.19    0.00     1.00
 If loan due in 2004                                          0.11        0.31    0.00     1.00
 If loan due in 2005                                          0.49        0.50    0.00     1.00
 If loan due in 2006                                          0.40        0.49    0.00     1.00



                                                       31
Table 2
Intra-group default behavior
Default behavior                        Groups
                                   #              %
If none of the members defaulted       848         76.4
If all of the members defaulted        188         16.9
If some of the members defaulted        74          6.7

Total                              1,110          100.0




                                             32
Table 3
Probability of default, Two-type model
Variable                                       Type H                  Type L
                                         Coeff.   Std. Error   Coeff.      Std. Error
                                                Dependent variable: If default
Constant                                 -3.399        0.629     7.775         28.740
If literate                               0.160        0.105     0.540          0.206
If disabled member in household           0.258        0.163    -0.263          0.383
If owns land                              0.180        0.119    -0.556          0.181
If lives in pucca house                  -0.198        0.122    -0.997          0.186
If lives in kacha house                   0.022        0.124    -0.844          0.209
If self-employed agricultural worker     -0.593        0.184     1.173          0.266
If agricultural laborer                   0.120        0.140     1.748          0.155
If belongs to scheduled tribe/caste       0.082        0.110     2.736          0.279
If belongs to leading caste              -0.092        0.163     0.260          0.383
Amount of loan (1,000 rupees)             0.068        0.016     0.462          0.049
Number of members with loan              -0.062        0.090    -0.338          0.151
Number of members with loan squared       0.001        0.004     0.003          0.007
Annual interest rate (%)                  0.083        0.013     0.277          0.034
Length of loan (years)                    0.508        0.081     0.963          0.193
If repayment at least monthly            -0.497        0.244 -10.989           30.416
If loan due in 2005                      -1.267        0.435    -0.128          0.287
If loan due in 2006                       1.052        0.189     1.229          0.286
Probability of type-H Group
Constant                                 -2.901        2.501
% literate                                1.921        0.409
% disabled member in household            1.630        0.777
% own land                                0.707        0.212
% live in pucca house                    -1.124        0.276
% live in kacha house                    -1.052        0.228
% self-employed agricultural worker       0.697        0.323
% agricultural laborer                    1.902        0.318
% belong to scheduled tribe/caste         0.623        0.167
% belong to leading caste                -1.020        0.496
Age of group (years)                      0.025        0.066
Age of group squared                     -0.004        0.004
If group has food credit program         -0.951        0.115
If group has marketing program            1.688        0.277
If group has insurance program            0.443        0.139
If group meets at least monthly           3.105        0.223
If located in Telangana                   2.320        0.255
If located in Rayalaseema                 0.652        0.211
                                                                             (Cont.)




                                                  33
Variable                                            Type H                  Type L
                                              Coeff.   Std. Error Coeff.       Std. Error
                                                     Dependent variable: If default
Number of group members                        0.132        0.360
Number of group members squared               -0.014        0.014
If financial institution in village            0.979        0.139
If public bus in village                       0.139        0.117
If telephone in village                        1.076        0.168
If post office in village                     -0.684        0.130
Predicted probability of being Type-H group
  Average                                                                          79.8%
  Group, no members defaulting                                                     82.9%
  Groups, all members defaulting                                                   66.9%
  Groups, some members defaulting                                                  76.4%
Predicted individual default probability
  Average                                                                          19.6%
  Conditional on being in Type-H group                                              9.5%
  Conditional on being in Type-L group                                             62.8%
# observations                                                                     12,883
Log-likelihood                                                                   -5,111.6




                                                       34
Table 4
Conditional marginal effects (percentage points)
 Variable                                             Type H                          Type L
                                              Mg.        [95% Conf.          Mg.        [95% Conf.
                                             Effect        Interv.]         Effect        Interv.]
 Individual characteristics
  If literate                                 0.84      -0.14      1.81      7.33      2.39      11.57
  If disabled member in household             1.44      -0.54      3.53      -4.21    -24.12     11.92
  If owns land                                0.89       0.23     1.69       -7.87    -13.13     -2.19
  If lives in pucca house                     -0.97     -1.91     -0.06     -16.44    -21.08     -9.58
  If lives in kacha house                     0.11      -0.78      1.19     -14.47    -21.46     -8.02
  If self-employed agricultural worker        -2.57     -3.91     -1.19     13.95      7.65      18.10
  If agricultural laborer                     0.60      -0.72      1.82      29.16     19.65     36.86
  If belongs to scheduled tribe/caste          0.42     -0.18      1.14      31.20     24.78     36.05
  If belongs to leading caste                 -0.48     -2.48      1.18       4.15     -8.23     14.55
 Loan characteristics
   One thousand rupees increase in loan        0.36      0.22      0.50       5.92      4.08      6.88
   One more member with loan                  -0.23     -0.32     -0.13      -4.77     -7.24     -1.04
   One-percent increase interest rate          0.44      0.32      0.52       3.77      2.39      4.68
   One more year in length of loan             3.23      2.27      3.95      10.39     6.79     12.36
   If repayment at least monthly              -3.08     -5.08     -1.11     -26.28    -35.23    -13.69
   If loan due in 2005                        -6.60     -8.33     -4.97      -1.91     -6.85     4.88
   If loan due in 2006                         6.03      4.10      7.43      17.05     12.08     20.68
Note: The marginal effects are calculated at the means of the covariates. For continuous variables, the corresponding
change is indicated in the table. For discrete variables, the change is from 0 to 1. The confidence intervals reported
are normal-based and biased-corrected using 200 bootstrap replications.




                                                         35
Table 5
Unconditional marginal effects (percentage points)
 Variable                                             Probit model             Full Probit model            Two-type model
                                                 Mg.       [95% Conf.        Mg.       [95% Conf.        Mg.      [95% Conf.
                                                Effect       Interv.]       Effect       Interv.]       Effect      Interv.]
 Individual characteristics
  If literate                                   -0.81     -2.01    0.51     -0.18     -1.84    1.58     1.56      0.54     2.50
  If disabled member in household               -1.62     -4.01    0.72     -0.04     -3.15    3.21      0.82     -1.45    2.76
  If owns land                                  -0.84     -1.71    0.27      0.18     -1.37    2.18     -0.08     -0.80    0.76
  If lives in pucca house                       -0.37     -1.48    0.64     -0.73     -2.86    1.22     -2.68     -3.67   -1.50
  If lives in kacha house                        2.82      1.43    4.26     -0.11     -2.30    2.19     -1.50     -2.74   -0.20
  If self-employed agricultural worker          -0.37     -2.09    1.02      0.04     -3.25    2.76     -0.74     -2.13    0.51
  If agricultural laborer                        0.76     -0.67    2.02      0.59     -2.12    3.16      3.76      2.30    5.03
  If belongs to scheduled tribe/caste            6.10      5.40    6.83     -1.98     -5.35    1.17      3.83      2.38    5.33
  If belongs to leading caste                    3.12      1.06    4.76     -0.23     -3.37    2.05      0.03     -1.94    1.51
 Loan characteristics
   One thousand rupees increase in loan           1.60     1.46     1.76     1.45      1.30     1.63     0.97      0.77    1.11
   One more member with loan                     0.01     -0.14    0.16      0.15     -0.06     0.34    -0.74     -0.95   -0.37
   One-percent increase interest rate             1.19     1.13     1.26     1.37      1.30     1.45     0.81      0.65    0.89
   One more year in length of loan                7.90     7.47     8.26     8.31      7.90     8.69     4.02      3.21    4.48
   If repayment at least monthly                -14.03   -15.83   -12.55    -6.78     -8.28    -5.51    -5.65     -7.60   -3.39
   If loan due in 2005                           -6.01    -6.59    -5.36    -5.84     -6.44    -5.14    -6.08     -7.17   -4.85
   If loan due in 2006                           9.52     8.90     10.18    10.64      9.97    11.35     7.25      5.55    8.39
 Average member characteristics
   10-% increase literate                                                   0.00      -0.21    0.21     -1.34     -1.66   -1.04
   10-% increase disabled member                                            -0.94     -1.35    -0.56    -1.15     -1.64   -0.56
   10-% increase own land                                                   -0.51     -0.74    -0.33    -0.52     -0.80   -0.28
   10-% increase pucca house                                                -0.12     -0.33    0.12      0.88     0.60    1.13
   10-% increase kacha house                                                 0.45      0.20     0.68     0.82      0.46    1.25
   10-% increase self-employed ag. worker                                    0.12     -0.19    0.48     -0.51     -0.92   -0.05
   10-% increase agricultural laborer                                        0.18     -0.11     0.47    -1.33     -1.64   -1.01
   10-% increase scheduled tribe/caste                                       0.75      0.42     1.11    -0.46     -0.72   -0.28
   10-% increase leading caste                                               0.49      0.24     0.85     0.80      0.29    1.53
 Other group and village characteristics
   One more year of age of group                                              1.19     1.03     1.36      0.06    -0.21     0.37
   If group has food credit program                                           8.08     7.67     8.57      8.46     4.94    13.33
   If group has marketing program                                            -6.12    -6.49    -5.76     -8.36    -9.43    -7.51
   If group has insurance program                                            -5.29    -5.75    -4.88     -3.07    -4.50    -2.20
   If group meets at least monthly                                          -30.11   -30.88   -29.49    -44.59   -47.40   -42.51
   If located in Telangana                                                   -9.58   -10.03    -9.13    -18.01   -22.78   -13.68
   If located in Rayalaseema                                                 -2.79    -3.32    -2.28     -4.27    -5.33    -3.02
   One more member in group                                                  -1.41    -1.63    -1.15      1.27     0.60     1.73
   If financial institution in village                                       -6.01    -6.39    -5.65     -6.59    -8.22    -5.45
   If public bus in village                                                   1.19     0.83     1.59     -1.06    -1.72    -0.12
   If telephone in village                                                   -3.43    -3.83    -3.01     -9.96   -11.56    -8.18
   If post office in village                                                  0.97     0.66     1.34      4.85     3.89     6.31
Note: The marginal effects are calculated at the means of the covariates. For continuous variables, the corresponding
change is indicated in the table. For discrete variables, the change is from 0 to 1. The confidence intervals reported
are normal-based and bias-corrected using 200 bootstrap replications.


                                                         36
Table 6
Predictive performance of alternative models
 Indicator                                                       Probit        Full       Two-type       Two-type
                                                                 model       Probit        "naïve"     "conservative"
                                                                             model
                                                                      Out-of-sample performance (5,068 obs.)
 Average predicted default probability (observed=0.210)         0.185         0.186         0.199           0.237
 Mean Square Predicted Error                                    0.160         0.159         0.145           0.156
 Predictive performance                                         73.7%        74.7%         76.4%           76.0%
 Correct default/non-default classification                     77.9%        77.9%          79.2%          78.6%
 Correct default classification (sensitivity),                  2.2%         17.2%         21.9%           31.3%
 1,062 defaults
 Correct non-default classification (specificity),              98.0%           94.0%           94.4%            91.2%
 4,006 non-defaults
Note: The “naïve” approach is based on the unconditional probability of default of each individual. The
“conservative” approach uses the probability of default based on the probability of individual of being in a particular
group type. The performance and classification rates are based on converting the estimated default probabilities to a
binary regime prediction using the standard 0.5 rule. The predictive performance measure is based on McFadden,
Puig, & Kirschner (1977); the measure is equal to p11  p 22  p12  p 21 where p ij is the ijth entry in the
                                                                    2       2


standard 2x2 confusion matrix of actual versus predicted (0,1) outcomes in which the entries are expressed as a
fraction of the sum of all entries. Sensitivity accounts for the percentage of cases in which individuals defaulting are
also predicted to default, while specificity measures the percentage of cases in which individuals not defaulting are
also predicted to not default. The results are based on 200 repeated 60-40% data partitions (averages reported).




                                                          37
Figure 1
Comparison of Type I errors
                                   1.0
   Percentage of "Good" rejected




                                   0.8


                                   0.6


                                   0.4


                                   0.2


                                   0.0
                                         0.0   0.1            0.2   0.3     0.4       0.5        0.6       0.7      0.8      0.9   1.0
                                                                                  Cutoff value

                                                     Probit           Two-type "naïve"                 Two-type "conservative"


Note: The “naïve” approach is based on the unconditional probability of default of each individual. The
“conservative” approach uses the probability of default based on the probability of individual of being in a particular
group type. The results are based on 200 repeated 60-40% data partitions (averages reported).




                                                                                            38
Figure 2
Comparison of Type II errors

                                  1.0
   Percentage of "Bad" Accepted




                                  0.8


                                  0.6


                                  0.4


                                  0.2


                                  0.0
                                        0.0   0.1            0.2   0.3     0.4       0.5        0.6       0.7      0.8      0.9   1.0
                                                                                 Cutoff value

                                                    Probit           Two-type "naïve"                 Two-type "conservative"


Note: The “naïve” approach is based on the unconditional probability of default of each individual. The
“conservative” approach uses the probability of default based on the probability of individual of being in a particular
group type. The results are based on 200 repeated 60-40% data partitions (averages reported).




                                                                                           39
Appendix A

Table A.1
Data description
Variable                                                            Description
Default                            If member failed to fully repay loan
Literate                           If member can read and write
Disabled                           If any household member has a disability
Own land                           If member owns any land
Pucca house                        If member lives in a house made of stone, bricks, concrete or timber
Kacha house                        If member lives in a house made of hay, grass, mud or bamboo
Self-employed                      If member is self-employed agricultural worker
Agricultural laborer               If member provides agricultural labor for someone else
Scheduled tribe/caste              If member belongs to a scheduled tribe or caste
Leading caste                      If member belongs to a leading caste
Age of group                       Group age in years
Food credit program                If group members receive a food credit program
Marketing program                  If group members are provided with a marketing program
Insurance program                  If group members are provided with an insurance program
Group meets at least monthly       If group members meet at least on a monthly basis
Located in Telangana               If the group is located in Telangana
Located in Rayalaseema             If the group is located in Rayalaseema
Located in Coastal AP              If the group is located in Coastal Andhra Pradesh
Number of group members            Number of members in the group
Financial institution in village   If there is a financial institution in the village
Public bus in village              If public bus service is available in the village
Telephone in village               If telephone service is available in the village
Post office in village             If there is a post office in the village
Amount of loan                     Amount of loan borrowed by member in rupees
Number of members with loan        Number of members in the group who borrowed loan
Annual interest rate               Annual interest rate of the loan
Length of loan                     Length of the loan in years
Monthly repayment frequency        If repayment frequency of the loan at least monthly
Loan due in 2004                   If loan is due in 2004
Loan due in 2005                   If loan is due in 2005
Loan due in 2006                   If loan is due in 2006




                                               40
Table A.2
Sorting based on observables
     If intra-group variance is less than or equal to intra-village or intra-mandal variance
                                    by member characteristic
                                                         Intra-village         Intra-mandal
                                                     # groups % total # groups % total
                                                                   groups                groups
 If literate                                               538       56.0        646       58.4
 If disabled member in household                           636       66.3        727       65.7
 If owns land                                              606       63.1        755       68.2
 If lives in pucca house                                   591       61.6        746       67.4
 If lives in kacha house                                   627       65.3        768       69.4
 If self-employed agricultural worker                      761       79.3        866       78.2
 If agricultural laborer                                   703       73.2        863       78.0
 If belongs to scheduled tribe/caste                       863       89.9       1018       92.0
 If belongs to leading caste                               680       70.8        763       68.9

 Average                                                 667       69.5         795       71.8
Note: The intra-village comparisons exclude 150 villages where there is only one group in the village, while the
intra-mandal comparisons exclude 3 mandals.




                                                           41
Table A.3
Probability of default, One-type model
Variable                                  Probit model        Probit model          Random-effects
                                                                   full              Probit model
                                       Coeff.   Std. Err.   Coeff.    Std. Err.    Coeff.   Std. Err.
                                                       Dependent variable: If default
Constant                               -1.827       0.562    0.502       1.370       0.646      2.121
If literate                            -0.032       0.055 -0.007         0.020       0.039      0.118
If disabled member in household        -0.065       0.080 -0.002         0.032 -0.030           0.194
If owns land                           -0.033       0.071    0.008       0.026       0.010      0.139
If lives in pucca house                -0.015       0.082 -0.031         0.037 -0.189           0.149
If lives in kacha house                 0.107       0.086 -0.005         0.047       0.056      0.152
If self-employed agricultural worker   -0.014       0.119    0.002       0.077       0.212      0.221
If agricultural laborer                 0.030       0.089    0.025       0.056       0.247      0.173
If belongs to scheduled tribe/caste     0.229       0.094 -0.085         0.113       0.300      0.298
If belongs to leading caste             0.128       0.081 -0.009         0.036       0.288      0.204
Amount of loan (1,000 rupees)           0.061       0.016    0.059       0.018       0.071      0.021
Number of members with loan             0.009       0.072    0.065       0.095       0.126      0.195
Number of members with loan squared     0.000       0.003 -0.003         0.005 -0.003           0.010
Annual interest rate (%)                0.046       0.014    0.056       0.015       0.182      0.024
Length of loan (years)                  0.274       0.108    0.304       0.113       0.867      0.168
If repayment at least monthly          -0.460       0.249 -0.256         0.269 -0.463           0.423
If loan due in 2005                    -0.235       0.156 -0.247         0.163 -0.803           0.286
If loan due in 2006                     0.359       0.158    0.430       0.170       1.138      0.275
% literate                                                   0.000       0.237 -0.034           0.448
% disabled member in household                              -0.405       0.426 -1.730           0.987
% own land                                                 -0.220        0.178 -0.467           0.325
% live in pucca house                                       -0.051       0.190       0.050      0.353
% live in kacha house                                        0.189       0.216       0.584      0.380
% self-employed agricultural worker                          0.050       0.259 -0.143           0.471
% agricultural laborer                                       0.074       0.188 -0.310           0.337
% belong to scheduled tribe/caste                            0.310       0.160       0.337      0.356
% belong to leading caste                                    0.206       0.334       0.338      0.583
Age of group (years)                                         0.076       0.074       0.299      0.109
Age of group squared                                        -0.003       0.004 -0.012           0.006
If group has food credit program                             0.319       0.108       0.910      0.172
If group has marketing program                             -0.288        0.144 -0.775           0.236
If group has insurance program                             -0.238        0.118 -0.513           0.193
If group meets at least monthly                            -0.952        0.144 -2.935           0.203
If located in Telangana                                     -0.409       0.141 -1.140           0.227
If located in Rayalaseema                                  -0.122        0.154 -0.490           0.247
                                                                                               (Cont.)




                                                  42
 Variable                                     Probit model          Probit model         Random-effects
                                                                         full             Probit model
                                          Coeff.     Std. Err.    Coeff.    Std. Err.   Coeff.   Std. Err.
                                                             Dependent variable: If default
 Number of group members                                         -0.346        0.204 -0.933           0.331
 Number of group members squared                                  0.013        0.008      0.033       0.013
 If financial institution in village                             -0.266        0.116 -0.765           0.189
 If public bus in village                                         0.051        0.103      0.152       0.166
 If telephone in village                                         -0.140        0.119 -0.250           0.186
 If post office in village                                        0.041        0.109      0.147       0.171
 ln(2u)                                                                                 2.836        0.103
 Rho                                                                                     0.945        0.005
 Predicted default probability                          19.5%                  19.5%                  7.6%
 # observations                                         12,883                 12,883                12,883
 Log likelihood                                       -5776.26               -5237.50              -1121.56
Note: The standard errors reported in the Probit model are robust, clustered by group. The ln(2u) term in the
random-effects model represents the group-level variance component and Rho captures the proportion of the total
variance contributed by the group-level variance component.




                                                       43
      Table A.4
      Two-type model exclusion tests: average member characteristics and group size and age
Variable                                   Excluding member characteristics              Excluding group size and age
                                            Type H                Type L                Type H                Type L
                                       Coeff. Std. Err.    Coeff.      Std. Err.   Coeff. Std. Err.     Coeff.     Std. Err.
                                            Dependent variable: If default              Dependent variable: If default
Constant                               -3.477      0.216     7.782       21.388    -3.492      0.339      7.570      29.829
If literate                            -0.020      0.107     0.176         0.212    0.158      0.097      0.602        0.244
If disabled member in household         0.161      0.173    -0.563         0.334    0.253      0.155     -0.454        0.365
If owns land                           -0.015      0.025    -0.787         0.235    0.073      0.058     -0.581        0.153
If lives in pucca house                -0.069      0.076    -0.713         0.212   -0.054      0.015     -1.092        0.180
If lives in kacha house                 0.205      0.117    -0.542         0.207    0.102      0.116     -0.908        0.203
If self-employed agricultural worker   -0.592      0.164     1.451         0.331   -0.644      0.074      1.302        0.316
If agricultural laborer                -0.150      0.119     1.383         0.222    0.061      0.107      1.807        0.155
If belongs to scheduled tribe/caste    -0.060      0.103     2.454         0.196   -0.047      0.035      2.825        0.637
If belongs to leading caste             0.103      0.149     0.145         0.313   -0.132      0.125      0.231        0.433
Amount of loan (1,000 rupees)           0.101      0.018     0.564         0.091    0.090      0.016      0.463        0.050
Number of members with loan            -0.045      0.105    -0.344         0.125   -0.031      0.050     -0.318        0.242
Number of members with loan squared     0.001      0.005     0.004         0.004    0.001      0.002      0.003        0.010
Annual interest rate (%)                0.085      0.012     0.261         0.047    0.082      0.013      0.284        0.039
Length of loan (years)                  0.585      0.086     1.012         0.351    0.555      0.020      0.825        0.358
If repayment at least monthly          -0.444      0.241 -10.982         21.541    -0.567      0.225 -11.081         31.719
If loan due in 2005                    -1.269      0.546    -0.117         0.084   -1.351      0.409     -0.066        0.044
If loan due in 2006                     0.730      0.160     1.607         0.346    0.894      0.157      1.233        0.289
Probability of type-H Group
Constant                               -2.777      5.297                           -3.006      0.402
% literate                                                                          2.055      0.530
% disabled member in household                                                      1.699      0.117
% own land                                                                          0.469      0.230
% live in pucca house                                                              -1.005      0.136
% live in kacha house                                                              -0.992      0.215
% self-employed agricultural worker                                                 0.518      0.063
% agricultural laborer                                                              1.748      0.350
% belong to scheduled tribe/caste                                                   0.473      0.170
% belong to leading caste                                                          -1.149      0.509
Age of group (years)                   -0.036      0.064
Age of group squared                    0.000      0.003
If group has food credit program       -0.814      0.129                           -1.011      0.109
If group has marketing program          1.397      0.218                            1.567      0.306
If group has insurance program          0.526      0.122                            0.300      0.125
If group meets at least monthly         3.036      0.303                            2.963      0.262
If located in Telangana                 2.341      0.306                            2.060      0.093
If located in Rayalaseema               0.809      0.420                            0.912      0.025
                                                                                                                  (Cont.)




                                                           44
Variable                                  Excluding member characteristics             Excluding group size and age
                                           Type H                Type L                Type H                Type L
                                      Coeff.    Std. Err. Coeff.      Std. Err.   Coeff.   Std. Err.  Coeff.      Std. Err.
                                           Dependent variable: If default              Dependent variable: If default
Number of group members                0.156       0.747
Number of group members squared       -0.010       0.029
If financial institution in village    0.961       0.054                           0.870       0.119
If public bus in village               0.166       0.078                           0.138       0.057
If telephone in village                0.829       0.107                           1.135       0.074
If post office in village             -0.571       0.115                          -0.535       0.104
# observations                                                          12,883                                       12,883
Log-likelihood                                                         -5173.4                                      -5153.9




                                                         45
      Table A.5
      Two-type model exclusion tests: group programs and frequency of meetings
Variable                                      Excluding group programs                    Excluding group meetings
                                            Type H                Type L                Type H                Type L
                                       Coeff. Std. Err.     Coeff.     Std. Err.   Coeff. Std. Err.    Coeff.      Std. Err.
                                            Dependent variable: If default              Dependent variable: If default
Constant                               -3.355      0.557      7.795      21.128    -3.461      0.635     7.572       35.427
If literate                             0.095      0.106      0.426        0.200    0.081      0.113     0.429         0.218
If disabled member in household         0.254      0.161     -0.113        0.377    0.228      0.173    -0.167         0.444
If owns land                            0.161      0.096     -0.278        0.125    0.100      0.111    -0.406         0.194
If lives in pucca house                -0.211      0.114     -0.992        0.203   -0.109      0.139    -1.043         0.204
If lives in kacha house                -0.130      0.127     -0.588        0.186    0.087      0.131    -0.948         0.219
If self-employed agricultural worker   -0.621      0.184      1.214        0.270   -0.638      0.204     1.103         0.285
If agricultural laborer                 0.087      0.143      1.574        0.218    0.081      0.141     1.729         0.215
If belongs to scheduled tribe/caste     0.082      0.103      2.683        0.254    0.071      0.117     2.895         0.297
If belongs to leading caste            -0.086      0.154      0.149        0.412   -0.052      0.149     0.272         0.445
Amount of loan (1,000 rupees)           0.062      0.017      0.470        0.056    0.076      0.018     0.430         0.058
Number of members with loan            -0.050      0.069     -0.350        0.195   -0.067      0.077    -0.356         0.267
Number of members with loan squared     0.001      0.003      0.002        0.006    0.004      0.003     0.005         0.011
Annual interest rate (%)                0.087      0.012      0.270        0.038    0.083      0.013     0.283         0.040
Length of loan (years)                  0.472      0.079      0.987        0.148    0.472      0.082     0.826         0.208
If repayment at least monthly          -0.548      0.237 -11.009         20.329    -0.681      0.222 -11.231         37.088
If loan due in 2005                    -1.059      0.109     -0.070        0.204   -1.145      0.092    -0.207         0.243
If loan due in 2006                     0.998      0.188      1.405        0.241    0.887      0.154     1.153         0.293
Probability of type-H Group
Constant                               -3.065      2.244                           -2.674      0.881
% literate                              1.624      0.263                            2.228      0.425
% disabled member in household          1.353      0.584                            1.881      0.637
% own land                              0.777      0.194                            0.456      0.243
% live in pucca house                  -1.047      0.193                           -0.971      0.229
% live in kacha house                  -0.907      0.223                           -0.849      0.233
% self-employed agricultural worker     1.018      0.258                            0.448      0.324
% agricultural laborer                  1.585      0.245                            2.053      0.241
% belong to scheduled tribe/caste       0.707      0.167                            0.634      0.172
% belong to leading caste              -1.236      0.440                           -0.885      0.516
Age of group (years)                    0.051      0.058                            0.038      0.073
Age of group squared                   -0.004      0.003                           -0.005      0.004
If group has food credit program                                                   -0.890      0.130
If group has marketing program                                                      1.441      0.185
If group has insurance program                                                      0.588      0.135
If group meets at least monthly        2.972       0.117
If located in Telangana                2.301       0.135                           2.146       0.117
If located in Rayalaseema              0.865       0.095                           0.975       0.154
                                                                                                                  (Cont.)




                                                           46
Variable                                     Excluding group programs                    Excluding group meetings
                                           Type H                Type L                Type H                Type L
                                      Coeff.   Std. Err.   Coeff.     Std. Err.   Coeff.   Std. Err.   Coeff.     Std. Err.
                                           Dependent variable: If default              Dependent variable: If default
Number of group members                0.148       0.312                           0.080      0.144
Number of group members squared       -0.014       0.013                          -0.001      0.006
If financial institution in village    0.769       0.135                           1.237      0.129
If public bus in village               0.209       0.108                           0.358      0.123
If telephone in village                1.163       0.099                           1.322      0.162
If post office in village             -0.627       0.075                          -0.569      0.157
# observations                                                          12,883                                      12,883
Log-likelihood                                                         -5223.0                                     -5418.5




                                                         47
      Table A.6
      Two-type model exclusion tests: group location and village characteristics
Variable                                      Excluding group location                 Excluding village characteristics
                                            Type H                Type L                Type H                Type L
                                       Coeff. Std. Err.    Coeff.      Std. Err.   Coeff. Std. Err.     Coeff.     Std. Err.
                                            Dependent variable: If default              Dependent variable: If default
Constant                               -3.536      0.745     7.808       30.180    -3.423      0.537      7.796       49.901
If literate                             0.153      0.094     0.679         0.226    0.212      0.102      0.344        0.233
If disabled member in household         0.177      0.125    -0.411         0.445    0.235      0.159     -0.409        0.409
If owns land                            0.059      0.075    -0.738         0.098    0.180      0.094     -0.514        0.216
If lives in pucca house                -0.020      0.078    -0.814         0.370   -0.040      0.102     -0.921        0.193
If lives in kacha house                 0.201      0.063    -0.875         0.220    0.070      0.117     -0.651        0.223
If self-employed agricultural worker   -0.521      0.113     1.319         0.312   -0.554      0.181      0.979        0.317
If agricultural laborer                -0.037      0.114     1.912         0.423    0.167      0.128      1.611        0.292
If belongs to scheduled tribe/caste     0.002      0.148     2.519         0.889   -0.047      0.103      2.825        0.473
If belongs to leading caste            -0.116      0.131     0.338         0.451   -0.044      0.156      0.246        0.441
Amount of loan (1,000 rupees)           0.104      0.025     0.519         0.199    0.056      0.016      0.512        0.048
Number of members with loan            -0.013      0.265    -0.328         0.587   -0.060      0.080     -0.336        0.164
Number of members with loan squared     0.000      0.013     0.007         0.019    0.001      0.004      0.002        0.006
Annual interest rate (%)                0.094      0.011     0.234         0.040    0.082      0.013      0.265        0.038
Length of loan (years)                  0.583      0.053     0.596         0.300    0.611      0.096      0.881        0.277
If repayment at least monthly          -0.548      0.222 -10.967         33.708    -0.533      0.263 -10.956          50.313
If loan due in 2005                    -1.237      0.234    -0.102         0.240   -0.992      0.170     -0.221        0.241
If loan due in 2006                     0.811      0.140     0.998         0.514    0.910      0.180      1.141        0.288
Probability of type-H Group
Constant                               -2.742      9.305                           -2.637      0.603
% literate                              1.759      0.206                            2.138      0.370
% disabled member in household          1.858      0.352                            1.843      0.577
% own land                              0.881      0.210                            0.479      0.243
% live in pucca house                  -1.300      0.580                           -0.820      0.241
% live in kacha house                  -1.322      0.215                           -0.992      0.230
% self-employed agricultural worker     0.857      0.095                            0.424      0.308
% agricultural laborer                  1.722      0.435                            1.925      0.233
% belong to scheduled tribe/caste       0.618      0.508                            0.327      0.159
% belong to leading caste              -0.957      0.174                           -0.869      0.475
Age of group (years)                    0.033      0.097                            0.022      0.068
Age of group squared                   -0.006      0.006                           -0.003      0.004
If group has food credit program       -1.205      0.066                           -0.934      0.124
If group has marketing program          1.813      0.108                            1.622      0.187
If group has insurance program          0.132      0.064                            0.687      0.160
If group meets at least monthly         2.822      0.449                            3.220      0.154
If located in Telangana                                                             1.994      0.180
If located in Rayalaseema                                                           0.826      0.079
                                                                                                                  (Cont.)




                                                           48
Variable                                     Excluding group location                    Excluding village variables
                                           Type H                Type L                Type H                 Type L
                                      Coeff.   Std. Err.  Coeff.      Std. Err.   Coeff.   Std. Err.    Coeff.    Std. Err.
                                           Dependent variable: If default              Dependent variable: If default
Number of group members                0.090      1.566                            0.153       0.166
Number of group members squared       -0.003      0.067                           -0.014       0.007
If financial institution in village    0.711      0.131
If public bus in village               0.421      0.258
If telephone in village                1.207      0.057
If post office in village             -0.411      0.118
# observations                                                          12,883                                       12,883
Log-likelihood                                                         -5236.6                                      -5191.6




                                                         49
Table A.7
Hausman tests: Baseline model versus alternative specifications
 Variables excluded                 H0: Difference in coefficients of repayment
                                      equation between baseline model and
                                     alternative specifications not systematic
 Average member characteristics                       16.610
                                                      (0.165)
 Group size and age                                   31.648
                                                      (0.084)
 Group programs                                       12.402
                                                      (0.574)
 Frequency of group meetings                          32.087
                                                      (0.076)
 Group location                                       11.307
                                                      (0.662)
 Village characteristics                              45.828
                                                      (0.000)
Note: Hausman Chi-squared statistics reported and p-values in parenthesis.




                                                        50
Figure A.1
Histogram of percentage of loan repaid by member




                                             51
Figure A.2
Location of villages in Andhra Pradesh and group default behavior

                                             North




                                           North East




                                             South




                                               52
Figure A.3
Distribution of intra-group default behavior by different group characteristics



            Percentage of literate women                                Frequency of meetings
 100%            5%                                       100%           6%
                                         7%                                                        11%
                13%                     17%                             14%
  80%                                                     80%
                                                                                                   41%
  60%                                                     60%

  40%           82%                     76%               40%           80%

                                                          20%                                      48%
  20%

   0%                                                      0%
           More than half           Less than half                    At least                   Less than
           women literate           women literate                monthly meetings            monthly meetings

         No default   All default   Some default                 No default     All default    Some default


            Marketing program in group                              Financial institution in village
 100%            6%                       7%              100%           6%                         7%
                16%                      17%                            12%
  80%                                                     80%                                       19%

  60%                                                     60%

  40%           79%                      76%              40%           82%                         74%
  20%                                                     20%

   0%                                                      0%
             Marketing              No marketing                       Financial                No financial
             program                  program                         institution                institution
         No default   All default   Some default                 No default     All default    Some default




                                                     53
Appendix B: Solution to model with peer selection and moral hazard
In this appendix, we solve the model with peer selection and moral hazard outlined in Section 2.
The model is an extension of Ghatak (1999) basic model, where we allow borrowers to vary on
their risk type and effort level. The model setup is presented in Section 2. We also assume that
Y  r  q , i.e. a successful borrower can make a profit even when her partner loses. This
assumption is innocuous because if it does not hold, a borrower with a failed project may have a
higher payoff than one with a successful project, which is an unreasonable scenario. We consider
both a non-cooperative game scenario where each borrower maximizes her own payoff and a
cooperative game scenario where matched borrowers maximize the total payoff of their group.
         In the non-cooperative game setting, the maximization problems of the matched
borrowers are given by


max E ij  ( pi  ei )Y  ( pi  ei )r  q( pi  ei )(1  p j  e j )  1 / 2ei2
  ei


max E ji  ( p j  e j )Y  ( p j  e j )r  q ( p j  e j )(1  p i  ei )  1 / 2e 2j
  ej


s.t. ei  0, e j  0 .


         The first order conditions (FOCs) are:


E ij / ei  Y  r  q (1  p j  e j )  ei  0

E ji / e j  Y  r  q (1  pi  ei )  e j  0

ei  0

ej  0

ei [Y  r  q (1  p j  e j )  ei ]  0

e j [Y  r  q (1  pi  ei )  e j ]  0 .


         Solving the FOCs, we have


eij  0, if   q

                                                             54
         (  q )(Y  r )  q[q (1  pi )   (1  p j )]
eij                                                       if   q .
                             2  q2


We change the subindex of effort from i to ij because the optimal effort of borrower i depends
not only on her own type but also on the type of her partner. To eliminate the corner solution
under which the second order condition (SOC) is violated, we assume   q . Hereafter we only
consider the interior solution. We note that the SOC of the internal solution is satisfied and we
have


                
ebb  eab  eba  eaa .


The above result suggests that a borrower's optimal effort level is higher if she is a safe type
and/or if her partner is a safe type.
           Substituting eij into E ij and denoting M, A and B as


M  Y r q,

                              q ( pb  p a )
A  ebb  eba  eab  eaa                        ,
                                     2  q2

                               q 2 ( pb  p a )
B  eba  eaa  ebb  eab                          ,
                                       2  q2


we obtain


E bb
   
       E ba
           
               AM  qpb ( pb  p a )  qpb B  q (ebb pb  eba p a  ebb
                                                                       2
                                                                           eba eab )  0.5A(ebb  eba )
                   AM  qpb ( pb  p a )  qpb B  qebb ( pb  p a )  (  q ) Aebb
                   AM  qpb ( pb  p a )  qpb B  q 2 ( pb  p a )ebb /(  q )  0,


and




                                                              55
   E ab
      
          E aa
              
                  AM  qp a ( p b  p a )  qp a B  q (e ab pb  eaa p a  eaa
                                                                              2
                                                                                  eba eab )  0.5A(eab  eaa )
                    AM  qp a ( pb  p a )  qp a B  qe ab ( p b  p a )  (A  qB )eab
                    AM  qpb ( pb  p a )  qpb B  0.


The above results suggest that a borrower prefers a safer partner despite of her own type.
            We then examine if positive assortative matching is the only equilibrium. Following
Ghatak (2009, such equilibrium must satisfy the optimal sorting property (Becker, 1993). That is,
the net expected loss for a safe borrower of having a risky borrower is higher than the net
expected gain for a risky borrower of having a safe partner. Therefore, a risky borrower does not
have sufficient incentives to pay enough money to a safe borrower to match with her. We find


( E bb
     
         E ba
             
                )  ( E ab
                         
                             E aa
                                 
                                    )  q( pb  p a ) 2  2q( pb  p a ) B  AB  q(ebb
                                                                                      2
                                                                                          eaa
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                2eba eab )
                                           q 4 ( pb  p a ) 2 /( 2  q 2 ) 2  0.


Consistent with Proposition 1 in Ghatak (1999), this result suggests positive assortative matching
is the only equilibrium.
            Next, we keep the same model setup but assume a cooperative game setting where
matched borrowers maximize their joint payoff given by


max ( E ij  E ji  ( pi  ei )Y  ( pi  ei ) r  q ( pi  ei )(1  p j  e j )  1 / 2ei2
 ei , e j

                       ( p j  e j )Y  ( p j  e j ) r  q ( p j  e j )(1  pi  ei )  1 / 2e 2j

s.t. ei  0, e j  0 .


            The FOCs are:


E ij / ei  Y  r  q  2q ( p j  e j )  ei  0

E ji / e j  Y  r  q  2q ( pi  ei )  e j  0

ei  0

ej  0


                                                                56
ei [Y  r  q  2q ( p j  e j )  ei ]  0

e j [Y  r  q  2q ( pi  ei )  e j ]  0 .


           Solving the FOCs, we have


eij  0 if   2q

         (  2q)(Y  r  q)  2q[2qpi  p j )]
eij                                                 if   2q .
                         2  4q 2


We impose the assumption   2q to eliminate the corner solution. For the interior solution, the
SOC is satisfied. Similar to the non-cooperative game, we obtain


                
ebb  eab  eba  eaa .


           We next prove that a group with two safe borrowers has a higher joint payoff than a
group with one safe borrower and one risky borrower. Plugging eij into E ij , we have


E bb
   
       E ba
           
               AM  qpb ( pb  p a )  qpb B   q(ebb pb  eba p a )  q(ebb
                                                                             2
                                                                                 eba eab )  0.5 (ebb
                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                         eba
                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                              ),

E bb
   
       E ab
           
               BM  ( pb  pa )M  qpb ( pb  pa )  q(2 pb ebb  pa eba  pa eab )  q(ebb
                                                                                           2
                                                                                               eba eab )  0.5 (ebb
                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                       eab
                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                            ),


                                       2q( pb  p a )                                 4q 2 ( p b  p a )
where A'  ebb  eba  eab  eaa                          , B '  e     e     e     e                        . We
                                              2  4q 2                                           2  4q 2
                                                                     ba     aa     bb     ab



note


      2
  q (ebb  eba eab )  0.5 (ebb
                              2
                                  eba
                                    2
                                       )  q (ebb
                                               2
                                                   eba eab )  0.5 (ebb
                                                                       2
                                                                           eab
                                                                             2
                                                                                )
 2q (ebb
       2
           eba
             2
                 eab
                   2
                      )  ebb
                            2
                                0.5 (eab
                                        2
                                            eba
                                              2
                                                 )
 0.5(  2q ) A(ebb  eba )  0.5(  2q ) B (ebb  eab )
 (  2q )( A  B )ebb  ( A  B ) M  2qp b ( A  B ).




                                                            57
Then,


 2 E bb
      
          ( E ab
                
                    E ba
                        
                           )
 ( A  B) M  2qpb ( pb  pa )  ( pb  pa ) M  qpb B  q(ebb pb  eba pa ) 
  q(2 pb ebb  pa eba  pa eab )  ( A  B ) M  2qpb ( A  B )
 2qpb ( pb  pa )  ( pb  pa ) M  q(ebb pb  eba pa )  q(2 pb ebb  pa eba  pa eab )  2qpb A  qpb B
 2qpb ( pb  pa )  ( pb  pa ) M  qpb A  qpb A  qpb B  2qpb A  qpb B
 2qpb ( pb  pa )  ( pb  pa ) M  0



Therefore, a safe borrower will prefer a safe to a risky borrower.
         We finally examine if positive assortive matching is the only equilibrium, which is
implied by


2 E bb  2 E aa  2( E ba  E ab )  0 .


We have


E bb  E aa  ( E ba  E ab )  ( E bb
                                         
                                             E ba
                                                 
                                                    )  ( E ab
                                                             
                                                                 E aa
                                                                     
                                                                        )
                                   q ( pb  pa ) 2  2q ( pb  pa ) B  AB  q (ebb
                                                                                      2
                                                                                          eaa
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                2eba eab )
                                                                                    4q 5 ( 2  4q 2 )( pb  pa ) 2
                                   q ( pb  pa ) 2  B[2q ( pb  pa )  A] 
                                                                                             ( 2  4q 2 ) 2
                                                        32q 5 ( pb  pa ) 2 4q 5 ( 2  4q 2 )( pb  pa ) 2
                                   q ( pb  pa ) 2                       
                                                          ( 2  4q 2 ) 2            ( 2  4q 2 ) 2
                                                      32q 4  ( 2  4q 2 )4q 2 
                                   q ( pb  pa ) 2 1                           
                                                           ( 2  4q 2 ) 2       
                                   q ( pb  pa ) /(  4q )  0
                                        2             2  2    2




This result indicates that the model also leads to positive assortative matching in the cooperative
game setting.




                                                                  58
