                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE EFFECTS OF POOR NEONATAL HEALTH ON CHILDREN'S COGNITIVE
                             DEVELOPMENT

                                           David N. Figlio
                                          Jonathan Guryan
                                        Krzysztof Karbownik
                                            Jeffrey Roth

                                        Working Paper 18846
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18846


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2013




We are grateful to the Florida Department of Health and Florida Department of Education for providing
us access to merged education and health data for the purposes of this project, and for the technical
support in interpreting the key variables described herein. Figlio and Roth appreciate the financial
support of the National Science Foundation, as well as the U.S. Department of Education and the Bill
and Melinda Gates Foundation through the National Center for the Analysis of Longitudinal Data
in Education Research (CALDER). Karbownik appreciates the support of a Hedelius Scholarship that
permitted him to conduct this research while visiting Northwestern University. Seminar participants
at CESifo (Munich), Dartmouth College, Emory University, Northwestern University, Roosevelt University,
Tulane University, University of California-Irvine, University of Florida, University of Maryland,
University of Texas, University of Wisconsin, and Uppsala University provided helpful comments
and feedback. All errors of omission and commission are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by David N. Figlio, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Poor Neonatal Health on Children's Cognitive Development
David N. Figlio, Jonathan Guryan, Krzysztof Karbownik, and Jeffrey Roth
NBER Working Paper No. 18846
February 2013
JEL No. I14,I20,I24

                                             ABSTRACT

We make use of a new data resource, merged birth and school records for all children born in Florida
from 1992 to 2002, to study the effects of birth weight on cognitive development from kindergarten
through schooling. Using twin fixed effects models, we find that the effects of birth weight on cognitive
development are essentially constant through the school career; that these effects are very similar across
a wide range of family backgrounds; and that they are invariant to measures of school quality. We
conclude that the effects of poor neonatal health on adult outcomes are therefore set very early.


David N. Figlio                                     Krzysztof Karbownik
Institute for Policy Research                       Department of Economics
Northwestern University                             Uppsala University
2040 Sheridan Road                                  Kyrkogardsgatan 10B
Evanston, IL 60208                                  SE-751 20 Uppsala
and NBER                                            Sweden
figlio@northwestern.edu                             krzysztof.karbownik@nek.uu.se

Jonathan Guryan                                     Jeffrey Roth
Northwestern University                             Department of Pediatrics
Institute for Policy Research                       University of Florida
2040 Sheridan Road                                  PO Box 100296
Evanston, IL 60208                                  Gainesville, FL 32610-0296
and NBER                                            jeffroth@ufl.edu
j-guryan@northwestern.edu
I. Introduction
        A large literature documents the effects of neonatal health (commonly proxied by
birth weight) on a wide range of adult outcomes such as wages, disability, adult chronic
conditions, and human capital accumulation. A series of studies, conducted in a variety of
countries, including Canada, Norway, and the United States, have made use of twin
comparisons to show that the heavier twin in the pair is more likely to have better adult
outcomes measured in various ways.1
        While the existing literature makes clear that there appears to be a permanent
effect of poor neonatal health on socio-economic and health outcomes, it provides no
guidance regarding the potential pathways through which these effects come into being.
For instance, we know very little to date about whether the effects of poor neonatal health
on cognitive development varies at different ages (say, at kindergarten entry versus third
grade versus eight grade), and no existing study identifies whether school quality could
help to mitigate the effects of poor neonatal health on cognitive development. For that
matter, we know virtually nothing about whether these effects vary heterogeneously
across different demographic or socio-economic groups, so it is impossible given the
extant literature to know whether early neonatal health and parental inputs are
complements or substitutes. As such, while we have strong evidence from twin
comparison studies that poor initial health conveys a disadvantage in adulthood, we have
virtually no information about the potential roles for policy interventions in ameliorating
this disadvantage during childhood.
        The reason for these gaps in the literature involves data availability. The datasets
that previous researchers have used to study the effects of poor neonatal health on adult
outcomes (e.g., Scandinavian registry data, or data matching a mother’s birth certificate
to her children’s birth certificates) do not include information on schooling and human
capital measures during key developmental years. And even the small number of studies

1
 Examples of influential previous research include Behrman and Rosenzweig (2004) on schooling and
wages, Almond et al. (2005) on neonatal outcomes and hospital costs, and Royer (2009) on next
generation birth weight, neonatal outcomes and educational attainment, for the United States; Black et al.
(2007) on neonatal outcomes, height, IQ, high school completion, employment, earnings and next
generation birth weight, for Norway; Oreopoulos et al. (2008) on neonatal outcomes, health outcomes in
adolescence, educational attainment and social assistance take up, for Canada; Rosenzweig and Zhang
(2012) on educational attainment, wages and weight for height, for China; Torche and Echevarria (2011) on
mathematics test scores; Bharadwaj et al. (2010) on mathematics test scores and attendance, for Chile.

                                                    2
that investigate the effects of birth conditions on test scores rather than adult outcomes
(Bharadwaj et al., 2010; Rosenzweig and Zhang, 2009) are in developing contexts (e.g.,
Chile and China) that lack the diversity necessary to explore heterogeneous effects of
poor neonatal health on cognitive development, or these effects in a western developed
context. And while the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study – Birth Cohort (ECLS-B) of
children born in the United States in 2001 oversamples twins, this data set is too recent to
investigate outcomes in late elementary school or adolescence, too small to study
heterogeneous effects of birth weight, and does not include cognitive outcomes that have
high stakes for children.
        Another gap in the adult-outcomes literature is that the subjects of that literature
are rather old at present; they were necessarily born in the 1970s and earlier. Given the
advances in modern neonatology, it is reasonable to believe that poor neonatal health in
the 21st century may bear little resemblance to poor neonatal health fifty years ago.2
There have been no studies linking neonatal health to either educational or later outcomes
in a western development context using very recent birth cohorts.3
        We make use of a major new data source that can fill these gaps in the literature.
We match all births in Florida from 1992 through 2002 to subsequent schooling records
for those remaining in the state to attend public school. Florida is an excellent place to
study these questions because it is large (its population of around 17 million compares to
Norway, Denmark, and Sweden combined) and heterogeneous (45 percent of mothers are
racial or ethnic minorities, and 23.4 percent of mothers were born outside the United
States.) In addition, Florida is well-known for having some of the strongest education
data systems in the United States; Florida, North Carolina, and Texas established the
most advanced statewide student longitudinal data systems in the United States during the
first half of the 2000s, and Florida has been testing children annually from third through
eighth grade for over a decade. For several cohorts, Florida also implemented a universal
2
  As one example of the temporal differences in neonatology, whereas 50 years ago the threshold for infant
viability was around 1500 grams, today the threshold for viability is as low as 500 grams or even lower. As
such, it is independently valuable to study the effects of birth weight using a more contemporary set of
births than those used in the existing literature.
3
  The potential benefits of using more current data become apparent when we compare the mean birth
weight amongst twins in our study of children born after 1992 (2409 grams) to those from previous studies
of twins born in the 1930s through the 1970s (which range from 2517 to 2598 grams, depending on the
cohort and country.) Therefore, our population includes a set of twins who more closely resemble twins
being born in western industrialized countries today.

                                                     3
kindergarten readiness assessment that allows us to explore the effects of birth weight on
children’s cognitive outcomes as early as age five. In addition to superb education data
quality, Florida offers another major advantage when attempting to match birth and
school records: Because children born in Florida are immediately assigned a social
security number, and because social security numbers are collected upon school
registration, Florida presents the opportunity for particularly effective matches between
birth and school records. This allows Florida’s health and education agencies the ability
to nearly perfectly match births to school records. As we describe in the next section, our
match rate is almost identical to what we would have expected based on American
Community Survey data.
       With these new data, we follow over 14,000 pairs of twins from birth through
middle school to study the effects of birth weight on cognitive development. Ours is the
first analysis of matched birth-school data in a developed context, and the first study to
our knowledge conducted anywhere in the world that looks at heterogeneous effects
across a variety of demographic and socio-economic dimensions. In addition, ours is the
first study to explore the interaction between schooling factors and the relationship
between birth weight and children’s cognitive development.
       We find that the effects of birth weight on cognitive development are roughly
constant across a child’s schooling career, and appear to be the same across a wide range
of demographic and socio-economic groups. In addition, this trajectory is very similar
regardless of the nature of the school the children attend. These results suggest that the
gaps observed in adulthood associated with poor neonatal health are largely fixed at least
by third grade or even kindergarten, indicating that some biological factors may be very
difficult to overcome.


II. A new data source

       A. Description of the data set and match diagnostics
       We make use of matched data for all twins born in Florida between 1992 and
2002 and educated in a Florida public school afterward. For the purposes of this study,
Florida’s education and health agencies matched children along three dimensions: first


                                              4
and last names, date of birth, and social security number. Rather than conducting
probabilistic matching, the match was conducted such that a child would be considered
matched so long as (1) there were no more than two instances of modest inconsistencies
(e.g., a last name of “Johnson” in the birth record but “Johnsen” or “Johnosn” in the
school record, or a social security number ending in “4363” in the birth record but ending
in “4336” in the school record); and (2) there were no other children who could plausibly
be matched using the same criteria. Common variables excluded from the match were
used as checks of match quality. These checks confirm a very high and clean match rate:
In the overall match on the entire (not just twin) population, the sex recorded on birth
records disagreed with the sex recorded in school records in about one-one thousandth of
one percent of cases, suggesting that these differences are almost surely due to typos in
the birth or school records.
       Between 1992 and 2002, 2,047,663 births were recorded by the Florida Bureau of
Vital Statistics, including 22,625 pairs of twins. Of these children, 1,652,333 have been
subsequently observed in Florida public school data maintained by the Florida
Department of Education’s Education Data Warehouse, and 17,639 pairs of twins have
both twins present in the Department of Education data. All told, 79.6 percent of all
children born in Florida, and 79.5 percent of twins born in Florida, are matched to school
records using the match protocols.
       In order to judge the quality of the match, we compare the 79.6 percent rate to
population statistics from the American Community Surveys and Census of Population
from 2000 through 2009. Recall that a child can only be matched in the Florida data if he
or she (1) is born in Florida; (2) remains in the state of Florida until school age; (3)
attends a Florida public school; and (4) is successfully matched between birth and school
records using the protocol described above. Reasons (1) through (3) are “natural” reasons
why we might lose children from the match. Our calculations from the American
Community Survey indicate that, amongst the kindergarten-aged children found in that
survey who were born in Florida, 80.9 percent were remaining in Florida at the time of
kindergarten and were attending public school. This figure is an overstatement of the true
expected match rate because the American Community Survey includes only children
who are still living in the United States at the time of kindergarten. Given that some


                                               5
children born in Florida leave the country in their first five years because of emigration,
because they were born to non-immigrant visitors to the country, or because they were
born to undocumented immigrants who returned to their home countries, the true
expected match is somewhat below 80.9 percent. While we are not aware of data
regarding the fraction of U.S.-born children who leave the country before age five, it
seems reasonable that the difference between 79.6 percent and 80.9 percent could be
explained by these three reasons. We therefore conclude that the match rate is extremely
high, and that nearly all potentially matchable children have been matched in our data.


       B. Comparisons of the matched data set to the overall population
       While we have demonstrated that we have matched virtually all potentially
matchable children born in Florida to Florida school records, it is still the case that the set
of Florida-born children attending Florida public schools differs fundamentally from the
set of all Florida-born children. People who leave the state of Florida might differ from
those who remain, and children attending public schools might differ fundamentally from
those who attend private schools. It is therefore important to gauge how comparable the
matched population is to the overall population of twins born in Florida. Though it is
separate from how the matched data differ from the population, it is important to note that
twins differ from singletons in important ways. We discuss issues of external validity in
the conclusion.
       Table 1 presents some evidence regarding the overall representativeness of our
population of twins, along a number of dimensions: maternal race and ethnicity, maternal
education, maternal age, maternal immigrant status, and parental marital status. There are
four columns in the table: The first column reflects the total population of children born
in Florida; the second column reflects the population of children matched to Florida
public school records; the third column represents the set of children with a third grade
test score; and the fourth column reflects the set of twins born in Florida who have a third
grade test score. The comparison between the first two columns demonstrates the total
population of twins born in Florida; and the third column reflects the total population of
twins born in Florida matched to Florida public school records. The comparison between
the first and second columns makes clear the costs associated with carrying out this type


                                               6
of analysis in the United States, where children are lost for matching if they cross state
lines between birth and school or if they attend private school. We observe that the set of
matched children are more likely to be black (24.8 percent of matched children versus
22.6 percent of all children) and less likely to have married mothers (62.2 percent versus
64.8 percent of all children). The mothers of matched children are more likely to be less
educated (17.5 percent college graduate versus 20.5 percent overall, and 22.5 percent
high school dropout versus 20.9 percent overall) and are moderately younger (23.6
percent aged 21 or below versus 22.0 percent overall, and 9.4 percent aged 36 or above
versus 9.8 percent overall). The comparison between the second and third columns of
table 1 shows the difference in composition of the population of test-takers in elementary
school versus those matched to school records more generally. As can be seen, 3rd-grade
test-takers are still lower in terms of socio-economic status than are all children appearing
in public school data. The fact that matched children are of somewhat lower socio-
economic status, and that those with 3rd-grade scores are somewhat lower again, is
unsurprising, given the well-documented relationship between family income (or parental
education) and private school attendance.4 However, our findings of estimated
relationships between birth weight and test scores that are remarkably similar across very
dissimilar groups reduces some of the potential concerns regarding external validity.
         The comparison between the third and fourth columns of table 1 demonstrates the
consequences of making use of twin comparisons, as is standard in the literature. As can
be seen, mothers of twins are quite different from mothers of singletons: Mothers of
twins are substantially less likely to be Hispanic or foreign-born and substantially more
likely to be married than are mothers of singletons. In addition, they are considerably
better educated (23.0 percent college graduate versus 15.8 percent in the overall
population of test-takers, and 15.5 percent high school dropout versus 23.4 percent of all
test-takers) and considerably older (13.6 percent aged 36 or above versus 9.1 percent in
the overall population of test-takers, and 14.4 percent aged 21 or below versus 24.2



4
  These relationships are observed in the Census data: In the 2000 Census, for instance, 6 percent of
families earning $0-$25,000 per year sent their children to private school, as compared with 7 percent for
those earning $25,000-$50,000 per year, 13 percent for those earning $50,000-$75,000 per year, and 19
percent for those earning over $75,000 per year.

                                                     7
percent in the overall population of test-takers.)5 Therefore, the decision to focus on twin
comparisons to promote increased internal validity brings with it some cost in terms of
external validity.


         C. Birth weight distributions


                  1. Distribution of birth weight discordance
         The variation that we use to identify the effect of poor neonatal health on
cognitive skills comes from the fact that nearly all twin pairs differ in the birth weights of
the two newborns, and sometimes the difference is quite substantial. In Florida, the
average discordance in birth weight is 284 grams (0.63 pounds), or 11.8 percent of the
average twin’s birth weight of 2409 grams. Figure 1 presents the distribution of
discordance for all twins, as well as all twins matched to test scores. As can be seen, the
two distributions are virtually identical, so even though twins remaining in Florida and
attending public schools have different maternal characteristics than do twins who leave
Florida or attend private schools, the identifying variation does not differ at all. 51.3
percent of twin pairs have birth weight discordance over 200 grams, and 16.8 percent
have birth weight discordance over 500 grams. 45 percent of twin pairs have birth weight
discordance greater than 10 percent of the larger twin’s birth weight, 26.6 percent have
discordance greater than 15 percent of the larger twin’s birth weight, and 14.7 percent
have discordance greater than 20 percent of the larger twin’s birth weight.6




                  2. Twins v. singletons
         Figure 2 makes clear that twins have a dramatically different distribution of birth
weight than do singletons. The mean twin birth weight during our time period is 2409
grams, 27.9 percent smaller than the mean singleton birth weight of 3342 grams. One can

5
  Twins are also more likely to be the consequence of in-vitro fertilization (IVF) or other forms of assisted
reproductive technologies (ART). Later in this paper we investigate the differential effects of birth weight
for twins likely conceived using IVF/ART versus those less likely to have been conceived using IVF/ART.
6
  There exists medical evidence that large birth weight discordances lead to increased chances of severe
disability. For instance, Luu and Vohr (2009) find that the likelihood of cerebral palsy in a twin is four
times greater when birth weight discordance is over 30 percent than when it is less than 30 percent.

                                                      8
easily observe that for both twins and singletons the birth weight distribution of children
observed in the test score data is identical to the distribution of all children born in
Florida. 53.3 percent of twins have birth weights below 2500 grams (considered clinically
low birth weight), as compared with 5.9 percent of singletons, while 7.1 percent of twins
have birth weights below 1500 grams (considered clinically very low birth weight), as
compared with 0.9 percent of singletons.
        Note that the average birth weight in our population is considerably smaller than
those in other studies using children from developed western countries born a generation
or two earlier: The mean birth weight in Behrman and Rosenzweig’s (2004) study of
Minnesota twins born 1936-1955 was 2557 grams; for Royer’s (2009) California twins
born 1960-1982, Black, Devereux, and Salvanes’s (2007) Norway twins born 1967-1981,
and Oreopoulos et al.’s (2009) Manitoba twins born 1978-1985, the mean birth weights
were 2533 grams, 2598 grams, and 2517 grams, respectively. The lower mean birth
weight in our sample is almost surely the result of improvements in medical technology
that allow lower birth weight babies to survive longer. This change in technology and
shift in the distribution of birth weights highlights another benefit of studying children
born in the 1990s and 2000s.7


III. Empirical framework
        Our empirical framework largely follows what has become standard in the
literature. We estimate twin fixed effect models in which the regressor of interest is the
natural logarithm of birth weight.8 Following Almond, Chay and Lee (ACL, 2005) and
Black, Devereaux and Salvanes (BDS, 2007), let


                                yijk     ln(bw)ijk  x 'jk    jk   ijk                        (1)


where i indexes individuals, j indexes mothers, k indexes births, yijk denotes the outcome

of child i, born to mother j in twin-pair k, x is a vector of mother and child-specific

7
  Note also that the rate of the twinning in the developed world increased 76 percent between 1980 and the
present (Ananth and Chauhan, 2012).
8
  We estimate other model specifications as well to explore the degree to which our results are robust to
model specification.

                                                      9
determinants of the outcome,  denotes unobservable determinants of the outcome that
are specific to the mother and birth, and  is an error term.9
         For the majority of specifications presented in the paper the outcome, denoted y,
is a test score – the criterion-referenced Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT)
– which is standardized within grade and year to have mean zero and standard deviation
one in the entire population of children in Florida.10 (Our measures of kindergarten
readiness are dichotomous, so we estimate linear probability models in those cases.) For
ease of presentation, we average standardized reading and mathematics FCAT scores for
our dependent variable, but our results are presented separately for reading and
mathematics, and the test-specific results are available on request. The regressor of
interest, ln(bw), is the natural logarithm of birth weight in grams. In section 6 we present
results from specifications other than the linear-in-log model, but the linear-in-log model
appears to fit the data well.
Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimation of (1) would produce biased estimates of  if

 jk were correlated with ln(bw)ijk – in other words, if there were unobservable
determinants of cognitive ability that were correlated with birth weight. To address the
potential bias due to correlation between  jk and ln(bw)ijk , we estimate a twin fixed

effect model.
         Twins necessarily share the same x jk and  jk . A twin fixed effect model

essentially differences out any mother- or birth-specific confounder and identifies 
based on between-twin variation in test scores and birth weight. Logically, birth weight
can vary due either to variation in gestation length, or to variation in fetal growth rates.
By focusing on twins, we necessarily hold gestation length constant. Our estimates are
identified, therefore, by variation in fetal growth rates.
         One potential internal validity concern is that we can only make use of test score
data for a twin pair if both members of the pair have test scores. If one twin is present in
the test score data but not the other, and the reasons for differential inclusion in the data
9
  In practice, because we estimate models with twin-pair fixed effects, the mother-specific determinants of
the outcome are subsumed in the fixed effect. The individual-specific determinants are child gender and
within-twin-pair birth order.
10
   We standardize FCAT scores for ease of interpretation. Our results are not substantively changed if
instead we measure the FCAT in its unstandardized developmental scale score format.

                                                    10
are correlated with neonatal health, this could present a source of bias. There are three
different reasons why we might observe differential inclusion in the test score data
related to poor neonatal health. First, parents may send one child to public school but the
other to private school; if parents systematically send their heavier or lighter twin to
different schooling settings, this could affect the observed relationship between birth
weight and test scores, conditional on being in the public school setting. Second, since
Florida exempts students from the FCAT in case of severe disability,11 any relationship
between birth weight and the likelihood of severe disability could affect our estimated
relationship of interest. A third potential reason is similar to the second: If low birth
weight children are more likely to miss the exam because of illness or absence, the effect
on the estimates would be similar to the bias that results from differential disability.
         That said, the evidence suggests that these potential internal validity concerns are
not major issues. When we estimate twin fixed effect regression models in which the
dependent variable is whether the twin ever attended public school (79.5 percent of the
Florida birth population) the coefficient on log birth weight is -0.012 (with a standard
error of 0.008). If the dependent variable is an indicator for beginning in public school by
first grade (77.0 percent of all births), the coefficient estimate is -0.006 (with a standard
error of 0.008). If the dependent variable is whether we ever observe an FCAT score for
the child (69.1 percent of all births), the coefficient estimate is -0.003 (standard error of
0.009), and if the dependent variable is whether we observe an FCAT score in every
possible year when we would have expected to see one if the student did not leave
Florida public schools (65.5 percent of all births) the coefficient estimate is 0.006
(standard error of 0.004). In sum, it appears that relatively heavy and relatively light
twins are remaining in public school and taking the FCAT at highly similar rates. This
diminishes the potential internal validity concerns associated with differential test-taking
rates.




11
  Florida’s Final Rule 6A-1.0943 gives the grounds for FCAT exemption, stating students can be exempted
from the test in “extraordinary circumstances [that] are physical conditions that affect a student’s ability to
communicate in modes deemed acceptable for statewide assessments.”

                                                      11
IV. Preliminary results – heavier versus lighter twins


        A. Heavier v. lighter twins
        Before presenting the main regression results, we begin with simple comparisons
of the test scores of heavier and lighter twins based on birth weight. These results, which
aggregate twin pairs with small birth weight discordance with those with large birth
weight discordance, are shown in figures 3 through 5.12 Nonetheless, they clearly
demonstrate the first main result of the paper. Figure 3 shows the average within twin
pair difference in test score between the higher birth weight twin and the lower birth
weight twin, while figures 4 and 5 show the same patterns for mathematics and reading,
respectively. These figures show test score differences for the average of math and
reading scores calculated separately at grades three through eight, along with the 95-
percent confidence interval around those differences.1314 Note that these figures do not
reflect panels of students, so there are different groups of children in each grade.
        Within twin pairs, on average the heavier born scores about five percent of a
standard deviation higher than his lighter born twin. This difference in test scores is
statistically distinguishable from zero, and is stable from third through eighth grades,
covering ages from approximately 9 to 14. This comparison holds constant any
confounding factor that varies at the family, mother or birth level. The results imply that
fetal health, as proxied by birth weight, has effects on cognitive skills by age 9.
Furthermore, this effect does not seem to either dissipate or widen through
preadolescence.


12
   We conduct this aggregation in order to fix ideas, but it is important to remember that birth weight
discordance is known to be an independent predictor of major morbidities such as congenital anomalies,
low APGAR scores, and periventricular leukomalacia (Vergani et al, 2004; Cheung, Bocking, and Dasilva,
1995).
13
   Throughout the analysis, unless otherwise noted, test score results are for the average of math and
reading scores for observations with non-missing scores for both tests. For observations with one test
missing, the non-missing test is used. In the main regression specification, 99.5 percent of observations
have both math and reading scores, 0.2 percent have only a math score and 0.3 percent have only a reading
score.
14
   For all analyses separated by grade, we assign students to the grade they would have been in had they
progressed one grade per year from the first time we observe them with an FCAT score in third grade We
use this “imputed grade” rather than the student’s actual grade because grade retention may be affected by
birth weight and because we are interested in following children longitudinally. All results are extremely
similar if we focus on actual grade rather than this imputed grade.

                                                    12
         B. Testing for differential attrition
         As described above, we observe test scores only for students who are in Florida
public schools, and a small fraction of public school students miss the exam because of
absence or because they have a profound disability.15 Attrition from the testing data is
only a concern for our estimates if students with missing test scores would have had
particularly high or low scores relative to their twin, and since we are including twin-pair
fixed effects in all of our models, attrition only causes bias if one twin leaves the testing
data and the other remains. As mentioned above, it may be the case that parents might
differentially send either heavier or lighter twins to private school, and it may also be the
case that twins with poor neonatal health are more likely to be sickly and more prone to
miss the FCAT, or more likely to be severely disabled and exempt from taking the
FCAT.16
         In addition to the twin fixed effects estimates described above, we present three
tests of whether non-random attrition from the sample biases our estimates. Each of these
tests indicates that the estimates are not meaningfully biased by non-random attrition.
First, in figure 6 we plot the difference in test scores between heavier and lighter birth
weight twins, restricting the sample to a sample for which we observe both twins for each
of the six grades. The pattern is essentially unchanged from what we saw for the full
sample in figure 3. The stability of the difference in test scores between heavier and
lighter birth weight twins does not appear to be affected by changing selection out of the
sample as twins age.
         Second, we measure directly the amount of differential attrition from the sample
between third and eighth grade. Starting with the sample of twins we first observe in third
grade, figure 7 shows the difference in the fraction of heavier and lighter birth weight
twins tested in each subsequent grade. The figure shows that lighter birth weight twins
are slightly more likely to have missing tests in the sixth through eighth grades, possibly
because they are pulled from public schools and possibly because they are still enrolled in

15
   While over 30 percent of Florida twins receive some special education services, a large majority of
students with disabilities in Florida take the FCAT. Only students with disabilities such as severe mental
retardation or severe autism are exempt from the FCAT.
16
   There has been a secular trend toward more very low birth weight infants surviving and entering the
educational system impaired. See Zwicker and Harris (2008) and Aarboudse-Moens et al (2009) for
examples of evidence.

                                                     13
public school but missed the exam.17 However, the magnitude of the difference is not
large enough to significantly affect the relative magnitude of the within twin pair test
score differences, a conjecture also we test directly below.
         Third, we can put bounds on the magnitude of any bias resulting from differential
attrition of high and low birth weight twins between third and eighth grade. Figure 8
shows two sets of estimated differences by grade, one where we replaced missing test
scores with the 5th percentile of test scores in that grade and another where we replaced
missing test scores with the 95th percentile. As the figure shows, even assuming that
students who no longer had an FCAT score after third grade had extremely low or
extremely high test scores does not change the conclusion that the within twin pair
difference in test scores is remarkably stable from third through eighth grade. Taken
together, the results show that attrition patterns do not significantly affect the patterns of
results between third and eighth grade.


V. Main results
         We now turn to our main regression results. As described above, the basic
regression model is an ordinary least squares estimate that includes twin-pair fixed
effects, a gender dummy, and a dummy for within-twin-pair birth order. The dependent
variable is the standardized FCAT score, and the regressor of interest is the natural
logarithm of birth weight in grams. We report some results based on separate regressions
for each grade from three through eight, and other results that pool test scores across all
six grades. In the pooled regressions, standard errors are clustered at the individual level
to account for the fact that each individual has up to six observations, one for each grade
in which he or she was tested.
         The non-parametric plots of the relationship between test scores and birth weight
reported in figure 9 present evidence supportive of the log birth weight specification that
we employ, as the figure is consistent with a concave relationship between birth weight

17
   We start off with a sample of twin pairs with twins old enough for 3rd grade. We have 2.9, 2.1, 2.1, 2.1,
1.9 and 1.7 percent of pairs in grades 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 respectively where twins are old enough to be in the
grade but neither of them is tested. We have 2.4, 2.3, 2.3, 2.4, 2.3 and 2.2 percent of pairs in grades 3, 4, 5,
6, 7 and 8 respectively where twins are old enough for the grade but we observe test scores for only one
twin. We have already demonstrated above that in cases in which only one twin is missing a test score, it is
not systematically the case that the twin with the missing score is the lighter twin.

                                                      14
and test scores. The figure shows two series, each derived from a test score regression
that pools 3-8 grades and both math and reading scores. Each series plots the coefficients
from a set of 36 dummy variables corresponding to 100g-wide birth weight bins. The
bins range from a low of 501-600g to a high of 4,001-4,100g. In both regressions, the
left-out group is below 501 grams. As was observed in similar sets of plots by ACL and
BDS, the figure also shows clearly that the shape of the relationship between test scores
and birth weight is very similar both unconditional and conditional on twin-pair fixed
effects.


           A. Pooled results for full sample
           We present our main result in column 2 of table 2. The results show that within
twin-pairs higher birth weight is indeed associated with higher test scores in grades three
through eight. The estimated coefficient of 0.441 implies that a ten percent increase in
birth weight is associated with a 0.045 standard deviation increase in test scores. The
coefficient is precisely estimated, with a t-statistic of over 15. The fixed effects result is
modestly larger than, but in the same general ballpark as, the equivalent OLS coefficient
of 0.310 reported in the first column of table 2. The results are somewhat larger for
mathematics than for reading, but the patterns are the same for both subject areas;
therefore, for ease of presentation, we concentrate on the combined mathematics and
reading results for the remainder of the paper.
           To put the magnitude into perspective, BDS estimate that the effect of log birth
weight on log earnings is 0.12. Assuming the log wage return to cognitive skills is 0.2 as
estimated by Neal and Johnson (1996), our estimates imply that increases in cognitive
skills present in grades three through eight explain approximately three-quarters of the
effect of birth weight on wages found by BDS. Our estimate of the effect of neonatal
health on cognitive development is large in those terms, but it is worth comparing to
other important correlates of student achievement. Figure 10 shows the test scores of
heavier and lighter born twins stratified by mother’s education. The figure clearly shows
that the difference in test scores resulting from differences in birth weight is small
compared with differences in achievement associated with mother’s education. Each of
the differences between heavier and lighter born twins shown in the figure is statistically


                                               15
significant. However, it is clear that in terms of math and reading achievement, it is better
to be the lighter born twin from a college educated mother than the heavier born twin
from a high school dropout mother. Taken together, these findings suggest that while
“nurture” can go a long way toward remediating a child’s initial disadvantage, there are
still biological factors at play that make it difficult to fully remediate this disadvantage.18


        B. Results by grade for full sample
        A key question of interest is how the cognitive effects of in utero conditions and
neonatal health develop. We have already shown that the effects of birth weight on
cognitive achievement in grades three through eight are similar to those observed with
respect to adult earnings. We next explore how the impact on test scores changes during
these important years for human capital development. Does the effect of birth weight
grow larger as children age, or is it present by age 9 and does it remain constant through
the upper elementary and middle school grades? The structure of the data allows us to
estimate the effect of birth weight on test scores separately by grade to address these
questions.
        The results are presented in columns 3-8 in table 2. The table shows the estimated
effect of log birth weight from twin fixed effects models that are estimated separately for
test scores from each grade, three through eight. As is the case throughout the paper,
grade refers to grade an individual would have attended if he had progressed on a normal
schedule after we first observe him or her take a third grade exam. (We call this the
“imputed grade.”) We have estimated the models based on actual grade, by dropping all
twin pairs that do not progress on a normal schedule, and by age rather than grade. The
results using these alternative specifications are substantially the same as the ones we
present.
        The table shows that the effect of birth weight on cognitive achievement is in fact
present by the third grade. The twin fixed effect estimate of the effect of log birth weight
on test scores in third grade is 0.442. The grade-specific estimated effect remains fairly
stable from third through eighth grade, ranging from 0.373 to 0.526. Note that while the

18
  By this statement we do not mean to suggest that the results answer the age-old nature-nurture question.
Rather, they are consistent with the growing literature on epigenetics that shows that environmental and
biological factors interact (Miller et al., 2009 or Lam et al., 2012)

                                                    16
F-test that the grade-level estimated effects are identical is rejected at a moderate level of
statistical significance (p=0.057), there is no evidence that this follows a substantial
systematic pattern as children age. In a regression model in which we interact the log of
birth weight linearly with grade in school, the coefficient estimate on the interaction term
is one-two thousandth the magnitude of the coefficient on the log of birth weight. These
results suggest that the effects of neonatal health do not substantially change, or develop,
between ages 9 and 14. Rather, whatever effect health at birth has on cognitive
development occurs largely by age 9, and remains fairly constant throughout the
preadolescent and adolescent years. Furthermore, comparing the effect with the results
BDS find for adult earnings suggests that the effect of birth weight appears not to change
substantially between 14 years and prime working age.


           C. Role of genetic differences between twins
           For some policy conclusions we might draw from the results, it could be
important to isolate the impact of factors that change intrauterine growth while holding
genetics constant. In studies where the zygosity of twins is known, it is possible to restrict
attention to comparisons between monozygotic twins, effectively holding genes constant.
19,20
        A potential weakness of our data is that they do not include the zygosity of the twins.
We do, however, know the gender of each child, and can use this information to obtain
some purchase on whether the relationship between birth weight and test scores is driven
by within-twin pair differences in genetics.
Same-sex twin pairs are a mix of monozygotic and dizygotic pairs. Different-sex twin
pairs are, however, all dizygotic. If genetic differences were driving a significant portion
of the relationship between birth weight and test scores, and birth weight were positively
correlated with positive determinants of later cognitive skills, we would expect to see a
stronger correlation between birth weight and test scores among different-sex twin pairs.
The first panel of table 3 shows estimates separately for same-sex and different-sex twins.
19
   Zygosity refers to whether the twins are identical (monozygotic) or fraternal (dizygotic). Monozygotic
twins form from a single egg, or zygote, and split into two embryos. Dizygotic twins form from two
separate eggs, fertilized by different sperm. Monozygotic twins therefore share the same genes, whereas
dizygotic twins generally have the same genetic similarity as two full siblings.
20
   Research on epigenetics implies that while they do hold constant genetics, comparisons among
monozygotic twins do not hold constant all of the effects emanating from genetics. Epigenetics is the study
of the way that environmental factors interact with genes to influence which genes are expressed.

                                                    17
       Note that as we explore the heterogeneity in effects across different groups, we
restrict our attention to models that include all test scores from grades three through
eight, restricting the effect of birth weight to be the same at each grade. For the sake of
clarity, in our main tables we report the results in which we pool test scores across all
grades; in Appendix table A1 we report grade-by-grade results for all subgroups. The first
column of table 3 reports the percent of the population in each subgroup. The second
column reports the mean test score for the group. The third column reports the mean and
standard deviation of the group’s birth weight. The fourth column reports the mean and
standard error of the estimated effect of birth weight on pooled third through eighth grade
test scores. The last column reports the p-value from an F-test of the null hypothesis that
the estimated birth weight effects are the same across relevant groups.
       Turning to the results, the estimated effect of birth weight is virtually identical for
same-sex twins (0.447) and different-sex twins (0.427), suggesting that the estimated
relationship is within the same general range regardless of zygosity. This result is
consistent with results reported in BDS, who find no significant differences in the effect
of birth weight on adult earnings between same-sex and opposite-sex twins. BDS also
find no significant difference in estimated effect of birth weight on earnings for
monozygotic twins and dizygotic same-sex twins in their sample with available zygosity
information. Taken together, the results suggest that genetic differences between twins
are unlikely to be driving a large portion of the relationship between birth weight and
later life outcomes.


       D. Differences by child gender
       We next turn to an examination of how the effects of neonatal health vary across
the population. We begin with a comparison by gender. This comparison allows us to
examine the basic question whether the effects of birth weight on test scores are different
for boys and girls (Rosenzweig and Zhang, 2009). With these results we begin to tell a
story about consistency in the effects across the population that we will continue to
explore in subsequent sections.
       The results broken down by gender are shown in the second and third panels of
table 3; the second panel includes girls and boys from both same-sex and opposite-sex


                                             18
twin pairs, while the third panel restricts the analysis to girl-girl and boy-boy pairs. Note
that the mean test scores of boys and girls in the twins sample are 0.048 and 0.099, and
boys are born 4.4 percent heavier (2473 versus 2369 grams). However, we cannot reject
the hypothesis that the marginal effect of birth weight is the same for boys and girls. The
estimate among female-female twin pairs is 0.444, and the estimate among male-male
twin pairs is 0.449. These differences are not statistically distinguishable. The same
patterns are seen when looking at all boys or all girls regardless of the gender
composition of the twin pair. This is unsurprising: Recall that the estimated effects of
birth weight are statistically indistinguishable between same (0.447) and opposite (0.427)
sex pairs.


       E. Results by maternal race, ethnicity and immigrant status
       Two special features of the Florida context allow us to investigate heterogeneity
in the effects of birth weight in ways that have not been possible in other related work to
this point. Florida has a remarkably heterogeneous population. Approximately one-
quarter of all births in Florida are to black mothers, 18 percent of births are to Hispanic
mothers, and 18 percent to foreign-born mothers. The diversity of demographics in the
state, combined with the size of the dataset make comparisons of birth weight effects
across racial and ethnic groups possible.
       It is inherently interesting to learn about whether the long-term effects of in utero
conditions on cognitive development vary across demographic groups. Beyond this
inherent interest, examining heterogeneity in the effects may shed light on the
mechanisms by which neonatal health affects cognitive skills. There are significant
differences in household income, wealth and education by race, ethnicity and immigrant
status. If these factors, each of which is strongly correlated with student achievement at
the population level, are substitutes with neonatal health in the production of cognitive
skills then we should expect to see larger effects of birth weight on test scores for more
disadvantaged groups. If income, wealth and parental education are complements with
neonatal health, one would expect to see larger effects for more advantaged groups.
       The fourth through sixth panels of table 3 shows estimates of the effect of birth
weight on pooled third through eighth grade test scores separately by race (panel 4),


                                              19
ethnicity (panel 5) and immigrant status (panel 6). Births to black mothers account for
26.1 percent of the sample, while births to white mothers account for 72 percent. Twins
with black mothers score 0.722 standard deviations lower than twins with white mothers,
a gap that is of a similar magnitude with black-white test score gaps measured in the
same time period for random samples of U.S. school children (Chay, Guryan, and
Mazumder, 2009). The gap in average test scores between students with a Hispanic and
non-Hispanic mother is smaller but still substantial, 0.459 standard deviations. There is
virtually no difference in test scores between the children of immigrant and non-
immigrant mothers.
       Despite the fact that there are substantial differences in average test scores
between demographic groups, we estimate no statistically or economically significant
differences in the effect of birth weight on test scores across these groups. Furthermore,
there is no clear pattern in the point estimates. The estimated effect of birth weight on
third through eighth grade test scores is somewhat smaller for twins with black mothers
than for twins with white mothers (0.381 versus 0.466). However, the estimated effect is
somewhat larger for twins with Hispanic mothers than for twins with non-Hispanic
mothers (0.478 versus 0.434), though not statistically significantly so. And the estimated
effects for twins with immigrant and non-immigrant mothers are quite close (0.449
versus 0.440) and statistically indistinguishable from one another. Taken together, these
results suggest that the effect of birth weight on cognitive development is remarkably
consistent across demographic groups.


       F. Results by family socio-economic status
       Based on these results, there does not appear to be a systematic relationship
between the effect of birth weight and demographic characteristics that are related to
parental income and human capital. The data also allow us to test for these relationships
more directly. The seventh and eighth panels of table 3 show effects estimated separately
by mother’s education (panel 7) measured at the time of the birth and a proxy of family
income (panel 8) – the median income in the zip code of residence at birth. Sixteen
percent of the population of twins with test scores are born to high school dropout



                                             20
mothers, 61 percent of the sample are born to mothers with a high school degree and/or
some college, and 23 percent of the sample are born to college graduate mothers.
       There is a strong relationship between mother’s education and children’s test
scores. On average in third through eighth grade, children with college graduate mothers
score more than a full standard deviation higher than children with high school dropout
mothers, and two-thirds of a standard deviation more than those with high school
graduate mothers. High school and college graduate mothers also have slightly higher
birth weight twins than high school dropout mothers.
       Estimated birth weight effects also vary somewhat by mother’s education. The
estimated effects of log birth weight on pooled third through eighth grade test scores are
monotonically increasing across the three categories of mother’s education. For twins
with high school dropout mothers the estimated coefficient on log birth weight is 0.359;
for those with a high school graduate mother the estimated coefficient is 0.434; for those
with a college graduate mother it is 0.529. None of these estimates is statistically
distinguishable from any other, and an F-test fails to reject the hypothesis that the
coefficient is the same for all three maternal education groups. It is thus important to be
careful about the inferences we draw from these differences. That said, it is worth noting
that one might have expected the effects of birth weight to be weaker for better-educated
families than for worse-educated families, rather than the reverse, if family inputs were
substitutes for neonatal health. Indeed, when we estimate a model with both log birth
weight and the interaction between log birth weight and maternal years of schooling, we
find an estimate of the interaction term of 0.028 with a standard error of 0.012. The fact
that we observe strong relationships between birth weight and test scores across all
maternal education groups strengthens the notion that while some biological disadvantage
can be overcome, there remain some biological factors that are very difficult to overcome
with nurture.
       This conclusion is reinforced by a split by a proxy for family income – the median
income (as of the 2000 Census) in the zip code of residence at the time of birth. As seen
in panel 8 of table 3, there is a strong relationship between test scores and this measure of
family resources: Those children whose families resided in the one-third richest zip codes
at the time of birth score two thirds of a standard deviation higher on tests than did those


                                             21
who resided in the one-third poorest zip codes at the time of birth.21 As in the case of
maternal education, we do not observe a statistically significant difference across birth
neighborhood affluence groups in the estimated effects of birth weight on children’s test
scores, though the point estimate is modestly larger for the two more affluent groups than
for the least affluent group.22 This provides one more piece of evidence that family
resources might help to mitigate biological factors but they are very difficult to
completely offset.
         We can also explore differences by maternal marital status at the time of birth
(panel 9) and maternal age at the time of the twins’ birth (panel 10), both reported in table
3. Approximately two-thirds of the twins in our sample are born to married mothers.
While birth weights of twins born to married mothers are only slightly higher than those
born to unmarried mothers, there is a large difference in test scores; twins born to married
mothers have average test scores that are nearly two-thirds of a standard deviation higher
than those born to unmarried mothers. There is suggestive evidence that the effect of
birth weight may be larger among married mothers than unmarried mothers. The point
estimate on log birth weight is 0.485 for married mothers and 0.362 for unmarried
mothers. This is the one head-to-head comparison that is statistically significant at
conventional levels – the p-value of the difference is 0.064 – though the magnitude of the
results are qualitatively quite similar, suggesting that the effects of poor neonatal health
on cognitive outcomes are of approximately the same magnitude across a wide range of
demographic and socio-economic dimensions. But to the extent to which the estimates
are larger for children of married mothers than for children of unmarried mothers, this is
the opposite of what one might have expected to find if biological differences were not as
important in families with greater parental resources. While higher-socio-economic-status
families clearly remediate early health disadvantage to a great degree (witness the fact
that poor-health children in educated families perform much better than good-health
children in less educated families) there seems to be a portion of this disadvantage that is
persistent and much more difficult to remediate, and if anything, the evidence points

21
   Note that the sizes of these groups differ by the time children are in school because, as noted above, more
affluent families are more likely to send their children to private school.
22
   When we estimate a model with both log birth weight and log birth weight interacted with zip code
median income (in $1000s), the coefficient estimate on the interaction term is -0.0004 with a standard error
of 0.0003.

                                                     22
toward neonatal health and parental inputs being more likely to be complements than
substitutes. This point, of course, is necessarily somewhat speculative.
       We separate maternal age into four categories: less than or equal to 21, 22-29, 30-
35 and older than 35. Fifteen percent of twins in the sample were born to mothers who
were 21 years or younger, 40 percent were born to mothers between 22 and 29 years old,
32 percent were born to mothers who were 30-35, and 14 percent were born to mothers
older than 35. There is a strong positive relationship between average third through
eighth grade test scores and mother’s age at birth. Twins born to mothers older than 35
have test scores that are almost three-quarters of a standard deviation higher than those
born to mothers 21 years old and younger, though the nature of twinning indicates that
some caution should be taken in interpreting this correlation. Selection into twinning
differs with mother’s age because of physiological changes and differences in use of
fertility treatments. Despite the strong relationship between mother’s age and average test
scores, there is no relationship between mother’s age and the estimated effect of birth
weight. Estimates of the effect of log birth weight on pooled third through eighth grade
test scores range from 0.372 to 0.483 among the four mother’s age categories. The
relationship between point estimates and mother’s age is non-monotonic across these
categories and the p-value of the F-test of the hypothesis that they are all equal is 0.698.


       G. Summarizing heterogeneity in birth weight effects on cognitive
development
       Our general conclusion after considering these ten different dimensions over
which the effects of birth weight on test scores is that these effects are roughly the same
for children from a wide range of different backgrounds – evidence that the effects of
biological factors are present throughout the socio-economic distribution. We note,
however, that if anything it appears that relatively high-socio-economic status families
experience larger, rather than smaller, effects of birth weight, suggesting that neonatal
health and family inputs may be complements rather than substitutes. Figure 11 places
this possibility into visual focus: We plot all 18 subgroups’ point estimates against the
mean test scores for that group – a range greater than a full individual-level standard
deviation of the test score distribution.


                                             23
         The figure demonstrates two important features of the heterogeneity of birth
weight effects across demographic groups. First, the estimated effects of birth weight are
all within the same general range between 0.36 and 0.53, and the estimated effects are
both statistically and economically significant for every demographic and socio-
economic group we analyzed. A log birth weight effect of 0.36 would indicate that effects
on cognitive development could account for 60 percent of the long-term relationship
between birth weight and test scores estimated by BDS. At the other end of our range, an
estimate of 0.53 would indicate that effects on cognitive development could account for
88 percent of the BDS estimate.
         The second pattern the figure demonstrates is that there does appear to be an
upward-sloping relationship between estimated treatment effects and the subgroup’s
mean test score. This positive relationship indicates that the effects of birth weight are
somewhat larger for relatively advantaged groups of children than they are for relatively
disadvantaged groups of children. The slope of the line plotted in figure 11 is 0.125, with
a standard error of 0.019, and is highly statistically significant. While by no means
definitive, this pattern indicates that biological factors may modestly disproportionately
inhibit high socio-economic status families, and is suggestive that neonatal health and
parental resources are complementary.23



23
   Children in higher-scoring subgroups – such as those from high income, highly educated families with
older mothers – are more likely to have been born with the assistance of in-vitro fertilization (IVF) or other
assisted reproduction technologies (ART). It is therefore conceivable that the positive relationship plotted
in figure 11 is due at least in part to differential patterns of IVF/ART. This could be especially important in
a population of twins, given that Bitler (2008) demonstrates that requiring health insurance plans to cover
use of IVF/ART substantially increases the likelihood that a mother will have twins, and these new twins
likely conceived with the assistance of IVF/ART have lower-quality birth outcomes. While we cannot
measure IVF/ART use in our data, we conduct two checks to see whether or not differential IVF/ART
prevalence is a plausible explanation for our findings. First, we conduct the identical analysis for twins
born to mothers aged 30 and above, versus those under 30; this is the age breakdown that Bitler uses to
proxy for IVF/ART likelihood. The estimated slope of the line for the 30-and-up group is 0.127 (standard
error of 0.045) while the estimated slope of the line for the under-30 group is 0.114 (standard error of
0.042); the p-value of the difference between these two slopes is 0.842. Next, we conduct the identical
analysis for twins who were the first children born to the mother to those who were not the first children
born to the mother, given that IVF/ART is more likely amongst families with previous fertility challenges.
The estimated slope of the line for the first-children mothers is 0.067 (standard error of 0.038) and the
estimated slope of the line for the subsequent-pregnancy mothers is 0.152 (standard error of 0.031). While
the difference between these two slopes is modestly statistically significant – the p-value is 0.091 – the
positive relationship between birth weight effects and SES is stronger for the group of twins less likely to
be conceived via IVF/ART. Taken together, these results suggest that differential probabilities that children
from high-scoring subgroups were conceived via IVF/ART are not responsible for the positive-sloped

                                                      24
VI. Effect variation across the birth weight distribution and with birth weight
discordance
         Thus far, we have presented estimates of our baseline model, which specifies that
the relationship between average test scores and birth weight is linear in the log of birth
weight. Understanding how the marginal effect of birth weight varies across the birth
weight distribution and with birth weight discordance may be helpful in narrowing down
potential mechanisms for the relationship. There is great attention paid by public health
officials and medical practitioners on the thresholds of 1500g and 2500g, the
conventional delimiters of very low birth weight and low birth weight. Stronger marginal
effects of proportional increases in birth weight for very low and low birth weight babies
might suggest different physiological mechanisms than if the effect were only present in
comparisons between moderate and high birth weight babies.
         We have already presented non-parametric evidence (figure 9) that the
relationship between birth weight and student test scores appears to be concave,
supporting the log birth weight specification that is common in the related literature. That
said, there could still be some important nonlinearities in the relationship. In this
subsection we relax the assumptions underlying our main specification in two additional
ways, and in doing so explore how the marginal effect of poor neonatal health varies
across the distribution of birth weight and with birth weight discordance. For one, we
estimate models that allow the marginal effect of birth weight to vary across different
bins of the birth weight distribution. This analysis includes models that are fairly non-
parametric in the specification of these marginal effects, and models that test explicitly
whether the marginal effects are different for very low birth weight (<1500g), low birth
weight (1500-2499g) and normal birth weight (>2500g) babies. We also include models
that allow the effect of neonatal health to vary nonlinearly according to the discordance in
birth weight between twins. In addition, we investigate whether alternative parametric
functions of birth weight better capture the relationship of interest. For example, using




relationship between the scoring level of the subgroup and the subgroup-specific estimated effect of birth
weight on test scores.

                                                    25
slightly more parametric models, we test whether the marginal effect of an additional
gram of birth weight is constant, or if the marginal effect is constant in percentages.
       In figure 12, we present estimates from a regression specification that address the
former of these questions. The estimates come from a regression that is based on our
standard twin fixed effect specification. The only difference is that log birth weight is
interacted with a set of dummy variables corresponding to 20 bins, each of which
corresponds to 5 percent of the lighter-born twin’s birth weight distribution. These
interactions allow the marginal effect of log birth weight to vary freely across the bins.
We have also estimated models that define the bins based on the heavier-born twin’s birth
weight. These results are very similar and are presented in appendix figure A1. The
results show no systematic relationship between the marginal effect of birth weight on
test scores and the level of birth weight. The estimated effects are largely stable, aside
from variation that appears to be due to sampling variation, across the distribution of
birth weight. There appears to be somewhat more variation in the estimated effects at
higher birth weights, but an F-test fails to reject the null hypothesis that the coefficient on
log birth weight is the same across all 20 bins (p-value: 0.840).
       We explore the second of these questions – whether the relationship between birth
weight and test scores varies by birth weight discordance – in figure 13. We divide twins
into 20 bins by birth weight discordance, excluding the twin pairs that are very close in
weight (<150g difference). As can be seen in the figure, the estimated relationship
between birth weight and test scores is qualitatively similar across a wide variety of birth
weight discordance.
       The non-parametric results presented in figure 9 suggest the marginal effect of log
birth weight on test scores is fairly stable across the birth weight distribution. But the
salience of 1500g and 2500g, both among medical professionals and in the social science
literature on early life health, lead us to estimate specifications that test whether the
marginal effect of birth weight on test scores varies above and below these thresholds.
Therefore, in rows 2 and 3 of table 4 we present results from specifications that allow the
effect of log birth weight to be different above and below 2500g. To do this, we estimate
one effect for twin pairs where both twins were born heavier than 2500g, and another
where both twins were born lighter than 2500g. In both cases, we estimate the baseline


                                              26
specification in which the effect of log birth weight is assumed to be constant within the
group.
         The estimated effect of a marginal increase in birth weight is quite similar for low
birth weight (<2500g) and normal birth weight (≥2500g) children. The estimate for low
birth weight twin pairs is 0.473, and for normal birth weight twin pairs it is 0.526. The
two pooled coefficients are not statistically distinguishable (p-value: 0.535). The results
reported in rows 4 and 5 of the table estimate different log birth weight effects for two
additional groups: very low birth weight (<1500g) and low birth weight (1500-2499g).
Consistent with the previous results, the estimated effects do not vary significantly across
these groups. The estimated effects for very low birth weight, low birth weight and
normal weight are, respectively, 0.572, 0.517 and 0.526. An F-test fails to reject that
these three estimates are the same (p-value: 0.914).
         We also seek to more formally test the assumption suggested by our non-
parametric estimates that the linear in log birth weight specification is reasonable. Rows 6
and 7 of table 4 show results from models that replace the natural logarithm of birth
weight in equation (1) with two alternative specifications. The sixth row reports the result
from a regression that replaces the log of birth weight with birth weight in thousands of
grams, but which is otherwise equivalent to the baseline specification. When we restrict it
to have a constant linear effect, we estimate that a marginal increase of 1000g of birth
weight is associated with 0.186 standard deviations higher third through eighth grade test
scores. The estimated effect is strongly statistically significant. As was the case in the log
birth weight specifications, estimates that allow the effect to vary by grade are largely
stable between third and eighth grade.
         To test whether the linear-in-grams model fit the data we also estimated a model
that allowed the marginal effect of a gram to be different among heavier and lighter twin
pairs. Specifically, we interacted birth weight in grams with the average of the twin pair’s
birth weight, a specification reported in row 7 of table 4 (there are two coefficients
reported in this row, the coefficient on birth weight and the coefficient on its interaction
with the deviation from mean twin pair birth weight.)24 The results show that the

24
  The twin pair average birth weight is demeaned by the sample average so that the birth weight coefficient
represents the marginal effect of birth weight in a twin pair of average birth weight. The main effect of twin
pair average birth weight is subsumed by the twin pair fixed effects.

                                                     27
marginal effect of a gram of birth weight is smaller in heavier twin pairs, as indicated by
the negative and significant coefficient on the interaction term. This result is consistent
with the linear-in-logs model, in which test scores are proportionally related to birth
weight. Based on these results, we concluded that the linear-in-logs specification is a
good approximation of the relationship between birth weight and cognitive skills.25


VII. School quality and the effect of birth weight on test scores
         The results presented thus far have demonstrated that there is a robust relationship
between birth weight and third through eighth grade test scores, and that this relationship
is remarkably stable as children age through preadolescence, across different
demographic groups, and across different socio-economic groups. The stability of this
relationship is all the more notable because the marginal effect of birth weight does not
vary very much across groups that have very different average test scores. Children
growing up in circumstances that lead to very different achievement levels nonetheless
appear to be impacted by early health conditions in similar ways. This finding raises the
question whether investments in children remediate the effect of early deficits in health.
         Schools are an obvious place to look for investments in human capital. In this
section we ask whether the effect of birth weight on test scores is different for students
who attend high quality versus low quality schools. Students who attend higher quality
schools have higher test scores. But does a lower birth weight twin perform better relative
to his counterpart if he or she attends a high quality school instead of a low quality
school? In other words, does school quality remediate the effect of neonatal health
deficits?
         To answer this question, we measure school quality in three different ways. First,
we take advantage of the fact that since 1999 the state of Florida has given each of its
public schools a letter grade ranging from A (best) to F (worst). Initially, this grading
system was based mainly on average proficiency rates on the FCAT. Beginning in 2002,
grades were based on a combination of average FCAT proficiency rates and average
student-level FCAT test score gains from year to year. In addition, we stratify schools

25
  In results we report in appendix table A2, we also estimated a model with a quadratic in birth weight,
which yields a positive coefficient on the linear term and a negative coefficient on the quadratic term, also
suggesting a concave relationship.

                                                      28
based on average proficiency levels and average student gains from year to year. While
these are only three of a wide range of ways in which one could evaluate school quality,
they are sufficiently different26 that similar findings across the three measures would
provide strong evidence of the potential effects of school quality in ameliorating or
exacerbating the relationships between birth weight and student cognitive development.
In our analysis, therefore, we measure school quality using (1) the state awarded letter
grade, (2) the school’s average FCAT proficiency level during our sample period, and (3)
the school’s average year-to-year student FCAT gain score over our sample period.
         The results of the school quality analyses are presented in table 5. The first panel
of the table shows twin-pair fixed effects estimates separately for twins who attended
schools that received an A, a B, and a C or below.27 As can be seen, almost half of the
sample attended schools that received a grade of A, while 28.8 percent attended a school
that received a B and 22.6 percent attended a school that received a C, D or F. For
reasons due either to school quality or to selection, test scores are much higher in A-rated
schools than in lower-rated schools, and we also observe that twins who attend higher-
rated schools tend to be born larger than those attending lower-rated schools. But while
there are relationships between school grade, birth weights, and test scores, there is no
monotonic relationship in the relationship between birth weight and test scores: The
estimated effect of birth weight is largest among twins who attend schools receiving a
grade of B (0.497). The smallest estimated effect is for twins attending A schools (0.407),
and the estimate in the middle is for twins attending C/D/F schools (0.455). These
coefficients are not statistically distinguishable from one another.
         The second panel in the table presents results where school quality is measured
based on the school’s average FCAT scores. About 60 percent of the sample attended
schools with scores that are above the state median average score – unsurprising given
that families of twins are disproportionately older, more educated, and live in

26
   If we code the school grades on the scale from 0 (F) to 4 (A), we observe that state-awarded grades
correlate with average school achievement at 0.68 and with growth in achievement at 0.20, while the
average achievement correlates with achievement growth at 0.03.
27
   We combine C, D, and F-graded schools in this analysis because highly educated and older families, who
are more likely to have twins, are more likely to live in “better” school zones than the general population,
and because the state of Florida has awarded relatively few grades of D and F. In the overall population,
5.8% and 0.9% students attend D and F schools respectively, while among twins these rates are 3.4% and
0.6% respectively.

                                                    29
neighborhoods with higher median income. Though average test scores are certainly
different in high- and low-average-test-score schools, the estimated effect of birth weight
does not vary significantly. We estimate that the marginal effect of log birth weight for
twins attending schools with above-average FCAT scores is 0.425. For twins attending
schools with below-average FCAT scores, we estimate the effect to be 0.436.
       Our estimates of the effect of log birth weight on test scores also does not vary
between schools with above and below average FCAT gains. These estimates are shown
in the third panel of table 5. We estimate that the marginal effect of log birth weight on
test scores for twins attending a school that had below-average year-to-year gains in
FCAT scores is 0.449. For twins attending a school that had above-average FCAT gains,
we estimate the marginal effect of log birth weight to be 0.433.
       In summary, the evidence appears to indicate that the effect of birth weight on test
scores does not vary with measures of the quality of schools that a child attends. One
view of this result could be that the effects of in utero health conditions create a ceiling to
learning that cannot be remediated after the fact, at least by the time that children are of
schooling age. Students spend a great deal of time in schools, and schooling is the
primary formal way that human capital investment takes place during childhood. The
amount (Card, 1999) and quality (Card & Krueger 1992, 1996, Krueger & Whitmore,
2001, Chetty et al., 2011a, Chetty et al., 2011b) of schooling have been shown to have
significant positive impacts on earnings and other outcomes. If attending a better school
does not completely remediate the effects of early health deficits on cognitive
development, maybe schools currently lack the resources to fully remediate them.
       An alternative view of the results is that they say that school quality does not
differentially affect remediation, but leaves open the possibility that remediation could
happen. This view is supported by a few observations. The difference in birth weights (or
cognitive capacities) between twins is probably far more noticeable to parents than to
classroom teachers. To a parent the outward signs of a 15 percent difference in birth
weight can seem large, but to a teacher they are small relative to the variation she
observes in the classroom. Even twins with large discordance in birth weight and with the
resulting differences in cognitive achievement probably appear to the teacher to be quite
similar to each other. Recall that the difference in achievement between the average high


                                              30
and low birth weight twin is far less than the difference in achievement between children
born to college educated and high school dropout mothers. Given this discrepancy, it is
likely that teachers treat twins very similarly. The lack of remediation may not indicate
that it is impossible to remediate. Rather, it may indicate that it is not done, at least not
systematically. We therefore turn to the question of whether remediation seems to be
occurring in the years prior to third grade.


VIII. Birth weight gaps at kindergarten entry
        The question of whether remediation for early health deficits is possible leads us
to investigate impacts at an earlier age, when children spend a larger share of time with
their parents. Alongside schooling, parents are the other main source of investment in
children’s human capital development. At ages 6-8, as children enter full time schooling,
they spend on average 30 percent less time being actively cared for by their parents than
they did when they were 3-5 and 43 percent less time than when they were 0-2 (Folbre et
al., 2005). The shift in time spent with parents to time spent with other adults, such as
teachers, and peers (Sacerdote, 2001) suggests it may be important to gauge whether the
effect of neonatal health on cognitive development is different in these early ages than
during school ages. One potential reason why school quality does not appear to affect the
relationship between neonatal health and cognitive development may be that differences
in factors correlated with poor neonatal health might be minimally perceptible to teachers
and school administrators who interact with a wide range of children, but more noticeable
to parents who make cross-child observations. And beyond learning about the roles of
adult investment and remediation, there is an inherent value in documenting the
developmental effects of early health on cognitive development. To provide further
evidence on these matters, we extend the age at which we measure outcomes back to
when children enter kindergarten, which typically happens at age 5 or 6.
        In various years between 1998 and 2008, Florida performed universal
kindergarten readiness screening and recorded this screening in its Education Data
Warehouse. From 1998 through 2001 all kindergarten entrants were screened with the
School Readiness Checklist (SRC), a list of 17 expectations for kindergarten readiness.
Subsequently, kindergarten entrants were screened with the Dynamic Indicators of Basic


                                               31
Early Literacy Skills (DIBELS), and beginning in 2006 the results of this screening were
collected and recorded by the Florida Department of Education.28 DIBELS rates
children’s letter sound recognition and letter naming skills and categorizes children as
above average, low risk, moderate risk or high risk. In our data, 82.1 percent of children
were deemed ready according to the earlier SRC screen, and a very similar 83.8 percent
of children were deemed either above average or low risk according to the DIBELS.
         These two kindergarten readiness screens are clearly different outcome measures
than the FCAT. However, they are highly predictive of later test scores. The average third
through eighth grade FCAT score for children deemed ready to start school ranges from
0.147 to 0.280 depending on the cohort, while the average FCAT score for those not
ready to start school ranges from -0.655 to -0.501, depending on the cohort.29 The
correlation with subsequent outcomes is present within families as well: In twin fixed
effects models, we estimate that average third through eighth grade FCAT score
differences between twins who were ready versus not ready for kindergarten range from
0.22 to 0.32 of a standard deviation, depending on the cohort.
         Turning to estimates of the effect of birth weight on kindergarten readiness, we
first present results from models like the baseline specification reported above, but
replacing FCAT scores with a dummy variable for being deemed ready for kindergarten.
These estimates show whether the effect of birth weight on cognitive skills is present at
age 5. We next analyze how the magnitude of these effects compare with the magnitudes
we find for third through eighth grade test scores.
         We begin by simply presenting the estimated effects of log birth weight on the
different variants of the kindergarten readiness assessment. The first three rows of table 6
present the coefficients on log birth weight in three different cases – the initial school
readiness checklist cohorts, the DIBELS cohorts, and the two kindergarten readiness
assessments pooled together. One observes that a 10 percent increase in birth weight is
associated with a 0.67 percentage point increase in being deemed ready for kindergarten
28
   For more details about the structure and interpretation of DIBELS, see for instance Hoffman et al.
(2009).
29
   While the kindergarten readiness assessments, and especially the DIBELS, focuses more on pre-literacy
skills than on numeracy skills, these kindergarten readiness assessments are predictive of both later reading
and mathematics achievement. The gap between kindergarten-ready and kindergarten-unready children
ranges between 0.609 and 0.823, depending on cohort, for reading FCAT scores and between 0.680 and
0.868, depending on cohort, for mathematics FCAT scores.

                                                     32
according to the school readiness checklist, and a 10 percent increase in birth weight is
associated with a 1.15 percentage point increase in kindergarten readiness according to
the DIBELS. When we pool the two sets of cohorts, these figures average to a 0.86
percentage point increase. All of these estimates are statistically distinct from zero at
conventional levels.
        These results make it clear that the effect of neonatal health on cognitive
development that we documented for ages 9-14 is present by age 5. How does the
magnitude of the effects at kindergarten entry compare with the magnitude of the effects
in grades three through eight? The kindergarten readiness outcome is a binary indicator
and the grade three through eight FCAT scores are continuous standardized z-scores. To
compare the two outcomes, we transformed the FCAT scores into a binary indicator. To
match the kindergarten readiness screens, we created a dummy variable that equals one if
the student’s FCAT score is above the 17th percentile (the threshold that corresponds to
the fraction of kindergarteners deemed not ready in the pooled SRC and DIBELS
samples). We then estimated the baseline log birth weight fixed effects model for the
pooled third through eighth grade sample and then separately by grade. These threshold-
based estimates are presented in the fourth through sixth rows of table 6. In order to
ensure that we are comparing kindergarten readiness to test scores for the same children,
we limit our comparisons to children for whom we observe a balanced panel of
kindergarten readiness assessments and FCAT scores between third and eighth grade.
        The three rows differ in terms of how late into school a child must be observed to
be included in the analysis. The fourth row includes all children observed at both
kindergarten and third through eighth grade, so includes only students who took the SRC
and none who took the DIBELS, while the sixth row includes children observed at both
kindergarten and third grade, so students who took the DIBELS and SRC are more
evenly represented.30 As can be seen, the coefficient estimates on log birth weight in
models where the kindergarten readiness assessment is the dependent variable (ranging
from 0.057 to 0.093) are considerably smaller than the coefficient estimates in models in
which the discretized FCAT score is the dependent variable (ranging from 0.159 to 0.181


30
  None of the cohorts for whom we have DIBELS scores are yet old enough to have reached 8th grade. The
oldest of the DIBELS cohorts was in 6th grade in 2011-12, the most recent year of our testing data.

                                                 33
if limited to third grade, and from 0.146 to 0.167 if all grades are pooled.) These
differences are statistically significant at conventional levels, which could be interpreted
as an increase in the effect of birth weight on test scores between kindergarten and third
grade.
         There is reason to believe, however, that the effects of birth weight on outcomes
remain roughly constant between kindergarten and third grade (and therefore, through at
least eighth grade.) Recall that the SRC and DIBELS reflect somewhat different skills;
while the SRC reflects numeracy, literacy, and behavioral skills, the DIBELS is explicitly
a pre-literacy assessment. The fact that the estimated effects of birth weight on DIBELS
are closer in magnitude to the estimated effects on FCAT scores than are the estimated
effects of birth weight on SRC could mean that birth weight has a greater effect on
cognitive readiness in kindergarten than it does on social and emotional readiness in
kindergarten. Indeed, given that the estimated effects of birth weight on discretized
reading and mathematics FCAT scores are the same whether we consider the set of
students who took the SRC or the set of students who took the DIBELS (see rows 7 and 8
in table 6),31 and given that the estimated birth weight effects on reading, math, and
DIBELS scores are all reasonably in line with one another in the panel that considers
them all simultaneously (see row 8 in table 6), the evidence suggests that the effects of
birth weight on cognitive skills remain steady from kindergarten through schooling.
Indeed, there exists some evidence that the cognitive differences associated with birth
weight seen throughout schooling are also present at about the same magnitude in early
childhood: In a study comparing a much smaller set of twins born in 2001 in the ECLS-
B, Hart (2008) finds estimated effects of birth weight on the Bayley Mental Scale that are
remarkably similar in effect size to those presented in our paper.
         Taken together, our findings indicate that the effects of poor neonatal health on
cognitive development appear to be largely fixed by the time children enter kindergarten,
and that the pattern of results are consistent with the notion that parental inputs and

31
  The coefficient estimates in the third column of table 6 are not always between the coefficient estimates
in the fifth and sixth columns because we discretized reading, math, and average test scores separately for
each column. If we use as our dependent variable in the third column the average of the discretized reading
and discretized math scores, rather than the discretized average reading and math score, then the estimated
effect of log birth weight is exactly midway between the estimated effects on reading and math. The
discrepancy occurs because reading and math scores are not perfectly correlated.

                                                    34
neonatal health are complements rather than substitutes. We should also point out that
there is evidence that parents actively make different decisions regarding their twins’
early childhood experiences, suggesting that parents recognize developmental differences
in their children and seek to remediate these differences in early childhood. In our data, it
is reasonably common for parents to send one twin to preschool but not the other (true in
7.6 percent of twin pairs and 8.8 percent of twin pairs in which the birth weight
discordance is greater than 20 percent). In 9.3 percent of twin pairs (10.5 percent of twin
pairs with discordance greater than 20 percent) parents choose different preschool
arrangements for their twins – either sending one twin to preschool but not the other, or
sending both twins to preschool but only one to privately-financed preschool. And in just
under one percent of cases (1.3 percent of twin pairs with discordance greater than 20
percent) parents “redshirt” one twin but not the other – sending the twins to kindergarten
at different times.32
         Coupled with the evidence on attempted parental remediation of disadvantage in
the United States (Hsin, 2012) and the evidence on differential parental time use in early
childhood versus early elementary grades (Folbre et al., 2005), the evidence is consistent
with the notion that parental remediation patterns could help to lower the negative effects
of poor neonatal health in early childhood. But the finding of a significant effect of birth
weight on kindergarten readiness in twin-comparison models indicates that there is an
apparent limit to the degree of remediation that is likely, and that a portion of the
biological factors are apparently difficult to overcome.


IX. Conclusion
         Using a unique population-level data source from Florida, we present the first
look at the effects of poor neonatal health on child cognitive development in a western
developed context, provide the first study of the differential effects on different
demographic and socio-economic groups, and offer the first exploration of the degree to
which school quality might influence these effects. Our results are remarkably consistent:
Twins with higher birth weights enter school with a cognitive advantage that appears to


32
  In cases of differential redshirting, parents are slightly more likely to redshirt the lighter twin than they
are to redshirt the heavier twin.

                                                       35
remain stable through the elementary and middle school years. The estimated effects of
low birth weight are present for children of highly-educated and poorly-educated parents
alike, for children of both young and old mothers, and for children of all races and
ethnicities, parental immigration status, parental marital status, and the like. The
estimated effects are just as pronounced for students attending highly-performing public
schools (measured in a variety of ways) as they are for students attending poorly-
performing public schools. These results strongly point to the notion that the effects of
poor neonatal health on adult outcomes are largely determined early – in early childhood
and the first years of elementary school.
       There exists circumstantial evidence to suggest that these biological impediments
may be remediated, but neither schools nor parents are able to fully remediate these
factors. It is the case that children with poor neonatal health who come from highly-
educated families perform much better than those with good neonatal health who come
from poorly-educated families, indicating that “nurture” can at least partially overcome
“nature.” While what exactly parents do to successfully remediate biological
disadvantage and what schools and parents could potentially do in early childhood and
the early elementary grades and beyond to continue to remediate these issues are open
questions, this study provides numerous indications that poor neonatal health establishes
a stable trajectory for children’s cognitive development.




                                             36
Bibliograpy

Aarnoudse-Moens, Cornelia, Nynke Weisglas-Kuperus, Johannes van Goudoever, and
Jaap Ooseterlann. 2009. “Meta-Analysis of Neurobehavioral Outcomes in Very Preterm
an/or Very Low Birth Weight Children”, Pediatrics 124(2): 717-728.

Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Y. Chay and David S. Lee. 2005. “The Costs of Low Birth
Weight”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3): 1031-1083

Almond, Douglas, Lena Edlund and Marten Palme. 2009. “Chernobyl’s Subclinical
Legacy: Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4): 1729-1772

Almond, Douglas, and Janet Currie. 2011. “Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins
Hypothesis”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(3): 153-172

Ananth, D.C. and S.P. Chauhan. 2012. “Epidemiology of Twinning in Developed
Countries”, Seminars in Perinatology 36: 156-161.

Behrman, Jere, and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 2004. “Returns to Birthweight”, Review of
Economics and Statistics 86(2): 586-601

Bharadwaj, Prashant, Juan Eberhard, and Christopher Neilson. 2010. “Do Initial
Endowments Matter Only Initially? Birth Weight, Parental Investments and Academic
Achievement in School”, working paper, University of California-San Diego

Bitler, Marianne. 2008. “Effects of Increased Access to Infertility Treatment on Infant
and Child Health: Evidence from Health Insurance Mandates”, working paper, University
of California-Irvine

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux and Kjell G. Salvanes. 2007. “From the Cradle to the
Labor Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 122(1): 409-439

Camacho, Adriana. 2008. “Stress and Birth Weight: Evidence from Terrorist Attacks”,
American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 98(2): 511-515

Card, David. 1999. “The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings”, in: Orley Ashenfelter
and David Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics 3A, Amsterdam: Elsevier

Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1996. “Labor Market Effects of School Quality:
Theory and Evidence”, in: Gary Burtless (eds.), The Link Between Schools, Student
Achievement, and Adult Success, Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution

Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1992. “School Quality and Black-White Relative
Earnings: A Direct Assessment”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1): 151-200


                                           37
Case, Anne, Angela Fertig and Christina Paxson. 2005. “The Lasting Impact of
Childhood Health and Circumstance”, Journal of Health Economics, 24: 365-389

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hilger, Emmanuel Saez, Diane Whitmore
Schanzenbach and Danny Yagan. 2011a. “How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom
Affect Your Earnings? Evidence from Project Star”, Quarterly Journal of Economics
126(4): 1593-1660

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman and Jonah Rockoff. 2011b. “The Long-Term Impacts of
Teachers: Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood”, NBER Working
Paper # 17699

Cheung, V.Y., A.D. Bocking, and O.P. Dasilva. 1995. “Preterm Discordant Twins: What
Birth Weight Difference is Significant?” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology
172(3): 955-959.

Folbre, Nancy, Jayoung Yoon, Kade Finnoff and Allison Sidle Fuligni. 2005. “By What
Measure? Family Time Devoted to Children in the United States,” Demography 42(2):
373-390

Hart, Cassandra. 2008. “Parenting and Child Cognitive and Socioemotional
Development: A Longitudinal Twin Differences Study”, working paper, Northwestern
University

Hoffman, Amy R., Jeanne E. Jenkins and Kay S. Dunlap. 2009. “Using DIBELS: A
Survey of Purposes and Practices”, Reading Psychology 30(1): 1-16

Hsin, Amy. 2012. “Is Biology Destiny? Birth Weight and Differential Parental
Treatment”, Demography 49(4): 1385-1405

Krueger, Alan B. and Diane Whitmore. 2001. “The Effect of Attending a Small Class in
the Early Grades on College-Test Taking and Middle School Test Results: Evidence from
Project STAR”, Economic Journal 111(468): 1-28

Lam, Lucia L., Eldon Emberly, Hunter B. Fraser, Sarah M. Neumann, Edith Chen,
Gregory E. Miller, and Michael S. Kobor. 2012. “Factors Underlying Variable DNA
Methylation in a Human Community Cohort”, Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 109(Supplement 2): 17253-17260.

Luu, T.M. and B. Vohr. 2009. “Twinning on the Brain: The Effect on
Neurodevelopmental Outcomes”, American Journal of Medical Genetics, Part C:
Seminars in Medical Genetics 151C(2): 142-147

Miller, Gregory E., Edith Chen, Alexandra K. Fok, Hope Walker, Alvin Lim, Erin F.
Nicholls, Steve Cole, and Michael S. Kobor. 2009. “Low Early-Life Social Class Leaves


                                          38
a Biological Residue Manifested by Decreased Glucocorticoid and Increased
Proinflammatory Signaling”, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106(34):
14716-14721

Neal, Derek A. and William R. Johnson. 1996. “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-
White Wage Differences”, Journal of Political Economy 104(5): 869-895

Oreopoulos, Philip, Mark Stabile, Randy Walld and Leslie L. Roos. 2008. “Short-,
Medium-, and Long-Term Consequences of Poor Infant Health. An Analysis Using
Siblings and Twins”, Journal of Human Resources 43(1): 88-138

Rosenzweig, Mark R., and Junsen Zhang. 2009. “Do Population Control Policies Induce
More Human Capital Investment? Twins, Birth Weight and China’s “One-Child”
Policy”, Review of Economic Studies 76: 1149-1174

Rosenzweig, Mark R., and Junsen Zhang. 2012. “Economic Growth, Comparative
Advantage, and Gender Differences in Schooling Outcomes: Evidence from the
Birthweight Differences of Chinese Twins”, Yale University Economics Department
Working Paper #98

Royer, Heather. 2009. “Separated at Girth: US Twin Estimates of the Effects of Birth
Weight”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1(1): 49-85

Sacerdote, Bruce. 2001. “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
Roommates”, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2): 681-704

Torche, Florencia, and Ghislaine Echevarria. 2011. “The Effect of Birthweight on
Childhood Cognitive Development in a Middle-Income Country”, International Journal
of Epidemiology 40(4): 1008-1018

Vergani, P., A. Locatelli, M. Ratti, A. Scian, E. Pozzi, J.C. Pezzullo, and A. Ghidini.
2004. “Preterm Twins: What Threshold of Birth Weight Discordance Heralds Major
Adverse Neonatal Outcome?” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 191(4):
1441-1445.

Zwicker, J.G. and S.R. Harris. 2008. “Quality of Life of Formerly Preterm and Very Low
Birth Weight Infants from Preschool Age to Adulthood: A Systematic Review”,
Pediatrics 121(2): 366-376.




                                           39
                                                             FIGURES
         Figure 1. Discordance in birth weight between twins born in Florida between 1992 and 2002




Note: Figure 1 plots kernel density distributions of within-twin-pair difference in birth weight for all twin births in Florida (solid pink
line) between 1992 and 2002 and twin births who were born in Florida and were successfully matched to Florida public school records
(dashed blue line). Distributions are censored at 2000 grams for the sake of clarity, which removes 6 and 3 twin pairs respectively.

  Figure 2. Difference in birth weight distributions between singletons and twins born in Florida between
                                               1992 and 2002




Note: Figure 2 plots kernel density distributions of infant birth weight for all singletons (solid pink line) and twins (solid purple line)
born in Florida between 1992 and 2002 as well as infant birth weight distribution of singletons (dashed blue line) and twins (dashed
orange line) that were successfully matched to Florida public school records.



                                                                   40
        Figure 3. Average within-twin-pair difference in test scores between heavier and lighter twins




Note: Figure 3 plots difference between the mean test score of heavier and lighter twin from each pair in each grade and the respective
95% confidence interval of this difference. Mean test score is constructed as an average of scores in mathematics and reading for each
individual in each grade where we observe both twins. If score in mathematics is not available then only reading is used and vice
versa. In each grade we create an average of scores for heavier and lighter twins and then calculate the difference between the two.

       Figure 4. Average within-twin-pair difference in mathematics between heavier and lighter twins




Note: Figure 4 plots difference between the test score in mathematics of heavier and lighter twin from each pair in each grade and the
respective 95% confidence interval of this difference. In each grade we create an average of scores for heavier and lighter twins and
then calculate the difference between the two.




                                                                 41
          Figure 5. Average within-twin-pair difference in reading between heavier and lighter twins




Note: Figure 5 plots difference between the test score in reading of heavier and lighter twin from each pair in each grade and the
respective 95% confidence interval of this difference. In each grade we create an average of scores for heavier and lighter twins and
then calculate the difference between the two.

 Figure 6. Average within twin pair difference in test scores between the higher birth weight and the lower
              birth weight twin: Sample where both twins are observed in each of six grades




Note: Figure 6 plots the same difference as Figure 3 but for a 6-year panel of twin-pairs i.e., we restrict the sample only to individuals
where we observe both twins mean test scores from grade 3 to grade 6.




                                                                   42
     Figure 7. Difference in fraction of lighter and heavier twins tested in either mathematics or reading




Note: Figure 7 plots difference and its 95% confidence interval of fraction of heavier and lighter twins attending each grade. We start
with all twin pairs old for grade where at least one twin has been successfully matched to Florida public schools in 3rd grade. For each
grade we then calculate the fraction of heavier and lighter individuals attending given grade and take the difference between the two.

  Figure 8. Differences across grades with 5th and 95th test score imputations for twins with missing scores




Note: Figure 8 plots two sets of differences calculated in the same way as in figure 3 but where we substitute the missing individual
scores within twin pairs with either the 5th (solid purple line) or 95th (solid orange line) percentile of test scores in that grade.




                                                                  43
                    Figure 9. Non-parametric relationship between birth weight and test scores




Note: Figure 9 plots coefficients from OLS (purple solid line) and twin-FE (orange solid line) models where the dependent variable is
the mean of pooled grades three through eight combined mathematics and reading test scores for each individual and the independent
variables are indicators for 37 weight bins corresponding to each individual birth weight. No additional controls are included in the
models.

Figure 10. Average within twin pair difference in test scores between the higher birth weight and the lower
                           birth weight twin by maternal education categories




Note: Figure 10 plots means of combined mathematics and reading test scores for lighter and heavier twins from each pair stratified by
maternal education. Purple lines correspond to averages for lighter while orange lines correspond to heavier twins. Solid lines present
means for high school drop-out mothers, dashed lines present means for children of mothers with high school diploma or some college
while dotted lines present means for college graduates.


                                                                 44
                  Figure 11. Average test scores among groups and estimated birth weight effects




Note: Figure 11 plots the pooled coefficients presented in rows 4 to 10 in table 3 against the mean tests scores for each of the groups
presented in column (2) of this table. We also fit the linear prediction with 95% confidence interval around it. Labels correspond to
each of the studied groups.

                        Figure 12. Estimated effects of birth weight, by weight of smaller twin




Note: Figure 12 plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a twin FE regression where the dependent variable is the mean
of pooled grades three to eight combined mathematics and reading test scores for each individual and the independent variables are 20
interactions corresponding to the product of log birth weight with indicators for 20 bins reflecting lighter twin percentiled birth weight.
The regression additionally controls for infant gender and birth order within-twin pair. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are
used to calculate the 95% confidence interval. Numbers on the x-axis correspond to the mean birth weight discordance in each of the
20 bins.


                                                                   45
                      Figure 13. Estimated effects of birth weight, by birth weight discordance




Note: Figure 13 plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a twin FE regression where the dependent variable is the mean
of pooled grades three to eight combined mathematics and reading test scores for each individual and the independent variables are 20
interactions corresponding to the product of log birth weight with indicators for 20 bins reflecting discordance in birth weight between
twins. The regression additionally controls for infant gender and birth order within-twin pair. Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors
are used to calculate the 95% confidence interval. Numbers on the x-axis correspond to the mean birth weight in each bin of lighter
twin birth weight.




                                                                  46
                                                      TABLES

                      Table 1. Representativeness of the Florida twin population
                                     (1)                  (2)                    (3)                      (4)
                                                    Population of
                                                                           Population of        Population of twins
                              Full population      kids matched to
   Maternal attribute                                                    kids with a third-    with a third grade test
                                 of births          Florida school
                                                                          grade test score              score
                                                       records
Black                               22.6                 24.8                   25.7                     25.9
Hispanic                            23.0                  23.3                  23.8                     18.0
High school dropout                 20.9                  22.5                  23.4                     15.5
High school graduate                58.6                  60.0                  60.8                     61.5
College graduate                    20.5                  17.5                  15.8                     23.0
Age 21 or below                     22.0                  23.6                  24.2                     14.4
Age between 22 and 29               42.2                  42.2                  42.2                     40.2
Age between 30 and 35               26.0                  24.8                  24.5                     31.8
Age 36 or above                      9.8                  9.4                    9.1                     13.6
Foreign-born                        23.5                  22.9                  23.1                     18.0
Married at time of birth            64.8                  62.2                  61.0                     68.3
Number of children               2,047,663             1,652,333             1,326,004                 28,564
  Note: The first column presents fractions in total population of children born in Florida between 1992 and 2002. The
  second column presents fractions in total population of children born between 1992 and 2002 linked to Florida school
  records. The third column presents fractions in total population of children born between 1992 and 2002 for whom we
  observe a third grade test score. Fourth column presents fractions in total population of twin pairs born between 1992
  and 2002 for whom we observe third grade test scores.




                                                           47
               Table 2. Estimated effects of birth weight on cognitive development
                        (1)      (2)                (3)          (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)                 (8)
                          Pooled                                    Imputed grade: Twin FE models
                       OLS    Twin FE                3            4          5         6          7                  8

                   Average of mathematics and reading:

Ln(birth weight)    0.310*** 0.441***           0.442*** 0.526*** 0.430*** 0.426*** 0.386*** 0.373***
                     (0.019)  (0.029)            (0.043)  (0.045)  (0.047)  (0.053)  (0.056)  (0.061)

R2                    0.180     0.751             0.825         0.813      0.825        0.831        0.826        0.834
N                         127,156                 28,564        26,628     23,056       19,408       16,246       13,254

                   Mathematics:

Ln(birth weight)    0.387*** 0.497***           0.473*** 0.579*** 0.533*** 0.490*** 0.410*** 0.429***
                     (0.020)  (0.032)            (0.051)  (0.051)  (0.052)  (0.061)  (0.067)  (0.070)

R2                    0.159     0.708             0.806         0.793      0.809        0.807        0.801        0.811
N                         126,542                 28,496        26,552     22,986       19,332       16,136       13,040

                   Reading:

Ln(birth weight)    0.230*** 0.392***           0.415*** 0.467*** 0.328*** 0.372*** 0.370*** 0.349***
                     (0.019)  (0.031)            (0.048)  (0.051)  (0.055)  (0.059)  (0.062)  (0.069)

R2                    0.158     0.697             0.795         0.787      0.793        0.805        0.798        0.806
N                         126,706                 28,470        26,520     22,976       19,348       16,210       13,182
 Note: Columns (1) and (2) present pooled grade three through eight results for OLS and twin-FE models. Columns (3)
 to (8) present twin-FE estimates separately for each of the 6 grades. Each coefficient comes from a separate regression.
 Sample sizes reflect number of individual observations in each regression and only twin pairs where both twins are
 observed with test scores in each grade are included. The dependent variable is an average test scores in mathematics
 and reading. If the test score in mathematics is not available then reading is included and vice versa. The main variable
 of interest is natural logarithm of birth weight. The remaining independent variables in twin-FE models include infant
 gender wand within-twin pair birth order. OLS estimates further controls for infant birth month and year, indicators for
 maternal age (each for one year) and education (high school dropout, high school graduate, college graduate). Standard
 errors in pooled regressions (columns (1) and (2)) are clustered at individual level; heteroskedasticity robust standard
 errors are calculated in columns (3) to (8) where there is just one observation per individual.




                                                           48
        Table 3. Effects of birth weight on cognitive development by child and mother characteristics
                                                   (1)              (2)              (3)           (4)             (5)
                                                                                Mean (SD)      Pooled twin     p-value of
     Characteristic            Sample         % population    Mean test score
                                                                                birth weight   FE estimate     difference
                              Same sex            68.2            0.073             2405        0.447***
          (1)                                                                       (568)        (0.032)
    Children gender                                                                                              0.773
     composition             Opposite sex         31.8            0.076            2454         0.427***
                                                                                   (557)         (0.062)
                                Boys              49.6            0.048            2473         0.449***
          (2)                                                                      (571)         (0.052)
                                                                                                                 0.941
         Gender                 Girls             50.4            0.099            2369         0.444***
                                                                                   (555)         (0.040)
                              Girl-Girl           35.2            0.100            2359         0.444***
         (3)                                                                       (561)         (0.039)
                                                                                                                 0.940
 Same-sex composition         Boy-Boy             33.7            0.044            2452         0.449***
                                                                                   (572)         (0.051)
                                White             72.0            0.256            2457         0.466***
         (4)                                                                       (554)         (0.034)
     Maternal race                                                                                               0.223
     (N=14 357)                 Black             26.1            -0.466           2318         0.381***
                                                                                   (585)         (0.061)
                            Non-Hispanic          82.0            0.098            2413         0.434***
         (5)                                                                       (565)         (0.033)
                                                                                                                 0.518
   Maternal ethnicity         Hispanic            18.0            -0.036           2454         0.478***
                                                                                   (564)         (0.059)
                            Non-immigrant         82.0            0.072            2413         0.440***
           (6)                                                                     (564)         (0.033)
  Maternal immigration                                                                                           0.899
        history               Immigrant           18.0            0.080            2451         0.449***
                                                                                   (570)         (0.058)
                                < 12              15.8            -0.476           2338         0.359***
                                                                                   (570)         (0.070)
          (7)                 <12; 15>            61.4            0.003            2430         0.434***
                                                                                                                 0.163
   Maternal education                                                              (563)         (0.038)
                                > 15              22.8            0.663            2451         0.529***
                                                                                   (562)         (0.059)
                               Bottom             36.7            -0.216           2393         0.389***
                                                                                   (567)         (0.057)
           (8)
                               Middle             33.1            0.122            2409         0.457***
 Zip code median income                                                                                          0.657
                                                                                   (568)         (0.054)
       (N=11 868)
                                 Top              30.2            0.437            2435         0.446***
                                                                                   (561)         (0.059)
                             Non-married          31.8            -0.360           2336         0.362***
          (9)                                                                      (574)         (0.057)
 Maternal marital status                                                                                         0.064
      (N=14 583)               Married            67.6            0.272            2458         0.485***
                                                                                   (556)         (0.033)
                                <= 21             14.7            -0.396           2269         0.372***
                                                                                   (574)         (0.086)
                              <22; 29>            40.2            -0.006           2419         0.443***
          (10)                                                                     (561)         (0.044)
 Maternal age at birth of                                                                                        0.698
       children               <30; 35>            31.6            0.277            2465         0.483***
                                                                                   (557)         (0.052)
                                >= 36             13.5            0.343            2479         0.413***
                                                                                   (559)         (0.078)
Note: Descriptive statistics for each group in columns (1) to (2). Column (1) presents the fraction for each group within
total population of twin pairs used in the analysis (born in Florida between 1992 and 2002 and successfully matched to
Florida public schools). Columns (2) and (3) present mean combined mathematics and reading test scores and mean
(SD) of birth weight for each studied group respectively. Column (4) presents pooled grades three through eight twin-
FE model estimates corresponding to model outlined in column (2) in table 2. Column (5) presents the joint
significance test for the analyzed groups in fixed effects model from column (4). Sample size: 127,156. Standard errors
are clustered at the individual level.

                                                             49
                                   Table 4. Sensitivity of results to model specification
                                        (1)                (2)            (3)           (4)         (5)                (6)           (7)
           Sample                                                                        Imputed grade
                                      Pooled
                                                           3              4              5           6                 7              8
              (1)                   0.441***           0.442***       0.526***       0.430*** 0.426***             0.386***       0.373***
       ln(birth weight)              (0.029)            (0.043)        (0.045)        (0.047)     (0.053)           (0.056)        (0.061)

            (2)                     0.526***           0.575***       0.656***       0.464***       0.528***       0.409***       0.427***
  Both twins above 2500g             (0.073)            (0.110)        (0.115)        (0.120)        (0.126)        (0.144)        (0.152)

            (3)                     0.473***           0.470***       0.569***       0.495***       0.455***       0.339***       0.419***
  Both twins below 2500g             (0.046)            (0.066)        (0.069)        (0.074)        (0.087)        (0.089)        (0.098)

            (4)                     0.517***           0.390***       0.537***       0.572***       0.591***       0.499***       0.579***
  Both twins 1500g-2499g             (0.062)            (0.092)        (0.097)        (0.105)        (0.114)        (0.120)        (0.131)

            (5)                     0.572***           0.604***       0.714***       0.721***        0.485**         0.360          0.295
     Both twins <1500g               (0.114)            (0.176)        (0.157)        (0.195)        (0.205)        (0.226)        (0.270)

            (6)                     0.186***           0.185***       0.223***       0.178***       0.180***       0.169***       0.155***
   Birth weight in 1000g             (0.013)            (0.019)        (0.019)        (0.020)        (0.023)        (0.024)        (0.026)

             (7)                    0.198***            0.196***       0.234***       0.191***      0.193***       0.177***       0.171***
        Birth weight                 (0.013)             (0.019)        (0.020)        (0.021)       (0.023)        (0.025)        (0.027)
Birth weight * (birth weight -      -0.105***          -0.117***      -0.105***      -0.114***      -0.105**        -0.058        -0.112**
mean twin pair birth weight)         (0.024)             (0.036)        (0.037)        (0.039)       (0.045)        (0.047)        (0.051)
Note: Column (1) present pooled grade three through eight results for the twin-FE model, with standard errors clustered at the individual
level. Columns (2) to (7) present twin-FE estimates separately for each of the 6 grades. Each coefficient estimate comes from a separate
regression (except for the last row where there are two coefficients from the same regression reported). Sample sizes and models are
identical to these estimated in columns (2) and (3) to (8) in table 2 but the variable of interest is substituted. For the sake of clarity we
carry over the main estimates from table 2 to the first row in this table. The second row presents the baseline model for the sample of
twin pairs where both twins are above 2500g. The third row presents the baseline model for the sample of twin pairs where both twins
are below 2500g. The fourth row presents the baseline model for the sample of twin pairs where both twins have birth weight between
1500g and 2499g. The fifth row presents the baseline model for the sample of twin pairs where both twins have birth weight below
1500g. The sixth row substitutes ln(birth weight) with birth weight measured in 1000g. The seventh row substitutes ln(birth weight) by
birth weight in grams as the firs variable and the interaction between birth weight in grams and the difference of birth weight in grams
and mean twin pair birth weight in grams as the second variable.




                                                                    50
                              Table 5. Results by school quality measures
                                                       (1)            (2)         (3)             (4)           (5)
                                                                               Mean (SD)
                                                                  Mean test                  Pooled twin     p-value of
 School quality measure           Sample          % population                   birth
                                                                   score                     FE estimate     difference
                                                                                weight
                                     A                48.6          0.277        2437         0.407***
                                                                                 (559)         (0.033)
          (1)                        B                28.8          -0.095        2409        0.497***
                                                                                                               0.204
     Awarded grade                                                                (570)        (0.055)
                                C&D&F                 22.6          -0.400        2375        0.455***
                                                                                  (578)        (0.062)
                              Below median            39.7          -0.340        2381        0.436***
          (2)                                                                     (580)        (0.048)
                                                                                                               0.831
  Average proficiency         Above median            60.3          0.297         2442        0.425***
                                                                                  (555)        (0.033)
                              Below median            49.8          0.044         2420        0.449***
          (3)                                                                     (565)        (0.036)
                                                                                                                0.649
 Growth in proficiency        Above median            50.2          0.098           2421        0.433***
                                                                                    (564)        (0.035)
Note: Descriptive statistics for each group are reported in columns (1) to (2). Column (1) presents the fraction for each
group within total population of twin pairs used in the analysis (born in Florida between 1992 and 2002 and
successfully matched to Florida public schools). Columns (2) and (3) present mean combined mathematics and reading
test scores and mean (SD) of birth weight for each studied group respectively. Column (4) presents pooled grades three
through eight twin-FE model estimates corresponding to model outlined in column (2) in table 2. Column (5) presents
the joint significance test for the analyzed groups in fixed effects model from column (4). In the case of awarded grades
since not all schools are awarded grades every year our sample consist of 124,380 individual observations used in
models in column (4). In the case of average proficiency and growth in proficiency we use 126,502 individual
observations in models in column (4). The discrepancy between the samples in table 3 and table 5 is due to the fact that
we do not have data on school quality for the universe of schools in every year in Florida (in particular average
proficiency and growth cannot be calculated for a newly established school).




                                                             51
                     Table 6. Effects of birth weight on kindergarten readiness
                                and comparison with FCAT scores
                            (1)             (2)           (3)                 (4)                (5)           (6)
Panel                        N         Kindergarten   3rd grade          Pooled panel        3rd grade     3rd grade
                                         readiness     FCAT                 FCAT               FCAT         FCAT
                                          measure   (discretized)        (discretized)        reading        math
                                      (dichotomous)                                        (discretized) (discretized)
School readiness          8,938           0.067*
checklist only                            (0.035)
(98-01 KG cohorts)

DIBELS only               6,696          0.115***
(06-08 KG cohorts)                        (0.043)

Pooled SRC and           15,634          0.086***
DIBELS (KGR)                              (0.027)

KGR & 3rd-8th             6,512            0.057          0.181***         0.146***          0.182***        0.149***
grade panel                               (0.040)          (0.045)          (0.024)           (0.046)         (0.045)


KGR & 3rd-5th             9,198           0.060*          0.178***         0.167***          0.179***        0.166***
grade panel                               (0.033)          (0.038)          (0.022)           (0.038)         (0.037)


KGR & 3rd grade          13,718          0.093***         0.159***         0.159***          0.161***        0.138***
panel                                     (0.029)          (0.031)          (0.031)           (0.031)         (0.031)

SRC & 3rd grade           7,824            0.060          0.163***         0.163***           0.098**         0.103**
panel                                     (0.037)          (0.040)          (0.040)           (0.041)         (0.045)

DIBELS & 3rd              5,894          0.139***          0.118**          0.118**           0.101**         0.103**
grade panel                               (0.046)          (0.050)          (0.050)           (0.049)         (0.051)


Note: The first three rows present the estimated effects of ln(birth weight) on three kindergarten readiness measures.
All models additionally control for infant gender, within-twin pair birth order and twin fixed effects. In each case the
sample includes all twin pairs where both twins were assessed. The next three rows limit the sample to those with both
a kindergarten readiness measure and, in turn, test scores observed between grades 3-8, grades 3-5, and grade 3. KGR
refers to SRC and/or DIBELS. The discretized FCAT scores are created by assigning a value of 1 to the top 83 percent
of the FCAT score distribution and 0 otherwise, in order to make the results directly comparable to those where the
dependent variables are dichotomous kindergarten readiness indicators. The final two rows limit the sample to those
with the SRC and 3rd grade score, and then the DIBELS and 3rd grade score, respectively. Standard errors are
heteroskedasticity robust in cases in which there is one observation per individual and clustered to the student level in
the cases in which there are multiple observations per individual. Sample sizes vary slightly from regression to
regression depending on whether reading, math, or both scores are the dependent variable.




                                                          52
                                                         APPENDIX
                                                          FIGURES
                       Figure A1. Estimated effects of birth weight, by weight of bigger twin




Note: Figure A1 plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a twin FE regression where the dependent variable is the mean
of pooled grades three to eight combined mathematics and reading test scores for each individual and the independent variables are 20
interactions corresponding to the product of log birth weight with indicators for 20 bins reflecting heavier twin percentiled birth
weight. The regression additionally controls for infant gender and birth order within-twin pair. Heteroskedasticity robust standard
errors are used to calculate the 95% confidence interval. Numbers on the x-axis correspond to the mean birth weight in each bin of
heavier twin birth weight.




                                                                53
                                                                                TABLES
Table A1. Birth weight difference and test scores across imputed grades and groups: coefficients on log birth
                                                   weight
                                                             (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)          (5)                     (6)              (7)
                     Sample                                                                                        Imputed grade
                                                          Pooled
                                                                               3                 4                 5            6                      7                8
                 Total sample                           0.441***           0.442***          0.526***          0.430***     0.426***               0.386***         0.373***
                                                         (0.029)            (0.043)           (0.045)           (0.047)      (0.053)                (0.056)          (0.061)
                                 Same sex               0.447***           0.460***          0.527***          0.406***     0.464***               0.394***         0.363***
       (1)                                               (0.032)            (0.049)           (0.053)           (0.053)      (0.059)                (0.062)          (0.066)
 Children gender
  composition                  Opposite sex             0.427***          0.398***           0.524***          0.486***          0.335***          0.365***         0.395***
                                                         (0.062)           (0.086)            (0.088)           (0.097)           (0.112)           (0.122)          (0.135)
                                    Boys                0.449***          0.471***           0.567***          0.379***          0.475***          0.410***         0.298**
        (2)                                              (0.052)           (0.089)            (0.096)           (0.097)           (0.114)           (0.115)          (0.121)
       Gender                       Girls               0.444***          0.449***           0.488***          0.434***          0.453***          0.378***         0.428***
                                                         (0.040)           (0.081)            (0.084)           (0.081)           (0.085)           (0.094)          (0.101)
                                  Girl-Girl             0.444***          0.449***           0.488***          0.434***          0.453***          0.378***         0.428***
       (3)                                               (0.039)           (0.067)            (0.070)           (0.068)           (0.071)           (0.078)          (0.085)
     Same-sex
    composition                   Boy-Boy               0.449***          0.471***           0.567***          0.379***          0.475***          0.410***         0.298***
                                                         (0.051)           (0.073)            (0.079)           (0.080)           (0.094)           (0.096)          (0.101)
                                    White               0.466***          0.504***           0.546***          0.440***          0.419***          0.417***         0.389***
       (4)                                               (0.034)           (0.051)            (0.054)           (0.054)           (0.060)           (0.065)          (0.068)
   Maternal race
   (N=14 357)                       Black               0.381***           0.291***          0.476***          0.412***          0.447***          0.300**          0.341**
                                                         (0.061)            (0.087)           (0.090)           (0.098)           (0.118)           (0.118)          (0.137)
                              Non-Hispanic              0.434***           0.442***          0.518***          0.440***          0.395***          0.376***         0.358***
      (5)                                                (0.033)            (0.049)           (0.052)           (0.053)           (0.060)           (0.064)          (0.070)
Maternal ethnicity                Hispanic              0.478***           0.442***          0.567***          0.390***          0.576***          0.432***         0.439***
                                                         (0.059)            (0.094)           (0.092)           (0.103)           (0.110)           (0.115)          (0.125)
        (6)                  Non-immigrant              0.440***           0.469***          0.518***          0.439***          0.408***          0.367***         0.348***
      Maternal                                           (0.033)            (0.049)           (0.052)           (0.053)           (0.061)           (0.065)          (0.070)
    immigration                  Immigrant              0.449***          0.323***           0.563***          0.394***          0.510***          0.470***         0.478***
      history                                            (0.058)           (0.090)            (0.090)           (0.095)           (0.105)           (0.111)          (0.122)
                                     < 12               0.359***           0.249**           0.484***          0.431***           0.257**           0.369**          0.342**
                                                         (0.070)           (0.110)            (0.125)           (0.121)           (0.128)           (0.145)          (0.152)
        (7)
                                  <12; 15>              0.434***           0.466***          0.493***          0.410***          0.443***          0.365***         0.365***
     Maternal
                                                         (0.038)            (0.055)           (0.055)           (0.060)           (0.070)           (0.070)          (0.078)
     education
                                     > 15               0.529***          0.517***           0.656***          0.493***          0.503***          0.477***         0.433***
                                                         (0.059)           (0.089)            (0.098)           (0.096)           (0.099)           (0.123)          (0.129)
                                   Bottom               0.389***          0.428***           0.445***          0.310***          0.328***          0.399***         0.396***
                                                         (0.057)           (0.083)            (0.085)           (0.091)           (0.110)           (0.110)          (0.133)
        (8)
 Zip code median                   Middle               0.457***           0.409***          0.534***          0.491***          0.504***          0.387***         0.338***
      income                                             (0.054)            (0.081)           (0.089)           (0.086)           (0.101)           (0.116)          (0.126)
   (N=11 868)
                                     Top                0.446***          0.507***           0.550***          0.383***          0.376***          0.320***         0.413***
                                                         (0.059)           (0.085)            (0.088)           (0.098)           (0.108)           (0.121)          (0.144)
       (9)                     Non-married              0.362***          0.336***           0.402***          0.413***          0.376***          0.363***          0.218*
 Maternal marital                                        (0.057)           (0.083)            (0.085)           (0.090)           (0.112)           (0.113)          (0.115)
     status                       Married               0.485***           0.497***          0.588***          0.446***          0.454***          0.400***         0.458***
  (N=14 583)                                             (0.033)            (0.050)           (0.053)           (0.055)           (0.058)           (0.064)          (0.072)
                           <= 21                        0.372***           0.371***          0.411***          0.495***            0.237            0.399**           0.233
                                                         (0.086)            (0.116)           (0.130)           (0.136)           (0.172)           (0.168)          (0.177)
                           <22; 29>                     0.443***           0.417***          0.509***          0.374***          0.534***          0.417***         0.385***
        (10)                                             (0.044)            (0.067)           (0.066)           (0.071)           (0.081)           (0.085)          (0.093)
 Maternal age at
 birth of children         <30; 35>                     0.483***           0.466***          0.585***          0.496***          0.465***          0.388***         0.426***
                                                         (0.052)            (0.080)           (0.081)           (0.085)           (0.090)           (0.101)          (0.113)
                           >= 36                        0.413***           0.529***          0.570***          0.393***            0.182            0.270*           0.354**
                                                         (0.078)            (0.114)           (0.135)           (0.124)           (0.134)           (0.155)          (0.155)
Note: Column (1) present pooled grade three through eight results for twin-FE model. Columns (3) to (8) present twin-FE estimates separately for each of the 6 grades. Models are
the same as used in columns (2) and (3) to (8) in table 2. Sample size is 127 156 individual observations in pooled regressions in column (1) except for race, marital status and
mean zip code income. In the case of race this discrepancy is caused by existence of other races with minor representation in Florida, In the case of income and marital status we
do not have complete data for all mothers and residential locations. In all these cases the modified sample sizes are given. Each coefficient comes from a separate regression.



                                                                                      54
 Table A2. Sensitivity to model specification: Birth weight as a second order polynomial
                                     (1)              (2)         (4)    (3)(5)     (6)     (7)
      Sample                                                    Imputed grade
                                  Pooled
                                              3         4          5         6       7       8
  Birth weight                   0.450*** 0.477*** 0.487*** 0.466*** 0.446*** 0.317*** 0.441***
                                  (0.063)  (0.094)   (0.098)   (0.100)    (0.118) (0.122) (0.133)
 Birth weight2                  -0.053*** -0.058*** -0.053*** -0.057*** -0.053** -0.029 -0.056**
                                  (0.012)  (0.018)   (0.019)   (0.019)    (0.023) (0.023) (0.025)
Note: Column (1) present pooled grade three through eight results for twin-FE model. Columns (2) to (7) present twin-FE estimates
separately for each of the 6 grades. Both coefficients comes from the same regression. Sample sizes and models are identical to these
estimated in columns (2) and (3) to (8) in table 2 but the variable of interest (ln(birth weight)) is substituted by birth weight in grams
and its square.




                                                                    55
