NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

'THOSE WHO KNOW MOST':
INSIDER TRADING IN 18TH C. AMSTERDAM
Peter Koudijs
Working Paper 18845
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18845
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

This paper is based on the second chapter of my dissertation. Thanks to Hans-Joachim Voth (advisor),
Fernando Broner and Jaume Ventura (PhD committee) for advice and guidance. I thank Monika Piazzesi
(the editor) and three anonymous referees for their insightful comments and suggestions. I am grateful
to seminar participants at UCLA, UC Berkeley, Chicago, Columbia, Gerzensee, Harvard, Northwestern,
NYU, UPF, Stanford, UCSD, Tilburg, Warwick, UPenn and Jonathan Berk, Jos van Bommel, Bradyn
Breon-Drish, Harry Garretsen, Vincent van Kervel (discussant), Floor Koudijs, Thijs Knaap, Larry
Neal, Christine Parlour (discussant), Paul P‡eiderer, Giacomo Ponzetto, Juan Carlos Rodriguez (discussant),
Christina Romer, David Romer, Dick Roll, Jonathan Rose, Subra Subrahmanyam (discussant), and
Jan de Vries for their comments and suggestions. Many thanks to Daphne Acoca, Bobak Moallemi,
Dmitry Orlov, Sophia Paliza and Hannah Rusk for excellent research assistance. Any errors are my
own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Peter Koudijs. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

'Those Who Know Most': Insider Trading in 18th c. Amsterdam
Peter Koudijs
NBER Working Paper No. 18845
February 2013, Revised October 2015
JEL No. G14,N2
ABSTRACT
This paper studies how private information is incorporated into prices, using a unique setting from
the 18th century that, in many dimensions, is simpler and closer to stylized models of price discovery
than modern-day markets. Specifically, the paper looks at a number of English securities that were
traded in both London and Amsterdam. Relevant information about these securities originated in London
and was sent to Amsterdam on board of official mail packet boats. Anecdotal evidence suggests that
these ships carried both public news and private information. They sailed only twice a week, and in
adverse weather could not sail at all. The paper exploits periods of exogenous market segmentation
to identify the impact of private information. The evidence is consistent with a Kyle (1985) model
in which informed agents trade strategically. Most importantly, the speed of information revelation
in Amsterdam depended on how long insiders expected it would take for the private signal to become
public. As a result of this strategic behavior, private information was only slowly revealed to the market
as a whole. This price discovery was economically important: private signals had almost as much impact
on prices as public information shocks.
Peter Koudijs
Stanford Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
koudijs@stanford.edu

A data appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18845

Private information is central to our understanding of …nancial markets, and, according to the
available evidence, has a signi…cant impact on asset prices. However, it is not fully understood
how private information is incorporated into prices. One of the most in‡uential approaches to
study this question is the Kyle (1985) model. In this framework, informed agents are strategic
and take the price impact of their trades into account. They internalize that their pro…ts fall
as prices become more informative. This constrains their behavior. Trades are spread out over
time and this prolongs price discovery. As a result, asymmetric information is persistent.1 This
approach continues to spur a large literature that analyzes how the strategic behavior of informed
agents a¤ects price discovery (this includes Admati and P‡eiderer 1988; Subrahmanyam 1991;
Back 1992; Holden and Subrahmanyam 1992, 1994; Foster and Viswanathan 1994, 1996; Chau
and Vayanos 2008; and Caldentey and Stacchetti 2010). Despite the breadth of this theoretical
literature, the empirical evidence is limited. Private information is by de…nition unobserved: it is
not clear how informed agents trade on their information and by what process their private signals
are revealed to the market as a whole.
This paper studies the process of price discovery using a unique setting from the 18th century,
and tests how well the Kyle model’s predictions hold up in the data. The analysis is based on
a number of English securities that were traded in both London and Amsterdam. Most relevant
information about these securities originated in London, or reached London …rst, and later arrived
in Amsterdam. Anecdotal evidence suggests that a signi…cant fraction of this information was
private in nature and held by insiders (Sutherland 1952). The paper compares the price dynamics
in the two markets to identify how this private information was incorporated into prices.
The identi…cation strategy relies on the communication technology of the time. In the 18th
century people relied on sailing ships to transmit news across the North Sea (Neal 1990; Koudijs
2012). There was an o¢ cial mail packet boat service that carried both public newspapers and
private letters. Figure 1 shows the route of this news service. For all practical purposes this was
the only way in which public and private information was transmitted from London to Amsterdam.
The same packet boat service also brought Amsterdam news back to London. These sailing boats
sailed twice a week. Under favorable conditions, it took them three days to transmit the news,
but this arrival rate varied considerably due to adverse winds at sea. As a result, Amsterdam was
frequently cut o¤ from London.
[FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]
The paper uses these periods of exogenous market segmentation to study price discovery. Under
the null hypothesis all information is public or, due to the competitive behavior of informed agents,
1

In the classical Kyle model there is a single insider. Foster and Viswanathan (1996) show that the main

predictions of the model are robust to the introduction of multiple insiders, as long as agents’private signals are
(su¢ ciently) heterogeneous.

3

private signals are immediately incorporated into prices.2 Under this null, Amsterdam prices
respond immediately to new information arriving on a packet boat. Any other price movements
in Amsterdam between the arrivals of two boats are unrelated to information. The empirical tests
reject this null: after the arrival of a boat, prices in Amsterdam tend to move in the same direction
as London after the departure of that boat. In other words, price changes in Amsterdam are
correlated with contemporaneous, but as of yet unreported, returns in London. This co-movement
is consistent with the strategic behavior of privately informed traders as in Kyle (1985). Suppose
that an insider in London observes a certain piece of information right before the departure of boat.
Further, suppose that the insider sends this signal to a business partner in Amsterdam. If both
agents spread their trades strategically over time, prices will only slowly reveal the underlying
information. London and Amsterdam will tend to move in the same direction, even though
information about these price changes is not (yet) communicated across markets.
It is unlikely that these co-movement patterns are the result of news slipping through other
channels. There is no qualitative evidence that market participants relied on sources other than
the o¢ cial mail service. For example, Hope & Co, the most important Anglo-Dutch bank of
the period, solely relied on the packet boats for their business. In addition, robustness tests
suggest that carrier pigeons, the sailing of other boats (including smugglers) or news travelling via
Dover-Calais cannot account for the empirical …ndings.
To determine whether co-movement was truly the result of strategic insider trading, I run a
number of additional tests. To begin with, the optimal strategy of the informed agent in Amsterdam should have depended on when he thought the next boat would sail in. Boats arriving
in Amsterdam relayed important information from London, including security prices. This (partially) revealed the private signal. If the informed agent expected the next boat to arrive in short
order, he would have less time to bene…t from his informational advantage, making it optimal to
trade more aggressively early on (Caldentey and Stacchetti 2010). The empirical evidence supports this prediction. The initial co-movement of Amsterdam and London prices was stronger
when weather conditions suggested that the next boat would arrive shortly. Furthermore, if the
discovery of private information was important, we would anticipate feedback e¤ects in London
(Chowdry and Nanda 1990; Boulatov et al. 2011). If a private signal was not yet fully incorporated
into prices, the London market could learn something from Amsterdam. This too is con…rmed
by the data. Conditional on its own price discovery, the London market updated its beliefs based
on price changes in Amsterdam. If, due to weather conditions, it took longer for a private signal
to “bounce back” from Amsterdam, the London market responded less. By that time, the pri2

If these agents are risk neutral, private information is immediately incorporated into prices (Grossman 1976;

Holden and Subrahmanyam 1992, 1994). If they are risk averse, competition does not necessarily lead to full
revelation (Grossman and Stiglitz 1980). However, Vives (1995) shows that in a dynamic setting insiders trade
only once. There is no price discovery in subsequent periods.

4

vate signal was largely incorporated into prices. Finally, a Kyle model predicts that prices are
a martingale (Banerjee at al. 2009). Perhaps contrary to intuition, price changes should not be
positively auto-correlated. Otherwise, market participants would be able to predict future price
changes, implying that prices did not incorporate all available information to begin with. The
empirical evidence con…rms that there is no positive auto-correlation of returns.
The absence of drift or return continuation is inconsistent with a number of other explanations
for the co-movement patterns in the data. I consider three speci…c alternatives. First, co-movement
could result from the slow incorporation of public information into prices due to trading costs,
inattention, or di¤erences of beliefs. This should lead to an observed drift in the Amsterdam price
series (Hong and Stein 2001). Second, the trading environment in Amsterdam and London was not
fully centralized. In such a setting, it might take time for traders to be matched with each other,
and for prices to re‡ect new information. If this friction is important, we again expect that prices
exhibit drift. Third, co-movement may be unrelated to information and could re‡ect slow moving
capital (Du¢ e 2010). Suppose that a liquidity shock hits the market in London. Arbitrageurs will
transmit this shock to Amsterdam. As intermediating capital slowly trickles into both markets,
prices will gradually move back to their fundamental level, leading to a positive correlation between
returns in London and Amsterdam. If a signi…cant fraction of this capital comes from England,
it is possible that prices in Amsterdam adjust faster when the next boat is expected to arrive
shortly. Again, contrary to the empirical evidence, this explanation implies return continuation.
The strategic behavior of privately informed agents had important economic consequences.
Informational asymmetries were persistent: the estimates indicate that it took almost two weeks
for a private signal to be fully incorporated into prices. Results suggest that this price discovery
had a signi…cant impact on the market as a whole: the contribution of private information to
overall price movements rivaled that of public information shocks.
This paper is related to other contributions that empirically test the Kyle model. Because
private information is, by de…nition, unobservable, the empirical evidence is often indirect. Notable
exceptions are Boulatov et al. (2011) and Hendershott et al. (2012) who show that the trading
behavior of institutional investors is consistent with a Kyle model. Collin-Dufresne and Fos (2012)
show that the trading patterns of activist investors also …t into this framework.
More generally, this paper is related to a large body of empirical work that documents the
importance of private information for asset price movements. Most empirical work links private
information to order ‡ow imbalances (Hasbrouck 1991; Easley, Kiefer and O’Hara 1997; Madhavan
et al. 1997; Evans and Lyons 2002; Vega 2006). It is not obvious that order ‡ow imbalances are
always the result of private information; they can also capture liquidity shocks (Duarte and Young
2009). There are a number of alternative approaches studying the impact of private information.
Pasquariella and Vega (2007) and Tetlock (2010) look at the interaction of order ‡ow imbalance
5

(or volume) and public information events. Marin and Olivier (2008) …nd that stock prices drop
sharply after (reported) insider sales peak. Cohen et al. (2012) analyze reported insider trades
and show that non-predictable trades outperform the market. Cohen et al. (2008; 2010) focus
on the performance of institutional investors in stocks of companies that are run by former classmates. Kelly and Ljunqvist (2012) look at the impact of the closure of brokerage …rms’research
departments.
Relative to this literature, the paper makes the following contributions. First and foremost, it
provides a test of the Kyle model that is based on information ‡ows rather than order ‡ow. The
paper identi…es when private information arrived to the market and when it expired. The time
available to insiders to trade on their information varied exogenously and this allows for a clean
identi…cation of strategic behavior. Second, it provides new evidence for the relevance of private
information in …nancial markets.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 discusses the historical background
and microstructure of the two markets in more detail. In addition, it provides anecdotal evidence
for the relevance of private information. To motivate the empirical analysis, Section 2 sets up
a simple Kyle model. Section 3 presents empirical evidence supporting the model’s predictions.
Section 4 provides a number of robustness tests. Section 5 concludes.

1

Historical background

1.1

Securities and sample period

During the second half of the 18th century there were only a handful of securities traded on the
London Stock Exchange. The most liquid and frequently traded were shares of the British East
India Company (EIC) and the Bank of England (BoE), and the 3% Annuities; the most important
form of government debt (Neal 1990). In addition, investors could trade in shares and bonds of
the South Sea Company, bonds issued by the EIC and BoE and a number of smaller government
debt issues. The paper focuses on the …rst group of securities because these are the only ones for
which price observations in both London and Amsterdam are available at a high enough frequency.
Together they represent about 60% of the entire British market (Cohen 1822).
The EIC was a trading company that governed large parts of India. The company was subject
to government regulation, and during the second half of the 18th century political developments
in England became of key importance (Sutherland 1952). The BoE was set up in 1694 to function
as the government’s banker and help it …nance the public debt. The bank operated as a private
commercial enterprise rather than a formal central bank. It had a de facto monopoly on the
issuance of bank notes and discounted commercial bills. During the 1770s it had a signi…cant
exposure to the EIC through the provision of credit (Clapham 1944).
6

The paper focuses on the periods 1771-1777 and 1783-1787. Before 1771, information about
boat arrivals is incomplete. After 1771, not all years can be used. The analysis of this paper rests
on the assumption that all relevant information about the English securities originated in England.
That was not necessarily the case when there were (military) con‡icts on the European continent
or when there was a signi…cant risk of a war breaking out (Neal 1990; Dempster et al. 2000). The
period between 1778 and 1782 featured military con‡ict between England, France and the Dutch
Republic and is not suitable for the analysis. The period after 1787 is equally problematic because
of increasing domestic tensions in the Dutch Republic and France.3
Figure D.1 in Appendix D con…rms that during the sample years most relevant information
about the English securities originated in England. The …gure presents impulse response functions
of price changes of EIC stock in Amsterdam responding to London and vice versa. The …gure
shows that Amsterdam responded strongly to London, with hardly any e¤ect in the opposite
direction. Koudijs (2012) presents more detailed evidence.

1.2

The ‡ow of information between London and Amsterdam

England and the Dutch Republic were connected by a system of sailing ships, the so-called packet
boats. Figure 1 shows that the ships sailed between the ports of Harwich and Hellevoetsluys. On
both sides of the North Sea, mounted couriers transported the news over land. The system was
set up in the late 17th century to ensure the fastest possible transmission of information between
London and the Dutch Republic (Le Jeune 1851; Hemmeon 1912; Ten Brink 1957, 1969; Stitt
Dibden 1965; Hogesteeger 1989; OSA 2599). The packet boats brought in newspapers and other
public newsletters with information about developments in each city, including the most recent
stock prices. In addition, they carried private letters that included political and economic updates
and news about market conditions (examples in Van Nierop 1931; Wilson 1941, pp. 74-75; SAA
735; 78, 79, and 1510; SAA 334; 643). Private letters could also contain trading orders from
London insiders (Van Nierop 1931, p. 68; SAA 735, 115).
The packet boats were scheduled to leave London on Wednesdays and Saturdays. Under
normal circumstances it took a full 24 hours to sail across the North Sea. On both sides it took
3

The starting point of the sample, September 1771 is determined by data availability. The …rst period stops in

December 1777 as tensions between France and England increased, eventually leading to outright naval war in July
1778. The second sample period starts in September 1783, right after the signing of an o¢ cial peace treaty between
France and England in August of that year. There had been an armistice between the Dutch Republic, France, and
England since January 1783 and the accord meant a return to normality. The Dutch only signed a treaty with the
English in 1784. This delay was due to prolonged negotiations over colonial possesions. The second sample period
stops in March 1787, when domestic tensions in the Dutch Republic ‡ared up. This “Patriotic Revolt” started
in April 1787 with a radical change in the Amsterdam city government, eventually leading to minor skirmishes in
May 1787 and an intervention by the Prussian army in September 1787.

7

an additional day to transport the news over land. During the period rivers were crossed by ferry
and roads were particularly bad. As a result couriers on horseback could not go faster than 4 to
5 mph (Le Jeune 1851; Lewins 1865; Stitt Dibden 1965).4 Upon arrival, the English news was
normally three days old.
The sailing ships often encountered adverse winds and news could be delayed for days: around
a third of the North Sea crossings from England to the Dutch Republic arrived late. The longest
delay during the sample period was 17 days. As a result, there was considerable variation in the
time between the arrival of boats. During these periods of bad weather, no news was transmitted
across the North Sea. The Tatler, an English newspaper of the time, described that there could
be a news blackout in London “when a West wind blows for a fortnight, keeping news on the other
side of the Channel”(quoted in Dale 2004, p. 17). The same was true for Amsterdam if the wind
blew from the East.
The packet boat system was the main source of English information for investors in Amsterdam,
including insiders. The Dutch newspapers of the time all relied on the packet boat service to get
news from England. Hope & Co., one of the biggest Dutch banks of the time and an agent for
London insiders, relied solely on the packet boat system.5 Virtually all newspaper articles about
England can be linked to a particular packet boat crossing. During periods of particularly bad
weather, English news arrived in Amsterdam through the port of Ostend in today’s Belgium,
which had a regular packet boat service with Dover (see Figure 1 for the di¤erent locations).
This happened infrequently during the sample period (a total of 9 times). The Dutch newspapers
meticulously reported these episodes and the empirical analysis takes them into account.
The packet boats were not the only ships sailing between London and Amsterdam. Each
week, freighter ships from England would dock in the Amsterdam harbor. In terms of keeping up
with current a¤airs these ships always lagged the o¢ cial packet boats. Amsterdam had no direct
connection to the North Sea and freighters had to sail via the isle of Texel to enter Amsterdam
from the East. This added a number of days to the journey.
Although the packet boat service was the most important source of information for Dutch
investors, they may not have been the only conduit of news. It is possible that investors set up
private initiatives to get information from London. For example, during the South Sea Bubble
4

In London, news was collected by the end of each Tuesday or Friday (day of departure: day 0). This was

transported to Harwich during the night and morning. In the afternoon a packet boat set its sails for the Dutch
coast (day 1) and the boat would usually arrive in Hellevoetsluys by the end of next day (day 2). From here it was
quickly sent to Amsterdam, usually arriving the following day (day 3).
5
Most English letters in the Hope records mention both the date a letter was written in London and the date it
was received and opened in Amsterdam. For the sample periods used in this paper, there are 112 letters that Hope
received from London. The great majority of these letters (99) were dated on mail days. Around three quarters
of the letters (83) mention the day Hope received and opened them. All letters were opened on the day of arrival
(73) or 1 or 2 days later (10) (Hope & Co, SAA 735: 78,79, 115 and 1510).

8

(1720), Dutch investors were rumored to have chartered their own …shing ships (Smith 1919;
Jansen 1946 …nds no evidence for this). It is reasonable to assume that if adverse conditions
preempted the packet boats from sailing, other boats had di¢ culty crossing the North Sea as
well. Alternatively, market participants may have used carrier pigeons to get information from
London. The use of pigeons can be retraced to antiquity, but the historical record suggests that
they were only introduced in northwestern Europe after 1800 (Levi 1977; Koudijs 2012, appendix
D). According to legend, Nathan Rothschild received news about the outcome of the Battle of
Waterloo in 1815, well before anyone else, by ways of a carrier pigeon. Ferguson (1998) argues that
this is a myth: Rothschild’s courier used a boat and only arrived a few hours before the o¢ cial
dispatches (Dale 2004, p. 17). Notably, in the 1840s carrier pigeons on the European continent
were not “in ‡ight”during the winter months. The weather was simply too rough for the birds to
cope (Ten Brink 1959). The paper will revisit these points in section 4.1.

1.3

Market microstructure

Both London and Amsterdam had active markets for English securities, with the Dutch getting
involved around 1700 (Smith 1919, p. 107). Previously, during the 17th century, the Dutch elite
amassed large amounts of wealth. Due to a lack of domestic investment opportunities and assets
to diversify their portfolio, they started to look abroad (De Koopman 1775, p. 234; Spooner 1983,
p. 63). Investors included “members of patrician families, magistrates and their wives, spinsters,
widows and [the attorneys for] orphans” (Wilson 1941, p. 141). During the 1770s and 1780s
these Dutch investors held between 20 and 30% of the English securities (Bowen 1989 and Wright
1999). Merchants also participated. In the absence of money market funds, these individuals
instead invested cash surpluses in (liquid) English securities. Futures and options allowed them to
hedge away any risk they were unwilling to hold (Michie 1999, p. 26). According to Michie, this
accounts for a large share of trading activity on both sides of the North Sea, but this is impossible
to quantify.
To support the market for English securities an extensive system of intermediaries emerged.
London bankers or brokerage …rms performed important functions for investors in Amsterdam.
Securities had the form of entries in the companies’ (or government’s) ledgers and had to be
transferred in London; there were no separate registries in Amsterdam. Whenever two traders
agreed on a transaction, they sent orders to an agent in London to make the transfer. A transaction
was only o¢ cially settled after the traders received conformation from London (usually within two
weeks). The intermediaries also collected and remitted dividends, carried out limit orders in the
London market, and provided valuable information about market conditions and general events
(Wilson 1941). They often had their roots in Amsterdam and were connected to Dutch …rms,
often through family ties. A famous example is David Ricardo, who was sent to London by

9

his father, an Amsterdam broker (Michie 1999, p. 30). Likewise, there were intermediaries in
Amsterdam with roots in Britain, such as Hope & Co., who served English principals (SAA 735,
1510; Sutherland 1952). These well-connected bankers and brokerage …rms also traded for their
own account, engaged in arbitrage, and often acted as liquidity providers (Wilson 1941, p. 141;
Michie 1999, p. 23).
Apart from simple spot transactions, investors in Amsterdam and London also had access to
futures that allowed them to take signi…cant long or short positions, without having to raise cash
or own any actual securities. Future markets functioned in largely the same way on both sides of
the North Sea. Contracts were on individual securities and were settled four times a year during
so-called rescontres or rescounters. These took place on the 15th of February, May, August or
November. Contracts typically ran until the next rescontre (Wilson 1941, p. 82-87; De Pinto
1771, p. 291¤.; Mortimer 1769, p. 28-33). Actual delivery was rare; buyers and sellers usually
settled pro…ts and losses. An o¢ cial “rescontre committee” calculated net payments and dealt
with any possible disputes (Mortimer 1769, p. 32; Smith 1919, p. 129; Wilson 1941, p. 83-86).
Payments had to be made within three weeks, otherwise someone was considered a bankrupt
(Koopman 1775). Between settlement periods there was no central clearing party keeping track of
transactions. Moreover, contracts had no margin requirements (Mortimer 1769, p. 36; Koopman
1775, p. 236; Wilson 1941, p. 83). To avoid default, investors had to ensure they kept a fraction of
the underlying value in reserve. De Pinto (1771, p. 296) argues that 10-15% of the underlying value
was usually su¢ cient. However, this reserve only had to be available during the next rescontre.
In the interim, cash could be employed elsewhere.
The enforcement of contracts was based on reputation. Courts only upheld future contracts
when the actual delivery of the underlying was intended (an example is in SAA 5075, 10527-382).
“Naked”transactions were illegal; in London by Barnards Act (passed in 1733), and in Amsterdam
by the “Placard of Frederik Hendrik”that went back to the 17th century (DeMarchi and Harrison
1994; Petram 2011). These laws proved ine¤ective in preventing naked transactions, but they did
imply that the enforcement of contracts was left to the market (Wilson 1941, p. 91; Harrison
2004). For example, if a trader reneged, he would lose market access. As Adam Smith put it in
1766, “all the great sums that are lost are punctually paid; persons who game must keep their
credit, else nobody will deal with them” (quoted in Harrison 2004, p. 680; more information in
Mortimer 1769, p. 59 and Koopman 1775, p. 229-231, 244).6
The lack of o¢ cial enforcement limited market access to well-connected, highly reputable
6

There are many examples of naked short selling in Amsterdam. De Pinto (1771, p. 309) reports that short

selling was so intense in 1755-1757 that future prices frequently fell below the spot price (backwardation). Hope &
Co.’s records indicate that they held a large naked short position in EIC stock in the futures market for the English
speculator Alexander Fordyce in 1772 (SAA 735, 1510). There is no evidence that investors borrowed shares to go
short; all shorting activity seems to have taken place in the futures market.

10

traders. Counterparty risk was a potentially important problem, especially in the absence of
margins and a central clearing party. One default could trigger a chain of bankruptcies (Mortimer
1769, p. 51-52fn; Michie 1999, p. 30-1). In both Amsterdam and London, the scope of the
market was limited: everyone knew each other, reputations could be formed, and monitoring was
possible (Michie 1999, p. 31; Harrison 2004). For example, the Amsterdam futures market was
dominated by a limited number of brokerage …rms (approximately 40) and only a limited group of
market participants had direct access to the futures market (Smith 1919, p. 129, 143). Outsiders,
including British investors, could only gain access to this market through reputable intermediaries
(SAA 735, 1510; Sutherland 1952, p. 208).
Brokers, acting on their principals’limit orders, dominated the trading process in Amsterdam
and London. They never declared their principal. The future transaction was between two brokers,
each signing a separate contract with the principal (SAA, 735, 1155; Mortimer 1769, p. 28, 113;
Van Nierop 1931; Michie 1999, p. 20-21). There was no centralized market mechanism to aggregate
the order ‡ow. Instead, brokers came together at a certain location and actively searched for
counterparties. This process was similar to a ‡oor based open outcry system (Mortimer 1769, p.
74¤.; Quinn and Roberds 2012, p. 11). Prices were public information for anyone present. In
London, security brokers traded EIC stock in co¤ee shops in Exchange Alley (mainly Jonathan’s)
and, from 1773 onwards, their own Stock Exchange Building. For BoE stock and the 3% Annuities,
the Bank of England’s Rotunda (a public “banking hall”) was the dominant trading venue (Duguid
1901, p. 59-62). In Amsterdam, security brokers met in a separate hall of the Exchange building
during o¢ cial market hours (between noon and 2 p.m.; Le Long 1780, p. 66; Spooner, p. 20-21).
Outside these hours, brokers met in co¤ee shops close to the Exchange (Smith 1919, p. 144).
Jewish brokers had their own trading venue in the Jewish neighborhood (Koopman 1775, p. 243;
Van Nierop 1931, p. 57).
In both Amsterdam and London, an o¢ cial committee of brokers was responsible for reporting
the day’s going price by the end of the afternoon (Mortimer 1769, p. 112; Smith 1919, p. 109;
Spooner 1983, p. 22). This o¢ cial price primarily functioned as a control mechanism so that
principals would know whether their brokers had managed to buy or sell at, or near, the going
price (Polak 1924, Van Nierop 1931; p. 199; Hoes 1986, p.4). In case of no trade, no price was
reported (Neal 1990; Amsterdamsche Courant).

1.4

Private information

There is ample anecdotal evidence that London insiders used the Amsterdam market to bene…t
from their private information. Insider trading in London and Amsterdam only became illegal in
the 1980s (Franklin 2013) and it was well understood that it was an inherent part of the market
(Mortimer 1769, p. 44; Koopman 1775, p. 238). The historical evidence suggests that it was
11

especially pronounced in EIC stock. On January 1731, in a letter to one of his clients, Amsterdam
broker Robert Hennebo mentioned that there had been some active buying of EIC stock on the
exchange and that
“if I am not mistaken, these orders came from London, from one of the directors of
the EIC, John Bance (. . . ), making it likely that the share price will rise some more”.7
There is also evidence that EIC directors James Cockburn and George Colebrooke were “bulling”
the Amsterdam market during 1772 (Sutherland 1952, p. 228; SAA 735, 1155). One of his contemporaries would later describe Colebrooke as he, “who was in the secret, knowing when to sell
for his own advantage”(quoted in Sutherland 1952, p. 234). Such practices were not restricted to
directors of the EIC. At times, political developments had an important impact on the Company’s
prospects and British politicians would engage in insider trading as well. During the 1760’s a
group of parliamentarians, amongst whom Lord Shelburne, a later prime-minister, and Lord Verney, member of the Privy Council, regularly engaged in insider trading in EIC stock. The Dutch
banker Gerrit Blaauw traded for their account in the Amsterdam market (Sutherland 1952, pp.
206-8).
It is entirely possible that the same politicians also applied their superior knowledge to trading BoE stock and the 3% Annuities. The market was aware of adverse selection problems in
government securities:
“whenever [investors] o¤er to sell, they will always …nd buyers whose desire of
buying (...) plainly makes a doubt of the matter: for it shews that the purchasers (or
their brokers for them) have as good an opinion of the annuities the sellers are going
to part with”(Mortimer 1769, p. 22).
The records of Hope & Co reveal how insider trading worked in practice. In the fall of 1772
Hope went into business with Thomas Walpole to speculate on EIC stock. As a London banker,
the nephew of former Prime-Minister Robert Walpole, and a prominent Member of Parliament
(Sutherland 1952, pp. 101 and 109), Walpole was undoubtedly a political insider. On December
22, 1772, Hope received a letter from Walpole dated the 18th which was labeled “private” and
read:
“A report is made [on the poor state of the EIC] and we shall soon judge of its
e¤ect upon the stock. Those who know most think the stock will fall and we are of
7

Translation from the original Dutch: “Hier is gisteravont veel premy voor de reysing gegeven, en vandaag waren

hier koopers tot 169. So ik niet mis heb komt die order van London, van een der directeurs, Mr. John Bance, sodat,
gelyk ik Ued meermaals gesegt en geschreeven heb, de apparentie grooter voor een reysing dan voor een daling is”.
Van Nierop (1931), p. 68.

12

that opinion. You may therefore resume your sales to such extent as you think proper
and with the usual dex[t]erity. (. . . ) There appears no risk in selling from 170 to
about 166. One wouldn’t go lower, for though it is probable the stock will fall to
150, yet at that price or higher people may begin to speculate for the rise which will
undoubtedly take place when any plan shall be …xed for the relief of the company.
Whenever therefore the price falls to 154 or thereabouts, we should not only settle
our positions but purchase more with a view to the rise as circumstances may make it
advisable”(SAA 735, 115).
Walpole’s intelligence proved to be accurate. On January 14, 1773 the directors of the EIC
asked for a government loan and unlimited access to the tea market in the American colonies, both
of which were granted (Sutherland 1952, pp. 249-251). Most importantly, Walpole’s predicted
price trajectory was largely correct. On December 30th , the price of EIC stock in Amsterdam fell
from 169.5 to 161, and reached its lowest point on January 4 at 157.50 (in London the EIC stock
price did fall to 154). After that, the price of EIC rose back to 169.5 on January 29, 1773.
Hope had to apply ‘the usual dex[t]erity’when executing the transactions. They likely had to be
careful not to trade too aggressively and reveal the information to other market participants. Hope
achieved this by going through intermediaries. Hope’s records indicates that all share transactions
on the Amsterdam exchange were handled by brokers such as David Pereira and Sons (SAA 735,
1492).
It is impossible to reconstruct the exact trades that Hope made. However, quarterly pro…t and
loss statements indicate that on February 15, 1773, Hope credited Walpole £ 679 for pro…ts on a
short position in EIC stock with a “par” value of £ 18,500 (SAA 735, 1155, the price at par was
100). It is unknown when Hope exactly entered and exited the market, but this must have been
somewhere between December 15 and February 15. Assuming that Hope and Walpole shared the
proceeds of this transaction 50/50, pro…ts are consistent with a price fall of 7.3 (so for example
from 165 to 157.7).

1.5

Data

The empirical analysis of this paper uses detailed price data in Amsterdam and London and
information about the arrival of packet boats in Hellevoetsluys and Harwich. I collected the
Amsterdam prices by hand from the Amsterdamsche Courant and, where necessary, supplemented
the data with information from the Opregte Haerlemsche Courant. Prices are available for Monday,
Wednesday and Friday8 and are reported in Pound Sterling (as a percentage of par value). London
price data is available on a daily basis (Monday - Saturday) and comes from Neal (1990), and,
8

Previous research by Neal (1990) and Dempster et al. (2000) use Amsterdam prices with a frequency of 2

observations a month.

13

where necessary, is supplemented with information from Rogers (1902). By the second half of
the 18th century, Dutch newspapers started to publish futures prices (Van Dillen 1931). Prices
in London refer to spot transactions. To facilitate comparison between London and Amsterdam,
Amsterdam future prices are converted into spots (details are in Appendix B).
I hand-collected information about the arrival of boats in Hellevoetsluys from the Rotterdamsche Courant.9 This newspaper not only mentions the day a speci…c boat arrived but also the
date of the news it carried, indicating what London price information was available to Amsterdam
investors at certain points in time. Information about the arrival of Amsterdam news in London
was also collected by hand from a series of English newspapers (General Evening Post, Lloyd’s
Evening Post, Lloyd’s Lists, London Chronicle, and Middlesex Journal).
Finally, the paper uses information about weather conditions. Dutch data come from the
Zwanenburg observatory, located 6 miles from Amsterdam. For every day there are two or three
observations including the direction and speed of the wind, type and quantity of precipitation,
and temperature (Royal Dutch Meteorological Institute, KNMI ). English information comes from
Lloyd’s Lists that published wind directions at Deal, a town close to Dover, 69 miles from London.

2

Model

This section develops a simple model in the ‡avor of Kyle (1985) to analyze what the theoretical predictions are if privately informed agents trade strategically. The next section tests these
predictions empirically.
The model features the trade of a single risky asset in two di¤erent markets, London (L)
and Amsterdam (A). All relevant information originates in London. It abstracts from public
information and focuses on private signals. The full model consists of an in…nite number of
episodes, indexed by k. An individual episode is diagrammed in Figure 2. At the beginning
of episode k, nature determines the true value of the asset vk , where vk is a random walk, i.e.
vk = vk

1

+ "k with "k

N (0;

2
" ).

A single London insider observes innovation "k ; this is not

known to the wider public. At the end of the episode "k is publicly revealed in London and the
next episode begins.
[FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE]
For simplicity the model focuses on Amsterdam. I assume that right after nature decides
on "k (and before any trade takes place) the London insider sends the signal to his agent in
Amsterdam. Episode k starts the moment this information arrives. When, at the end of the
9

In general, information was only available to Amsterdam investors the day after arrival. If a boat arrived in

Hellevoetsluys very early in the morning, it was possible that the information from London was already available
in Amsterdam on the same day. I use the publication dates of English news in the Amsterdamsche Courant and
Rotterdamsche Courant to identify these cases.

14

episode, "k is revealed in London, this information is also sent to Amsterdam straight away as
public information. This news either arrives shortly after just one round of trade (referred to as
t = 1), or is delayed and arrives after an additional trading period (t = 2). The probability of
news arriving after t = 1 is 1

k.

The probability of it arriving after t = 2 is

k.

After the

arrival of this news, the Amsterdam agent loses the informational advantage.
Parameter

k

varies over time and is determined by weather conditions and the speed of boats

crossing the North Sea. If the …rst boat happens to be quick, there will be a longer wait for the
next boat since they depart on …xed days. In addition, the expected period between the two boat
arrivals depends on current weather conditions that determine the current sailing speed.
The model proceeds as a two period version of Kyle (1985). Herein subscript k is dropped. There
is a single risk neutral agent in Amsterdam who privately observes ". The only modi…cation to
the Kyle (1985) setup is the uncertainty about having a second period to trade on the private
information.10 There is a competitive risk neutral market maker and every period there is a noise
trading shock ut with ut

N 0;

2
ut

. Shocks u1 and u2 are iid and independent of ". The variance

of these noise trading shocks can di¤er between periods. The informed agent submits a market
order xt to the market maker. The market maker also receives the liquidity shock ut and cannot
discriminate between xt and ut , only observing yt = xt + ut . He sets the price at which orders are
executed at p1 = v0 + E [vjy1 ] and p2 = v0 + E [vjy1 ; y2 ] (v0 is the unconditional expectation of
the price, i.e. vk 1 ). There are no constraints on the position the market maker can take.11 The
model is arbitrage free. At any point in time the Amsterdam price re‡ects the expected value of
the asset which coincides with the (expected) price in London.
The following proposition characterizes linear equilibria (all proofs are in Appendix A).
Proposition 1 A unique linear equilibrium exists and has the following form:

10
11

x1 =

1"

x2 =

2

(1)

(v0 + "

(2)

p1 )

p1 = v0 +

1 y1

= v0 +

1

(x1 + u1 )

(3)

p2 = p1 +

2 y2

= p1 +

2

(x2 + u2 )

(4)

Both Back and Baruch (2004) and Caldentey and Stacchetti (2010) analyze random deadlines in greater detail.
Note that this speci…c market microstructure di¤ers from the historical setting that looks more like a limit

order market. An alternative setup would be a stylized two period limit order market model in the vein of Kyle
(1989). Such a model adds signi…cant complications. Numerical analysis indicates that results are qualitatively
similar.

15

with
1

1
=
2 1
1
=
2 2

1
2
1
4

2
2

s

(5)

1
2
u2

2

=

1

=

2
1 "
2 2
2
1 " + u1

=

2 (1
2
2 (1

2

1

(1

1 1)

(6)

2
"

(7)
1

1)

1 1)

2
"

2
"

+

2
u2

=

s

(1
4

1 1)
2
u2

2
"

(8)

This equilibrium is similar to the one in Kyle (1985). The …rst key result is summarized by
the following corollary:
Corollary 2 (a) cov(p1

v0 ; ") > 0 and (b) cov(p2

p1 ; ") > 0, while (c) cov(p2

p1 ; p1

v0 ) = 0

Corollary 2 states that price changes in Amsterdam in both t = 1 and t = 2 are correlated
with the private signal ". The monopolistic behavior of the insider leads to a slow revelation of the
private signal. The insider takes his own price impact (Kyle’s ) into account and this constrains
his behavior. In other words, the equilibrium in t = 1 is not fully revealing and asymmetric
information is persistent. As a result, there is additional price discovery in t = 2.
Price changes in London after the departure of a boat are also correlated with ". The private signal will be publicly announced in London by the time the next boat is set to depart for
Amsterdam. Before that happens the London insider trades on his private information and "
will be (largely) revealed before the actual public announcement. As a result, price changes in
Amsterdam after the arrival of a boat should be positively correlated with the returns in London
after the departure of that boat. In other words, price changes in Amsterdam should be correlated
with contemporaneous, but as of yet unreported, returns in London. Hereafter this is referred to
as co-movement. Price changes in London remain unreported in Amsterdam until the sailing of
the next boat. Co-movement is therefore not driven by the transmission of public information.
The corollary also states that, even though prices slowly incorporate private information, they
follow a martingale process. The intuition comes from market e¢ ciency. If there is positive autocorrelation, prices in t = 1 would not fully incorporate all available information. The market
maker would be able to predict the price change in t = 2 based on the price change in t = 1.
This is inconsistent with risk neutrality and competitive behavior (Banerjee et al. 2009 provide a
detailed discussion).
The second key result is summarized by the following:
Corollary 3 cov(p1

v0 ; ")=

<0
16

Co-movement between " and the price change in t = 1 is decreasing in

. The intuition

follows from a trade-o¤ facing the informed agent. If he has only one period to trade, he balances
the volume of trades he can get executed with the impact on prices that this has. One speci…c
combination of price impact and volume maximizes pro…ts. If he gets a second period to trade,
the optimal price impact-volume combination changes. The insider would now prefer to trade less
in period t = 1. In this way he reveals less of his information and he can obtain higher pro…ts in
period t = 2. In the model, period t = 2 only occurs with probability . If

is low, the insider

wants to trade more aggressively in t = 1, implying stronger co-movement with ".
There are a number of assumptions that merit further discussion. First, all private information
is publicly revealed in London by the time the next boat sets its sails for Amsterdam. This is a
simpli…cation to ensure that (a) there is only one private signal at a given point in time and (b)
that trades in Amsterdam have no impact on insider pro…ts in London. It is certainly possible
that the private signal is not revealed until later. This does not change the model’s qualitative
predictions. London prices still reveal private information, albeit imperfectly, and the two markets
move in the same direction. In addition, it is optimal for the Amsterdam insider to trade more
aggressively is he expects news from London to arrive shortly. Though this news is not fully
revealing, it still divulges part of the private signal. Second, the London insider does not trade on
the private signal before it is sent to Amsterdam. It is easy to allow for informed trading before the
departure of a boat. As long as the private signal is not perfectly revealed before a boat departs
for Amsterdam, this does not change the model’s predictions. Third, the insider is a monopolist.
There may in fact be multiple insiders. The model’s predictions should be the same as long as
the di¤erent private signals are su¢ ciently heterogeneous and privately informed agents have an
incentive to delay their trades (see Foster and Vishwanathan 1996 for a detailed discussion). If
multiple agents observe the same private signal, competition between agents would quickly undo
the model’s predictions (Holden and Subrahmanyam 1994).

3

Empirical evidence

3.1

Introduction

Figure 3 explains the empirical setting. There are two relevant boat crossings. The …rst crossing
transmits private signal "k and publicly reveals previous private signal "k 1 . The second crossing
reveals private signal "k and brings in new private signal "k+1 . With probability

k

the second

boat arrives relatively late.
[FIGURE 3 ABOUT HERE]
Returns in London and Amsterdam are de…ned as follows. The London post-departure return,
RkL , is the return in London after the departure of the …rst boat. To be clear, information about
17

this return is not publicly transmitted by the …rst boat. Returns are calculated over di¤erent
periods (2, 3, 4, and 5 days). The baseline results use the 3 day returns. The Amsterdam news
A
return, Rk;t=1
, is the return in Amsterdam after the arrival of this boat. This corresponds to

period t = 1 in the model. News about this return is transmitted back to London, but always
A
arrives after the 2-5 day post-departure period. This means that RkL and Rk;t=1
are not spuriously
A
correlated due to possible public information shocks in Amsterdam. Finally, if it occurs, Rk;t=2
is

the return in Amsterdam over the subsequent period without news (period t = 2 in the model).
Price information in Amsterdam is only available for Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays. Returns
are therefore calculated over 2 or 3 day periods, depending on the day of the week.12 Returns are
de…ned as

3.2

pt = 100 ln(pt =pt 1 ).

Baseline results

How well do the corollaries established by the model hold up? Corollary 2 predicts that returns
in Amsterdam are correlated with contemporaneous, but as of yet unreported, returns in London.
A
This should be true for both t = 1, the period right after the arrival of a boat (Rk;t=1
), and t = 2,
A
the subsequent no-news period (Rk;t=2
). For each of the three securities, I estimate the following

regressions:

The model predicts that

1

A
Rk;t=1
=

0

+

L
1 Rk

+ ut

(9)

A
Rk;t=2
=

0

+

L
1 Rk

+ vt

(10)

> 0. Estimates are in columns 1, 3, and 5 of Table 1.

[TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE]
The results indicate that both Amsterdam news (Panel A) and no-news returns (Panel B) are
strongly correlated with London post-departure returns. This is the case for all three securities.
Coe¢ cients are statistically signi…cant at the 1 or 5% level. Statistically speaking, there is no
signi…cant di¤erence in co-movement between news and no-news returns. The model has no clearcut predictions about this dimension; it depends on the variance of the noise trading shocks in the
two periods.
It is possible that the co-movement patterns are driven by return continuation or momentum.
If, for whatever reason, prices in both markets drift in the same direction, returns will automatically
be correlated. This would be fundamentally di¤erent from a model of strategic insider trading that
predicts that prices are a martingale (Corollary 2). To di¤erentiate between these two explanations,
I condition the co-movement estimates on past returns, both in London and Amsterdam.
12

The 3 day period includes the weekend during which trading was restricted. Jewish traders did not trade

during the Shabbat and Christians did not trade on Sundays (Spooner 1983). I therefore treat the weekend return
the same as the 2 day return.

18

Figure 3 de…nes past returns. Return RkL

1

is the price change in London before the departure

of a boat. This can be interpreted as a public information shock; it tells Amsterdam investors
how much prices in London have moved since the last shipment of news. Return RkL

is the

2

pre-departure return associated with the previous boat. With a slight abuse of notation, RkA

1

captures the previous Amsterdam return that can either re‡ect the arrival of a boat or not.
Table 1 presents estimates of the following two regressions

where coe¢ cients

A
=
Rk;t=1

0

+

L
1 Rk

+

L
2 Rk 1

+

A
3 Rk 1

A
Rk;t=2
=

0

+

L
1 Rk

+

L
2 Rk 1

+

A
3 Rk;t=1

1

+

L
4 Rk 2

(11)

+ ut

(12)

+ vt

again measure co-movement. Speci…cation (11) for news returns includes

RkL 1 , the London pre-departure return that captures public information. The model abstracts
away from public news shocks, but in reality they likely played an important role for security
prices, that is

2

> 0. The speci…cation also includes the pre-departure return associated with

the previous boat (RkL 2 ). If there is any continuation of previous news returns then
Finally, RkA

1

4

> 0.

captures drift in the Amsterdam return series. Speci…cation (12) for no-news returns

is similar. It includes the news shock associated with the most recent boat arrival (RkL 1 ). The
associated coe¢ cient

2

picks up the continuation of the London news return into no-news periods.

A
The speci…cation also includes lagged Amsterdam returns (Rk;t=1
in this case).

Results are in columns 2, 4 and 6 of Table 1. Most importantly, for both speci…cations the
inclusion of past returns has no impact on the coe¢ cient on RkL . After controlling for past returns,
there is still strong evidence for co-movement. If anything,

1

increases. This indicates that co-

movement is independent of any drift that might be present in the return series. The estimates for
A
Amsterdam news returns (Rk;t=1
) are in Panel A. As expected, the impact of public information

RkL

1

is highly economically and statistically signi…cant. The e¤ect of the previous public news

shock RkL

2

is close to zero. The coe¢ cient on the previous Amsterdam return, RkA 1 , has a negative

sign, indicating that returns partly revert, rather than exhibit drift. This could be consistent with
liquidity shocks having transitory price impact (Grossman and Miller 1988). Results for no-news
A
returns (Rk;t=2
) are in panel B. In this case, there is some continuation of London news returns

into no-news periods. This is statistically signi…cant for EIC stock and the 3% Annuities. Again,
there is evidence that previous returns in Amsterdam partly revert.
This 18th century pattern of return reversals is strikingly similar to those of modern markets.
There is a large literature going back to Niederho¤er and Osborne (1966) demonstrating that
returns exhibit reversals in the short run. Using daily returns on large and liquid equities between
1979 and 2007, Tetlock (2010, Table 1) presents reversal coe¢ cients of around

0:10.13 This

number lies very close to the estimates in Table 1.
13

Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) provide evidence for momentum over longer horizons, speci…cally periods between

3 and 12 months.

19

Appendix D presents estimates of two other robustness tests for EIC stock. In Table D.1 the
London post-departure return RkL is calculated over 2, 4 or 5 days after a boat departure. Varying
this period does not matter substantially for the estimates. Estimates in Table D.2 exclude the
…rst day of the London post-departure return to ensure that the positive co-movement between
A
RkL and Rk;t=1
is not driven by boats carrying public information more recent than indicated by

the historical sources. Results indicate that this does not signi…cantly change the results.
The co-movement estimates in Table 1 are economically important. Suppose, for example,
that prices in London increase by 1% after the departure of a boat. Then, on average, prices in
Amsterdam increase by about 0.25% in the …rst days after the arrival of that boat and an additional
0.25% in the subsequent no-news period (if it occurs). We can compare this to the response to
public information shocks (the coe¢ cient on RkL 1 ) to get a sense of the relative magnitude. On
average, a 1% return in London before the departure of a boat leads to an instantaneous price
increase in Amsterdam of 0.5%. This means that the cumulative e¤ect of private information is
comparable to the impact of public news shocks.
The presence of private information also increased trading costs. Evidence suggests that uninformed agents shied away from trading right after the arrival of a boat when adverse selection
costs would have been the highest. Detailed trading data is di¢ cult to come by. There are two
sources that mention exact transaction dates. The …rst contains trading records of Abraham Cohen de Lara, a Portuguese-Jewish merchant based in Amsterdam (SAA 334, 722-723). The second
has information about the liquidation of securities that were pledged as collateral in margin loans
(SAA 5075, 10603-10611). In total there is information about 32 transactions of which only 4 took
place on days with news. If traders were indi¤erent between trading on days with or without news
this number should be close to 9 (on average two boats arrived each week; 2=7

32

9). The

di¤erence is statistically signi…cant with a p-value of 0.028 (one sided binomial test).

3.3

Di¤erent expectations about the next boat arrival

Corollary 3 predicts that the co-movement with London in period t = 1 should be stronger if the
next boat is expected to arrive shortly. This corollary is a consequence of the strategic behavior
of insiders.14
Before moving to the empirical tests a quick note on the estimation of

k.

This parameter

captures the probability that there is a second period of trade. We can calculate an empirical
counterpart by looking at the number of days between the arrivals of two news shipments, denoted
by A. The longer this period, the more trading opportunities an informed agent expects to have.
14

The model also holds predictions for co-movement in period t = 2. Speci…cally, we expect to observe less

co-movement if the insider initially expected the next boat to arrive right after t = 1. Unfortunately, there are too
few observations to test this. It is rare that period t = 2 took place unexpectedly.

20

At the beginning of a period he does not know what the realization of A will be, but he has some
expectation, E[A], that we can approximate. This expectation depends on two factors. First, how
many days ago did a news shipment leave London? Or, if it didn’t depart yet, when is it set to do
so? This information comes directly from the sailing schedule. Second, how long will the shipment
of news take to arrive in Amsterdam? This is not known with certainty. The …rst de…nition,
E [Ajsimple], simply uses the median travelling time. The second de…nition, E [Ajextended], is
based on a duration model with a ‡exible Gamma distribution that uses information about weather
conditions, most importantly the direction of the wind. A sailing boat adjusts its sails to the
prevailing winds. However, when it gets “too close to the wind”, it enters the so-called “nogo zone”. In order to advance it needs to tack (constantly change direction). This slows down
sailing and increases the e¤ective distance. Information on wind directions is available for 2
or 3 observations a day. For every observation we can determine whether a boat sailing East
faces a no-go zone. This includes winds that lie within 55 degrees of an Eastern direction. To
capture the possible presence of ice, the model includes a dummy for low temperatures.15 It also
includes month dummies to account for additional seasonalities. Both procedures yield reasonable
estimates of E [A], although the extended model does signi…cantly better. The correlation between
E [Ajsimple] and the actual realization of A is 0.36. For E [Ajextended] this is 0.52. Figures D.2
and D.3 in Appendix D present these results graphically.
A
Table 2 presents empirical tests of whether Amsterdam news returns (Rk;t=1
) co-move more

strongly with London if the next news shipment is expected to arrive relatively soon. For simplicity
the estimation di¤erentiates between E [A] higher or lower than the unconditional expectation.
Two boats were scheduled to depart each week, so this is 3:5 days. The regression of interest is
A
Rk;t=1
=

0

+

L
1 Rk

+

L
2 Rk

(E [A] < 3:5) +

3

(E [A] < 3:5) + Xk;t=1 + ut ;

where Xk;t=1 includes past returns. Corollary 3 predicts that

2

> 0. Table 2 presents results for

both E [Ajsimple] and E [Ajextended]. The interaction e¤ect is positive and statistically signi…cant
for EIC and BoE stock. As expected, the interaction with E [Ajextended] is stronger, although the
di¤erence with E [Ajsimple] is not statistically signi…cant. The impact is economically important:
co-movement roughly doubles if the next boat is expected to arrive within 3.5 days. For the 3%
Annuities the interaction terms are positive but statistically insigni…cant. The interaction with
E [Ajextended] only has a p-value of 0.203 but its magnitude is similar to the other two securities.
[TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE]
15

Hellevoetsluys is situated in the mouth of several rivers. Ice ‡oating downstream could make it hard to reach

the harbor. A dummy for temperatures below 3 degrees Celcius has the best …t in the duration model; inland
tempartures were lower than the ones measured at the Zwanenburg observatory which was relatively close to the
sea.

21

3.4

Feedback e¤ects and price discovery in London

Thus far, the analysis has focused on Amsterdam. However, the presence of private information
also implies a number of testable predictions for price discovery in London. Speci…cally, there may
be feedback e¤ects since both markets face the same private signal. If noise in the price discovery
process is not perfectly correlated, a combination of the two markets’signals is more informative
than each signal individually (Chowdry and Nanda 1991; Boulatov et al. 2011). In other words,
London investors update their beliefs based on price changes in Amsterdam. The theoretical model
proposed in Section 2 assumes that the private signal in London is revealed before any of this can
happen. This is an abstraction that facilitates the analysis of price discovery in Amsterdam.
It is likely that private information in London was longer lived. In that case, price changes in
Amsterdam might a¤ect price discovery in London. Figure 4 formalizes this intuition. At London
time t , a boat with private signal " sets sail to Amsterdam where it arrives at time t. A few days
(a) later, a boat departs for London, transmitting Amsterdam prices at time t + a. The concrete
price signal that this boat carries can be expressed as pA
t+a

A
pA
t , where pt is the Amsterdam price

recorded right before the arrival of the boat. This information reaches London at t + l, where l
is the number of days since the departure of the …rst boat from London. Between t and t + l,
the London market observes its own (noisy) signal and the price changes by pLt +l

pLt . After

the arrival of the boat, the London market maker updates his beliefs based on the news from
Amsterdam and sets a new London price pLt +l+1 .
[FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE]
This section of the paper analyzes this situation in reduced form. Appendix E develops a
full-‡edged Kyle model and under a number of reasonable assumptions predictions are equivalent.
Without loss of generality Amsterdam and London signals can be written as

where "k

N (0;

2
" ),

N (0;

2

A

= "+

(13)

L

= "+

(14)

) and

N (0;

2

). Disturbances

and

are independent of ",

and can be correlated as long as
0 < cov

A

;

L

< var

i

for i = A; L;
A

where the second inequality simply implies that signals

and

L

cannot be identical. Assuming

away any additional innovations in the price process, price changes in Amsterdam and London
can be written as
pLt +l
pLt +l+1

pLt

=

pLt +l =

L L

; pA
t+a

AjL A

22

(

L

A A

pA
t =
LjA

)

L

;

where
i

ijj

2
"

=

A

jji cov

i

=

(15)

i

var

var

L

;

, for i; j = A; L:

i

(16)

This implies that
L

=

and

pLt

pLt +l
L

A

;

AjL

pLt +l+1

pLt +l =

pA
t+a

A

pA
t

=

pA
t+a

(

pA
t
A

L

LjA

;

)

L

pLt +l

pLt :

(17)

Equation (17) has three testable predictions (proofs are included in Appendix A).
Prediction 1: (a) Price changes in London pLt +l+1
AjL

in Amsterdam:

=

A

pLt +l respond positively to price changes

> 0. In addition, (b) pLt +l+1
L

previous London price change:

LjA

=

L

pLt +l is negatively correlated with the

>0

If the Amsterdam and London signal are both correlated with ", and not perfectly correlated
with each other, then the London market maker can learn from the Amsterdam signal. In addition,
since the signals partly reveal the same information, it is optimal for the London market maker to
put less weight on the signal he observed earlier (expression 16). This implies that after observing
the Amsterdam signal, the earlier price change in London partially reverts.
Prediction 2: In the empirical estimation of (17), the coe¢ cient on the Amsterdam signal
pA
t is smaller if the previous London price change

pA
t+a

pLt +l

pLt

is not included in the

regression.
The lagged London return enters the regression with a negative coe¢ cient. It is positively
correlated with the signal from Amsterdam. Omitting it from the regression leads to a downward
bias of the coe¢ cient on the Amsterdam signal, pA
t+a

pA
t . This is critical: if London prices simply

respond to an independent public news shock from Amsterdam, the impact of this shock should
not depend on past London price changes.
AjL

Prediction 3: Finally,
A

cision of signal
AjL

A

AjL

:

2

> 0.

As expected,

AjL

but

=

AjL

=

A

=

A

, the coe¢ cient on pA
t+a
=

2

< 0, and (b) decreasing in the precision of signal

drops when

L

falls as more weight is put on

L

less precise, both

A

=

and

(bivariate) coe¢ cient
London signal
more than

A

L

A

AjL

AjL

pA
t , is (a) increasing in the pre-

becomes more informative. Parameter

A

L

:

is una¤ected,

. Part (a) of the result is less intuitive. When

A

becomes

fall: overall, there is less to learn from the signal. The drop in the

dominates because the London market maker also has access to the

. Since cov(

A

;

L

) > 0 this means that more weight is put on

.
23

L

and

AjL

falls

How does the precision of the Amsterdam and London signals vary over time? First, the price
in Amsterdam is arguably more informative when there are many days (denoted a) between the
arrival and departure of a boat. In a simple Kyle model more opportunities to trade lead to the
dissemination of more information. Period a is longer when news from London happens to come
in right after a boat has just set sail for England. At that point, it will take 3 or 4 days for the
next boat to depart. In the same vein, if there are many days in London (denoted l) between the
initial departure of a boat and the eventual arrival of news from Amsterdam, London prices are
likely to be more informative. Period l is longer when sailing times on the North Sea (in either
direction) happen to be long.
The regression of interest is
pLt +l+1

pLt +l =

0

+

+
Coe¢ cient

1

4

1

pA
t+a

pLt +l

pA
t +

pLt +

2

pA
t+a

L
5 (pt

pA
t

pA
t )+

a+
6a

+

7l

3

pA
t

pA
t+a

(18)

l

+ ut

captures the e¤ect of the Amsterdam signal; the model predicts that

1

> 0. This

coe¢ cient is downwardly biased since prices in Amsterdam respond to earlier (public) news from
London. To reduce this bias, the estimates include pLt

pA
t , the di¤erence between the London

price observed in Amsterdam after the arrival of a boat at time t and the Amsterdam price recorded
right before (see Figure 4 for details). Coe¢ cient

4

measures whether the London market puts

less weight on its own signal after the arrival of news from Amsterdam. The model predicts that
4

< 0. Coe¢ cients

2

and

3

(interactions between the Amsterdam signal and periods a and l)

pick up changes in the relative precision of the Amsterdam signal; according to the model
and

3

2

>0

< 0.

[TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE]
Table 3 presents the regression results. Columns 1, 3, and 5 only include the Amsterdam
signal pA
t+a

L
pA
t , and earlier news from London pt

pA
t . For all three securities coe¢ cient

1

is positive, but it is only statistically signi…cant for EIC stock. Consistent with the impulse
responses in Figure D.1 in Appendix D, the coe¢ cients are relatively small. Columns 2, 4 and 6
include the other variables. The results are in line with Predictions 1 and 2. Coe¢ cient
16

Amsterdam signal increases; this increase is statistically signi…cant for EIC stock.

1

on the

Coe¢ cient

4,

the coe¢ cient on previous London returns, has a negative sign, but is statistically insigni…cant for
all three securities. The interaction e¤ects with periods a and l are introduced as deviations from
the median. Coe¢ cient

1

in columns 2, 4 and 6 therefore measures the impact of Amsterdam

news at median values of a (2 days) and l (10 days). The interaction terms measure the impact
on
16

1

when moving away from the median. For all securities, the signs on the coe¢ cients are as

In a speci…cation omitting the interaction terms with a and l, the coe¢ cients on

(EIC), 0.102* (BoE) and 0.066 (3% Ann.). In this speci…cation the increase in
for the EIC.

24

1

1

slightly increase to 0.129***

is still only statistically signi…cant

predicted. A longer time period l reduces the impact of the Amsterdam signal, whereas a longer
period a increases the e¤ect. The coe¢ cients are statistically signi…cant for the EIC and the 3%
Annuities.
The economic impact of the interaction e¤ects is considerable. Consider EIC stock. The 75th
percentile of the distribution of [a
doubles

1

median(a)] is 1 day and moving to the 75th percentile almost

from 0.122 to 0.214. The 25th percentile of the distribution of [l
th

days. Moving to the 25

percentile also nearly doubles

1

median(l)] is

2

from 0.122 to 0.234. Note that a and l

are positively correlated. If a increases, l tends to increase as well, cancelling some of the e¤ect on
1.

Based on these estimates it appears that, at median values of a, the London market stopped

responding to news from Amsterdam after approximately 12 days (

1+2

5

0). At this point,

private information seems to have been fully incorporated into London prices.
To summarize, the empirical evidence is consistent with the idea that discovery of private
signals in Amsterdam has subsequent impact on London. This con…rms that informational asymmetries were persistent. It is unlikely that these empirical …ndings are driven by public information
shocks originating in Amsterdam. First, London’s response to Amsterdam increases after conditioning on past London returns. Second, the e¤ect is larger when there was more time to trade in
Amsterdam or when the “round-trip”of a signal was relatively short. This is inconsistent with a
public information story.

3.5

Amsterdam as a source of private information

Thus far, the underlying assumption of the paper is that private information exclusively originated
in London. It is not obvious that this was always the case. Private information could have reached
Amsterdam before London, especially when it concerned the EIC. The Dutch had their own East
India company and their network might have generated relevant information about their British
competitor. There is a straightforward way to test this: switching Amsterdam and London in the
regressions. If Amsterdam was a signi…cant source of private information, we expect that returns
in Amsterdam after the departure of a boat are correlated with price changes in London after the
arrival of that boat.
Table 4 replicates the results from Table 1 after swapping the identities of the two cities. Results
do not suggest that Amsterdam was an important source of private information. The London nonews returns are not correlated with the Amsterdam post-departure returns: coe¢ cients are close
to zero. The London news returns co-move somewhat with Amsterdam, but the coe¢ cients are
small and statistically insigni…cant for all three securities. The di¤erences with the baselines
estimates of Table 1 are highly statistically signi…cant. Table D.3 in Appendix D analyzes the
co-movement of London news returns in more detail. If Amsterdam was an important source of
private information, we would expect that co-movement increases if the next boat from the Dutch

25

Republic is expected to arrive in short order. Table D.3 replicates the results from Table 2 with
the two cities switched around. There is no evidence that co-movement in London varied with
expectations about the next boat arrival from Amsterdam.17 This con…rms that Amsterdam was
not an important source of private information.
[TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE]

4

Robustness tests

The baseline …ndings of section 3.2 might be driven by other factors than private information. This
section discusses four alternative explanations: (1) public news slipping through other channels,
(2) the slow incorporation of public information, (3) search frictions, and (4) correlated liquidity
shocks.

4.1

Slipping through of news

The co-movement of Amsterdam and London security prices could simply be the result of the
arrival of news through channels other than the o¢ cial packet boats. The …rst possibility is
the crossing of other ships. This alternative explanation is most relevant for Amsterdam no-news
A
returns (Rk;t=2
). We can test for this with the following robustness exercise. All ships relied on the

right wind direction to cross the North Sea. This suggests that, if other ships are responsible for
the co-movement results, the estimates should be signi…cantly stronger when winds were favorable.
Table 5 presents estimates of the following regression:
A
Rk;t=2
=

0

+

L
1 Rk

+

L
2 Rk

f avorable +

where Xk;t=2 includes past returns. Baseline coe¢ cient

3 f avorable

1

+ Xk;t=2 + ut ;

measures co-movement during periods

of adverse winds. The interaction term between RkL and the dummy for favorable winds measures
by how much co-movement increases when the winds turn for the better. If sailing boats other than
the packets played an important role we would expect that good weather periods drive most of the
results; i.e.

2

> 0. In that case

1

should be close to zero. There are three di¤erent de…nitions

for favorable winds. Under de…nition A, a return period had favorable winds if the next packet
boat arrived according to schedule. Under de…nition B winds have to blow from the West (from
180 to 360 degrees) on every single day of a no-news period. The starting point for de…nition C
is the “no-go zone”: for every day of a return-period, at least two wind observations within that
day (out of a total of 2 or 3) have to be outside the no-go zone. Table 5, Columns 1, 3, and 5,
17

These expectations are calculated in the same way as for Amsterdam. Due to data limitations, E[Ajextended]

is only based on the no-go zone and month dummies. Weather observations come from Deal, a town 69 miles from
London.

26

present the estimates for de…nition A. Results for de…nitions B and C are in Table D.4 in Appendix
D. The results indicate that the degree of co-movement is equally strong in periods of good and
bad weather:
Coe¢ cient

2

1

is just as large and statistically signi…cant as the baseline estimates in Table 1.

is economically small (or negative) and statistically insigni…cant. Exceptions are

de…nitions B and C for the 3% Annuities. Coe¢ cient
these speci…cations, but

2

is still signi…cantly di¤erent from zero in

1

is positive (albeit statistically insigni…cant).

[TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE]
Carrier pigeons are another potential source of information. The historical evidence suggests
that they were not introduced until after 1800. At that point, they could only be used during
periods of reasonable weather; they did not ‡y in the winter. We can test for their possible impact
during the 1770s and 1780s by running the following regression
A
Rk;t=2
=

0

+

L
1 Rk

+

L
2 Rk

non

winter +

3 non

winter + Xk;t=2 + ut ;

where the “non-winter”dummy has a value of one from March to October and Xk;t=2 again includes
lagged returns. Baseline coe¢ cient

1

measures co-movement from November to February. If

carrier pigeons played an important role in transmitting information, we would expect that comovement is stronger during the rest of the year, i.e.

2

> 0. Results in columns 2, 4, and 6 in

Table 5 indicate that, if anything, co-movement is weaker from March to October. This suggests
that carrier pigeons did not play an important role.
A third possible alternative is the arrival of news via Dover and Calais. When winds on the
North Sea were unfavorable, boats may have managed to cross the Strait of Dover, which is only 26
miles wide.18 Table 6 replicates the estimates of Table 1 after omitting price information that could
have been a¤ected by this channel. Under favorable conditions, news travelling over Dover and
Calais took a week to arrive in Amsterdam: 4 days longer than the regular mail. It took at least a
full day to ship the news from London to Calais and the subsequent route over land to Amsterdam
took 6 days. Road conditions were poor and rivers had to be crossed by ferry (Le Jeune 1851;
Ten Brink 1969, p. 21). This is supported by the newspapers of the time. News from England
that arrived in Amsterdam via Ostend, a port situated 60 miles northeast of Calais, was at least
1 week old (Rotterdamsche and Amsterdamsche Courant·; see Section 1.2 for further discussion).
Table 6 excludes periods in Amsterdam when the most recent information from London (that had
arrived through the regular packet service) was older than 6 days. The number of observations
drops considerably, but the co-movement estimates are similar to those in Table 1 and statistically
18

Crossing the Strait of Dover is far from straightforward. It is infamous for its strong currents and quickly

changing weather. Even with light winds, the sea can be rough. Visibility is often limited and dense fogs occur
regularly, making it di¢ cult to navigate. Risks could be enormous: on November 20, 1775 the o¢ cial Dover-Calais
packet boat sank in a storm, killing “16 English gentlemen and their entourage”, Rotterdamsche Courant, Nov. 24,
1775.

27

signi…cant. Co-movement is not as weak as we would expect if news arriving via the Strait of
Dover played an important role.19
[TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE]

4.2

Trading costs, inattention, or heterogeneous beliefs

It is possible that the co-movement of prices between Amsterdam and London was driven by the
slow incorporation of public news. This might have been the result of trading costs. If it is costly
to trade on new public information, prices might not be fully updated right away. Alternatively,
market participants may have “agreed to disagree” or there may have been a lack of attention,
leading some agents to initially ignore certain news. It is possible to distinguish between this
alternative explanation and the strategic behavior of insiders. The slow incorporation of public
news generally leads to return continuation (Hong and Stein 1999; Huberman and Regev 2001;
DellaVigna and Pollet 2009). Results in Table 1 suggest that, consistent with a model of strategic
insider trading, there is hardly any drift in the return series. Most importantly, the co-movement
results are independent of any return continuation that is present.

4.3

Search frictions

The co-movement patterns could be explained by the decentralized trading environment in Amsterdam and London (see Section 1.3 for details). In such a setting, it might take time for traders
to …nd each other, transactions to take place, and for prices to re‡ect new information. If search is
particularly di¢ cult during spells of bad weather, this might also explain why initial co-movement
is weaker when the next boat is delayed. This section considers two di¤erent cases.
4.3.1

Public news

In the …rst case all information is public. Conditional on trade taking place, prices will immediately
incorporate news. However, if transactions are delayed, it will take time for prices to re‡ect new
information. This can give rise to co-movement. For example, suppose that a new piece of
information arrives in London one day before a boat is set to depart for Amsterdam. Due to
search frictions, no trade takes place until after departure. The boat transmits the information to
Amsterdam where prices respond, either immediately after arrival or, if transactions are delayed,
19

A
and RkL 1 , signifIn the no-news estimates, the coe¢ cients on past Amsterdam and London returns, Rk;t=1

icantly increase in size compared to Table 1. This is due to collinearity problems. The two returns are strongly
correlated with

= 0:58 (EIC),

= 0:37 (BoE), and

= 0:49 (3% Ann.). With only a limited number of ob-

servations, the regression cannot fully distinguish between the two: the coe¢ cients largely cancel each other out.
In a regression without past returns, the coe¢ cients on RkL are 0.310*** (EIC), 0.310*** (BoE), and 0.407** (3%
Ann.).

28

in the subsequent no-news period. As a result, London post-departure and Amsterdam post-arrival
returns are positively correlated. The key prediction from this framework is that co-movement is
only present after periods without transactions.
It is not obvious that this mechanism can explain the empirical …ndings. The historical evidence
suggests that London newspapers only published actual transaction prices: no trade implied no
price. The co-movement regressions include price changes in London before the departure of a
boat and therefore omit any observations for which there is no such price change available.
The London newspapers may have occasionally reported stale prices (Lesmond et al. 1999;
Bekaert et al. 2007). In that case, search frictions might still be relevant. To test this alternative,
we can check whether co-movement between Amsterdam and London is stronger after the reporting
of a (potentially) stale price. Table 7 presents estimates of the following regressions for Amsterdam
news and no-news returns:
A
Rk;t=1
=

0

+

L
1 Rk

+

L
2 Rk

I RkL

1

=0 +

3

RkL

1

= 0 + Xk;t=1 + ut

A
Rk;t=2
=

0

+

L
1 Rk

+

L
2 Rk

I RkL

1

=0 +

3

RkL

1

= 0 + Xk;t=2 + vt ;

where Xk;t=1 and Xk;t=2 include past returns and RkL

1

is the London pre-departure return (see

Figure 3 for details). The reporting of a stale price implies a zero return. The interaction term
between RkL and I RkL

1

= 0 captures whether there is more co-movement if RkL

1

= 0. Estimates

are in Table 7. The results suggest that zero returns are not associated with stronger co-movement:
coe¢ cient

2

is small or negative and statistically insigni…cant.

[TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE]
It is possible that zero returns are an imperfect measure of search frictions in London: even
if prices move, they may not re‡ect the most recent information. Using a similar approach,
we can check whether there is evidence for search frictions in Amsterdam. In this particular
mechanism, news is only slowly incorporated into prices if there are no transactions. This means
that Amsterdam no-news returns should only co-move with London if the preceding news return
was zero. Table D.5 in Appendix D reports the corresponding regression results. There is no
evidence that co-movement for no-news returns was stronger after zero news returns: for the EIC
there is a slight increase, but this is not statistically signi…cant. For the BoE the e¤ect is close to
zero; for the 3% Annuities it is negative (but statistically insigni…cant).
Search frictions might explain why Amsterdam news returns exhibited less co-movement when
the next boat was expected to arrive relatively late. The idea is that adverse sailing conditions
were associated with bad weather in Amsterdam, making it more di¢ cult for agents to …nd each
other and transact. Table D.6 in Appendix D reports simple tests of whether news returns were
more likely to be zero when the next boat was expected to be late. The table shows that this
was not the case. In sum, the evidence does not suggest that search frictions in combination with
public news shocks can explain the co-movement results.
29

4.3.2

Private signals

In the second case, a boat transmits many di¤erent individual signals. One way to interpret this is
that there is one single information event, but everyone interprets this di¤erently due to di¤erences
in the initial information set. Agents do have homogeneous beliefs, so the market converges to a
single valuation (Kim and Verrecchia 1994). This section uses a simpli…ed version of the model in
Du¢ e and Manso (2007) to analyze this situation.
For simplicity, new information only becomes available in London right before a boat is set
to depart. After its arrival in Amsterdam, there are 3 trading rounds: together t = 1; 2 can be
thought of as the news period; t = 3 as the no-news period. There is a continuum of agents with
unit mass that have subscript i. There is a single risky asset that pays out v0 + " after t = 3,
where v0 is common knowledge. At the beginning of t = 1 a boat arrives and all agents observe
an individual signal about ":
i

where ! i are iid, ! i

N (0;

2
!)

and "

= " + !i
2
" ).

N (0;

For exogenous reasons, half of the agents

want to buy stock and the other half want to sell. Buyers are randomly matched to sellers with
matching intensity 0 <

< 1. When they meet they share their information and transact at their

common posterior (as in Du¢ e and Manso 2007). Almost surely, they will never run into the same
agent again.
In t = 1, there is a continuum of transactions with prices pe1 = v0 +
2

Through this trading process a fraction

=

2
"

2

2
"

+

2( i

+

j)

for i 6= j, where
(19)

:

of the agents will have observed an additional signal at

the end of t = 1. As a result, there are three types of possible matches in period t = 2 that result
in the following prices
pe2 (n) = v0 +

n

n
X

(20)

i;

i=1

where n 2 f2; 3; 4g is the number of signals a price is based on and
n

=

2
"
2

+ (n

1)

2
"

(21)

:

Similar to the historical setting, there is an o¢ cial committee that collects information about the
going price. For tractability, I assume that they report the simple mean of a continuous subset of
transaction prices at the end of t = 2. Using the law of large numbers
Z
p2 = v0 + pe2 (n) = v0 + 2 2 (1
)2 + 6 3 (1
)+4
|
{z
where (proofs are included in Appendix A):

30

2
4

}

";

(22)

Lemma 4 0 <

< 1.

This means that p2 “underreacts” to the available information: the coe¢ cients

n

on the

individual signals are all smaller than one. This re‡ects the fact that, for each individual, signals
are noisy. The reported price is based on a continuum of those signals and therefore reveals the
true value of ". After observing p2 , all agents update their beliefs and set p3 = v0 + ".
This simple model has the following predictions
Lemma 5 (a) cov(p2
cov(p2

v0 ; p3

p2 ) =

2
"

v0 ; ") =
(1

)

2
"

> 0 and (b) cov(p3

p2 ; ") = (1

)

2
"

> 0, while (c)

> 0:

In other words, this simple model can explain the co-movement patterns between Amsterdam
and London. At the same time, price changes are auto-correlated. After an initial “underreaction”,
the price drifts in the same direction as p2

v0 . The estimates in Table 1 indicate that there is

little evidence for return continuation in the return series. Most importantly, the inclusion of past
returns does not lead to a drop in the co-movement estimates. This is inconsistent with this model.
To see this, write the London post-departure return as

= " + &, where & is an iid information

shock that is not yet transmitted to Amsterdam. In the baseline regression
p3
coe¢ cient

1

p2 =

1

is strictly positive. If we include p2 v0 ,

+ u;
1

will fall to 0: p2 v0 is perfectly correlated

with " and subsumes the entire e¤ect of . If p2 does not perfectly re‡ect "

v0 ,

1

will remain

positive but it will be signi…cantly smaller.
These predictions are robust to changing the way the o¢ cial committee reports prices. Take
the example where they report a single transaction price. For simplicity, suppose that the price
in t = 2 is based on a transaction between two individuals who haven’t traded before:
pe2 (2) =

2( i

+

j)

for some i 6= j. In t = 3, the committee again reports a single price that is based on a transaction

between two traders who have not been matched to a counterparty before, but who have observed
the price pe2 . In this case,

pe3 (4) =

4( i

+

j

+

k

+

l)

for some i 6= j 6= k 6= l. Price changes in both t = 2 and t = 3 are correlated with "; it is easy to

show that

2

> 0 and that 2

4

2

> 0. In addition, there is return continuation. This follows

from the fact that
cov(e
p2

v0 ; pe3

pe2 ) =

2 4(

2

2
")

>0

The model also links search frictions to the degree of co-movement:
31

Lemma 6 The correlation between p2
cov(p2

v0 ; ")=

v0 and the true value of the asset " is increasing in :

>0

As search gets easier, more agents observe an additional signal in period t = 1. Agents’signals
in t = 2 become (weakly) more precise, and coe¢ cient

increases. If search frictions and sailing

conditions are related, this could explain why co-movement is stronger when the next boat is
expected to arrive in short order. Table 8 documents how expected arrival times correlate with
a wide range of weather variables, other than the wind direction. Overall, the evidence for a
link with weather induced search frictions is weak. Expected arrival times are only signi…cantly
correlated with wind speed and rainfall. It is not obvious that traders would have had more
di¢ culty …nding each other if it rained or if the wind was stronger. Table 8 shows that longer
expected boat arrivals were not correlated with a combination of rainfall (or any other type of
precipitation) and high wind speeds, or more extreme forms of weather such as (thunder)storms.
As a …nal robustness check, the estimates in Table D.7 in Appendix D include interaction terms
between the London post-departure return, RkL , and the rainfall and wind speed variables. The
additional interaction terms are small, statistically insigni…cant, and do not a¤ect the key …nding
that co-movement increases when the next boat is expected to arrive in short order. In sum, even
though a simple model of matching frictions goes quite some way in explaining the patterns in the
data, it is inconsistent with other elements of the empirical evidence.
[TABLE 8 ABOUT HERE]

4.4

Correlated liquidity shocks and slow moving capital

The co-movement of prices in London and Amsterdam could also re‡ect slow moving capital. If
the market has limited risk-bearing capacity, shifts in the demand or supply of an asset will have
an impact on prices (Grossman and Miller 1988; Du¢ e 2010). Suppose that a liquidity shock hits
the London market and is transmitted to Amsterdam. This has an immediate impact on prices.
Later, as capital (or securities) slowly trickle into the market, prices recover. This might explain
why Amsterdam post-arrival and London post-departure returns are positively correlated: after
the initial impact of the liquidity shock, prices in both markets move back to their fundamental
level. If London was an important source of capital or securities, the anticipated arrival of a
boat might have relaxed the constraints of liquidity providers in Amsterdam, leading to stronger
co-movement.
It is not immediately obvious that this mechanism was of …rst order importance in this speci…c
context. Market participants had access to the futures market where neither cash nor securities
were immediately necessary to transact (see Section 1.3 for details). However, these futures were
only available to a select number of reputable traders and it is possible that the marginal investor
did not always come from this group. In that case, the supply of securities or capital did matter.
32

Alternatively, if free entry to the futures market was indeed restricted, it is possible that liquidity
provision was not fully competitive. In such an oligopolistic setting, liquidity shocks could have a
signi…cant impact on prices, even if the market is frictionless in other dimensions. The in‡ow of
capital or securities may have substituted for a good reputation, enabling more liquidity providers
to participate. This would have made the Amsterdam and London markets more competitive,
bringing prices closer to fundamentals.
I use a model in the spirit of Biais et al. (1998) to evaluate whether slow moving capital can
explain the patterns in the data. For simplicity, I focus on a setup with oligopolistic liquidity provision without any other frictions. This is a useful abstraction: introducing additional constraints
does not change the model’s qualitative predictions. Results are generalizable to other models of
slow moving capital.
Figure 5 shows that the setup of the model is slightly di¤erent from the one considered in
Section 2. There is a single risky security with a normally distributed payo¤ v0 + ", with "
N (0;

2
" ).

Information is symmetric. There are three periods, t = 0; 1; 2. In London time is

indexed as t . The payo¤ of the risky asset is realized after t = t = 2. In t = 0 a liquidity
shock of size U hits the London market, U

N (0;

2

). English investors absorb fraction

of

this shock. The remainder is transmitted to the Amsterdam market, where it arrives in t = 0. In
periods t = t = 0, there are no liquidity providers present. There are only long term, price taking
investors in the market who can absorb this liquidity shock. At any point in time they have an
aggregate demand of
YA =

1
(v0
'A

L
This pins down prices pA
0 and p0 . Note that

'A (1

YL =

pt );

1
(v0
'L

pt )

L
can be set such that pA
0 = p0 , i.e.

) = 'L ,

=

'A
'A + ' L

so that there are no arbitrage opportunities. The aggregate demand functions can be interpreted
in a number of ways (Brunnermeier and Pedersen 2005). For example, long run investors might
be relatively risk averse and demand additional compensation for taking a position in the risky
security.20
From period t = t = 1 onwards a number of risk neutral, non-competitive liquidity providers
(or market makers) enter the market. Crucially, they compete on quantity rather than price and
20

This speci…c de…nition of the aggregate demand functions does not allow long term investors to arbitrage

between t = 0; t = 1 and t = 2. If they were allowed to arbitrage many results would go away. This assumption
can be motivated as follows. In the simple setup analyzed here, the only source of risk is related to the payo¤ of
the risky asset that only materializes after t = 2. In a more realistic setup, there would be additional risk in the
form of public news or liquidity shocks that materialize before t = 2 and make arbitrage risky. If the long term
investors are risk averse, this will limit arbitrage. As long as arbitrage is imperfect, results will be qualitatively
similar.

33

act strategically. In t = 1, capital ‡ows into the London market, enabling a single risk neutral
market maker to supply liquidity to the market. In addition, a certain amount of capital is shipped
to Amsterdam. This arrives in t = 1 so that a single liquidity provider can also set up shop here.
In t = 2, more capital ‡ows into London and this enables an additional group of L market makers
to provide liquidity. Some of this capital is again shipped to Amsterdam. With probability 1

,

the boat arrives before the beginning of t = 2 (superscript b) and this enables an additional M
agents to provide liquidity in this period. With probability

the boat arrives only after t = 2

(superscript nb). In t = 2, the Amsterdam market also receives fresh capital from a location other
than London. This happens with certainty and enables N additional market makers to provide
liquidity.
[FIGURE 5 ABOUT HERE]
The equilibrium is constructed as follows. Every period, long term investors and liquidity
providers submit demand curves to a Walrasian auctioneer. The long term investors e¤ectively set
the price, conditional on the liquidity shock and the amount of liquidity that the market makers
…nd optimal to provide. The following proposition characterizes the equilibrium in Amsterdam;
results for London are analogous (proofs are included in Appendix A).
Proposition 7 In Amsterdam there is a unique linear equilibrium with prices
pA
= v0 + 'A (1
)U
0
A
' (1
)
pA
= v0 +
U
1
2(1
)
'A (1
)
pA;nb
=
v
+
U
0
2
2(N + 2)(1
)
'A (1
)
A;b
p2
= v0 +
2(N + M + 2)(1
where
=

(N +

2)2

+

(23)
(24)
(25)

)

1
;0<
(N + M + 2)2

Prices in t = 0 adjust immediately to the liquidity shock (1
A

providers so the price impact is ' (1

(26)

U

<

1
4

(27)

)U . There are no liquidity

)U . Afterwards, in t = 1 and t = 2, more market makers

enter and prices move back towards v0 . They do not fully converge because the market never
becomes fully competitive.
A
How does this translate into the empirical setup? Amsterdam news returns Rk;t=1
are a mixture

of price changes in periods t = 0 and t = 1: they either re‡ect the immediate impact of a liquidity
shock or the partial dissipation of a previous shock. To explain the co-movement patterns in the
data I interpret them as the latter. In a similar vein, London post-departure returns, RkL , are
A
interpreted as price changes in London in t = 1. Amsterdam no-news returns Rk;t=2
correspond

to period t = 2 if no boat arrives.
34

It is straightforward to arrive at the following results:
Corollary 8 (a) cov(pA
1
cov(pA;nb
2

A
pA
1 ; p1

L
pA
0 ; p1

pL0 ) > 0 and (b) cov(pA;nb
2

L
pA
1 ; p1

pL0 ) > 0, while (c)

pA
0 ) > 0:

In words, this Corollary states that Amsterdam returns in t = 1 are positively correlated
with price movements in London in t = 1. This is due to the dissipation of the liquidity shock.
The same holds for Amsterdam returns in period t = 2. Even in the absence of a boat, new
capital pours into the market, making liquidity provision more competitive. Prices move closer
to v0 , generating additional co-movement with London. Apart from co-movement, this process
also generates drift. Returns in periods t = 1 and t = 2 are positively correlated. This prediction
is inconsistent with the empirical evidence (the argument is similar to the discussion in Section
4.3.2).
Similar to the Kyle model, co-movement between London and Amsterdam in t = 1 is decreasing
in the probability

that a boat only arrives after t = 2:

Corollary 9 cov(pA
1

L
pA
0 ; p1

pL0 )=

<0

The intuition for this result comes from the strategic behavior of the liquidity provider in
Amsterdam in t = 1. If he provides more liquidity in t = 1, his pro…ts from t = 2 will fall.
This endogenously constrains the amount of liquidity he is willing to provide in the …rst period.
However, if a boat arrives and more liquidity providers enter in t = 2, he will get a smaller fraction
of the total pro…ts in that period. If this is more likely to happen, it is optimal to provide more
liquidity in period t = 1. As a result, the Amsterdam price reverts to v0 faster, and co-movement
with London is stronger.
Apart from drift, the model holds another prediction that is inconsistent with the data. The
co-movement results are based on a liquidity shock that originates in London and has immediate
price impact in both markets. As this shock dissipates, subsequent Amsterdam returns will be
negatively correlated with the initial price change in London. In terms of the model:
Corollary 10 (a) cov(pL0

v0 ; pA
1

L
pA
0 ) < 0 and (b) cov(p0

v0 ; pA;nb
2

We can test this by projecting Amsterdam price movements, pA
k+T

pA
1) < 0
pA
k;t=1 , on past returns in

London, RkL 1 . The price change in Amsterdam is calculated over T days after a boat arrival, where
T varies between 2 days and 4 weeks. Note that pA
k;t=1 incorporates any new public information
that is contained in RkL 1 . The regressions therefore do not pick up the response to public news.
If the model is correct, returns should be negatively correlated. Estimates are in Table 9. There
is no evidence for such return reversals across markets. This is inconsistent with a model of slow
moving capital.
35

[TABLE 9 ABOUT HERE]
There is one …nal test of this model. Since Dutch investors held between 20 and 30% of outstanding securities, it is unlikely that liquidity shocks solely originated in London. If co-movement
re‡ects slow moving capital, we would therefore expect to observe similar return correlations when
we switch London and Amsterdam in the regression analysis. Table 4 shows that there is hardly
any evidence for co-movement in this speci…cation. Furthermore, Amsterdam was an important
source of capital for the London market (Wilson 1941; Spooner 1981). We would therefore expect
that co-movement increased when the next boat from Amsterdam was expected to arrive shortly.
Table D.3 in Appendix D shows that this is not the case. In sum, a model of slow moving capital
can explain the co-movement results, but also has implications that are inconsistent with the empirical evidence. Table 10 summarizes and compares the empirical …t of the Kyle model with the
di¤erent alternative explanations.
[TABLE 10 ABOUT HERE]

5

Conclusion

This paper studies the e¤ect of privately informed trading on security prices, using unique handcollected data from the Amsterdam and London markets for English securities in the 1770s and
1780s. Anecdotal evidence suggests that London insiders traded in both markets to bene…t from
their privileged information. They used o¢ cial mail boats to communicate with their agents in
Amsterdam. These boats only sailed twice a week, and in adverse weather could not sail at all. As
a result, Amsterdam was frequently cut o¤ from London news. The paper exploits these periods
of exogenous market segmentation to identify the impact of private information.
The results suggest that the classical Kyle (1985) model of strategic informed trading provides
an accurate description of the incorporation of private signals into prices. The empirical discussion
is guided by a two period model in which an informed agent trades strategically. Prices follow a
martingale and slowly reveal the insider’s information. The rate at which private information is
incorporated in prices depends on when the agent expects the next boat from London to arrive and
his informational advantage to (partially) expire. The empirical evidence supports the model’s
predictions. The importance of private information is underlined by the London market’s response
to news from Amsterdam. Conditional on its own price discovery, London reacted to observed
price changes in Amsterdam. If, due to adverse weather conditions, it took longer for a private
signal to “bounce back”, the price change in Amsterdam became relatively less informative, and
the response in London was weaker.
A number of robustness tests suggest that co-movement between Amsterdam and London was
not driven by news arriving through other channels than the o¢ cial packet boats. The paper
also explores a number of alternative explanations for the empirical …ndings: speci…cally the slow
36

incorporation of information due to search frictions, and the price impact of liquidity shocks due
to slow moving capital. These models can match (some of) the co-movement results, but, unlike
the Kyle model, generally predict drift or return continuation. This is inconsistent with the data.
The estimates indicate that private information was economically important. On the positive
side, informed trading contributed signi…cantly to the market’s ability to aggregate information.
Private information was almost as important for overall price movements as public news. Contemporaries readily acknowledged this and saw no fault in it. On the negative side, the strategic use
of private information caused informational asymmetries to be persistent. Results suggest that
it took almost two weeks for a private signal to be fully incorporated into prices. This increased
overall trading costs and reduced liquidity. As a case in point, evidence suggests that Amsterdam
market participants preferred not to trade right after the arrival of a boat, when informational
asymmetries were arguably the most severe.

References
Historical newspapers:
Amsterdamsche Courant, Amsterdam City Archive
Burney Collection, British Library (General and Lloyd’s Evening Post, Middlesex Journal, London
Chronicle)
De Koopman of weekelijkse bij-dragen ten opbouw van Neerlands Koophandel en Zeevaard (1775)
Lloyd’s Lists, Maritime Museum Rotterdam
Opregte Haerlemsche Courant, Dutch Royal Library, The Hague
Rotterdamsche Courant, Rotterdam City Archive

Amsterdam (SAA) and Rotterdam (OSA) City Archives:
Estates Uriel Cardozo and Abraham Cohen de Lara, SAA 334; 643, 722-723
Archives Hope & Co, SAA 735; 78, 79, 115, 1155, 1492, and 1510
Amsterdam Notary Archives, SAA 5075
Stukken betre¤ende het postverkeer met Engeland, 1687, 1697-1710. [Documents regarding the postal
connection with England, 1687, 1697-1710.], OSA 2599

Literature
Admati, A.R. and P. P‡eiderer, ‘A theory of intraday patterns: volume and price variability’, Review of
Financial Studies 1-1 (1988).
Back, K., ‘Insider Trading in Continuous Time’, Review of Financial Studies 5 (1992)

37

Back, K., and S. Baruch, ‘Information in securities markets: Kyle meets Glosten and Milgrom’,
Econometrica 72-2 (2004).
Banerjee, S., R. Kaniel, and I. Kremer, ‘Price drift as an outcome of di¤erences in higher-order beliefs’,
Review of Financial Studies (2009)
Bekaert, G., C.R. Harvey and C. Lundblad, ‘Liquidity and expected returns: lessons from emerging
markets’, Review of Financial Studies 20-5 (2007)
Biais, B., T. Foucault, and F. Salanie, ‘Floors, dealer markets and limit order markets’, Journal of
Financial Markets 1 (1998)
Boulatov, A., T. Hendershott and D. Livdan, ‘Informed trading and portfolio returns’, Review of
Economic Studies 80 (2013)
Brunnermeier, M.K., and L.H. Pedersen, ‘Predatory trading’, Journal of Finance (2005)
Caldentey R. and E. Stacchetti, ‘Insider trading with a random deadline’, Econometrica 78-1 (2010).
Chau, M. and D. Vayanos, ‘Strong-form e¢ ciency with monopolistic insiders’, Review of Financial
Studies 21-5 (2008).
Chowdry, B. and V. Nanda, ‘Multimarket Trading and Market Liquidity’, Review of Financial Studies
4-3 (1991).
Clapham, J.H., The Bank of England: a history, Vol 1, Oxford UP (1966)
Cohen, B., Compendium of Finance, London (1822)
Cohen, L., A. Frazzini and C. Malloy, ‘The small world of investing: board connections and mutual
fund returns’, Journal of Political Economy (2008)
Cohen, L., A. Frazzini and C. Malloy, ‘Sell side school ties’, in: Journal of Finance (2010)
Cohen, L., C. Malloy and L. Pomorski, ‘Decoding inside information’, Journal of Finance (2012)
Collin-Dufresne, P. and V. Fos, ‘Do prices reveal the presence of informed trading?’, mimeo (2012)
Dale, R., The First Crash: Lessons from the South Sea Bubble, Princeton UP (2004)
DeMarchi, N. and P. Harrison, ‘Trading in the wind and with guile’, History of Political Economy
(1994)
De Pinto, I., Traité de la Circulation et du Crédit, Amsterdam: Marc Michel Rey (1771)
DellaVigna, S. and J.M. Pollet, ‘Investor inattention and Friday earnings announcements’, Journal of
Finance (2009)
Dempster, G., J.M. Wells, and D.T. Wills, ‘A common-features analysis of Amsterdam and London
…nancial markets during the eighteenth century’, Economic Inquiry (2000).
Duarte, J., and L. Young, ‘Why is PIN priced?’, Journal of Financial Economics 91 (2009).
Du¢ e, D. and G. Manso, ‘Information percolation in large markets’, American Economic Review
(2007)
Du¢ e, D., ‘Presidential Address: Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving Capital’, Journal of Finance (2010)
Duguid, R., The Story of the Stock Exchange, London: Grant Richards (1901)

38

Easley, D., N. Kiefer and M. O’Hara, ‘One day in the life of a very common stock’, Review of Financial
Studies 10-3 (1997)
Evans, M.D.D. and R.K. Lyons, ‘Order ‡ow and exchange rate dynamics’, Journal of Political Economy 110-1 (2002).
Ferguson, N. ‘The House of Rothschild. Money’s Prophets 1798 - 1848’, London: Viking (1998)
Foster, F. Douglas, and S. Viswanathan, ‘Strategic trading with asymmetrically informed traders and
long-lived information’, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 29-4 (1994).
Foster, F. Douglas, and S. Viswanathan, ‘Strategic trading when agents forecast the forecasts of
others’, Journal of Finance 51-4 (1996).
Franklin, K.,‘U.S. v. U.K. Insider Trading Laws: Who Is the Top Dog?’, mimeo (2013)
Grossman , S.J., ‘On the e¢ ciency of competitive stock markets where trades have diverse information’, Journal of Finance (1976)
Grossman, S.J., and J. Stiglitz, ‘On the impossibility of informationally e¢ cient markets’, American
Economic Review 70-3 (1980).
Grossman, S.J., and M.H. Miller, ‘Liquidity and market structure’, Journal of Finance 43-3 (1988).
Harrison, P., ‘What Can We Learn for Today from 300-Year-Old Writings about Stock Markets?’,
History of Political Economy 36-4 (2004)
Hasbrouck, J., ‘Measuring the information content of stock trades’, Journal of Finance 46-1 (1991).
Hemmeon, J.C., The History of the British Post o¢ ce, Cambridge: Harvard UP (1912).
Hendershott, T., D. Livdan and N. Schuerho¤, ‘Are institutions informed about news?’, mimeo (2012)
Hoes, H.J., ‘Voorgeschiedenis van het Financiële dagblad’, in Economisch-Historisch Jaarboek (1986).
Hogesteeger, G., Van lopende bode tot telematica, Groningen: PTT Nederland (1989).
Holden, C.W. and A. Subrahmanyam, ‘Long-lived private information and imperfect competition’,
Journal of Finance 47 (1992).
Holden, C.W. and A. Subrahmanyam, ‘Risk aversion, imperfect competition, and long-lived information’, Economics Letters 44 (1994).
Hong, H. and J.C. Stein, ‘A uni…ed theory of underreaction, momentum trading, and overreaction in
asset markets’, Journal of Finance (1999)
Hong, H., and J. Stein, ‘Disagreement and stock market’, Journal of Economic Perspectives (2001)
Huberman, G. and T. Regev, ‘Contagious speculation and a cure for cancer: A nonevent that made
stock prices soar’, Journal of Finance (2001)
Jansen, L., De Koophandel van Amsterdam, Nieuwe Uitgevers Maatschappij, Amsterdam (1946).
Jegadeesh, N, and S. Titman, ‘Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Implications for stock
market e¢ ciency’, The Journal of Finance (1993)
Kelly, B. and A. Ljungqvist, ‘Testing asymmetric-information asset pricing models’, Review of Financial Studies (2012).

39

Kim, Oliver, and Robert E Verrecchia, ‘Market liquidity and volume around earnings announcements’,
Journal of Accounting and Economics 17 (1994)
Koudijs, P., ‘The boats that did not sail: news and asset price volatility in a natural experiment’,
mimeo (2012)
Kyle, A.S., ‘Continuous auctions and insider trading’, Econometrica 53-6 (1985).
Kyle, A.S., ‘Informed speculation with imperfect competition’, Review of Economic Studies (1989)
Le Jeune, J.C.W., Het brieven-postwezen in de Republiek der Verenigde Nederlanden, Utrecht (1851)
Le Long, I., De Koophandel van Amsterdam, Vol. 1, Rotterdam (1780)
Lesmond, D.A., J.P. Ogden, and C.A. Trzcinka, ‘A new estimate of transaction costs’, Review of
Financial Studies 12-5 (1999)
Levi, W., The Pigeon. Sumter: Levi Publishing Co. (1977).
Lewins, W., Her Majesty’s Mails: a history of the post o¢ ce and industrial account of its present
condition, London (1865)
Madhavan A., M. Richardson and M. Roomans, ‘Why Do Security Prices Change? A TransactionLevel Analysis of NYSE Stocks’, Review of Financial Studies 10-4.
Marin, J.M., and J.P. Olivier, ‘The dog that did not bark: Insider trading and crashes’, Journal of
Finance (2008)
Michie, R.C., The London Stock Exchange: A History, Oxford UP (1999)
Mortimer, T., Every man his own broker, London: S. Hooper (1769)
Neal, L., The Rise of Financial Capitalism, Cambridge UP (1990).
Pasquariello, P., and C. Vega, ‘Informed and strategic order ‡ow in the bond markets’, Review of
Financial Studies (2007)
Petram, L.O., The world’s …rst stock exchange: how the Amsterdam market for Dutch East India
Company shares became a modern securities market, 1602-1700, Dissertation (2011)
Polak, N.J., ‘Het nooteeringsvraagstuk aan de Amsterdamsche e¤ectenbeurs in de eertse helft der
negentiende eeuw’, Economisch-Historisch Jaarboek 10 (1924).
Quinn, S. and W. Roberds, ‘Responding to a shadow banking crisis: lessons of 1763’, mimeo (2012)
Rogers, Th., Agriculture and prices in England, Henry Frowde, Oxford, Vol. 7-2 (1902)
Romer, D., ‘Rational Asset-Price Movements Without News’, American Economic Review 83-5
(1993).
Smith, M.F.J., Tijd-a¤ aires in e¤ ecten aan de Amsterdamsche beurs, The Hague (1919).
Spooner, F., Risks at sea. Amsterdam insurance and maritime Europe, Cambridge UP (1983).
Stitt Dibden, W.G., Four hundred years of Anglo-Dutch mail, Postal History Society (1965)
Subrahmanyam, A., ‘Risk Aversion, Market Liquidity, and Price E¢ ciency’, Review of Financial
Studies 4-3 (1991)
Sutherland, L., The East India Company in eighteenth-century politics, Oxford UP (1952).
Ten Brink, E.A.B.J., De geschiedenis van het postvervoer, Bussum: Fibula (1969).

40

Ten Brink, E.A.B.J., De Rotterdamsche Telegraaf Maatschappij, 1854-1884, The Hague (1957).
Tetlock, P.C., ‘Does Public Financial News Resolve Asymmetric Information?’, Review of Financial
Studies 23 ( 2010).
Van Dillen, J.G., ‘E¤ectenkoersen aan de Amsterdamsche Beurs 1723-1794’, Economisch Historisch
Jaarboek 17 (1931).
Van Nierop, L., ‘Brieven van den Amsterdamschen makelaar Robert Hennebo aan zijdereder Simon
Bevel over Engelschen Fondsen (1735-1736)’, Economisch Historisch Jaarboek 17 (1931).
Vega, Clara, ‘Stock price reaction to public and private information’, Journal of Financial Economics
82 (2006)
Vives, X., ‘Short-Term Investment and the Information E¢ ciency of the Market’, Review of Financial
Studies, 8-1 (1995)
Wilson, C., Anglo-Dutch commerce & …nance in the eighteenth century, Cambridge UP (1941).

Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Map North Sea Area

41

Figure 2: Setup model

Figure 3: Setup - baseline estimates

42

Figure 4: Setup - feedback

Figure 5: Setup - model with slow moving capital

43

Table 1: Co-movement - baseline
A
Panel (A): Dep. variable: Amsterdam post-arrival news returns, Rk;t=1
EIC
London post-departure
returns, RkL

BoE

3% Annuities

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.287

0.291

0.193

0.238

0.226

0.242

(0.077)**

(0.053)***

(0.102)**

(0.072)***

(0.059)*** (0.048)***

London pre-departure

0.395

0.501

0.605

RkL 1

(0.048)***

(0.065)***

(0.066)***

-0.028

0.059

0.081

(0.044)

(0.055)

(0.054)

-0.149

-0.328

-0.386

(0.080)*

(0.058)***

(0.063)***

returns,

Lagged London predeparture returns, RkL

2

Lagged Amsterdam
returns, RkA

1

Constant
Obs.
Adj. R2

0.069

0.052

0.038

0.028

0.052

0.015

(0.033)**

(0.027)*

(0.020)*

(0.018)

(0.024)**

(0.019)

585

570

558

544

663

646

0.104

0.323

0.033

0.342

0.035

0.412

A
Panel (B): Dep. variable: Amsterdam post-arrival no-news returns, Rk;t=2

London post-departure
returns, RkL

0.216

1

Lagged Amsterdam
returns,

A
Rk;t=1

Constant
Obs.
Adj. R
2

2

0.255

0.301

0.265

0.310

(0.057)*** (0.056)*** (0.066)*** (0.068)*** (0.083)*** (0.085)***

London pre-departure
returns, RkL

0.251
0.146

0.100

0.199

(0.053)***

(0.071)

(0.075)***

-0.142

-0.212

-0.190

(0.069)***

(0.073)***

(0.070)***

-0.024

-0.026

0.016

0.020

0.014

0.019

(0.032)

(0.032)

(0.024)

(0.024)

(0.026)

(0.026)

310

306

282

277

374

368

0.094

0.136

0.078

0.127

0.058

0.115

test

0.68

0.26

0.30

0.50

0.08

0.36

(p-value)

0.411

0.608

0.584

0.480

0.781

0.547

Estimates of co-movement between London post-departure and Amsterdam post-arrival returns.
Figure 3 gives the exact de…nitions of returns. London post-departure returns are calculated
over the three days after a boat departure. A

2

test is performed on the equality of the RkL

coe¢ cients in panels A and B. ***,**, and * denote statistical signi…cance at the 1, 5, and 10%
level. Robust, bootstrapped standard errors are reported in parentheses.

44

Table 2: Co-movement - di¤erent expectations next boat
A
Dep. variable: Amsterdam post-arrival news returns, Rk;t=1
EIC
London post-departure
returns, RkL

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.224

0.201

0.145

0.139

0.214

0.183

(0.068)**

(0.061)**

(0.101)**

(0.097)**

0.151

0.250

0.063

(0.092)*

(0.106)**

(0.141)

E[Ajextended] < 3:5 days
E[Ajsimple] < 3:5 days

RkL 2

Lagged Amsterdam
1

Constant
Obs.
Adj. R
2

0.171

(0.090)**

(0.099)***

(0.136)
-0.064

(0.058)

(0.035)

(0.040)

-0.007

-0.040

-0.105

(0.057)

(0.033)

(0.037)***

0.400

0.499

0.500

0.606

(0.044)*** (0.042)*** (0.064)*** (0.067)*** (0.066)***

Lagged London pre-

returns, RkA

0.301
-0.049

0.400

1

departure returns,

0.211
0.016

E[Ajextended] < 3:5 days
London pre-departure

3% Annuities

(1)

(0.069)*** (0.048)***

E[Ajsimple] < 3:5 days

returns, RkL

BoE

2

0.610
(0.062)***

-0.026

-0.026

0.048

0.056

0.080

0.084

(0.044)

(0.044)

(0.054)

(0.055)

(0.054)

(0.055)

-0.159

-0.157

-0.318

-0.314

-0.389

-0.383

(0.078)***

(0.077)**

0.046

0.051

0.051

0.044

0.042

0.060

(0.038)

(0.036)

(0.025)**

(0.024)*

(0.025)*

(0.025)**

(0.059)*** (0.060)*** (0.065)***

(0.061)***

570

570

544

544

646

646

0.328

0.336

0.355

0.359

0.413

0.421

test

1.06

0.39

0.69

(p-value)

(0.303)

(0.531)

(0.408)

Estimates of co-movement between London post-departure and Amsterdam post-arrival news returns.
E[A] stands for the expected number of days until the next boat arrival. E[Ajsimple] is calculated by
adding the median sailing time to the departure date of the next boat. For E[Ajextended], the median
sailing time is replaced by a conditionally expected sailing time which is estimated in a duration model
using a Gamma distribution, including a number of weather variables and month dummies (see main
text). The reported

2

statistics refer to a test on the equality of the coe¢ cients on RkL E[Ajsimple]

< 3:5 days and RkL E[Ajextended] < 3:5 days in cols 1 vs 2; 3 vs 4; and 5 vs 6. Exact de…nitions of returns are in Figure 3. London post-departure returns are calculated over three days after a boat
departure. ***,**, and * denote statistical signi…cance at the 1, 5, and 10% level. Robust, bootstrapped standard errors are reported in parentheses.

45

Table 3: Feedback e¤ects
Dep. variable: London returns between t + l and t + l + 1 (pLt +l+1
EIC
Amsterdam news return
(pA
t+a

pA
t )

pLt +l )

BoE

3% Ann.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.082

0.122

0.084

0.096

0.058

0.062

(0.042)**

(0.050)**

(0.056)

(0.059)

(0.041)

(0.042)

Amsterdam period a

0.092

0.033

0.053

(0.037)**

(0.032)

(0.026)**

-0.056

-0.022

-0.035

(0.022)***

(0.021)

(0.017)**

Lagged London return

-0.070

-0.048

-0.042

(pLt +l

pLt )

(0.044)

(0.048)

(0.038)

Amsterdam period a

-0.032

-0.003

-0.016

(0.034)

(0.021)

(0.018)

0.007

-0.009

-0.000

(0.019)

(0.015)

(0.012)

London period l

London period l
Past London news

-0.054

-0.087

-0.035

-0.046

0.012

0.007

return (pLt

(0.043)

(0.044)**

(0.052)

(0.051)

(0.034)

(0.034)

0.053

0.046

0.018

0.018

0.008

0.005

(0.037)

(0.037)

(0.019)

(0.020)

(0.019)

(0.019)

Constant

pA
t )

Obs.

694

693

681

681

842

842

Adj. R2

0.00

0.03

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.02

2

test

2.85

0.819

0.738

(p-value)

(0.091)*

(0.366)

(0.390)

This table provides estimates of the feedback e¤ect of Amsterdam returns on London prices.
De…nitions of the returns and the exact timing are in Figure 4. a measures the number of days
between the arrival of a signal in Amsterdam and the departure of the next boat to London.
l measures the number of days it takes for the private signal to “bounce o¤”from Amsterdam.
Variation in a and l is driven by weather conditions. In columns 2, 4, and 6, the baseline e¤ect
of pA
t+a

pA
t is estimated at median values of l (10 days) and a (2 days).

a test on the equality of the coe¢ cients on

pA
t+a

pA
t

2

statistics refer to

in cols 1 vs 2; 3 vs 4; and 5 vs 6.

***, **, and * denote signi…cance at the 1, 5, and 10% level. Robust, bootstrapped standard
errors are reported in parentheses.

46

Dep. variable:

Table 4: Co-movement - Amsterdam as source of information
London post-arrival news returns, London post-arrival no-news
L
Rk;t=1

Amsterdam post-departure
returns, RkA
Amsterdam pre-departure
returns,

RkA 1

2

Lagged London returns,
RkL 1

or

L
Rk;t=1

Constant

EIC

BoE

3% Ann.

EIC

BoE

3% Ann.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.066

0.077

0.049

0.012

-0.006

0.017

(0.052)

(0.050)

(0.040)

(0.058)

(0.061)

(0.044)

0.047

0.132

0.108

-0.018

-0.010

0.066

(0.037)***

(0.053)

(0.051)

(0.040)

(0.045) (0.057)**

Lagged Amsterdam predeparture returns, RkA

L
returns, Rk;t=2

0.000

0.042

0.053

(0.046)

(0.051)

(0.042)

-0.089

-0.053

-0.097

0.030

-0.037

0.022

(0.089)

(0.083)

(0.058)*

(0.059)

(0.077)

(0.069)

0.048

0.018

0.005

0.018

0.066

0.031

(0.039)

(0.021)

(0.020)

(0.042) (0.023)**

(0.024)

Obs.

593

589

824

286

341

425

Adj. R2

0.00

0.02

0.03

0.00

0.00

0.00

2

test

13.5

6.67

6.92

9.65

12.3

9.96

(p-value)

(0.00)

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.00)

(0.00)

(0.00)

Baselines estimates where the identities of the two cities are switched around, i.e. Amsterdam is
assumed the source of relevant information. The (permutated) de…nitions of returns are in Figure
3. Amsterdam post-departure returns are calculated over three or four days. A
ported on the equality of the coe¢ cients on

RkA

2

test is re-

in this table and the coe¢ cients on RkL in Table 1,

cols 2, 4, 6. ***,**, and * denote statistical signi…cance at the 1, 5, and 10% level. Robust, bootstrapped standard errors are reported in parentheses.

47

Table 5: Co-movement - favorable winds and winter
A
Dep. variable: Amsterdam post-arrival no-news returns, Rk;t=2
EIC
London post-departure
returns, RkL
f avorable (A)
non

non

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.242

0.404

0.397

0.354

0.290

0.352

(0.128)*

(0.125)***

(0.182)**

(0.155)**

(0.162)*

(0.144)**

0.004

-0.119

0.029

(0.141)

(0.195)

(0.198)

returns, RkL

1

Lagged Amsterdam
returns,

A
Rk;t=1

Constant

-0.225

-0.085

-0.090

(0.141)

(0.161)

(0.181)

-0.144

0.046

-0.033

(0.109)

(0.072)

(0.084)

winter

London pre-departure

3% Annuities

(1)

winter

f avorable (A)

BoE

0.138

-0.036

-0.047

-0.041

(0.064)

(0.055)

(0.052)

0.142

(0.055)** (0.053)***

0.101

0.093

0.197

0.193

(0.071)

(0.072)***

(0.078)**

(0.079)**

-0.218

-0.210

-0.188

-0.191

-0.137

-0.143

(0.075)*

(0.071)**

0.094

-0.013

-0.017

0.050

0.046

0.045

(0.103)

(0.053)

(0.068)

(0.048)

(0.080)

(0.046)

Obs.

(0.077)*** (0.078)*** (0.072)***

(0.074)***

306

306

277

277

368

368

Adj. R2

0.138

0.154

0.125

0.126

0.110

0.113

Obs. with non-favorable

53

Obs. with winter

50
113

66
97

136

Estimates of co-movement between London post-departure and Amsterdam post-arrival no-news
returns. Co-movement is made conditional on (1) having favorable winds or not (“favorable”) or
(2) observations taking place during the winter or the rest of the year (“non-winter”). The baseline
coe¢ cients measure co-movement during the winter or during periods with non-favorable winds.
The interaction term captures any additional co-movement outside the winter or during periods
with favorable winds. The table uses de…nition A for non-favorable winds (see main text for details).
The table lists the number of observations during the winter or under non-favorable wind conditions.
The baseline coe¢ cients are based on this (limited) number of observations. Exact de…nitions of
returns are in Figure 3. London post-departure returns are calculated over three days after a boat
departure. ***,**, and * denote statistical signi…cance at the 1, 5, and 10% level. Robust, bootstrapped standard errors are reported in parentheses.

48

Table 6: Co-movement - excluding potential impact Dover-Calais
Dep. variable:
Amsterdam post-arrival news
Amsterdam post-arrival no-news
A
returns, Rk;t=1

London post-departure
returns,

RkL

departure returns,

RkL 2

Lagged Amsterdam
1

A
or Rk;t=1

Constant
Obs.
Adj. R
2

BoE

3% Ann.

EIC

BoE

3% Ann.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.274

0.233

0.261

0.411

0.332

0.401

0.524

0.620

0.436

(0.048)*** (0.065)*** (0.069)*** (0.106)***

1

Lagged London pre-

returns, RkA

EIC

0.474

(0.046)*** (0.056)*** (0.073)*** (0.085)*** (0.097)*** (0.171)***

London pre-departure
returns, RkL

A
returns, Rk;t=2

2

-0.016

0.066

0.118

(0.046)

(0.055)

(0.051)

-0.160

-0.343

-0.411

(0.083)*

-0.363

0.271

0.459

(0.152)*

(0.129)***

-0.316

-0.358

(0.057)*** (0.062)*** (0.100)*** (0.122)*** (0.127)***

0.046

0.027

0.011

-0.037

0.013

0.026

(0.029)

(0.017)

(0.019)

(0.055)

(0.039)

(0.039)

538

518

607

157

143

191

0.33

0.37

0.44

0.31

0.17

0.22

test

2.05

0.82

1.43

(p-value)

0.152

0.366

0.231

Replication of table 1 (conditional estimates only), omitting all Amsterdam price information that
could be a¤ected by news arriving via Dover-Calais (see text for details). London post-departure
returns are estimated over three day periods after a boat departure. A

2

test is performed on

the equality of the coe¢ cients on RkL : cols 1 vs 4; cols 2 vs 5; and columns 3 vs 6. ***,**, and *
denotes statistical signi…cance at the 1, 5, 10% level. Robust, bootstrapped standard errors are
reported in parentheses.

49

Table 7: Co-movement - zero returns in London
Amsterdam post-arrival news
Amsterdam post-arrival no-news

Dep. variable:

A
returns, Rk;t=1

London post-departure
returns, RkL
I(RkL
I(RkL

1

1

BoE

3% Ann.

EIC

BoE

3% Ann.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.288

0.234

0.249

0.255

0.319

0.304

0.037

-0.098

0.001

-0.171

0.044

(0.094)

(0.115)

(0.136)

(0.131)

(0.158)

(0.285)

0.138

0.031

0.082

0.138

0.007

-0.068

(0.074)*

(0.036)

(0.040)**

(0.075)*

(0.040)

(0.059)

0.397

0.502

0.607

0.147

0.101

0.198

(0.072)

(0.077)**

-0.144

-0.211

-0.189

(0.070)**

(0.077)***

(0.071)***

London pre-departure
RkL 1

(0.044)*** (0.068)*** (0.064)*** (0.054)***

Lagged London predeparture returns, RkL

2

Lagged Amsterdam
1

A
or Rk;t=1

-0.027

0.058

0.083

(0.044)

(0.056)

(0.054)

-0.151

-0.329

-0.388

(0.080)*

Constant

0.023

0.001

-0.050

0.016

0.032

(0.030)

(0.020)

(0.022)

(0.036)

(0.027)

(0.028)

Adj. R2
1

(0.061)*** (0.063)***

0.029

Obs.
Obs. with RkL

(0.086)***

0.020

= 0)

returns, RkA

EIC

(0.057)*** (0.063)*** (0.076)*** (0.065)*** (0.073)***

= 0)

returns,

A
returns, Rk;t=2

=0

570

544

646

306

277

368

0.325

0.341

0.413

0.137

0.124

0.112

94

96

123

53

40

68

This table presents co-movement estimates that are conditional on whether the London pre-departure
return is zero or not: I(RkL
movement if RkL

1

1

= 0). The interaction term measures whether there is additional co-

= 0. London pre and post-departure returns are calculated over three day periods.

The table reports the number of observations associated with zero returns in London.
***,**, and * denote statistical signi…cance at the 1, 5, and 10% level. Robust, bootstrapped standard
errors are reported in parentheses.

50

Table 8: Expectation next boat and general weather conditions
E[Ajextended]
< 3:5 days

> 3:5 days

t-statistic

Obs.

Average daily temperature ( C)

9.84

9.80

-0.09

898

Fraction of days with average T < 3 C

0.18

0.16

-0.69

898

Fraction of days with icy frost

0.03

0.03

0.23

898

Fraction of days with snow

0.03

0.03

-0.03

898

Fraction of days with hail

0.02

0.03

1.06

898

Fraction of days with rain

0.26

0.35

2.78***

898

Average daily rainfall (mm)

1.19

1.62

1.97**

898

Fraction of days with rain throughout

0.08

0.11

1.60

898

0.09

0.11

1.17

898

3.04

3.19

1.72*

898

0.00

0.00

0.23

898

0.04

0.05

1.08

898

0.01

0.01

-0.29

898

0.02

0.01

-1.08

898

the day (2 out of 2 or 3 daily obs.)
Fraction of days with total daily rainfall
th

> 90

percentile

Average max. daily wind speed
(Beaufort)
Fraction of days with wind speed
> 7 Beaufort
Fraction of days with rain and wind
speed > 5 Beaufort
Fraction of days with snow or hail and
wind speed > 5 Beaufort
Fraction of days with thunder

This table presents information about weather conditions on the days London news arrived
in Amsterdam. Days are di¤erentiated by whether the next packet boat is expected to arrive
in short order or not (E[A] 7 3:5 days). Information comes from the observatory of Zwanenburg (close to Amsterdam) and is based on 3 observations a day (between sunrise and sunset). The table reports the average temperature during the day (in degrees Celcius) and indicates when at least one observation reports icy frost, snow, hail or rain. Total daily rainfall
is determined by adding up the rainfall reported for each observation (this excludes rainfall
at nighttime). The table also reports the maximum wind speed across all three observations
Wind speed is measured in Beaufort (0-12). A wind speed in excess of 7 (gales or stronger)
can seriously impede pedestrians. A wind speed in excess of 5 (strong breeze or stronger)
makes it di¢ cult to use an umbrella. Days with thunder generally feature heavy rainfall.
***, **, and * denote statistical signi…cance at the 1, 5, and 10% level. Source: Royal Dutch
Meteorological Institute, KNMI.

51

Table 9: Reversals across markets
Dep. variable: Amsterdam return over period T after episode k (pA
k+T
T =

2=3 days 4=5 days

1 week

2 weeks

pA
k;t=1 )
3 weeks

4 weeks

EIC
London return (RkL 1 ) 0:043
(0:043)
Constant

0:007
(0:028)

0:028

0:077

0:077

0:087

0:195

(0:060)

(0:060)

(0:077)

(0:104)

(0:115)

0:011

0:068

0:131

0:159

0:214

(0:038)

(0:048)

(0:067)

(0:087)

(0:102)

N

734

733

731

726

719

717

Adj. R2

0:00

0:00

0:00

0:00

0:00

0:00

BoE
London return

(RkL 1 )

Constant

0:072

0:142

(0:043)

(0:069)

0:026

0:054

(0:016)

(0:022)

0:108

0:281

0:325

0:470

(0:096)

(0:124)

(0:150)

0:078

0:144

0:247

0:306

(0:026)

(0:038)

(0:050)

(0:058)

(0:074)

N

705

705

702

695

688

685

Adj. R2

0:01

0:02

0:00

0:02

0:02

0:03

3% Annuities
London return

(RkL 1 )

0:081
(0:052)

Constant

0:155
(0:061)

0:129
(0:083)

0:255

0:317

0:497

(0:094)

(0:117)

(0:131)

0:010

0:045

0:073

0:144

0:241

0:307

(0:019)

(0:025)

(0:029)

(0:039)

(0:050)

(0:058)

Obs.

863

862

857

848

838

834

Adj. R2

0:01

0:02

0:01

0:02

0:02

0:04

Estimates of regressions predicting future Amsterdam returns based on London returns. The
London return is de…ned as the London pre-departure return (RkL 1 , de…ned in Figure 3). The
Amsterdam return pA
k+T

pA
k;t=1 is calculated over T days after the arrival of a boat (k; t = 1)

where T varies between 2-3 days and 4 weeks. ***, **, and * denote statistical signi…cance
at the 1, 5, and 10% level. Robust, bootstrapped standard errors are reported in parentheses.

52

53

No

Co-movement in the reverse

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No2
No2

Yes

No

No

Yes

No

Yes4

Yes

No

No

No

?

No

Yes

No

Yes4

No

No

No

Yes

?

No

Yes

public news private signals

Yes

No

No

Yes1;3

Yes1;3

Yes

?

Yes1

Yes

capital

Slow moving

4

Under the assumption that search frictions were related to bad weather. See Sections 4.2 - 4.4 for a detailed discussion.

was not an independent source of private information. 3 Assuming that liquidity shocks originated in Amsterdam as well.

that packet boats brought in capital and improved liquidity in Amsterdam/London. 2 Under the assumption that Amsterdam

number of salient features of the data. “?”: prediction of the model is unclear without further assumptions. 1 Assuming

This table summarizes the empirical …t of the Kyle model and a number of alternative explanations. The rows include a

markets

Return reversals across

during good weather

Stronger initial co-movement

zero returns

Stronger co-movement after

boat expected shortly

initially stronger if next

No

No

Return continuation

direction (cities switched)

Yes

Feedback e¤ects in London

if next boat expected shortly

No

Yes

Stronger initial co-movement

Yes

Yes

Yes

Co-movement

Yes

het. beliefs

evidence

Table 10: Empirical …t Kyle model and alternative explanations
Empirical
Kyle model Inattention /
Search frictions

