NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOMESTIC INSTITUTIONS AS A SOURCE OF COMPARATIVE ADVANTAGE
Nathan Nunn
Daniel Trefler
Working Paper 18851
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18851
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

The authors thank Marianna Belloc, Samuel Bowles, Davin Chor, David Donaldson, Andrei Levchenko,
Elhanan Helpman and Thierry Mayer for valuable comments. Trefler gratefully acknowledges the
support of the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Nathan Nunn and Daniel Trefler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Domestic Institutions as a Source of Comparative Advantage
Nathan Nunn and Daniel Trefler
NBER Working Paper No. 18851
February 2013
JEL No. D23,F10,F19
ABSTRACT
Domestic institutions can have profound effects on international trade. This chapter reviews the theoretical
and empirical underpinnings of this insight. Particular attention is paid to contracting institutions and
to comparative advantage, where the bulk of the research has been concentrated. We also consider
the reverse causation running from comparative advantage to domestic institutions
Nathan Nunn
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St
Cambridge, Ma 02138
and NBER
nnunn@fas.harvard.edu
Daniel Trefler
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
dtrefler@rotman.utoronto.ca

Contents
1

Introduction

1

2

Contracting and Property-Right Institutions: Impacts on Comparative Advantage

3

A

Product Markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

B

Methodological Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

a

Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

b

Benchmarking Bias . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

C

Financial Markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

D

Labor Markets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

E

All Together Now . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

26

3

Informal Institutions and their Impacts on Comparative Advantage

29

A

Repeated Interactions and Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

30

B

Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

31

C

Cultural Beliefs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

34

D

The Interplay between Culture, Institutions, and International Trade . . . . . . . . .

35

E

Vertical Integration, Offshoring, and Outsourcing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

37

4

Policies and the Indirect Impacts of Institutions on Comparative Advantage

42

5

The Impact of Trade and Comparative Advantage on Domestic Institutions

43

A

International Trade and Domestic Institutional Change . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

44

B

Heterogeneous Impacts of Trade on Institutions: The Role of Comparative Advantage 47

C

Comparative Advantage and Domestic Institutions: Contemporary Evidence . . . .

6

51
53

Conclusions

54

References

0

1. Introduction
When Ricardo first presented his theory of comparative advantage, he was preaching to an
English audience that was in the midsts of a technological revolution that would transform human
history. To Ricardo’s cocksure audience, nothing less than divine right dictated that the exporter
of the manufactured good should be England, while the exporter of fortified wine should be
Portugal, a country whose coast was patrolled to great profit by Her Royal Majesty’s loyal navy.
It is clear that Portugal would have preferred to be in the midst of an industrial revolution that
gave her a comparative advantage in manufacturing, but this was not an option. The question is:
Why not?
Today we understand that 19th century English comparative advantage in advanced manufacturing goods can be traced back in no small part to its institutions, institutions that promoted
innovation and commercial enterprise. The link between institutions and industrial structure, or
between institutions and comparative advantage, has been discussed for decades by economic
historians. However, it is only recently that systematic empirical attempts have been made to
assess the importance of this link.
There is, of course, a long history of research on the relationship between levels of development
and industrial structure. Rich and poor countries export very different baskets of goods. Our
knowledge of the relationship between a country’s mix of exports and its income dates back
at least to the discussion of ladders of development by Chenery (1960) and Leamer (1984).
What has breathed new life into this literature are the insights that come out of the literature
on institutions and long-term growth. See Helpman (2004), Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson
(2005a) and La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer (2008) for reviews of this literature. Previous
research on comparative advantage and economic development had given pride of place to technology/innovation together with physical and human capital accumulation as the drivers both of
growth and, in the tradition of Ricardo and Heckscher-Ohlin, of comparative advantage. We now
understand that these proximate drivers of growth are themselves the product of deeper social,
political and economic processes that have come to be gathered under the rubric of ‘institutions.’
This insight from the institutions-and-growth literature suggests that we could profitably push
beyond these proximate drivers of comparative advantage and dig deeper into the institutional
determinants of international trade.

1

A simple example makes the main point about the role of institutions for comparative advantage. Consider a complex product such as a commercial airliner. Its production requires
high levels of innovative effort by all parties involved and this effort is so difficult to verify in a
legal setting that only the most incomplete of contracts can be written between these parties. In
contrast, more standardized products such as blue jeans do not require any relationship-specific,
non-contractable inputs. Thus, a country with good contracting institutions will have relatively
low costs of producing airliners and relatively high costs of producing blue jeans. That is,
contracting institutions will be a source of comparative advantage. This theme is developed
in section 2.
A skeptic will argue that all this is obvious: Institutions matter for comparative advantage
because institutions affect factor accumulation and technological innovation. So to what extent is there anything new in this literature? Has it simply pushed back the determinants of
comparative advantage from proximate causes (e.g., endowments) to more fundamental causes
(e.g., institutions)? The empirical research to be presented indicates that institutional sources of
comparative advantage can and do operate through fundamentally different channels than do
traditional sources of comparative advantage such as endowments. Institutions are statistically
and economically important determinants of comparative advantage even after controlling for
factor endowments. Indeed, there is abundant evidence that institutions are quantitatively as
important as these traditional sources.
A skeptic might also argue that contracting institutions are not important because, in their
absence, alternative institutions will evolve to deal with underinvestment. There is in fact some
evidence of this in the international trade literature. Repeated interactions in long-term relationships, kin- and ethnic-based networks, and vertical integration can all be used as substitutes for
weak contracting institutions. Cultural beliefs (e.g., about trust) can also play a similar role. In
section 3 we explore the implications of these alternatives for comparative advantage.
In section 4, we briefly cast a wider net by considering the indirect impacts of domestic
institutions, particularly those working through government policies.
A major obstacle faced by the literature on the impact of domestic institutions on comparative
advantage is that of reverse causality: Comparative advantage exerts strong impacts on domestic
institutions. The causal mechanism involves power and politics. International trade generates
wealth and power and this may be distributed either inclusively or exclusively. To the extent that

2

specialization and trade enriches specific groups in society, it will provide economic power that
can translate into political power and affect institutional change. This has been shown historically
in studies examining the 17th to 19th century Atlantic three-corner trade (Engerman and Sokoloff,
1997, Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2005b, Nunn, 2008a, Dippel, Greif and Trefler, 2012). The
striking lesson from the historical literature is that initial conditions, working through their effect
on comparative advantage, are crucially important for whether changes in international trade lead
to inclusive or exclusive institutional change. For example, the Atlantic triangle trade enriched a
Caribbean plantation elite who then used their riches to exclude workers from political power as
well as from education and other public goods. In Europe, the Atlantic triangle trade enriched
an emerging merchant class who used their riches to push for growth-enhancing improvements
in property-rights institutions. Within Africa, the specialization of production in slaves resulted
in a deterioration of domestic institutions and property rights. As we show in section 5, these
heterogeneous institutional responses to changes in international trade patterns are in large part
explained by characteristics of the goods initially exported, such as sugar versus manufactures
versus slaves. That is, institutional responses to trade depend on initial comparative advantage.
Finally, the reader will have noticed that we have studiously avoided defining institutions.
North (1990) famously defines institutions as the ‘rules of the game’; however, this definition is
both narrow and problematic and reviewing alternative definitions would take us too far afield.
Deeper thinkers are referred to Greif (2006b, chapter 1). In a landmark definition of pornography,
Supreme Court Justice Stewart states simply: “I know it when I see it.” This is a pretty good
definition of institutions, too.

2. Contracting and Property-Right Institutions: Impacts on Comparative Advantage
Examples of contracting institutions include laws on the books and contractual flexibility that
mitigate contractual incompleteness (La Porta et al., 2008, p. 300). Nunn (2007) was one of the
first to empirically examine the impacts of contracting-institutions on comparative advantage,
focusing specifically on their impacts working through hold-up and underinvestment. Levchenko
(2007) examined institutions more broadly defined — contracting institutions, property rights
institutions, etc. — and provided evidence for their impacts on comparative advantage. This set
of findings are the subject of section 2.A.

3

There are many other institutions that affect comparative advantage, each in its own way.
Institutions associated with financial development (e.g., bankruptcy law, securities law and corporate law) are also a source of comparative advantage: Industries with large fixed costs relative
to sales require access to external finance and this external finance comes cheaply when outside
investors are protected from the opportunistic behavior of insiders such as CEOs. Beck (2003)
and, more persuasively, Manova (2008, 2013) were the first to empirically examine this channel.
This is explored in section 2.C.
A variety of labor-market-related institutions affect comparative advantage. These include
institutions that affect the ability of a firm and its workers to enter into contracts that induce high
levels of effort (Costinot, 2009), institutions that affect hiring and firing costs (Cunat and Melitz,
2012), and institutions that affect labor-market search frictions (Davidson, Martin and Matusz,
1999, Helpman and Itskhoki, 2010). These are discussed in section 2.D.

A. Product Markets
In the canonical model of incomplete contracts, an input supplier produces a customized input for
a final goods producers. Because the customized input has greater value to the buyer than to other
potential buyers, the investments made to produce the input are relationship-specific — i.e., their
value is higher within the relationship than outside of it. If contracts are imperfectly enforced,
then after the input supplier makes the relationship-specific investments, the purchaser has an
incentive to renegotiate the terms of the original agreement. In short, there is a hold-up problem
e.g., Williamson (1985). Anticipating this ex post renegotiation, the input supplier provides an
inefficiently low level of relationship-specific investment and this inefficiency drives up the cost
of production. This well-known phenomenon has a striking implication for international trade.
Think of contractual incompleteness as an institutional feature that varies across countries and
think of the relationship-specific investment as a technological feature that varies across products.
Then a country with ‘good’ contracting institutions will suffer less from hold-up and hence be
a low-cost producer of goods requiring high levels of relationship-specific investments. In short,
good contracting institutions are a source of comparative advantage in industries that intensively
use relationship-specific investments.
Levchenko (2007) offers up a formal general equilibrium model of this. Consider first a
standard 2 × 2 Heckchsher-Ohlin model with factor price equalization in which one sector only

4

users labor (L with price w) and the other sector only uses capital (K with price r). Factor
price equalization pins down w and r. Now introduce a Leontief ’middle’ sector M that requires
one unit each of capital and labor to produce one unit of output. Further, as in Caballero and
Hammour (1998), capital is subject to one-sided hold-up. This is captured by assuming that in the
M sector labor is able to grab a share φ of the capital. The surplus from the relationship, per unit
of input and/or output, is s ≡ pM − w − (1 − φ)r where pM is the price of the final good, w is
the outside option of labor (its value in the L-intensive sector) and (1 − φ)r is the outside option
of what remains of the capital (its value in the K-intensive sector). Assuming Nash bargaining
over s with equal bargaining weights and equating the returns to capital in the K-intensive and
M sectors yields:1
pM = w + φr + r .
Absent hold-up (φ = 0), this is a standard equation relating price to marginal cost. So the key
term is φr, which captures the hold-up rents received by labor. Neatly, Levchenko has reduced the
entire problem of characterizing the equilibrium to the more familiar problem of characterizing
the equilibrium of a Heckscher-Ohlin model with a factor-market distortion, and this is a wellunderstood problem. In particular, while capital receives r in both the K-intensive and M sectors,
labor receives w in the L-intensive sector and w + φr in the M sector. Since w + φr > w, there is
a distortion.
Levchenko assumes that the hold-up problem is more severe in the North than in the South
so that φN < φS . When trade opens up, and assuming that factor price equalization holds, the
North will be the low-cost producer of M and hence all M production will migrate there. This
has two implications. In terms of welfare, if the two countries have identical endowments then
opening up to trade raises both r and w. This raises welfare for capital in both countries. It also
raises welfare for labor in the L-intensive sectors of both countries. However, labor that was in
the Southern M sector migrates to the L-intensive sector and, as a result, it loses its rents φr. This
may or may not be offset by the rise in w i.e., some Southern labor may not gain from trade.
The second implication of Levchenko’s models is that the country with better institutions will
have a comparative advantage in the product whose costs are sensitive to the quality of institutions.
Berkowitz, Moenius and Pistor (2006) and Nunn (2007) informally make similar arguments. It
derive this equation, note that Nash bargaining implies that capital in the M sector receives s/2 + (1 − φ)r.
Since capital is mobile ex ante, this must equal r, which is what capital receives in the K-intensive sector. The equation
follows from manipulating s/2 + (1 − φ)r = r where s ≡ pM − w − (1 − φ)r.
1 To

5

is this implication that has been subject to a substantial body of empirical research. A unifying
theme of this empirical research is the following estimating equation:
ygi = αg + αi + β (zg · qi ) + Xgi γ + εgi

(1)

where ygi is a measure of country i exports of good g, qi is a measure of the quality of contracting
institutions in country i, and zg is a measure of the sensitivity of industry g costs to the quality
of contracting institutions. αg and αi are industry and country fixed effects, respectively, and Xgi
is a vector of other determinants of comparative advantage. The theory predicts β > 0, that is,
a country with high-quality contracting institutions will export relatively more of those goods
whose costs are sensitive to the quality of contracting institutions.
The interaction term in equation (1) has a long lineage in international trade, though interest
in the equation wained in light of the critique by Leamer and Bowen (1981). Interest was revived
for two reasons. The first was the theoretical/structural underpinnings provided by Romalis
(2004). The second was the reduced-form difference-in-difference rationale provided by Rajan
and Zingales (1998).
The equation (1) prediction that β > 0 cannot be examined without a credible measure of zg . By
and large, the literature appears to have settled on Nunn’s (2007) notion of the ‘contract-intensity’
of goods. Nunn starts with Rauch’s (1999) three-way classification of goods:
1. Goods that are sold on an organized exchange (e.g., oil);
2. Goods that have a reference price (i.e., they appear in catalogues); and,
3. Differentiated goods (i.e., goods that are neither sold on an organized exchange nor have a
reference price).
Nunn interprets a good that is bought and sold on an exchange or that is referenced priced in a
trade publication as a good that is traded in a thick market with many buyers and sellers. If there
are multiple buyers for an input, then the value of the input outside of the relationship is close
to the value within the relationship. Therefore, the investments made to produce the good are
not relationship-specific. Put differently, if the buyer were to attempt to renegotiate a lower price
ex post, then the seller could simply sell the input to another buyer. On the other hand, if there
are only a small number of buyers of a good, then an input produced for a particular buyer has
limited value outside of the relationship and the investments undertaken to produce the good are
relationship-specific.

6

Nunn’s next step is to calculate, for each output g, the share of its inputs that are not bought
and sold on thick markets i.e., whose production involves relationship-specific investments. This
information is easily culled from the U.S. input-output Use table. The calculated share is Nunn’s
measure of the relationship-specific investment intensity of good g. This is a bit of a mouthful so
Nunn coins the term ‘contract-intensity’ of the good. It enters equation (1) as zg .
Table 1 presents the 20 most and 20 least contract-intensive industries. The ordering of industries he reports is intuitive. For example, the least contract-intensive goods/industries according
to his metric are ‘poultry processing’ and ‘flour milling.’ For both of these industries, their primary inputs – chickens and wheat — are homogenous and sold on thick markets; therefore, any
investments made by wheat and chicken suppliers are not specific to any buyer-seller relationship
and hence are not subject to hold-up. Re-stated, if the purchaser were to try and renege on the
initially agreed upon contract, the input producers would simply sell their products elsewhere.
The most contract-intensive industries include automobile, truck and aircraft manufacturing. The
production of these goods requires the use of customized relationship-specific inputs that are
susceptible to hold-up. If the purchaser attempts to renegotiate ex post, the supplier’s outside
option is limited because he will be hard-pressed to find an alternative buyer for these customized
inputs.
In estimating equation (1), Nunn’s baseline measure of a country’s ability to enforce contracts
(qi in equation 1) is the country’s rule of law from Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2003). He also
considers objective measures of the quality of the judicial system from World Bank (2004). As is
common in this literature, results are not usually sensitive to the measure of qi . Nunn’s dependent
variable ygi is the log of country i’s total exports of industry g in 1997. His positive estimates of
β establish that countries with better contracting institutions export relatively more in contractintensive industries. Quantitatively, these effects of institutions on comparative advantage are
greater than the combined impacts of skill and capital endowments. We discuss magnitudes
further below.
In analysis pre-dating Nunn (2007), Berkowitz et al. (2006) consider a variant of equation
(1) in which zg is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the good is differentiated in Rauch’s sense
and 0 if the good is reference-priced. Goods sold on an organized exchange are deleted from the
sample. Their estimate of β is positive, but is huge in that it implies that a one-standard-deviation

7

Table 1: Contract-intensity from Nunn (2007)

zg

Least contract intensive
Industry Description

zg

Most contract intensive
Industry Description

.024
.024
.036
.036
.053
.058
.087
.099
.111
.132
.144
.171
.173
.180
.184
.190
.195
.196
.200
.200

Poultry processing
Flour milling
Petroleum refineries
Wet corn milling
Aluminum sheet, plate & foil manuf.
Primary aluminum production
Nitrogenous fertilizer manufacturing
Rice milling
Prim. nonferrous metal, ex. copper & alum.
Tobacco stemming & redrying
Other oilseed processing
Oil gas extraction
Coffee & tea manufacturing
Fiber, yarn, & thread mills
Synthetic dye & pigment manufacturing
Synthetic rubber manufacturing
Plastics material & resin manuf.
Phosphatic fertilizer manufacturing
Ferroalloy & related products manuf.
Frozen food manufacturing

.810
.819
.822
.824
.826
.831
.840
.851
.854
.872
.873
.880
.888
.891
.893
.901
.904
.956
.977
.980

Photographic & photocopying equip. manuf.
Air & gas compressor manuf.
Analytical laborator instr. manuf.
Other engine equipment manuf.
Other electronic component manuf.
Packaging machinery manuf.
Book pubilshers
Breweries
Musical instrument manufacturing
Aircraft engine & engine parts manuf.
Electricity & signal testing instr. manuf.
Telephone apparatus manufacturing
Search, detection, & navig. instr. manuf.
Broadcast & wireless comm. equip. manuf.
Aircraft manufacturing
Other computer peripheral equip. manuf.
Audio & video equipment manuf.
Electronic computer manufacturing
Heavy duty truck manufacturing
Automobile & light truck manuf.

Notes : Data are from Nunn (2007), Table 2.

8

improvement in the rule of law leads to a 1256% increase in exports.2 These enormous effects
suggest issues of endogeneity: For example, advanced countries have both good institutions and
a production structure skewed towards complex goods, which leads to a spurious correlation or
bidirectional causality between good institutions and comparative advantage.
The recent analysis by Ma, Qu and Zhang (2010) confirms Nunn’s finding at the firm-level.
Motivated by evidence that domestic institutions vary subnationally (e.g., Laeven and Woodruff,
2007, Acemoglu and Dell, 2010), the authors examine perceptions of the quality of the judicial
system among approximately 8,792 firms in 28 countries, taken from the World Bank’s Enterprise
Surveys. Although the firm-level variation in judicial quality is surely explained by differences
in perception or measurement error, much of the variation is also likely explained by differences
in firms’ access to the judicial systems because of power or political connections. The authors
provide evidence for this by showing that within-country cross-firm differences are correlated
with observable characteristics in a sensible manner: For example, state-owned firms report
having access to a better judicial system.
Estimating a variant of equation (1) that looks at firm-level exports across a number of
countries, Ma et al. find that firms with access to better judicial institutions tend to export
more in contract intensive industries, measured using Nunn’s (2007) contract-intensity variable.
Interestingly, the authors show that this effect is above and beyond the standard comparative
advantage effect, which is that firms in countries with better judicial quality tend to export more
in contract-intensive industries. The authors show that in their data, the standard country-level
comparative advantage impacts can be seen. In addition, there also exist subnational comparative
advantage effects that work at the firm level.
This firm-level comparative advantage effect has also been confirmed by Li, Wang and Wang
(2012) who look at 77,000 Chinese firms located in the capital of 31 provinces producing in
29 2-digit CIC industries. The authors find that firms located in Chinese regions with bettercontracting institutions tend to specialize in the production of contract-intensive goods.
Feenstra, Hong, Ma and Spencer (2012) also examine cross-province comparative advantage
using Nunn’s (2007) contract-intensity measure, which they construct using Chinese I-O tables.
Their analysis, which looks at variation across 30 provinces, 11 years and 22-industries, also
2 A subsequent study by Ranjan and Lee (2007), using the same general methodology but different data, roughly
confirms the findings from Berkowitz et al. (2006): The impact of better contracting institutions on exports is greater
for complex goods than for simple goods (also proxied for using Rauch’s measure).

9

distinguishes between processing trade and ordinary trade as well as between foreign-owned
firms, joint ventures, and domestically-owned firms. Consistent with Li et al. (2012), Feenstra et
al. (2012) find that provinces with better domestic institutions tend to export more in contractintensive industries. They also show that the impact of domestic institutions on comparative
advantage is stronger for foreign-owned firms and for processing trade.
A common characteristic of these papers is that they all examine the impact of contracting
institutions on horizontal specialization — i.e., specialization across industries. However, it is
also possible that contracting institutions also affect specialization in higher or lower quality
goods within industries — i.e., vertical specialization. Essaji and Fujiwara (2012) hypothesize
that since the production of higher-quality varieties of a good typically requires the use of higherquality inputs requiring more customization and relationship-specific investments, a country with
a better contracting environment will have a comparative advantage in the production of higherquality varieties of a given good (all else equal). In other words, imperfect contracting institutions
and the existence of relationship-specific investments may cause vertical specialization as well as
horizontal specialization.
Essaji and Fujiwara (2012) test their hypothesis using data on imports to the United States
from 123 exporting countries. The export data, which are measured at the HS 10 product level,
report both quantities and prices. Following the empirical strategy of Hallak and Schott (2010)
and Khandelwal (2010), the authors infer product quality of exports of all HS 10 products from all
countries using unit values and market shares. The authors use Nunn’s (2007) contract-intensity
measure and show that countries with better contracting institutions (measured by the rule of
law) tend to export higher-quality varieties of goods.
Nunn (2007) focuses narrowly on the impact of rule of law on non-contractible relationshipspecific investments. However, Levchenko’s (2007) theoretical model has a broader interpretation
and it is this interpretation that Levchenko takes to the estimation of equation (1). He also
undertakes an empirical examination of the importance of institutions for comparative advantage.
The main difference from Nunn is in the measure of the sensitivity of a good to the quality
of contracting institutions (zg ). Levchenko (2007, page 807) argues theoretically that the larger
the number of input suppliers needed to produce a good, the more complex the good is, and
therefore the more sensitive it is to imperfect institutions. Empirically, he measures ‘institutional
dependence’ as the Herfindahl index of intermediate input use (times minus 1), computed from

10

Table 2: Institutional-intensity from Levchenko (2007)
Least institutionally intensive

Most institutionally intensive

Code

Industry description

Code

Industry description

2011

Meat packing plants

3728

Aircraft parts and equiment, n.e.c.

2075

Soybean oil mills

3296

Mineral wool

2015

Poultry slaughtering and processing

3842

Surgical appliances and supplies

2429

Special product sawmills, n.e.c.

3565

Packaging machinery

2021

Creamery butter

3644

Noncurrent-carrying wiring devices

2911

Petroleum refining

3643

Current-carrying wiring devices

2026

Fluid milk

3482

Small arms ammunition

2296

Tire cord and fabrics

3999

Manufacturing industries, n.e.c.

2083

Malt

3321

Grey and ductile iron foundries

2652

Setup paperboard boxes

2451

Mobile homes

Notes : Data are from Levchenko (2007) Table 2, Table A1. Industries classified by 4-digit SIC. Industry codes and
descriptions are reported.

the U.S. input-output Use table for 1992. For concreteness, suppose that an industry purchases
equal amounts of inputs from n sectors. Then each input accounts for a share 1/n of all inputs
and the Herfindahl index (times minus 1) is − ∑(1/n)2 = −n(1/n)2 = −1/n. Thus, the more
industries that supply inputs, the greater is the measure of institutional dependence. A second
motivation for the measure is that every time an intermediate good is purchased, institutions
are needed to facilitate the transaction. Therefore, the greater the variety of goods needed
for production, the greater the reliance on domestic institutions. The 10 least and 10 most
institutionally intensive industries according to Levchenko’s (2007) measure are reproduced in
table 2.
Armed with this institutional-dependence measure of zg , Levchenko estimates equation (1)
using U.S. imports from 116 countries across 389 4-digit SIC industries in 1998. He measures
the quality of exporters’ domestic institutions (qi ) using the Kaufmann et al. (2003) rule-of-law
variable. As predicted by his model, Levchenko estimates a positive β: countries with better
rule of law have a comparative advantage in ‘institutionally dependent’ goods. We discuss the
magnitude of this estimate below in section 2.E.
Summarizing, there is now a large body of evidence about the impact of contracting institutions on exports of contract-intensive goods. Empirical evidence strongly confirms that
contracting institutions are indeed a source of comparative advantage.

11

B. Methodological Issues
a. Identification
The interaction term in equation (1) arises because of the complementarity between an industry
characteristic and a country characteristic. The nice feature of the interaction term is that it
allows one to control directly for country fixed effects and industry fixed effects, resulting in
an estimating equation that has the same logic as a standard difference-in-difference equation.
However, this also means that as with standard difference-in-difference estimates, the coefficient
estimate can only be interpreted as causal given specific assumptions.
The first concern is that of reverse causality. Countries that specialize in the production of
contract-intensive or institutional-intensive industries have a greater incentive to develop and
maintain good contracting institutions. Not doing so would be very costly. A few of the papers
considered address endogeneity. For example, Nunn (2007) provides instrumental variable (IV)
estimates, instrumenting a country’s contracting environment with its legal origin.3 Since legal
origin is predetermined and unaffected by current trade flows, it helps to alleviate the concern of
reverse causality. However, this IV strategy does raise concerns about whether the exclusion
restriction is satisfied; that is, whether legal origin affects the pattern of trade only through
contracting institutions. This is particularly true given the large number of studies that have
emerged, many since the publication of Nunn (2007), showing that a country’s legal origins have
wide-ranging impacts on a variety of outcomes including military conscription, labor market
regulations, and even economic growth (La Porta et al., 2008).4
Recognizing this concern with the IV estimates, Nunn (2007) undertakes an auxiliary procedure to address the issue of causality. He uses propensity-score matching and compares the
relative exports of paired British common law and French civil law countries across industries.
Matching on per capita GDP, human capital stock, physical capital stock, financial development
and trade openness, Nunn (2007) shows that British common law countries export relatively
more in contract-intensive industries relative to (matched) French civil law countries. This same
3 See

Acemoglu and Johnson (2004) for earlier evidence on the link between legal origin and contract enforcement.
studies have employed other instruments to address the issue of reverse causality. For example, Feenstra
et al. (2012), who estimate the impacts of provincial-level institutions on comparative advantage within China, use
the identity of the colonizer measured in 1953 to address the issue of reverse causality. Essaji and Fujiwara (2012)
use a country’s population density in 1500, urbanization in 1500, and the European settler mortality measure from
Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001).
4 Other

12

strategy is also employed in subsequent research by Ma et al. (2010) who examine subnational
variation in contracting institutions.
One advantage of the matching estimates is that they hold constant a large number of country
characteristics in the analysis. Unlike the IV estimates, this can be done without taking a stance
on exactly how the country characteristics affect the pattern of trade. In other words, one does
not have to take a stance on what the country-industry interactions look like. Since only matched
country-pairs (and not all countries) are being compared in the analysis, these country differences,
no matter how they affect the pattern of trade, are accounted for.
Another concern is that of omitted-variables bias. As an example, consider the empirical
finding from Levchenko (2007) that countries with a better rule of law tend to specialize in
goods requiring a broader range of inputs. Producers in an industry that uses a wide variety
of inputs may not only produce more complex goods that intensively use institutions, they may
also more intensively use communication, transportation, and distribution infrastructure, because
more inputs are being ordered and shipped to the locations of production. The Herfindahl index
of input concentration has been proposed by Christopher Clague (1991b), not as a measure of
institutional intensity, but as a measure of how ‘self-contained’ an industry is, which affects the
extent to which it relies on transportation and communication infrastructure. Given that countries
with better institutions also have better-developed infrastructure, there is a concern that the
estimated interaction between rule of law and Levchenko’s measure of institutional dependence
may be biased by the fact that countries with better infrastructure specialize in goods whose
production relies heavily on this. See Yeaple and Golub (2007) for evidence on the importance of
infrastructure.
The primary strategy undertaken by the studies described here is to control for alternative
interactions between country and industry characteristics. For example, Levchenko (2007) and
Nunn (2007) both control for Heckscher-Ohlin interactions (human capital endowment times skill
intensity and capital endowment times capital intensity) in their baseline regressions. As well,
Levchenko (2007) recognizes the possibility that his measure of institutional intensity may be
correlated with other industry characteristics, including Clague’s notion of how self-contained
an industry is. To deal with this, Levchenko includes industry fixed effects interacted with a
country’s real per capita GDP: These interactions control for the possibility that richer countries
tend to produce in industries whose characteristics are correlated with his institutional-intensity

13

measure. When these additional interactions are included in his regressions, Levchenko finds
that the coefficient on his interaction of interest actually increases.

b. Benchmarking Bias
A final methodological issue within the literature arises from the fact that all studies rely on an
industry measure taken from one country, usually the United States, to approximate the industry
characteristic in all countries. In other words, zg is used rather than zgi . The typical justification
for this is that industry characteristics are by-and-large technologically determined and therefore
their intensity ordering does not change when moving from one country to another. As an
example, although richer countries use more capital than poorer countries this is true across all
industries and in a way that preserves the ordering of capital intensity in the different countries.
In all countries, construction is relatively capital intensive while services are not, although on
average more capital is used in the United States than in Ghana. As an alternative example,
consider Levchenko (2007) and Nunn (2007) who both construct their measures using the United
States’ input-output tables. Their presumption is that no matter where goods are produced
they still require the same inputs and in the same proportions. For example, wherever cars
are manufactured, they generally still require tires, windshields, textiles for seats, etc.
Ciccone and Papaioannou (2010) derive the properties of OLS estimates when the industry
measure from one country is an imperfect proxy for the other countries. They identify two sources
of bias. One is standard attenuation bias. If there is random measurement error associated with
the industry measure, zg then the estimate of β will be biased downwards. However, there is also
a second bias that arises if the measure being used zg is systematically a better proxy for certain
countries. They refer to this as amplification bias. As an example, again consider the measure
from Levchenko (2007) or Nunn (2007). If it is the case that countries that are similar to the United
States in terms of the rule of law are also similar in terms of input-output production structures,
then the industry measure is going to be more accurate for countries with U.S.-like institutions.
Ciccone and Papaioannou (2010) show that this results in an estimate of β that is biased away
from zero e.g., upwards if β > 0. The authors suggest a two-step procedure that, under certain
conditions, can yield consistent estimates.5
5 Nunn

and Trefler (2010) find no evidence of such bias in their work examining the distribution of tariffs across
industries. They find very similar results when using factor intensities from countries other than the United States.

14

C. Financial Markets
There are many potential ways that financial development could affect comparative advantage.
However, there is no standard model or mechanism for this. Theoretical contributions include
Kletzer and Bardhan (1987), Baldwin (1989), Xu (2001), Beck (2002) and Matsuyama (2005).
In each of these models, credit-market imperfections raise costs in some industries relative to
others, thus creating comparative advantage. Beck (2002) was the first to empirically examine
the role of financial development for comparative advantage. Following Kletzer and Bardhan
(1987), he argues theoretically that manufacturing-sector firms face up-front fixed costs whereas
agricultural-sector firms do not. Credit-market imperfections make it costly to finance the fixed
costs. Since countries with well-developed financial markets have lower finance costs, such
countries have a comparative advantage in manufacturing.6
Beck (2002) examines the cross-country relationship between manufacturing exports as a share
of total exports and measures of financial development. Beck estimates a positive β, which means
that more financially developed countries have a comparative advantage in manufacturing. The
estimated effect is economically large: A one standard deviation increase in private credit leads
to half of a standard deviation increase in manufacturing as a share of total exports. However, he
does not control for the endogeneity of financial development.
While Beck’s analysis considers just two types of sectors, subsequent research allows for a
much richer set of industries. The seminal study by Rajan and Zingales (1998) shows that
financially developed countries tend to have higher output in industries that traditionally require
large amounts of external finance. They measure external financial dependence, eg , as the fraction of
a firm’s capital expenditure that is financed from sources external to the firm. More precisely, it
is:
eg ≡

(capital expenditures) − (cash flow from operations)
.
(capital expenditure)

The firm-level data are from the United States (COMPUSTAT) and the industry-level data are the
6 There are two types of market frictions in Beck (2002).

First, firms have private information about their productivity
and hence about their default productivities, information that can only be revealed to financial intermediaries through
costly monitoring. Second, savers cannot invest directly in firms but must instead use costly financial intermediation.
These costs are proportional to the amount of the investment. (Beck interprets this as costly search, but does not
actually model the search.) There are two sectors, one featuring constant returns (agriculture) and one featuring
increasing returns (manufacturing) as in Krugman (1980). Because of its fixed costs, manufacturing is relatively more
sensitive to intermediation costs than is agriculture. As a result, countries with low costs of financial intermediation
have a comparative advantage in manufacturing.

15

external financial dependence of the median firm in each industry. Rajan and Zingales estimate:
∆V Agi = αg + αi + β (eg · fi ) + Xgi γ + εgi

(2)

where g indexes 36 ISIC industries (manufacturing only), i indexes 41 countries, ∆V Agi is the
change in real value added between 1980 and 1990, fi is a measure of financial development,
and Xgi is a vector of other covariates.7 β is estimated to be positive, indicating that financially
developed countries experienced relatively rapid value-added growth in industries with a high
degree of external financial dependence.
This methodology is immediately applicable to studying comparative advantage since all that
is needed is to replace the dependent variable in equation (2) with a measure of exports:
ygi = αg + αi + β (eg · fi ) + Xgi γ + εgi

(3)

where ygi is a measure of country i exports of good g. Note that this is simply a variant of
equation (1) described above and that this is precisely what Beck (2003) estimates. Measuring
yic as industry-i exports divided by GDP and using a sample of 56 countries and 36 industries
averaged over the 1980s, he finds the expected positive estimate of β. However, the magnitude is
implausibly large and the sample statistics suggest that there are outliers. Also, as Beck points
out, there is an issue of endogeneity, but his method of dealing with it is unsatisfactory.
Svaleryd and Vlachos (2005) consider a variant of equation (3) for 20 OECD countries and
32 4-digit ISIC industries in which the dependent variable is a somewhat unusual measure of
competitiveness.8 Their estimate of β is not statistically significant when fi is private credit,9 but
is statistically significant when other measures of fi are used.10 The authors do not interpret
the magnitude of their estimates. They do, however, attempt to deal with the endogeneity of
7 Rajan and Zingales (1998) provide a large number of empirical measures of financial development at the national
level. Many of these are collected in Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine (2010). Studies of financial development as a
source of comparative advantage typically report results for several such measures. Rajan and Zingales (1998) prefer
to use private credit plus stock market capitalization. The correlation between this sum and private credit is 0.67. The
seminal cross-country study by King and Levine (1993) considers four measures: (KL1) The size of the formal financial
intermediary sector relative to GDP (specifically, the ratio of liquid liabilities to GDP); (KL2) The importance of banks
relative to the central bank (specifically, deposit money bank domestic credit divided by deposit money bank plus
central bank domestic credit); (KL 3) The percentage of credit allocated to private firms (specifically, the ratio of claims
on the non-financial private sector to total domestic credit); and, (KL4) The ratio of credit issued to private firms to
GDP (specifically, the ratio of claims on the non-financial private sector to GDP). Rajan and Zingales (1998) consider
three measures: (RZ 1) Total capitalization (the ratio of domestic credit plus stock market capitalization to GDP); (RZ
2) Private credit (credit extended to the private sector as a share of GDP); and, (RZ 3) Accounting standards.
8 The measure is (C + X − M ) /C where C is consumption, X is exports and M is imports.
gi
gi
gi
gi
gi
gi
gi
9 This is defined as the ratio of credit issued to private firms to GDP. (‘Private’ here means claims on the non-financial
private sector.)
10 Specifically, the size of the stock market relative to GDP (RZ 1 in footnote 7) or accounting standards (RZ 3).

16

financial development: a country with industrial structure that is skewed towards sectors with
high external financial dependence will have a high demand for financial development. They
instrument financial development using a measure of civic engagement from Knack and Keefer
(1997). This IV strategy is unfortunately not successful as it produces large standard errors on the
estimates of β.
Becker, Chen and Greenberg (2012) argue that exporting requires fixed costs and that these
fixed costs are higher in financially less-developed countries. Further, fixed costs are higher in
industries that are differentiated in the sense of Rauch (1999) or require large sales and R&D
outlays. They thus interact private credit fi with either (a) the average fraction of sales devoted to
R&D and advertising by U.S. firms (from COMPUSTAT) or (b) a dummy for being a differentiated
product.11 In a regression similar to equation (3), but with eg now either the R&D/sales or Rauch
variables, the authors estimate a β that is positive. That is, access to lower fixed costs of exporting
is a source of comparative advantage.
As discussed, a significant methodological problem with estimating equation (1) or, by symmetry, equation (3) is that there may be omitted country-level factors that interact both with
industrial structure and with fi . This possibility suggests that endogeneity may be a concern.
Manova (2008) tackles this in a very neat way. She looks at what happens to the composition of
a country’s exports as it goes through a period of financial liberalization. Specifically, she starts
with:
ygit = α + β (eg · fit ) − β 0 (eg0 · fit ) + εgit

(4)

where t indexes years, ygit is the log of country i exports of good g, fit is a measure the degree
to which equity markets are liberalized in country i in year t, eg is external financial dependence
in industry g, and eg0 is asset tangibility.12 Asset tangibility is the share of property, plant and
equipment in total assets (again, for the median firm in the industry). It captures the idea that
industries with large fixed assets can use these as collateral for a loan, thus making financial
development less important. We have put a minus sign in front of (fit · eg0 ) so that we expect β 0 >
0. Manova estimates β and β 0 to be positive and statistically significant, as expected. Further, these
results hold even when controlling for interactions between country-level factor endowments and
industry level factor intensities.
11 Point

(b) is closely related to what Berkowitz et al. (2006) do. See the above discussion.
data for external financial dependence and asset tangibility are from Braun (2003).

12 Manova’s

17

What makes Manova’s paper stand out is the treatment of endogeneity. Let dit be a dummy
that equals 1 after an equity-market liberalization and equals 0 before an equity-market liberalization. Then, as in Trefler’s (2004) study of the Canada-U.S. trade liberalization, one can estimate
a difference-in-difference specification either in levels or in changes:
ln ygit = α + β (eg · dit ) − β 0 (eg0 · dit ) + εgit

(5)

∆ ln ygi = α + βeg − β 0 eg0 + εgi

(6)

where ∆ ln ygi is the log difference of exports before and after liberalization. Manova estimates
that β and β 0 are positive, indicating that financial liberalization leads to a greater comparative
advantage in goods that require large levels of external finance and small levels of tangible
(collateralizable) assets. While equation (6) does not eliminate endogeneity concerns entirely
(the timing of financial liberalization might be endogenous), it is a very large step forward.
The financial crisis of 2008 provides an interesting experiment into the role of financial intermediation. The crisis was more severe in some countries than in others and operated through
different mechanisms in different countries. This has allowed researchers to dig deeper into the
impacts of short-run financing problems on aggregate trade and comparative advantage. The
interested reader is referred to the symposium in the May 2012 (vol. 87, No. 1) issue of the Journal
of International Economics.
Although this chapter is primarily concerned with comparative advantage across sectors, there
have been interesting studies of other outcomes, notably, comparative advantage across firms
within a sector and the mode of entry into foreign markets. We start with comparative advantage
across firms within a sector. Since the seminal contributions of Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and
Kortum (2003) and Melitz (2003), attention has shifted to the role of heterogeneous firms, and
in particular, to the role of selection into and out of exporting. Chaney (2005) and Manova (2013)
both offer models in which firm heterogeneity interacts with financial constraints. We focus here
on Manova’s work because it includes a major empirical component. Manova (2013) observes
that firms that cannot find financing will be unable to export. This means that in thinking about
comparative advantage, it is important to distinguish between the extensive-margin and intensivemargin effects of financial-market imperfections. To do this she develops a heterogeneous-firm
model (Melitz, 2003) with countries at different levels of financial development and sectors with
different levels of tangible assets.
18

In the model, firms must borrow to cover their fixed costs of exporting. Recognizing that
there is default risk, lenders will only lend an amount that is incentive compatible i.e., that will
be repaid. This incentive compatible amount will depend on the firm’s sales and hence on the
firm’s productivity. Very productive firms will be able to borrow as much as they need. Very
unproductive firms will not export and hence will not need to borrow. Firms with intermediate
levels of productivity would borrow and export if credit markets were perfect, but can do neither
because they are credit-constrained.13
Applying this model to aggregate trade data, Manova (2013) studies the mechanisms through
which credit constraints operate and finds that credit constraints substantially reduce exports
both at the extensive margin (whether or not to export, how many products to export, and
which destinations to enter) and at the intensive margin (how much to export of a product to
a destination).
Credit constraints can also have an influence on the mode of entry into foreign markets i.e., on
the choice between FDI and outsourcing. This is discussed in Antràs and Foley (2011), Manova,
Wei and Zhang (2011), and Shen (2012). Finally, credit constraints can have effects on the size
distribution of firms, which has implications for trade via the selection of firms into exporting.
Finally, we have focussed here on financial underdevelopment to the exclusion of regulatory
barriers to entry. Both of these affect the fixed costs of setting up a business and thus affect the
extensive margin of trade. However, as La Porta et al. (2008) point out, financially underdeveloped
countries typically have high regulatory barriers to entry. In an influential paper, Helpman, Melitz
and Rubinstein (2008) show that regulatory barriers to entry have a major impact on the extensive
margin of trade. Thus, more work is needed to sort out the separate roles of regulatory barriers
to entry and financial underdevelopment.

D. Labor Markets
Research has also explored the importance of other institutions for comparative advantage. Here
we consider labor-market institutions, starting with Costinot (2009). Costinot emphasizes a tradeoff between the costs and benefits of a greater division of labor in production. A good is produced
with many tasks, each of which has a fixed training cost so that there are returns to scale at
13 In

contrast, Chaney (2005) assumes that firms have a randomly drawn, exogenous amount of liquidity which they
must use towards the fixed costs of exporting.

19

the task level. In a very large market, a firm would like to have each worker learn a single
task and specialize in it. This is Adam Smith’s observation that specialization is limited by the
extent of the market. Against this benefit are the costs of monitoring workers. Each worker
exerts non-contractible effort and performs his or her assigned task less than 100% of the time;
unfortunately, a good is produced only if all tasks are produced. The greater is the degree of
specialization in tasks, the more workers are needed and the lower is the probability that the
good will be produced. This trade-off between the productivity gains from task specialization
(scale returns) and the productivity costs of task specialization (incomplete contracting / worker
monitoring costs) leads to predictions about institutions as a source of comparative advantage.
Countries that are effectively able to monitor workers have a comparative advantage in goods
that require many tasks i.e., complex goods.
To connect the theory with empirics, Costinot shows that in equilibrium there is a one-to-one
relationship between the unobservable complexity of a good (i.e., the number of tasks required)
and the observable average training costs per worker. Thus, his main result can be stated in
terms of observables: Goods with high training costs will locate in countries with better worker
monitoring. Costinot creatively measures training costs using responses to the following PSID
question: “Suppose someone had the experience and education needed to start working at a job
like yours. From that point, how long would it take them to become fully trained and qualified (to
do a job like yours)?” Costinot aggregates the individual responses up to 20 2-digit SIC industries.
Costinot first estimates the determinants of bilateral exports across a panel of industries in
1992:
ygij = αgj + αij + βi zg + εgij

(7)

where ygij is a measure of the log of country i’s exports to j of good g, αgj and αij are industryimporter and exporter-importer fixed effects, respectively, and zg is Costinot’s training-cost measure of complexity. Notice that the key term βi zg is independent of the importer (j) so one can
aggregate across importers, which leads to a specification that is very similar to equation (1). The
key differences are that the measure of complexity is very different from Levchenko (2007) and
Nunn (2007) and βi flexibly replaces βqi where qi is the rule of law. Costinot estimates this model
and shows, not surprisingly, that the estimated βi are positively correlated with the rule of law.
More interestingly, Costinot shows that the estimated βi are positively correlated with an “Ability
to Perform” index. This index is calculated from the Business Environment Risk Intelligence
20

(BERI) survey of business persons’ views about various country characteristics including: work
ethic; availability and quality of trained manpower; class, ethnic and religious factors; attention
span and health; and absenteeism. In short, Costinot’s result shows that incomplete contracts in
labor markets are a source of comparative advantage.14
Tang (2012) also studies how a country’s labor market institutions, by affecting workers’
incentives to acquire skills, can shape export patterns. He develops an open-economy model
in which workers undertake non-contractible activities in order to acquire firm-specific skills on
the job. In the model, labor market protection raises workers’ incentives to acquire firm-specific
skills relative to general skills, turning labor laws into a source of comparative advantage. In
particular, the model shows that countries with more protective labor laws export relatively more
in firm-specific skill-intensive sectors. This is true for both the intensive and extensive margins of
exporting.
To test the theoretical predictions, he constructs sector proxies for firm-specific skill intensity
and industry-specific skill intensity by estimating the returns to firm tenure and the returns to
industry tenure for 63 3-digit U.S. manufacturing industries between 1974 and 1993. Firm-specific
skill intensity is measured using firm-tenure returns from a Mincer equation on PSID data. Data
on labor regulations (for 84 countries) are taken from the World Bank’s Doing Business Survey
(Botero, Djankov, La Porta, de Silanes and Shleifer, 2004). Based on countries’ legal documents
from the late 1990s, Botero et al. quantify the extent to which labor market regulations cover
employment, collective relations, and social security. Tang then estimates sector-level gravity
equations for 84 countries using the Helpman et al. (2008) framework, and provides evidence
that countries with institutions that protect labor have a comparative advantage in goods that are
intensive in firm-specific skills.
Cunat and Melitz (2012) explore the impacts of the flexibility of a country’s labor market
institutions on comparative advantage. They begin by observing that workers change jobs much
more flexibly in some countries than in others. For example, gross job flows in manufacturing
are twice as high in the United States as in Portugal. Further, workers are much more likely to
move jobs in some industries than in others. For example, ranking U.S. manufacturing industries
14 Costinot’s

analysis is actually more subtle in a very interesting way. His model also predicts an interaction between
traditional human capital endowments and a country’s ability to monitor workers; specifically, the most complex goods
will be produced in the country for which the product of human capital per worker and the effectiveness of worker
monitoring is greatest. He is able to show that βi is correlated with human capital endowments and that the correlation
between βi and ability to perform holds after controlling for human capital.

21

by their gross job flows, the 90th-percentile industry has gross job flows that are twice as high as
in the 10th-percentile industry. This suggests that countries with more flexible labor markets will
have a comparative advantage in industries that require higher gross job flows.
The precise mechanism that Cunat and Melitz (2012) explore focuses on differences in the
volatility of industries — defined as the dispersion of firm-level shocks within an industry — and
the extent to which this drives the reallocation of workers across firms within an industry. They
conjecture that firms in countries with greater labor market flexibility are better able to respond
to firm-specific shocks by hiring and firing workers as necessary. Therefore, countries with more
flexible labor market institutions have a comparative advantage in more volatile industries.15
Cunat and Melitz (2012) develop a model that illustrates this source of comparative advantage,
showing how it manifests itself as a Ricardian technology difference. (See Cunat and Melitz (2010)
for a more general version of their model.) Also, a second insight arises from the model when
capital is introduced: Their mechanism should be weaker in industries that are more capital
intensive. This insight suggests that capital intensity can affect comparative advantage in a
manner beyond standard Heckscher-Ohlin effects.16
The authors find cross-sectional support for the predictions of their model: Countries with
more flexible labor market institutions concentrate their exports in sectors with greater volatility.
Also, greater capital intensity reduces this effect. Flexibility of a country’s labor market institutions is measured using the 2004 World Bank Doing Business Survey (see Botero et al. 2004), from
which they build an index based on hiring costs, firing costs, and restrictions on changing the
number of hours worked. Motivated theoretically, the authors measure a sector’s volatility in
2004 as an average of the time-series volatility of each firm within the sector. Their estimating
equation is of the form:
ygi = αg + αi + β 0 (zg0 · qi0 ) + εgi

(8)

where ygi is the log of country i’s exports of good g, qi0 is their measure of labor-market flexibility,
and zg0 is their measure of volatility.17 The authors find that β 0 is indeed positive, indicating that
flexible labor markets are a source of comparative advantage in volatile industries.
15 This

link between labor market flexibility and specialization of production also appears in Saint-Paul (1997) and
Davidson et al. (1999).
16 Ju and Wei (2011) offer an analysis with a similar flavour that involves financial intermediation.
17 They also include (1) an interaction of sector g’s U.S. capital stock times q 0 , (2) g’s capital stock times country i’s
i
capital endowment, and (3) g’s skilled-labor stock times country i’s skill endowment. These all perform as expected.

22

Cunat and Melitz (2012) are clearly concerned with unemployment, but their formal model
does not explicitly model the phenomenon. Unemployment varies dramatically across sectors
so that unemployment must have important implications for comparative advantage. The are
many strands of the literature on trade and unemployment. These include models featuring
minimum wages (Brecher, 1974, Davis, 1998), implicit contracts (Matusz, 1986), efficiency wages
(Copeland 1989 and Matusz 1996 in Heckscher-Ohlin and Ricardian settings, respectively, and
Davis and Harrigan 2011 in a heterogeneous-firms setting), fair wages (Agell and Lundborg
1995, Kreickemeier and Nelson 2006, and Egger and Kreickemeier 2009, in a heterogeneous-firm
setting), and unions (Mezzetti and Dinopoulos 1991, Gaston and Trefler 1995; Eckel and Egger
2009, and Karasik 2012). Here we focus on Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides-type models featuring
search and matching in labor markets. We emphasize that our interest here is only in comparative
advantage whereas most contributors to the literature are concerned in addition with the impact
of trade liberalization on unemployment, income distribution and welfare.
Consider a world economy with two countries (i = A,B), two factors (workers L and firms
K), and two identical industries (g = 0,1). In each industry one worker pairs with one firm to
produce one unit of output. Suppose that L > K in country A. Because technologies are Leontief
and identical across industries there can be no Stolper-Samuelson or Rybczynski effects: L − K
workers will be unemployed. In this setting there is unemployment, but no source of comparative
advantage and no trade.
Now introduce Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides search and matching. A worker-firm match
produces on unit of output and, since there is a bilateral hold-up problem with zero outside
options, each party is assumed to receive a fixed share of the revenue. Workers and firms are in
one of two states, matched or unemployed. Unemployed workers and firms choose an industry
in which to search — the industry that offers the highest expected future returns — and match
probabilistically in the chosen industry. Matched pairs produce, share revenues and then, with
probability bg , the match dissolves and the pair becomes unemployed. All of this happens in
continuous time so that 1/bg is the expected duration of a match. The instantaneous probability
of matching depends positively on a matching-efficiency parameter mi .18 In this setting there are
two causes of unemployment: Some matches dissolve and some of the unemployed fail to match.
18 More specifically,

the measure of pairs that form instantaneously in industry g in country i is given by the matching
1−χ
function f (Lgi ,Kgi ) = mi Lχ
where Lgi and Kgi are the measures of workers and firms, respectively, who are
gi Kgi
searching in sector g in country i.

23

These two causes are controlled by bg and mi , respectively.
Consider an unemployed worker’s choice of sector. A match has an expected duration of
1/bg so that if a matched worker receives wgi per period then she receives expected return wgi /bg
per match. Suppose b1 > b0 so that industry 1 has relatively short-lived matches. Then ceteris
paribus, w1i /w0i must be high in order to compensate workers for short match durations. Now
suppose mA > mB so that country A’s unemployed workers find new matches relatively fast. This
advantage reduces the level of compensation needed by workers in industry 1. That is, mA > mB
and b1 > b0 imply w1A /w0A < w1B /w0B : Country A has a comparative advantage in industry
1. Empirically, this puts us on familiar ground in that the interaction of a country characteristic
mi with an industry characteristic bg produces an institutional source of comparative advantage.
Since industry 1 has the relatively high rate of unemployment, one may state this result in a more
interesting way: The country with better labor-market institutions will have a comparative advantage in
the high-unemployment sector.19
This basic argument appears in Davidson et al. (1999, lemmas 3 and 4). It was first formulated
by Davidson et al. (1988) and Hosios (1990), who developed the argument in a Heckscher-Ohlin
context. In those earlier models, which use the same production structure as we have used,
all adjustment occurs via changes in the pool of unemployed workers and firms. For example, if
there is an increase in a country’s endowment of workers then the country must expand the sector
whose pool of unemployed has relatively more workers than firms. Restated, the Hecksher-Ohlin
term ’labor intensity of an industry’ is now replaced with the term ’labor intensity of an industry’s
pool of unemployed.’
There are a number of drawbacks to the above analysis that are elegantly addressed by
Helpman and Itskhoki (2010). First, we treated firms as exogenous endowments even though
trade economists prefer to allow for the free entry of firms. Second, we assumed that firms are
identical even though the importance of productivity heterogeneity for exporting has been widely
acknowledged. Third, we assumed that there is one worker per firm despite overwhelming evidence on heterogeneity in the number of workers per firm. Helpman and Itskhoki address all of
19 We said that w /w must be high ceteris paribus and it is useful to explain this. Let p
gi be the price of good g
0i
1i
in country i. In our simple model, pgi is the per-period surplus of a match so that wgi will be proportional to pgi . If
demand outstrips supply for good g then pgi will rise, wgi will rise, and workers will be attracted to the industry. There
is thus an upward-sloping industry supply, as is standard in models with industry specificity. As such, w1i /w0i will
also depend on demand conditions that influence p1i /p0i . On a separate note, the possibility of a downward-sloping
supply schedule is debated by Davidson, Martin and Matusz (1988) and Hosios (1990): The possibility is ruled out if
there is efficient matching (the ‘Hosios Rule’).

24

these drawbacks by introducing Melitz-style firm heterogeneity. This leads to important insights
about the impact of labor-market frictions on both firm entry and firm exporting decisions. It also
leads to a rich set of predictions about unemployment, income distribution, and the gains from
trade that are beyond the scope of this review chapter.
Note that Helpman and Itskhoki (2010) is not a trivial extension of existing work. For example,
they address issues with the underlying search-and-matching structure of earlier studies. These
studies assume that the key parameter bg is exogenous. Helpman and Itskhoki address this by
eliminating match breakup altogether (bg = 0) and introducing, realistically, costly posting of
vacancies by firms. Posting costs vg together with matching efficiencies mi generate a source of
comparative advantage. Eliminating match breakups also allows Helpman and Itskhoki to move
from a complicated dynamic model to a one-period model, which in turn allows them to explore
free entry and the extensive margin of trade. Another problem is that when firms choose to hire
more than one worker they must engage in multilateral bargaining with these workers. This is
elegantly modelled as in Stole and Zwiebel (1996).
The above models do not allow for heterogeneous workers and cannot explain the important
fact that large firms pay high wages.20 Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding (2010) introduce heterogeneous workers and screening for high-ability workers. This leads to another interesting set of
comparative advantage and welfare results, as well as a prediction that large firms and exporters
will pay a wage premium. Helpman, Itskhoki, Muendler and Redding (2012) show that matched
worker-firm data from Brazil is consistent with the predictions of Helpman and Itskhoki (2010)
and Helpman et al. (2010). Davidson, Heyman, Matusz, Sjoholm and Zhu (2012a,b) also offer a
model of two-sided heterogeneity (both workers and firms) and matching. They show empirically
that trade liberalization leads to better matching between workers and firms. Clearly, much more
empirical work is needed to assess the large class of models featuring unemployment.21
20 On

the correlation between wages and firm size in an international trade context, see also Davis and Harrigan
(2011) and Amiti and Davis (2012). On worker heterogeneity, see also Ohnsorge and Trefler (2007).
21 Paralleling the literature on labor-market frictions is a literature on non-Walrasian product markets. In product
markets, buyers and sellers may not be able to identify one another except via costly search and this has a variety of
implications. One of these is that specialists in matching buyers and sellers — trade intermediaries — may arise in
equilibrium. Antràs and Costinot (2010, 2011) explore the role of intermediaries in reducing matching frictions and
draw welfare implications from trade liberalization. Rauch and Watson (2004) explore how costly search affects the
evolution of trade networks between developed-country buyers and developing-country suppliers. (See also Rauch
(1999, 2001).) A large number of studies have shown that intermediation through wholesalers is empirically important
in international trade. See Ahn, Khandelwal and Wei (2011) for China, Akerman (2010) for Sweden, Basker and Van
(2010), Felbermayr and Jung (2011) and Bernard, Jensen, Redding and Schott (2010) for the United States, Bernard,
Grazzi and Tomasi (2011) for Italy, Bernard, Blanchard, Beveren and Vandenbussche (2012) for Belgium, and Blum,
Claro and Horstmann (2010, 2011) for Chile, Argentina and Colombia.

25

Table 3: Pairwise correlation coefficients based on Chor (2012)
Manova (2013):
External finance
dependence

Levchenko
(2007): Input
concentration

Nunn (2007):
Input relationshipspecificity

Costinot (2009):
Job complexity

Cunat & Melitz
(2012): Sales
volatility

Levchenko (2007): Input
concentration

0.628
(0.00)

Nunn (2007): Input
relationship-specificity

0.131
(0.58)

0.551
(0.01)

Costinot (2009): Job
complexity

0.652
(0.00)

0.539
(0.01)

0.210
(0.37)

Cunat & Melitz (2012):
Sales volatility

0.382
(0.10)

0.106
(0.66)

-0.200
(0.40)

0.068
(0.78)

Capital intensity

0.104
(0.66)

-0.344
(0.14)

-0.536
(0.01)

0.191
(0.42)

0.059
(0.80)

Skill intensity

0.524
(0.02)

0.465
(0.04)

0.088
(0.71)

0.820
(0.00)

-0.085
(0.72)

Capital intensity

0.382
(0.10)

Notes:
correlation
coefficients
are reported,are
withreported,
p-values in parentheses.
Coefficients
that are statistically
significant at
the are
10% statistically
level or lower
Notes:Pairwise
Pairwise
correlation
coefficients
with p-values
in parentheses.
Coefficients
that
are
reported in at
bold.
correlation
across 20
2-digit
SIC industries.
Data
are from
Chor (2010).
significant
theEach
10%
level orislower
are
reported
in bold.
Each
correlation
is across 20 2-digit SIC industries.

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from Chor (2010).

E. All Together Now
One of the frustrating elements of empirical research in economics (and arguable in all the sciences), is that there are often many statistically significant explanations of a single phenomenon.
Often, many studies claim to explain the phenomenon in its entirety, creating an embarrassment
of riches. In particular, it is tempting to interpret the above survey as indicating that there are
enough institutional explanations of comparative advantage to explain trade patterns many times
over. What would happen if all the explanations were examined simultaneously? Would we find
that explanatory variables are so highly correlated that none are statistically significant? These
questions are answered by Chor (2010).
Chor simultaneously tests five of the comparative advantage mechanisms discussed above.
To do this he first constructs the following 2-digit SIC industry measures of zg in equation
(1). These are (1) the average relationship-specificity of inputs (Nunn, 2007); (2) the Herfindahl
index of input concentration (Levchenko, 2007); (3) the average complexity of tasks (Costinot,
2009); (4) sales volatility (Cunat and Melitz, 2012); and, (5) external finance dependence (Beck,
2003, Manova, 2013). He also constructs standard Heckscher-Ohlin measures of capital and skill
intensity.
The pairwise correlation coefficients of Chor’s industry measures are reported in table 3.
26

Coefficients that are statistically significant are in bold. The highest correlation in the matrix
is between skill intensity and Costinot’s (2009) measure of job complexity. This is intuitive since
Costinot’s measure is based on the time required to learn the skills of a job, which one would
expect to be positively correlated with educational attainment in an industry. The measure of
external finance dependence constructed by Chor is also highly correlated with both Levchenko’s
(2007) input concentration measure and with Costinot’s (2009) job complexity measure. For these
variables, there is no obvious reason to expect the measures to be correlated.
With these five industry measures of zg in hand, Chor re-estimates equation (1), but now
includes all of the zg · qi interactions in a single specification. Letting m index the five models of
Nunn, Levchenko, Costinot, Cunat and Melitz, and Manova, Chor estimates
5

ygij = αi + αgj +

∑

β m (zgm · qim ) + Xij γ + εgij

(9)

m=1

where ygij is the log of bilateral exports from country i to country j of product g and where
zgm · qim is the comparative advantage interaction term implied by model m. The regression also
includes exporter fixed effects (αi ), industry-importer fixed effects (αgj ), and a vector of gravity
controls Xij that includes bilateral distance as well as dummies for common language, colony,
border, regional trade agreement, and WTO membership. The sample includes 83 countries and
20 SIC 2-digit industries. The coefficients of interest are the β m ’s.
Table 4 reports the results. The first column reports estimates of the β m in equation (9).
The second and third columns report standard errors and t-statistics.

Each row reports a

single regressor. Row 1 corresponds to Nunn (2007), row 2 to Levchenko (2007) , rows 3–4
to Costinot (2009), row 5 to Cunat and Melitz (2012), and row 6 to Manova (2013). The final
two rows correspond to traditional Heckscher-Ohlin interactions of industry variables (humanand physical-capital intensity) with country variables (human and physical capital endowments
relative to labor). Looking at the t-statistics, the truly remarkable conclusion is that each and
every one of the regressors is individually significant.
Chor’s findings raise an important question: How is it that all the determinants are significant?
The answer lies in the fact that although the determinants considered are each highly significant,
the contribution of each to the overall variation in trade patterns is small. For example, Nunn
(2007, p. 583) reports that his judicial quality-contract intensity interaction only explains 2.3%
of the residual variation in the pattern of trade i.e., variation after controlling for country fixed

27

Table 4: The Significance of Each of the Institutional Determinants of Comparative Advantage

Slope Estimates
t-stat
β
Std. Err.
(1)
(2)
(3)
Product-Market Institutions
(Relationship-specificity)g x (Rule of Law)i

Impacts
Beta Coeff. 75th - 25th
(4)
(5)

9.64

0.86

11.27

0.49

1.6

14.31

1.67

8.57

0.65

1.7

(Job complexity)g x (Rule of Law)i

2.92

0.45

6.52

0.15

1.3

(Job complexity)g x ln(H/L)i

1.46

0.43

3.41

0.10

1.2

Labor-Market Institutions
(Sales volatility)g x ln(Flexible lab. markets)i

9.04

2.24

4.04

0.09

1.1

Financial-Market Institutions
(External fin. Depend.)g x (Fin. Develop.)i

1.28

0.09

14.37

0.11

1.2

Heckscher-Ohlin
ln(H/L)g x ln(H/L)i

1.25

0.25

4.98

0.17

1.3

ln(K/L)g x ln(K/L)i

0.16

0.02

8.20

0.49

1.6

(Input concentration)g x (Rule of Law)i

Notes: The first column reports estimates of equation (9). The dependent variable ygij is the log of bilateral exports from
country i to country j for industry g. The trade data are for 1990. Industries are coded at the 2-digit SIC (1987) level so
that there are 20 industries. There are 83 countries (accounting for 82% of world trade) and hence 83 × 82 bilateral pairs
per good, of which 45,034 (one-third) have positive trade flows. (Zero trade flows are omitted.) The specification also
includes a set of regressors that are not reported: (1) the log of distance; (2) indicator variables for common language,
colony, border, regional trade agreement, and WTO membership; and, (3) exporter and industry-importer fixed effects.
Source: Chor (2010, table 1).

28

effects and industry fixed effects. Therefore, the many results from the studies examined here can
all be simultaneously true without over-explaining the pattern of trade.
Columns 4–5 examine the economic importance of each factor. Beta coefficients are a standardized measure of in-sample fit: They are the predicted standard deviation change in the
dependent variable induced by a one standard deviation change in the independent variable.
(Beta coefficients are also proportional to the contribution of the regressor to the R2 .) Chor finds
that the most important regressors are those suggested by Levchenko (2007) and Nunn (2007).
For example, a one standard deviation change in Nunn’s zg · qi leads to a 0.49 standard deviation
change in log exports. Incredibly, both are at least as important as traditional Heckscher-Ohlin
determinants of comparative advantage.
Another economic measure of importance is the OLS estimate of β m times the interquartile
range of the explanatory variable. The latter is the 75th quartile minus the 25th quartile. This
measure appears in the last column of table 4. By this economic measure, all of the variables
are very important. We conclude from this that each of the many institutional determinants of
comparative advantage considered in the literature are important for understanding comparative
advantage.
In addition to this remarkable conclusion, another remarkable result has come out of the literature. Institutions matter even after controlling for traditional sources of comparative advantage
such as factor endowments. Indeed, institutions matter even after controlling for the interaction
of per capita GDP with either Nunn’s contract-intensity measure (Nunn, 2007, table 5) or with
industry fixed effects (Levchenko, 2007, table 3). This is a satisfying conclusion. The obvious
interpretation is that institutions affect costs more in some industries than in others and that
such relative cost impacts are better captured by institutional variables than by endowments or
per capita GDP. Adding Ricardian productivity measures at the country-sector level to the above
regressions, something no researcher has done, would help confirm that this interpretation is
correct.

3. Informal Institutions and their Impacts on Comparative Advantage
It is easy to argue that contracting institutions are not important because, when they are weak,
alternative institutions evolve to deal with hold-up problems. In this section we explore the ways

29

in which such alternative institutions have impacted comparative advantage and the extent to
which they substitute for formal institutions in the fact of contractual incompleteness.

A. Repeated Interactions and Dynamics
As is well-known, repeated interactions can facilitate cooperation even in an environment in
which contract enforcement is poor. Further, repeated interactions themselves can lead to the
creation of networks, especially non-kin-based networks. The standard folk theorem suggests
that as long as both parties value the future sufficiently, with repetition full investment can be
obtained. Empirically, we do observe many instances in which reputation substitutes for formal
contract enforcement. For example, Bigsten, Collier, Dercon, Fafchamps, Gauthier, Gunning,
Oduro, Oostendorp, Patillo, Soderbom, Teal and Zeufack (2000) show that for manufacturers in
Burundi, Cameroon, Ivory Coast, Kenya, Zambia and Zimbabwe, repeat relationships are very
common and are used as a substitute for legal contract enforcement. In these countries, only
the largest firms rely on legal forms of contract enforcement. Further, these reputation-based
relationships appear to be one of the most important determinants of success. In addition to
providing a form of contract enforcement, the relationship, once formed, is also used to share
risk and pool information (Fafchamps and Minten, 1999).
McMillan and Woodruff (1999) study buyer-seller relationships within the Vietnamese context,
examining 259 non-state firms between 1995 and 1997. They also find evidence for the importance
of repeat relationships. Using the provision of trade credit as a proxy for trust, they show that a
seller is more trusting of a buyer the longer is the duration of the relationship.
An important point, however, is that repeat relationships and relational contracting is not
without costs. Because well-tested relationships have value, buyers and sellers are likely to
stick with existing relationships rather than establishing new, untried ones. This creates barriers
to entry and inefficiencies, particularly in dynamic environments, where old partnerships soon
become less productive. Johnson, McMillan and Woodruff (2002) provide evidence for such an
effect of relational contracting among countries from the former Soviet Union. They examine
1,741 privately owned manufacturing firms from Poland, Slovakia, Romania, Russian and the
Ukraine. They ask firms how likely they would be to switch to a supplier that provided an input
at a 10% lower price. They find, consistent with repeat relationships causing barriers to entry,
that only 50% of firms in the sample would be willing to switch. They also find that firms that

30

perceive the courts to be more effective are more likely to switch. More generally, they find that
the primary impact of courts is to encourage the formation of new buyer-seller relationships.
While the importance of repeat relationships for international trade has received little attention,
there are notable contributions. Araujo, Mion and Ornelas (2012) develop a model of trade with
imperfect contract enforcement. Although the model does not have predictions for comparative advantage per se, it does provide insights into reputation-based trade relationships in an
environment with incomplete contracting. The model predicts that trading partners will begin
trading small volumes that then grow over time. This dynamic generates a positive relationship
between duration and the destruction of trading partnerships. Examining Belgian firm-level data
from 1995 to 2008, the authors find support for these patterns, as well as others predicted by
their reputation-based trade model. In short, the evidence provided in the study suggests that
reputation, not just formal contract enforcement, does play a role in international trade. The
findings, however, do not provide evidence for whether reputation and repeat relationships are
also important for comparative advantage.

B. Networks
Very closely related to the notion of repeat interactions is that of networks, which can also help
alleviate contracting issues. While repeat relations - and the accompanying folk theorem - are
typically thought about bilaterally, networks can feature a large number of individuals or more
complex relationship structures that may or may not feature regular repetition.
If being within the network is valuable to its members, then a credible threat of being expelled
can maintain cooperative behavior, such as non-renegotiation, even if the single-period relative
payoffs provide an incentive to do so.22 The value of being within the network could arise for a
host of reasons. For example, the network may be a social one that provides direct utility to its
members. Alternatively, it could be a business network that provides future benefits.
A second, closely related, reason that networks can help alleviate contractual issues is that
information flows are typically higher with networks than without. Therefore the formation of
networks may make contracts more complete by reducing the states of the world or contingencies
that cannot be contracted upon.
22 An

important caveat here is that the threat of expulsion must be credible. See Greif (1993, 1994) for an examination
of this in an environment of long-distance trade with moral hazard issues.

31

Finally, if networks are kin-based, then participants within the network care about the payoffs
of others within the network. In other words, entering into contractual relations among those
genetically related kin helps to overcome contracting issues because of altruism within the group.
The reason why genetically related organisms care about each other is due to gene-level selection
under evolutionary forces.
McMillan and Woodruff’s (1999) study of Vietnamese firms in the 1990s provides evidence
for the importance of business networks. They distinguish between two benefits of networks:
increased ability to sanction and increased information. They argue that the informational benefit
of networks should be decreasing over the life of a buyer-seller relationship. Through increased
interactions, the buyer and seller gain information about one another over time. The authors find
that in the Vietnamese context, and consistent with the importance of networks, buyers identified
by sellers through business networks tended to receive more trade credit. Further, they find that
this effect persists over the duration of the buyer-seller relationship, suggesting that it reflects
the sanctioning of buyers within the network rather than the increased information about buyers
within the network.
The analysis of networks within the international trade literature has focused on the effect that
the formation of international buyer-seller networks has on aggregate bilateral trade flows (e.g.,
Rauch, 1999, 2001, Rauch and Trindade, 2002, Chaney, 2011). Although comparative advantage is
not at the core of these studies, some of the findings do have implications for the pattern of trade.
For example, Gould (1994) estimates a bilateral gravity equation explaining trade with the United
States. He examines the importance of immigrant populations for bilateral trade and shows
that the presence of immigrant populations from a particular country is positively correlated
with trade with that country. In addition, he finds that the effect is greater for consumer goods
than for producer goods. Gould interprets the estimates as reflecting the presence of ethnic
networks that facilitate the flow of product information and this increases trade. Gould argues
that because consumer goods are more differentiated, information about product characteristics
is more important and the effects are stronger for these products relative to producer goods. In
a follow-up study, Head and Ries (1998) confirm Gould’s findings for immigrant populations in
Canada.
Rauch and Trindade (2002) also consider ethnic networks but focus solely on ethnic Chinese
networks. They estimate a standard gravity model of countries’ bilateral trade and test how the

32

presence of ethnic Chinese populations in the two countries affects bilateral trade flows. (In the
gravity equation, Rauch and Trindade include the product of the two shares.) The estimates show
that the presence of ethnic Chinese populations in both the importing and exporting countries
increases bilateral trade. The authors then disaggregate total trade into goods that are bought
and sold on organized exchanges, reference-priced, or differentiated. They find that the impact of
ethnic Chinese populations is greatest for differentiated goods, precisely where one might think
that informational barriers to trade are most pronounced and hence networks most important.
The studies by Gould (1994) and Rauch and Trindade (2002) provide some evidence that
international networks may affect the composition of exports. However, we know little about how
the density of domestic networks affects comparative advantage, if at all. One can think about
many different reasons that networks would affect production differentially across industries.
For example, because resources (e.g., expertise in different fields, entrepreneurship, etc.) within
networks tend to be limited — particularly kin-based groups — there are limits to the types of
goods that could be produced. It is more difficult to produce more sophisticated goods that
require a diversity of skills, expertise, and inputs working solely within a small network. It is
possible that higher quality formal contract enforcement (rather than informal networks) enables
firms to specialize much more in the production of goods that require expansion beyond the
network.
Kolasa (2012) is one of the only studies that provides direct evidence on the importance of
informal networks for solving contracting issues. The author examines 10,000 large firms in
India from 1998 to 2008. He first shows that firms located in states with better judicial quality
tend to capture a greater market share in industries that are contract intensive as defined and
measured by Nunn (2007). He then shows that this comparative-advantage effect is much weaker
among firms operating within business groups, which are networks of firms with informal
connections with one another. It has been argued that these networks, where participants are
“linked by relations of interpersonal trust, on the basis of a similar personal, ethnic, or communal
background,” have emerged in response to institutional failures (Leff, 1978, p. 663). One of the
primary benefits of these networks is that they facilitate the purchase and sale of intermediate
inputs (Leff, 1978). Therefore, Kolasa’s findings suggest that, at least in the Indian context,
underinvestment in relationship-specific investments due to imperfect contract enforcement has
been partially alleviated by the formation of business groups.

33

C. Cultural Beliefs
The potential importance of cross-country culture differences for determining comparative advantage has received little attention in the literature. There are, however, some important exceptions.
Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2009) examine the impact that bilateral trust has on bilateral trade
flows. Examining bilateral trade flows among 16 European countries, the authors show that
an exporting country’s trust of an importing country is strongly correlated with bilateral trade
flows even after controlling for importer and exporter fixed effects. The estimated impacts are
enormous: A one-standard-deviation increase in bilateral trust is associated with an increase in
trade of 1.6 standard deviations. Interestingly, the authors find that the impact of trust only exists
for goods classified by Rauch (1999) as differentiated (neither sold on exchanges nor reference
priced). Although these results provide some evidence that trust not only affects aggregate trade
but also its composition, exactly why differentiated goods are ‘bilateral-trust-intensive’ remains
unclear.
Tabellini (2008a) also considers the importance of trust for international trade, but examines
the role of trust of citizens within a country rather than trust of those from other countries. He
hypothesizes that in contract-intensive industries, trust — in addition to contract enforcement —
may be a way to overcome issues related to hold-up. If this is the case, then countries with higher
levels of trust should have a comparative advantage in contract-intensive industries.
Tabellini re-estimates the comparative-advantage equations from Nunn (2007) — see equation
(1) above — with the addition of an interaction between a country’s average level of trust among
its citizens and Nunn’s contract-intensity measure. Tabellini finds that the trust interaction is
highly correlated with trade flows: Countries with more trust tend to specialize in the production
of contract-intensive goods. Consistent with the hypothesis that trust can substitute for formal
legal enforcement, Tabellini shows that trust only has an impact on the pattern of trade among
the countries in the sample with rule of law below the median value.
An important point to bear in mind is that although Tabellini (2008a) and Guiso et al. (2009)
both consider trust and trade flows, there is no direct connection between the findings from the
two papers. Tabellini considers the level of trust of citizens within a country towards others
within the same country. By contrast Guiso et al. do not consider the levels of trust among
citizens within a country, but trust between countries. Therefore, it is likely that their analysis
has less to do with comparative advantage (as typically understood as being driven by country
34

characteristics), but with frictions between countries and which goods tend to be more sensitive
to these distrust-induced trade frictions.

D. The Interplay between Culture, Institutions, and International Trade
Belloc and Bowles (2013) study how both culture and institutions can impact comparative advantage. The authors develop a 2-factor, 2-good, and 2-country model in which both preferences (i.e.,
culture) and contracts (i.e., institutions) are endogenously determined. In the model, production
is undertaken by matched employer-employee pairs. Two types of employment contracts are
possible: (i) a fixed-wage contract with monitoring and (ii) a partnership where the surplus is
split between the employer and the employee.
The cultural trait examined is reciprocity. Employees with reciprocal preferences care about
the nature of the contract and their employer’s payoff. If the employer implements a fixed-wage
monitoring contract the reciprocal worker takes this as a sign of distrust and as a result gets
negative utility from the employers’ payoff. If the employment contract is a partnership in which
the employee’s share is judged to be fair, then the employee gets positive utility. Those without
the reciprocity trait have conventional self-interested preferences.
The two goods are produced using two types of labor, one that is verifiable and the other that
is not. Non-verifiable labor services (e.g. care, creativity, problem-solving) can be provided by the
worker in addition to verifiable effort (e.g. time at work, compliance with explicit directions) at
a higher cost for him. Production requires verifiable aspects of work and productivity is further
enhanced by non-verifiable labor services but in different degrees in the two sectors.
Employees in fixed-wage monitoring contracts cannot be forced to provide non-verifiable labor,
and they choose not to in equilibrium. By contrast, reciprocal types choose to provide nonverifiable labor under partnership contracts, because in addition to their own return under the
share contract, they also place a positive value on the resulting profits of the employer.
In the model, employers’ employment contracts (i.e., institutions) and employees’ preferences
(i.e., culture) evolve overtime through a dynamic process based on the relative benefits of each
type. The authors show that there are two evolutionarily stable equilibria: one in which employers
choose fixed-wage monitoring contracts and employees do not have reciprocal preferences, and
one in which employers choose partnership contracts and employees have reciprocal preferences.
Multiple equilibria arise because of the complementarity between partnership contracts and

35

reciprocal preferences. Since reciprocal workers always provide more productive non-verifiable
labor services under partnership contracts, countries in the reciprocal preferences and partnership
contracts equilibrium have an absolute advantage in both goods, but also enjoy a comparative
advantage in the production of goods intensive in non-verifiable labor investments.
One of the interesting results of the model is that trade liberalization does not support convergence to Pareto-optimal cultural-institutional equilibria configurations, but instead enhances the
persistence of existing cultures and institutions, even Pareto-dominated ones.
Tabellini (2008b) provides a theoretical framework for understanding the coevolution of culture
and institutions in an environment of international trade.

He considers a setting where a

continuum of individuals are located on a circle. Individuals are randomly matched and play
a prisoner’s dilemma game, which can be interpreted as exchange. It is assumed that in addition
to material payoffs, individuals obtain utility from cheating on the other trader. The utility from
cooperating is decreasing in the distance between the two traders; distance can be interpreted
as geographic, cultural, etc. There are two types of cultures in the economy: A ‘bad’ culture
characterized by a higher rate of utility decay in distance and a ‘good’ type with a lower rate.
This environment results in both types not cheating when matched with less distant traders and
cheating when matched with a trader from a further distance away. The cut-off determining
cheating vs. cooperation is further away for ‘good’ types than for ‘bad’ types.
In the model, preferences are determined endogenously and are shaped by the effort parents
expend instilling values in their children. Parents invest in their children, evaluating their child’s
expected outcome using their own utility function. ‘Good’ parents make investments to instill
‘good’ values in their children and ‘bad’ parents do not.
The setting is then used to examine the impacts of improved enforcement of cooperation (i.e.,
better institutions) on the equilibrium prevalence of good types in the economy. Interestingly, the
impact of better enforcement institutions depends on whether the enforcement is for less-distant
(e.g., domestic) vs. more distant (e.g., international) trades. If enforcement is increased for
international trade, then this only affects the good types (since the bad types always cheat in
more distant trades). For the good types, the improved institutions increases the trade distances
over which they still choose to still cooperate. This in turn accentuates the differences in actions
between the good and bad types, which causes good parents to invest more in their children,
causing an increase in the prevalence of good types in society.

36

In other words, improved

enforcement of long-distance trades causes an increase in the prevalence of good types in the
economy. Enforcement of close (e.g., domestic) trades impacts bad types, but not good types
(since they cooperate at these distances no matter what). Specifically, it increases the length
of distances over which bad types continue to cooperate. This in turn decreases the difference
between good and bad types making it less important for good parents to invest in instilling
good values in their children. Therefore, this form of enforcement decreases the amount of good
culture in the economy.
The model highlights an interesting asymmetry in the relationship between institutions and
culture in the context of international trade. Better enforcement of domestic trades decreases the
prevalence of good culture in the economy. Here, better institutions crowd out good culture.
However, better enforcement of international trades increases the prevalence of good culture.
Here, better institutions crowd in good culture.
Tabellini (2008b) also allows enforcement of distant trades to be an endogenous outcome of
voting. He shows that if the initial prevalence of bad types is large enough, then voting results in
weak enforcement (i.e., poor institutions), which in turn maintains a low level of good types in
the economy. Here, because of the complementarity between culture and institutions, a society
can be stuck in an equilibrium with low levels of successful exchange, poor institutions, and bad
culture.

E. Vertical Integration, Offshoring, and Outsourcing
Another way for firms to partially overcome underinvestment due to hold-up is through vertical
integration. If hold-up is one-sided then underinvestment can be alleviated if the other party
purchases and controls the party that underinvests. If hold-up is two-sided, so that both parties
underinvest, then the total underinvestment can be reduced by allocating control to one party or
the other. If profits are more sensitive to the buyer’s underinvestment, then it will be efficient
for the buyer to purchase (control) the selling firm. Similarly, if profits are more sensitive to the
seller’s underinvestment, then it will be efficient for the seller of the product to purchase the
buying firm. In short, the possibility of vertical integration provides an additional tool that can
be used to help alleviate underinvestment due to hold-up.
The possibility that vertical integration, by affecting the severity of incomplete contracting, has
an impact on comparative advantage is noted in Nunn (2007). He reasons that vertical integration

37

as a way to overcome incomplete contracts is more difficult if production requires many different
inputs. In this case, a firm has to vertically integrate with many different suppliers to reduce
underinvestment. If instead a producer has one important supplier, then underinvestment can
be overcome with only one purchase. Consistent with vertical integration being used to alleviate
hold-up, he shows that the impact of a country’s rule of law on specialization in contract-intensive
industries is smaller among the subset of industries that have a large number of inputs (i.e., in
which vertical integration is more difficult).
Ferguson and Formai (2011) provide a deeper empirical examination of the interaction between
contract enforcement, vertical integration and comparative advantage. The authors construct a
measure of the ease of vertical integration across industries by looking at the actual prevalence of
vertical integration within the United States. The authors re-estimate Nunn’s (2007) comparative
advantage equations using his measure of contract intensity, but allow for a differential impact
of the rule of law on specialization in contract-intensive industries. Consistent with vertical
integration providing a way of (at least partially) alleviating contracting issues, they find weaker
comparative advantage effects in industries in which vertical integration is easier.
The most progress, on both the theoretical and empirical front, has been on the determinants
of vertical integration internationally rather than domestically. An discussion of the determinants
of international vertical integration (i.e., FDI vs. outsourcing) appears in the Antràs and Yeaple
chapter of this Handbook volume.23 Although the focus of the literature is on explaining the
determinants of the boundaries of the multinational firm, some of the findings provide insights
into the determinants of countries’ specialization of production. The manner in which contracting
institutions affect the way goods are traded (i.e., within or outside of firm boundaries), not just
what goods are traded, is also an important impact of institutions for international trade.
Antràs and Helpman (2004) model a headquarter, located in a developed country (North),
that chooses to source its products either domestically or from a developing country (South),
and either within firm boundaries or at arm’s length. The model allows for a headquarter-andsupplier specific (i.e., match-specific) productivity of production. Production is Cobb-Douglas in
two inputs: headquarter-provided services and supplier-produced components.
After observing the productivity of the match, the headquarter decides whether to source the
product from the North or the South, and whether to vertically integrate or not. The fixed costs
23 For

earlier reviews of this literature see Spencer (2005), Helpman (2006) and Nunn and Trefler (2008).

38

associated with each decision satisfy: fvs > fos > fvn > fon , where fvs is the fixed cost of vertically
integrating production in the South, fos is the fixed cost of sourcing from a stand-alone firm in
the South, fvn is the fixed cost of vertical integration in the North and fon is the fixed cost of
outsourcing in the North.
As is standard in this literature, it is assumed that contracts are incomplete. Therefore, the
headquarter and input supplier bargain over the surplus from the relationship ex post. As in
Antràs (2003), the distribution of the surplus is sensitive to the organizational form. When the
headquarter owns the input supplier, it is assumed that the headquarter obtains a greater share of
the ex post surplus than when it does not own the firm. Because the ex post non-contractability
affects ex ante investment, which organizational form is chosen by the headquarter depends on
which party’s inputs is relatively more important in the production process. If the supplier’s
investment is most crucial to production, then it is optimal for the headquarter to incentivize the
supplier by not vertically integrating. This is the basic insight from Antràs (2003).
Working through the model, Antràs and Helpman (2004) show that the location of production
and ownership structure are driven by the relative importance of the headquarter’s contribution
and the supplier’s contribution to production. When the supplier’s components are relatively
more important, then outsourcing is always preferred to vertical integration. In this environment,
the headquarter wants to incentivize the supplier’s investment and does this through outsourcing.
In addition, the fixed costs of outsourcing are lower than the fixed cost of vertical integration
whether the component is produced in the North or the South. Therefore, it is always optimal
for the headquarter to purchase the component at arm’s length. Further, it is shown that for less
productive matches, the component is sourced from the North (which has lower fixed costs but
higher wages) and for more productive matches the component is sourced from the South (which
has higher fixed costs but lower wages).
When headquarter services are relatively more important, then the headquarter no longer
wants to incentivize the supplier (whose investments are less important). Now there is a trade-off
since the fixed costs of vertical integration are greater than the fixed cost of outsourcing. The decision of whether to outsource or vertically integrate now depends on the trade-off between higher
fixed costs and more efficient production. The benefit depends crucially on the productivity of
the match. Intuitively, for more productive matches (with greater production), underinvestment
is relatively more important than the one-time fixed costs. This suggests that all else equal more

39

productive matches will vertically integrate.
Antràs and Helpman (2004) fully characterize both the location and integration decision for
this scenario. They show that the sourcing strategy of the headquarter depends on the productivity of the match, and the outcome can be characterized by four regions in the productivity
space. In the region of the lowest productivity matches, the headquarter chooses to source the
component from a stand-alone supplier in the North. In the next more productive region the
headquarter vertically integrates with a Northern supplier. Matches of even greater productivity
induce the headquarter to source from a stand-alone firm in the South, and the most productive
matches result in vertical integration in the South.
Although Antràs and Helpman (2004) do not model a country’s contracting environment
explicitly, it is reasonable to believe that the average quality of the buyer-supplier match (or their
dispersion within industries and countries) may be affected by the quality of domestic institutions.
For example, better institutions, all else equal will generate more productive matches. According
to their model, this will result in more components being produced in the South, and in a greater
prevalence of FDI relative to outsourcing.
Antràs and Helpman (2008) extend the model of Antràs and Helpman (2004) and explicitly
model contracting institutions. They do this by allowing for partial contractibility of the inputs
provided by the headquarter and of the supplier. It is assumed that a portion µh of the headquarter’s inputs is contractible and a portion µm of the supplier’s inputs is contractible. They show
that all of the intuition of Antràs and Helpman (2004) continues to hold, with one important
exception. Now, when the headquarter engages in its make-or-buy decision, what is important is
no longer the relative contribution of the inputs of the headquarter and supplier, but the relative
contribution of the non-contractible inputs of the headquarter and supplier. This is intuitive, since
it is the non-contractible inputs that lead to underinvestment by both parties, which in turn affects
the headquarter’s make-or-buy decision.
Nunn and Trefler (2013) test the implications of Antràs and Helpman (2008). Specifically,
they show that as predicted by the model, when looking across industries, an increase in
non-contractible inputs provided by the headquarter is associated with greater FDI and less
outsourcing, which they measure at the industry level using the share of U.S. imports that are
intra-firm. By contrast, an increase in contractible inputs provided by the headquarter is not
associated with a greater share of intra-firm imports. The authors follow Antràs (2003) and

40

assume that capital is an input provided by the headquarter. They further disaggregate capital
into buildings, computers, automobiles, and other machinery. They assume that investments in
buildings, computers and automobiles are contractible because they have value outside of the
relationship i.e., they are not relationship-specific.
Unfortunately, the model of Antràs and Helpman (2008) does not yield clear predictions for
changes in contractibility of the supplier’s input. When the headquarter’s input is unimportant,
an increase in the supplier’s contractibility µm has no impact on the headquarter’s sourcing
decision, and when the headquarter’s input is important an increase in µm increases the share
of components sourced from the South, but has an ambiguous impact on the share of these that
are through FDI vs. outsourcing (i.e., on the share of imports that are intra-firm). The ambiguity
arises due to two effects that work in opposite directions. One effect, which Nunn and Trefler
(2008) call the ‘standard effect’ is that an improvement in µm causes some U.S. production to
migrate abroad where it is outsourced, decreasing the share of U.S. imports that are intra-firm.
The second effect, which they call the ‘surprise effect,’ arises because an improvement in µm
causes the most productive outsourcing relationships to become vertically integrated, increasing
the share of U.S. imports that are intra-firm. In reality, which of the two effects dominates is an
empirical question.
Nunn and Trefler (2008) examine data on U.S. intra-firm imports of 5,423 products from 210
countries and conclude that improved contracting of the suppliers’ inputs increases the share of
imports that are intra-firm. They use Nunn’s (2007) measure of contract intensity (the share of
intermediate inputs that are relationship-specific and susceptible to hold-up problems) to measure
the proportion of the supplier’s production that is non-contractible. They find that consistent
with Antràs and Helpman (2008), for low values of headquarter intensity a change in supplier
contractibility µm has no impact on the share of imports that are intra-firm. They also find that
in headquarter-intensive industries, the surprise effect dominates the standard effect. In other
words, an increase in supplier contractibility is associated with an increase in the share of U.S.
imports that are intra-firm.
Costinot, Oldenski and Rauch (2011) propose an alternative measure of contractability based
on the extent to which production is composed of predictable and routine tasks, arguing that
these can be foreseen and written into contracts. Using information from the U.S. Department of
Labor’s Dictionary of Occupation Titles (DOT) on the extent to which industries are composed

41

of tasks for which “making decisions and solving problems” are important, the authors construct
a measure of routineness that is based on the absence of decisions and problem solving. Their
results show that in less routine industries (with worse contractability), a greater share of imports
into the United States occurs within firm boundaries.
Their finding is consistent with a Williamsonian theory of firm boundaries, where contracting
issues can be overcome through vertical integration. This prediction stands in contrast to a
Grossman-Hart-Moore property rights theory of the firm. Lower contractability of a suppliers
product results in a need to incentive the supplier through independent sourcing rather than
vertical integration. Their finding also stands in contrast to Nunn and Trefler (2008) who find that
improved contracting is associated with greater vertical integration, not less (at least for the most
productive firms).
Overall, the recent literature on the boundaries of the multinational firm show that a country’s
domestic institutions not only affect what goods a country produces (i.e, its comparative advantage), but they also impact the form that trade takes — namely, whether trade occurs within or
outside of firm boundaries. A clear lesson from the literature is that the impacts of institutions
on the form of trade are often complex and not obvious ex ante.

4. Policies and the Indirect Impacts of Institutions on Comparative Advantage
An important impact of institutions on comparative advantage — and one that we have ignored
to this point — arises due to the impact of institutions on intervening factors that in turn
affect trade flows. While few papers have examined this indirect relationship directly, there
are well-developed literatures showing that: (i) domestic institutions have important and sizeable
impacts on many aspects of an economy, such as the accumulation of factors of production and
the implementation of economic policies, and (ii) these factors are important for comparative
advantage.
Yeaple and Golub (2007) examine the impact of roads, telephone lines, and electrical power
generation facilities on comparative advantage and find that roads and electrical power affect
comparative advantage, but telecommunications infrastructure does not. These findings complement earlier work by Clague (1991a,b), providing indirect evidence of transportation and
communication infrastructure as being important for comparative advantage. In addition, a
number of studies (e.g., Romalis, 2004) have shown that a country’s stock of physical and human
42

capital are important sources of comparative advantage. Therefore, by affecting the accumulation
of infrastructure, education, and capital, domestic institutions also have an indirect impact on
comparative advantage.
Institutions not only affect the aggregate endowments of factors in a society, but also their
distributions. This is significant since a number of theoretical and empirical papers document
the importance of endowment dispersion (inequality) for comparative advantage. These include
Grossman and Maggi (2000), Grossman (2004), Ohnsorge and Trefler (2007), and Bombardini,
Gallipoli and Pupato (2012). This is another indirect mechanism through which institutions affect
comparative advantage.
An additional indirect channel occurs due to the impact of institutions on per capita income.
As hypothesized by Linder, per capita income can itself be a source of comparative advantage
and affect the pattern of trade. Hallak (2010) provides empirical evidence consistent with income
being a source of comparative advantage. Essaji (2008) empirically uncovers another way that
underdevelopment may affect comparative advantage. He shows that less-developed countries,
with limited human resources and bureaucratic capital, have a comparative disadvantage in the
production of products that are heavily exposed to technical regulations. Using data on countries’
exports to the United States across 4019 products, he shows that countries with better capacity to
meet technical regulations specialize in sectors that have more technical measures.
Turning to policies, Nunn and Trefler (2010) have shown that countries with poor domestic
institutions also tend to have tariff structures that are biased towards less skill-intensive industries,
which in turn through a dynamic process reduces a country’s comparative advantage in skillintensive industries. Therefore, through endogenous trade policies, domestic institutions can
impact comparative advantage.
Once one begins to think about indirect impacts of domestic institutions on the pattern of
trade, the potential channels soon become overwhelming. We have simply noted a few here.

5. The Impact of Trade and Comparative Advantage on Domestic Institutions
So far we have discussed the impact of institutions on trade and comparative advantage. We
have also repeatedly noted a severe endogeneity problem: International trade can have impacts
on domestic institutions. Viewed in this way, this reverse causality is nothing more than a
nuisance, a detour on the route to understanding the impacts of institutions on comparative
43

advantage. However, it is less widely recognized that the impact of international trade on
domestic institutions may be a tremendously important phenomenon. Increasingly, research
outside of the mainstream of international economics is providing evidence that international
trade has had major impacts on the evolution of domestic institutions. Given that institutions are
slow-moving, much of the evidence is from the fields of economic history and economic growth.
These studies are reviewed in section 5.A.
A shortcoming of this literature from our perspective is that it typically focuses on the volume
of trade rather than on the mix of goods being traded i.e., on comparative advantage. One of
the surprising conclusions of this review is that international trade’s confusingly varied impacts
on domestic institutions can in fact be systematically explained by comparative advantage: The
mix of goods that a country exports has a profound impact on the form of the institutions that
develop. The example of the Atlantic triangle trade (English manufacturing exports, Caribbean
sugar exports, and African slave exports) is one of many illustrative historical examples reviewed
in section 5.B. Contemporary examples are reviewed in section 5.C.

A. International Trade and Domestic Institutional Change
Medieval Europe experienced a massive expansion of long-distance trade during the ‘Commercial Revolution’ of 950–1350 (e.g., de Roover, 1965, Lopez, 1971, North and Thomas, 1973).
In response, medieval Europe embarked on a set of major institutional reforms that laid the
groundwork for the Rise of the West.
Medieval long-distance trade created a host of commitment problems. Consider a merchant
travelling to a distant land. First, the merchant sets out with the capital of his investors, literally
carrying the capital over the horizon and out of sight. What real commitment could the merchant
give to his investors? Second, the merchant arrives in a foreign land ruled by a powerful monarch
who has every short-run incentive to expropriate the merchant’s goods. What real commitment
could the ruler give to foreign merchants? Third, the merchant contracts with other merchants
from other lands who have every short-run incentive to cheat and run. What real commitments
could merchants from diverse lands give each other? The Commercial Revolution, by creating the
potential for great profits from long-distance trade, was an impetus to institutional innovations
that solved these three commitment problems in a way that proved fundamental to Europe’s later

44

growth miracle. The innovations included the rapid development of property-right institutions
and contracting institutions.
The most discussed innovation is the Law Merchant, which is universally accepted as the
foundation of modern commercial law (Berman, 1983). Its very scope — the use of a court of peers
to adjudicate commercial disputes between merchants travelling in distant lands — means that the
Law Merchant was a direct and immediate response to the needs of long-distance trade (Kadens,
2004). Milgrom, North and Weingast (1990) discuss how the Law Merchant was a response to
commitment problems. Other examples include property-right protections that committed rulers
not to prey on merchants (Greif, Milgrom and Weingast, 1994), the rise of a nascent Western legal
system beginning exactly when long-distance trade began to take off (Berman, 1983, Landau,
2004), and the development of many new innovations in contracting institutions (e.g., González
de Lara 2008 and additional work by Greif described below). By the early fourteenth century,
the latter included: the appearance of rudimentary limited-liability joint stock companies (the
commenda); thick markets for debt (especially bills of exchange); secondary markets for a wide
variety of debt, equity and mortgage instruments; bankruptcy laws that distinguished illiquidity
from insolvency; double-entry accounting methods; business education (including the use of
algebra for currency conversions); deposit banking; and a reliable medium of exchange. All of
these innovations can be related directly back to the demands of long-distance trade. See Puga
and Trefler (2012).
The above historical research is pervaded by two themes. First, institutional change does not
occur because it is efficient, but because it is advanced by powerful special interests. Second,
as trade grows it affects the domestic distribution of income and hence the relative power of
competing special interests. It is this change in relative power that drives institutional change.
Puga and Trefler’s (2012) analysis of Venice during the Commercial Revolution illustrates these
two themes. They show that increases in long-distance trade that were exogenous to Venice
enriched a broad-based group of merchants and these merchants then pushed for constraints on
the executive i.e., for the end of a de facto hereditary Doge in 1032 and for the establishment
of a parliament or Great Council in 1172. The merchants also pushed for remarkably modern
innovations in contracting institutions (such as the commenda) that facilitated large-scale mobilization of capital for risky long-distance trade. The fact that participation in long-distance trade
was inclusive and risky (which leads to rapid income churning) led to a society that displayed

45

remarkable economic, political and social mobility. Over time, a group of extraordinarily rich
merchants emerged and in 1323 they were able to erect barriers to political mobility: Participation
in parliament became hereditary. These rich merchants then built a coercive state apparatus
that was used to suppress opposition. With this state apparatus in place, the rich merchants
moved to reduce competition on the most lucrative segments of long-distance trade, especially
the state-controlled galley trade. Puga and Trefler document this ‘oligarchization’ using a unique
database on the names of 8,103 parliamentarians and their families’ use of the commenda. They
show that before 1323 there was tremendous political mobility into and out of parliament and
broad-based participation in the commenda. After 1323, the oligarchs formed themselves into
an exclusive nobility and non-oligarch participation in the commenda melted away. In short,
long-distance trade first encouraged institutional dynamism and then created powerful forces
that blocked social inclusion. These changes operated via the impacts of trade on the distribution
of wealth and power.
The role of income distribution as a mediator of the impact of trade on institutions appears
elsewhere. Greif and Laitin (2004) and Greif (2006b) study the role of changing income distribution for institutional change in their comparative study of Venice and Genoa. They show that
the (endogenous) evolution of income distribution was a decisive force behind Genoa’s political
instability. Jha (2010) uses detailed data from the English Long Parliament (1640–1660) to examine
the formation of a coalition supporting stronger constraints on the Crown. Using data on the
investments of about 500 parliamentarians, Jha finds that a financial innovation — shares in
overseas companies that allowed broader investor participation — was key in aligning interests
against royal discretion over foreign economic affairs.
Jha (2008) provides evidence that in medieval India, overseas trade generated domestic institutions that helped to maintain peace between Hindus and Muslims until this day. Looking across
cities within modern India, Jha finds a negative relationship between participation in overseas
trade during the medieval period and religious conflict during the late 19th and early 20th
centuries. Because Muslims provided access to the markets of the Middle East, in the towns
connected to this overseas trade the returns to Hindu-Muslim cooperation were much higher. As
a result, institutions that supported exchange and a peaceful coexistence between Hindus and
Muslims were developed.

46

B. Heterogeneous Impacts of Trade on Institutions: The Role of Comparative Advantage
The previous subsection dealt with the impacts of rising trade without reference to comparative
advantage. From a historical perspective, the rise of the Atlantic three-corner trade following the
discovery of the Americas provides a nice case study for examining the impacts of comparative
advantage on institutional development. Merchants and entrepreneurs in each of the three corners of the trade — Europe, the Americas, and Africa — specialized in the production and export
of very different commodities. While Europe specialized in the production of manufactures such
as firearms, gunpowder, copper and iron products, the Americas specialized in the production
of raw commodities such as sugar, tobacco, and cotton, while Africa specialized in the export
of human beings (slaves). The standard trade circuit saw manufactured items being shipped to
Africa for slaves, which were then shipped to the Americas for raw commodities, which were
then shipped to Europe where they were used in production (e.g., cotton) or consumption (e.g.,
sugar).
A number of studies, primarily in the historical development literature, have separately
estimated the institutional impacts of specialization in each corner of the trade. For Africa, comparative advantage during the Atlantic trade is equated with the most malign form of resource
extraction: the slaving of human beings. Nunn (2008a) shows that the slaving of Africans had
very negative effects on post-colonial African growth rates: Growth was slowest in regions whose
populations were largely composed of heavily slaved ethnicities. Nunn and Wantchekon (2011)
examine the mechanism involved. They document numerous accounts of (supposed) friends,
family members and neighbors tricking, kidnapping and selling each other into slavery. In the
environment of complete insecurity brought on by the slave trade, the temptation to slave or be
enslaved proved too much for many. The authors hypothesize that in such an environment, norms
of mistrust may have evolved and spread throughout society. Combining individual-level survey
data with ethnicity-level slave export estimates (constructed using data sources from Nunn 2008a),
the authors show that individuals belonging to an ethnicity that was more severely affected by
the Indian Ocean and trans-Atlantic slave trades exhibit less trust today. This is true for trust in
relatives, neighbors, co-ethnics, other ethnicities, and the local government. The authors show
that part of this is explained by the fact that the slave trades had a detrimental impact on local
institutions that enforce good behavior. Another part is explained by persistent norms of mistrust
that evolved over time and persist until today.
47

The significance of these findings lie in the fact that we now increasingly understand, both
theoretically and empirically, that trust is a fundamental determinant of economic development
(Fukuyama, 1995, Algan and Cahuc, 2010). Inikori (2003) offers a mechanism consistent with
the comparative advantage view in which specialization determines the type of institutions
demanded. Inikori points out that Africa was forced to specialize in goods (human slaves) whose
production does not require high-quality domestic institutions. To the contrary, the slave trade
required insecurity of property rights and the disrespect of human rights. That is, comparative
advantage specialization in slaves created a demand for growth-retarding institutional change.
In Latin America, trade led to specialization in plantation products such as sugar, tobacco
and cotton and in extractive activities such as silver mining. These activities required large
landholdings and coercive labor policies that created extreme inequality, with a handful of Europeans garnering vast fortunes. Engerman and Sokoloff (1997, 2000) argue that this comparative
advantage specialization and the resulting economic inequality allowed these European elites to
dominate politics and shield themselves from economic and social competition. This ‘shield’
involved growth-retarding institutions such as skewed land-tenure rights, abusive labor rights,
corporate law and financial regulation that favoured incumbents, and the under-provision of
education and other public goods. See also Engerman and Sokoloff (2012).
A particularly careful empirical study of this phenomenon appears in Dell’s (2010) fine-grained
study of Spanish silver mining in Potosi in modern-day Bolivia. She examines the long-term impacts of the Spanish forced labor system – mining mita — that was used to recruit slaves to work in
the Potosi silver mines. She finds that the forced labor system had permanent long-term impacts
on consumption, education, and public-goods provisions. Naritomi, Soares and Assuncao (2012)
study the impact of comparative advantage specialization across Brazilian municipalities. They
find that colonial specialization in sugar is associated with greater inequality today and that
specialization in gold mining is associated with worse governance and property-rights institutions
today.
Bruhn and Gallego (2012) extend the Engerman and Sokoloff (1997) thesis in their comparative
study of North and South America. The authors construct an impressive dataset of the goods that
were initially produced across 345 regions in 17 countries in the Americas. The authors divide
the goods into two categories: (i) Those that display economies of scale and were historically
produced using coercive methods including slavery e.g., gold, silver and sugar; and, (ii) Those

48

that display constant returns to scale e.g., subsistence crops, ranching, and manufacturing. The
authors show that regions that specialized in increasing-returns goods are less developed today.
Further, regions that specialized in constant-returns goods were not guaranteed future development because in some of those regions, those with large native populations, constant-returns
production may have employed coerced native labor. On a closely related point, Mitchener and
McLean (2003) show that the parts of the United States that relied heavily on slave labor in 1860,
subsequently had lower levels of labor productivity in manufacturing. Similarly, Nunn (2008b)
shows that the historical use of slave labor is associated with long-term underdevelopment both
within the United States and across the Americas more broadly.
Europe’s experience during the Atlantic trade was very different from the Americas and Africa.
Many have argued that the Atlantic trade played an important part in the industrial revolution
(e.g., Inikori, 2002). Acemoglu et al. (2005b) empirically examine this assertion, focusing in
particular on the institutional impacts of the trade. In Britain and the Netherlands, the Atlantic
trade shifted the balance of political power in favour of commercial interests and away from
the interests of the royal circle. Since the merchants representing commercial interests were in
favour of strong property-rights protections, they used their newfound political muscle to push
for reforms that constrained the power of the monarchy. Perhaps the most famous of these is
the Glorious Revolution of 1688 which dramatically shifted power from the English Crown to
Parliament (Acemoglu and Robinson, 2012, chapter 7).
To study the links between trade, institutions and economic growth, Acemoglu et al. (2005b)
examine variation across countries and cities and show that the rise of Western Europe was
due to the economic growth of Atlantic traders — in particular, Britain, Netherlands, France,
Portugal, and Spain.

In addition, they also show that the quality of domestic institutions,

measured by constraints on the executive, were improved by the Atlantic trade. Perhaps the most
interesting part of their analysis is their examination of heterogeneity. They show that among the
countries with better initial institutions (measured in 1400 and 1500), the Atlantic trade resulted
in greater institutional improvements and greater economic growth. In other words, the impact
of international trade on domestic institutions depends critically on initial conditions.
Acemoglu et al.’s finding that the impacts of international trade were dependent on initial
conditions has also been shown in other contexts. In particular, in a series of articles Greif
(1992, 1993, 1994, 2006b,a) examines how the impacts of medieval trade differed across regions

49

within the Old World. He argues that today’s institutions constrain the set of institutions that
can develop tomorrow and therefore, trade’s impact will depend on initial institutions. While
initial property-rights institutions are part of the equation, they need not be the most salient.
This is illustrated by Greif’s comparative analysis of medieval trade in Western Europe versus
the Islamic world (including the Maghreb in North Africa). Comparing initial institutions in
Western European versus Islam, one sees individualistic versus kin-based institutions, weak
versus strong states, and norms of self-legitimization versus religion-based legitimization. At the
start of the medieval period, both regions organized trade in kin-based (and community-based)
networks. However, as trade expanded, its volume reached a level that was not supportable by
kin-based organizations. The Western European response, as we have seen, was a set of new
institutions such as the precursor of the modern corporation. These corporations were collections
of non-kin-based individuals and were legitimated by the civil statutes of the cities that flourished
under relatively weak Western European monarchs. In contrast, such an institutional response
was not possible in Islam. Indeed, one continues to see limited institutional responses to this day,
as evidenced for example by the problems with Islamic banking.
Another example of the importance of initial institutions is found in a trio of papers that
estimate the impact of terms-of-trade shocks on wages in coercive societies (Bobonis and Morrow,
2010, Dippel et al., 2012, Naidu and Yuchtman, 2013). In neoclassical trade models, favourable
term-of-trade shocks translate into positive demand shocks and positive demand shocks translate
into higher wages. However, this need not be the case in coercive societies. Dippel et al. (2012)
examine the impact of secular movements in sugar prices on wages and coercion in 14 British
Caribbean sugar colonies over the period 1838–1914. In a regression of wages on world sugar
prices they estimate a zero coefficient on sugar prices. They then argue that this zero effect is
caused by an offsetting institutional effect: When sugar prices rise secularly, the plantation elite
grows stronger and uses coercion to depress wages. To show this, Dippel et al. first use archival
data on the share of sugar in total exports to get a measure of the strength of the plantation
economy by colony and year. When this measure is added to their wage regression, the coefficient
on sugar becomes very positive (the neoclassical channel) and the coefficient on the strength of
the plantation economy becomes very negative (the institutional channel). Dippel et al. also
show that higher sugar prices translate into more coercion as measured by incarceration rates of
those of African origin. Finally, Dippel et al. provide a precise mechanism. When the plantation

50

economy is strong, there is no land available for small freeholds so that workers have no choice
but to work on the plantation. This makes coercion cheap.24
Bobonis and Morrow (2010) examine the impact of world coffee price shocks on labor coercion
in 19th century Puerto Rico. Between 1849 and 1874, unskilled workers were forced to work for
legally-titled landowners. Using variation in labor demand driven by changes in world coffee
prices, they show that increased demand for labor increased the coercive measures undertaken
by Puerto Rican landowners.
Finally, Naidu and Yuchtman (2013) examine the impact of labor demand shocks on wages
during a coercive period of British labor history. While their paper is not about trade per se,
the analysis is of obvious relevance and elegance. The 18th century British Master and Servant
Act forced apprentices to sign long-term contracts with their masters. If an apprentice ran away
— as was common when positive demand shocks led masters to compete for apprentices — the
run-away was criminally prosecuted. Naidu and Yuchtman show that during periods of high
demand the Act prevented apprentice wages from rising and led to more incarcerations. Further,
when the Act was repealed in 1875, wages became more responsive to demand shocks, especially
in those counties with initially high incarceration rates i.e., in those counties that exported textiles,
iron and coal.

C. Comparative Advantage and Domestic Institutions: Contemporary Evidence
The insight that international trade can have very different impacts depending on initial conditions and comparative advantage has also been empirically verified using contemporary data.
This is most immediately seen in the literature on the ‘curse of natural resources,’ which
documents a negative relationship between specialization in natural resource production and
economic growth. See Ross (1999) for a review of the literature. A number of studies focus on
oil production and find that specialization is associated with negative institutional development.
An early contributor to this literature is Barro (1999), whose cross-country regression estimates
show that oil extraction hinders democracy. Tsui (2011) documents a relationship between oil
discoveries and movements of regimes away from democracy and towards autocracy.
24 Acemoglu and Wolitzky (2011) define coercion as an active attempt to reduce the outside options of workers.
As will become apparent, Bobonis and Morrow (2010), Dippel et al. (2012), and Naidu and Yuchtman (2013) are all
instances of coercion in this sense.

51

The historical evidence examined above suggests that the impact of trade depends on which
groups are enriched by changes in the structure of production. According to Acemoglu et al.
(2005b), the Atlantic trade empowered merchants that supported pro-business institutions and
constraints on the monarchy. In a contemporary context, Braun and Raddatz (2008) test for this
same mechanism, but within the context of financial development. A benefit of a more developed
financial system is that it facilitates the entry of new firms, thereby increasing competition and
reducing the rents of incumbents. The authors use the average price-cost margin of firms in
an industry as a measure of the degree of product market competition and profitability of
incumbents. They then estimate the relationship between the price-cost margin and a country’s
level of financial development (measured as private credit to GDP) for 28 3-digit ISIC industries.25
This generates, for each industry, a measure of the extent to which financial development erodes
incumbent profits in the industry. This is then used to group industries into ‘promoters’ and
‘opponents’ of financial development. The ‘opponents’ are defined as the 14 industries for which
financial development has the most adverse effect on incumbent profitability; the ‘promoters’ are
the remaining 14 industries. Braun and Raddatz (2008) then examine the liberalization episodes
of 73 countries and show that improvements in financial development following liberalization
episodes were greater the greater the economic growth of ‘promoters’ relative to ‘opponents’
of financial development. In other words, if the industries that were strengthened due to trade
liberalization were industries that tended to be hurt most by financial development, then financial
development tended to be slow after liberalization.
Do and Levchenko (2007) also focus on the relative demand for financial innovation across
industries. They start by observing that some industries require more external finance than others.
They hypothesize that countries with a comparative advantage in industries that are highly
dependent on external finance will have a greater demand for external finance and hence more
developed financial markets. To show this empirically, they estimate a cross-section regression in
which the dependent variable is private credit as a share of GDP and the key independent variable
is the average external-finance intensity of a country’s exports. All variables are measured as
annual averages from 1970 to 1999. The coefficient estimate is positive, indicating that trade,
by raising the demand for external finance, can lead to financial development. To account for
25 In practice, in a country and industry panel, the price-cost margin is regressed on industry fixed effects, country
fixed effects, and country-level financial development interacted with industry fixed effects.

52

potential reverse causality, Do and Levchenko employ an IV strategy that extends the strategy
of Frankel and Romer (1999) to a multi-industry setting. In particular, the authors estimate the
gravity regressions from Frankel and Romer (1999) sector by sector (across ISIC 3-digit industries)
and construct country- and sector-specific measures of predicted exports. They then use this
measure of predicted exports to calculate a measure of a country’s financial dependence of
predicted exports. This is used as an instrument for a country’s actual measure of financial
dependence of exports.
In subsequent analysis, Levchenko (2012) estimates the relationship between a country’s average rule-of-law measure between 1996 and 2000 and its average contract-intensity of predicted
exports between 1970 and 1999, where predicted exports are constructed as in Do and Levchenko
(2007). Levchenko combines the measure of predicted exports with Nunn’s (2007) measure of
contract intensity. He finds a robust positive relationship between the contract-intensity of a
country’s predicted exports and its rule of law. This is interpreted as evidence that a natural
comparative advantage in contract-intensive industries increases the returns to improved institutions and thus causes better institutions in the long run. In other words, trade and comparative
advantage shape domestic institutions.
Finally, there is also a literature that examines the potential impacts that international trade
has on cultural traits. See for example Olivier, Thoenig and Verdier (2008), Thoenig, Maystre,
Olivier and Verdier (2009), and Atkin (2013).

To conclude, the historical evidence makes clear that international trade has had pronounced
impacts on domestic institutions. We noted that for institutions to change, the change must be
supported by powerful special interests. Often it is trade itself that makes these groups powerful.
Finally, the type of trade (whether or not it involves the production of goods that require good
supporting institutions) and the level of coercion trade generates play key roles in whether the
institutional change is growth-enhancing or growth-retarding.

6. Conclusions
The literature on institutions as a source of comparative advantage has grown rapidly. In this
chapter we provided evidence that institutional sources of comparative advantage can and do op-

53

erate through fundamentally different channels than traditional sources of comparative advantage
such as endowments. Indeed, institutional sources of comparative advantage are quantitatively as
important as traditional sources. We also reviewed the rapidly growing literature on the impact
of international trade on domestic institutions. These impacts are profound, so much so that one
is left conjecturing that the impact of international trade on domestic institutions is the single
most important source of long-run gains from trade.

References
Acemoglu, Daron and Alexander Wolitzky, “The Economics of Labor Coercion,” Econometrica,
2011, 79 (2), 555–600.
and James A. Robinson, Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty, New
York, ny: Crown Publishing, 2012.
and Melissa Dell, “Productivity Differences Between and Within Countries,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, January 2010, 2 (1), 169–188.
and Simon Johnson, “Unbundling Institutions,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 113, 949–995.
, , and James A. Robinson, “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 2001, 91, 1369–1401.
, , and , “Institutions as the Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth,” in Philippe Aghion
and Stephen Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 1A, London: Elsevier, North
Holland, 2005, pp. 386–464.
, , and , “The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change and Economic Growth,”
American Economic Review, 2005, 95, 546–579.
Agell, Jonas and Per Lundborg, “Fair Wages in the Open Economy,” Economica, August 1995, 62
(247), 335–351.
Ahn, JaeBin, Amit K. Khandelwal, and Shang-Jin Wei, “The Role of Intermediaries in Facilitating Trade,” Journal of International Economics, May 2011, 84 (1), 73–85.
Akerman, Anders, “A Theory on the Role of Wholesalers in International Trade Based on
Economies of Scope,” Research Papers in Economics 2010:1, Stockholm University, Department
of Economics January 2010.
Algan, Yann and Pierre Cahuc, “Inherited Trust and Growth,” American Economic Review, 2010,
100 (5), 2060–2092.
Amiti, Mary and Donald R. Davis, “Trade, Firms, and Wages: Theory and Evidence,” Review of
Economic Studies, January 2012, 79 (1), 1–36.
Antràs, Pol, “Firms, Contracts and Trade Structure,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118,
1375–1418.
and Arnaud Costinot, “Intermediation and Economic Integration,” American Economic Review
Papers and Proceedings, May 2010, 100 (2), 424–428.
54

and

, “Intermediated Trade,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (3), 1319–1374.

and C. Fritz Foley, “Poultry in Motion: A Study of International Trade Finance Practices,”
NBER Working Papers 17091, National Bureau of Economic Research May 2011.
and Elhanan Helpman, “Global Sourcing,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112, 552–580.
and , “Contractual Frictions and Global Sourcing,” in Elhanan Helpman, Dalia Marin,
and Thierry Verdier, eds., The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy, Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 2008, pp. 9–54.
Araujo, Luis, Giordano Mion, and Emmanuel Ornelas, “Institutions and Export Dynamics,”
2012. Mimeo, London School of Economics.
Atkin, David, “Trade, Tastes and Nutrition in India,” 2013. American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Baldwin, Robert E., “Exporting the Capital Markets: Comparative Advantage and Capital Market
Imperfections,” in David B. Audretsch, Leo Sleuwaegen, and Hideki Yamawaki, eds., The Convergence of International and Domestic Markets, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1989, pp. 135–152.
Barro, Robert J., “Determinants of Democracy,” Journal of Political Economy, 1999, 107 (6/2), S158–
183.
Basker, Emek and Pham Hoang Van, “Imports “R” Us: Retail Chains as Platforms for
Developing-Country Imports,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 2010, 100
(2), 414–418.
Beck, Thorsten, “Financial Development and International Trade: Is there a Link?,” Journal of
International Economics, June 2002, 57 (1), 107–131.
, “Financial Dependence and International Trade,” Review of International Economics, 2003, 11,
296–316.
, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine, “Financial Institutions and Markets across Countries
and Over Time: The Updated Financial Development and Structure Database,” The World Bank
Economic Review, 2010, 24 (1), 77–92.
Becker, Bo, Jinzhu Chen, and David Greenberg, “Financial Development, Fixed Costs and
International Trade,” Mimeo, Harvard Business School 2012.
Belloc, Marianna and Samuel Bowles, “Cultural-Institutional Persistence under Autarchy, International Trade, and Factor Mobility,” 2013. Santa Fe Working Paper 13-01-003.
Berkowitz, Daniel, Johannes Moenius, and Katharina Pistor, “Trade, Law, and Product Complexity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2006, 88 (2), 363–373.
Berman, Harold J., Law and Revolution: The Formation of the Western Legal Tradition, Cambridge,
ma: Harvard University Press, 1983.
Bernard, Andrew B., Emily J. Blanchard, Ilke Van Beveren, and Hylke Y. Vandenbussche,
“Carry-Along Trade,” NBER Working Papers 18246, National Bureau of Economic Research
July 2012.
, J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott, “Wholesalers and Retailers in
US Trade,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 2010, 100 (2), 408–413.
55

, Jonathan Eaton, Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum, “Plants and Productivity in International Trade,” American Economic Review, September 2003, 93 (4), 1268–1290.
, Marco Grazzi, and Chiara Tomasi, “Intermediaries in International Trade: Direct versus Indirect Modes of Export,” NBER Working Papers 17711, National Bureau of Economic Research
December 2011.
Bigsten, Arne, Paul Collier, Stefan Dercon, Marcel Fafchamps, Bernard Gauthier, Jan Willem
Gunning, Abena Oduro, Remco Oostendorp, Cathy Patillo, Mans Soderbom, Francis Teal,
and Albert Zeufack, “Contract Flexibility and Dispute Resolution in African Manufacturing,”
Journal of Development Studies, April 2000, 36 (4), 1–17.
Blum, Bernardo S., Sebastian Claro, and Ignatius Horstmann, “Facts and Figures on Intermediated Trade,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 2010, 100 (2), 419–423.
, , and , “Intermediation and the Nature of Trade Costs: Theory,” Mimeo, University of
Toronto June 2011.
Bobonis, Gustavo J. and Peter M. Morrow, “Labor Coercion and the Accumulation of Human
Capital,” 2010. Mimeo, University of Toronto.
Bombardini, Matilde, Giovanni Gallipoli, and German Pupato, “Skill Dispersion and Trade
Flows,” American Economic Review, August 2012, 102 (5), 2327–2348.
Botero, Juan C., Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei
Shleifer, “The Regulation of Labor,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, 119 (4), 1339–1382.
Braun, Matías, “Financial Contractibility and Asset Hardness,” Mimeo, UCLA 2003.
Braun, Matias and Claudio Raddatz, “The Politics of Financial Development: Evidence from
Trade Liberalization,” Journal of Finance, 2008, 63 (3), 1469–1508.
Brecher, Richard A., “Minimum Wage Rates and the Pure Theory of International Trade,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1974, 88 (1), 98–116.
Bruhn, Miriam and Francisco A. Gallego, “Good, Bad, and Ugly Colonial Activities: Do They
Matter for Economic Development?,” Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2012, 94 (2), 433–
461.
Caballero, Ricardo J. and Mohamad L. Hammour, “The Macroeconomics of Specificity,” Journal
of Political Economy, August 1998, 106 (August), 724–767.
Chaney, Thomas, “Liquidity Constrained Exporters,” Working Papers, Department of Economics,
University of Chicago July 2005.
, “The Network Structure of International Trade,” Working Paper 16753, National Bureau of
Economic Research January 2011.
Chenery, Hollis B., “Patterns of Industrial Growth,” American Economic Review, 1960, 50 (4),
624–654.
Chor, Davin, “Unpacking Sources of Comparative Advantage: A Quantitative Approach,” Journal
of International Economics, November 2010, 82 (2), 152–167.
Ciccone, Antonio and Elias Papaioannou, “Estimating Cross-Industry Cross-Country Models
Using Benchmark Industry Characteristics,” 2010. Mimeo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
56

Clague, Christopher, “Factor Proportions, Relative Efficiency and Developing Countries’ Trade,”
Journal of Development Economics, 1991a, 35, 357–380.
, “Relative Efficiency, Self-Containment, and Comparative Costs of Less Developed Countries,”
Economic Development and Cultural Change, 1991b, 39, 507–530.
Copeland, Brian R., “Efficiency Wages in a Ricardian Model of International Trade,” Journal of
International Economics, November 1989, 27 (3–4), 221–244.
Costinot, Arnaud, “On the Origins of Comparative Advantage,” Journal of International Economics,
April 2009, 77 (2), 255–264.
, Lindsay Oldenski, and James Rauch, “Adaption and the Boundary of Multinational Firms,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 2011, 93 (1), 298–308.
Cunat, Alejandro and Marc J. Melitz, “A Many-Country, Many-Good Model of Labor Market
Rigidities as a Source of Comparative Advantage,” Journal of the European Economic Association
Papers and Proceedings, 2010, 8 (2–3), 434–441.
and , “Volatility, Labor Market Flexibility, and the Pattern of Comparative Advantage,”
Journal of the European Economic Association, 2012, 10 (2), 225–254.
Davidson, Carl, Fredrik Heyman, Steven Matusz, Fredrik Sjoholm, and Susan Chun Zhu, “Liberalized Trade and Worker-Firm Matching,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
May 2012, 102 (3), 429–434.
, , , , and Susan Zhu, “Globalization and Imperfect Labor Market Sorting,” Discussion
Papers 10/30, University of Nottingham, GEP April 2012.
, Lawrence Martin, and Steven Matusz, “The Structure of Simple General Equilibrium Models
with Frictional Unemployment,” Journal of Political Economy, December 1988, 96 (6), 1267–1293.
, , and , “Trade and Search Generated Unemployment,” Journal of International Economics,
August 1999, 48 (2), 271–299.
Davis, Donald R., “Does European Unemployment Prop Up American Wages? National Labor
Markets and Global Trade,” American Economic Review, June 1998, 88 (3), 478–494.
and James Harrigan, “Good Jobs, Bad Jobs, and Trade Liberalization,” Journal of International
Economics, May 2011, 84 (1), 26–36.
de Roover, Raymond, “The Organization of Trade,” in M. M. Postan, E. E. Rich, and Edward
Miller, eds., The Cambridge Economic History of Europe, Volume 3: Economic Organization and
Policies in the Middle Ages, Cambridge, uk: Cambridge University Press, 1965, pp. 70–86.
Dell, Melissa, “The Persistent Effects of Peru’s Mining Mita,” Econometrica, 2010, 78 (6), 1863–
1903.
Dippel, Christian, Avner Greif, and Daniel Trefler, “The Rents from Trade and Coercive Labor
Markets: Removing the Sugar Coating,” Technical Report, University of Toronto and UCLA
2012.
Do, Quy-Toan and Andrei A. Levchenko, “Comparative Advantage, Demand for External Finance, and Financial Development,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2007, 86 (3), 796–834.

57

Eckel, Carsten and Hartmut Egger, “Wage Bargaining and Multinational Firms,” Journal of
International Economics, April 2009, 77 (2), 206–214.
Egger, Hartmut and Udo Kreickemeier, “Firm Heterogeneity and the Labor Market Effects Of
Trade Liberalization,” International Economic Review, 02 2009, 50 (1), 187–216.
Engerman, Stanley L. and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Differential Paths of Growth Among New World Economies: A View from Economic Historians of
the United States,” in Stephen Harber, ed., How Latin America Fell Behind, Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1997, pp. 260–304.
and , “Institutions, Factor Endowments, and Paths of Development in the New World,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2000, 14 (3), 217–232.
and , Economic Development in the Americas since 1500: Endowments and Institutions, Cambridge: MA: Cambridge University Press, 2012.
Essaji, Azim, “Technical Regulations and Specialization in International Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 2008, 76, 166–176.
and Kinya Fujiwara, “Contracting Institutions and Product Quality,” 2012. Journal of Comparative Economics, forthcoming.
Fafchamps, Marcel and Bart Minten, “Relationships and Traders in Madagascar,” Journal of
Development Studies, August 1999, 35 (6), 1–35.
Feenstra, Robert, Chang Hong, Hong Ma, and Barbara J. Spencer, “Contractual Versus NonContractual Trade: The Role of Institutions in China,” 2012. NBER Working Paper 17728.
Felbermayr, Gabriel and Benjamin Jung, “Trade Intermediation and the Organization of Exporters,” Review of International Economics, September 2011, 19 (4), 634–648.
Ferguson, Shon and Sara Formai, “Institution-Driven Comparative Advantage, Complex Goods
and Organizational Choice,” 2011. Mimeo, Stockholm School of Economics.
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and David H. Romer, “Does Trade Cause Growth?,” American Economic
Review, 1999, 89 (3), 379–399.
Fukuyama, Francis, Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity, New York: Free Press
Paperbacks, 1995.
Gaston, Noel and Daniel Trefler, “Union Wage Sensitivity to Trade and Protection: Theory and
Evidence,” Journal of International Economics, August 1995, 39 (1–2), 1–25.
González de Lara, Yadira, “The Secret of Venetian Success: A Public-Order, Reputation-Based
Institution,” European Review of Economic History, December 2008, 12 (3), 247–285.
Gould, David M., “Immigrant Links to the Home Country: Empirical Implications for U.S.
Bilateral Trade Flows,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 1994, 76 (2), 302–316.
Greif, Avner, “Institutions and International Trade: Lessons from the Commercial Revolution,”
American Economic Review, 1992, 82 (2), 128–133.
, “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The Maghribi Traders’
Coalition,” American Economic Review, 1993, 83 (3), 525–548.

58

, “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical Reflection on
Collectivist and Individualist Societies,” Journal of Political Economy, 1994, 102 (5), 912–950.
, “The Birth of Impersonal Exchange: The Community Responsibility System and Impartial
Justice,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2006, 20 (2), 221–236.
, Institutions and the Path ot the Modern Economy: Lessons from Medieval Trade, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
and David D. Laitin, “A Theory of Endogenous Institutional Change,” American Political
Science Review, November 2004, 98 (4), 633–652.
, Paul Milgrom, and Barry R. Weingast, “Coordination, Commitment, and Enforcement: The
Case of the Merchant Guild,” Journal of Political Economy, August 1994, 102 (4), 745–776.
Grossman, Gene M., “The Distribution of Talent and the Pattern and Consequences of International Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, February 2004, 112 (1), 209–239.
and Giovanni Maggi, “Diversity and Trade,” American Economic Review, December 2000, 90
(5), 1255–1275.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange?,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (3), 1095–1131.
Hallak, Juan Carlos, “A Product-Quality View of the Linder Hypothesis,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, August 2010, 92 (3), 453–466.
and Peter Schott, “Estimating Cross-Country Differences in Product Quality,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 417–474 2010, 126 (1).
Head, Keith and John Ries, “Immigration and Trade Creation: Econometric Evidence from
Canada,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 1998, 31 (1), 47–62.
Helpman, Elhanan, The Mystery of Economic Growth, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
2004.
, “Trade, FDI, and the Organization of Firms,” Journal of Economic Literature, September 2006,
44 (3), 589–630.
and Oleg Itskhoki, “Labour Market Rigidities, Trade and Unemployment,” Review of Economic
Studies, July 2010, 77 (3), 1100–1137.
, Marc Melitz, and Yona Rubinstein, “Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Partners and Trading
Volumes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123, 441–487.
, Oleg Itskhoki, and Stephen Redding, “Inequality and Unemployment in a Global Economy,”
Econometrica, 07 2010, 78 (4), 1239–1283.
, , Marc-Andreas Muendler, and Stephen J. Redding, “Trade and Inequality: From Theory
to Estimation,” Working Paper No. 17991, National Bureau of Economic Research, April 2012.
Hosios, Arthur J., “Factor Market Search and the Structure of Simple General Equilibrium
Models,” Journal of Political Economy, April 1990, 98 (2), 325–355.
Inikori, Joseph E., Africans and the Industrial Revolution in England: A Study in International Trade
and Economic Development, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
59

, “The Struggle against the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade,” in A. Diouf, ed., Fighting the Slave Trade:
West African Strategies, Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 2003, pp. 170–198.
Jha, Saumitra, “Trade, Institutions and Religious Tolerance: Evidence from India,” 2008. Mimeo,
Stanford University.
, “Financial Innovations and Political Development: Evidence from Revolutionary England,”
Research Paper No. 2005, Stanford University Graduate School of Business August 2010.
Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff, “Courts and Relational Contracts,”
Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 2002, 18 (1), 221–277.
Ju, Jiandong and Shang-Jin Wei, “When is Quality of Financial System a Source of Comparative
Advantage?,” Journal of International Economics, July 2011, 84 (2), 178–187.
Kadens, Emily, “Order within Law, Variety within Custom: The Character of the Medieval
Merchant Law,” Chicago Journal of International Law, Summer 2004, 5 (1), 39–66.
Karasik, Leo, “The Impact of Labor Market Institutions on Markups and Export Market Performance when Firms and Countries are Heterogeneous,” Working Paper, University of Toronto,
Department of Economics April 2012.
Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Massimo Mastruzzi, “Governance Matters III: Governance
Indicators for 1996–2002,” Working Paper No. 3106, World Bank 2003.
Khandelwal, Amit, “The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders,” Review of Economics and Studies,
2010, 77 (4), 1450–1476.
King, Robert G. and Ross Levine, “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might be Right,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 1993, 108 (3), 717–737.
Kletzer, Kenneth and Pranab Bardhan, “Credit Markets and Patterns of International Trade,”
Journal of Development Economics, October 1987, 27 (1–2), 57–70.
Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer, “Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff? A CrossCountry Investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1997, 112 (4), 1251–88.
Kolasa, Art, “Business Groups and Contract Enforcement,” 2012. Mimeo, George Washington
University.
Kreickemeier, Udo and Douglas Nelson, “Fair Wages, Unemployment and Technological Change
in a Global Economy,” Journal of International Economics, December 2006, 70 (2), 451–469.
Krugman, Paul R., “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,” American
Economic Review, December 1980, 70 (5), 950–959.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “The Economic Consequences of Legal Origins,” Journal of Economic Literature, June 2008, 46 (2), 285–332.
Laeven, Luc and Christopher Woodruff, “The Quality of the Legal System, Firm Ownership, and
Firm Size,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2007, 89 (4), 601–614.
Landau, Peter, “The Development of Law,” in David Luscombe and Jonathan Riley-Smith, eds.,
New Cambridge Medieval History, Volume 4, c.1024–c.1198, Part I, Cambridge, uk: Cambridge
University Press, 2004, pp. 113–147.

60

Leamer, Edward E., Sources of International Comparative Advantage: Theory and Evidence, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1984.
and Harry P. Bowen, “Cross-Section Tests of the Heckscher-Ohlin Theorem: Comment,”
American Economic Review, 1981, 71 (5), 1040–1043.
Leff, Nathaniel H., “Industrial Organization and Entrepreneurship in the Developing Countries:
The Economic Groups,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 1978, 26 (4), 661–675.
Levchenko, Andrei A., “Institutional Quality and International Trade,” Review of Economic Studies,
2007, 74 (3), 791–819.
, “International Trade and Institutional Change,” 2012. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, forthcoming.
Li, Kunwang, Yanling Wang, and Yongjin Wang, “Judicial Quality, Contract Intensity and Firm
Exports: Evidence from China,” 2012. Mimeo, Nankai University.
Lopez, Robert S., The Commercial Revolution of the Middle Ages, 950–1350, Cambridge, uk: Cambridge University Press, 1971.
Ma, Yue, Baaozhi Qu, and Yifan Zhang, “Judicial Quality, Contract Intensity and Trade: FirmLevel Evidence from Developing and Transition Countries,” Journal of Comparative Economics,
2010, 38, 146–159.
Manova, Kalina, “Credit Constraints, Equity Market Liberalizations and International Trade,”
Journal of International Economics, 2008, 76 (1), 33–47.
, “Credit Constraints, Heterogeneous Firms, and International Trade,” Review of Economic
Studies, 2013.
, Shang-Jin Wei, and Zhiwei Zhang, “Firm Exports and Multinational Activity under Credit
Constraints,” NBER Working Papers 16905, National Bureau of Economic Research March 2011.
Matsuyama, Kiminori, “Credit Market Imperfections and Patterns of International Trade and
Capital Flows,” Journal of the European Economic Association, May–June 2005, 3 (2-3), 714–723.
Matusz, Steven J., “Implicit Contracts, Unemployment and International Trade,” Economic Journal, June 1986, 96 (382), 307–322.
, “International Trade, the Division of Labor, and Unemployment,” International Economic
Review, February 1996, 37 (1), 71–84.
McMillan, John and Christopher Woodruff, “Interfirm Relationships and Informal Credit in
Vietnam,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (4), 1285–1320.
Melitz, Marc J., “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity,” Econometrica, November 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725.
Mezzetti, Claudio and Elias Dinopoulos, “Domestic Unionization and Import Competition,”
Journal of International Economics, August 1991, 31 (1–2), 79–100.
Milgrom, Paul R., Douglass C. North, and Barry R. Weingast, “The Role of Institutions in the
Revival of Trade: The Law Merchant, Private Judges, and the Champagne Fairs,” Economics and
Politics, 03 1990, 2 (1), 1–23.

61

Mitchener, Kris James and Ian W. McLean, “The Productivity of U.S. States Since 1880,” Journal
of Economic Growth, 2003, 8, 73–114.
Naidu, Suresh and Noam Yuchtman, “Coercive Contract Enforcement: Law and the Labor
Market in 19th Century Industrial Britain,” American Economic Review, 2013.
Naritomi, Joana, Rodrigo R. Soares, and Juliano J. Assuncao, “Institutional Development and
Colonial Heritage within Brazil,” Journal of Economic History, 2012, 72 (2), 393–422.
North, Douglas C., Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
North, Douglass C. and Robert Paul Thomas, The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic
History, Cambridge, uk: Cambridge University Press, 1973.
Nunn, Nathan, “Relationship-Specificity, Incomplete Contracts, and the Pattern of Trade,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (2), 569–600.
, “The Long-Term Effects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123 (1),
139–176.
, “Slavery, Inequality, and Economic Development in the Americas: An Examination of the
Engerman-Sokoloff Hypothesis,” in Elhanan Helpman, ed., Institutions and Economic Performance, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008, pp. 148–180.
and Daniel Trefler, “The Boundaries of the Multinational Firm: An Empirical Analysis,” in
Elhanan Helpman, Dalia Marin, and Thierry Verdier, eds., The Organization of Firms in a Global
Economy, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2008, pp. 55–83.
and , “The Structure of Tariffs and Long-Term Growth,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, October 2010, 2 (4), 158–194.
and , “Incomplete Contracts and the Boundaries of the Multinational Firm,” Journal of
Economic Behavior and Organization, 2013, p. forthcoming.
and Leonard Wantchekon, “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa,” American
Economic Review, 2011, 101 (7), 3221–3252.
Ohnsorge, Franziska and Daniel Trefler, “Sorting It Out: International Trade and Protection with
Heterogeneous Workers,” Journal of Political Economy, October 2007, 115 (5), 868–892.
Olivier, Jacques, Mathias Thoenig, and Thierry Verdier, “Globalization and the Dynamics of
Cultural Diversity,” Journal of International Economics, 2008, 76 (356–370).
Puga, Diego and Daniel Trefler, “International Trade and Institutional Change: Medieval
Venice’s Response to Globalization,” Working Paper No., National Bureau of Economic Research, August 2012.
Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales, “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American Economic Review, 1998, 88, 559–586.
Ranjan, Priya and Jae Young Lee, “Contract Enforcement and International Trade,” Economics
and Politics, 7 2007, 19 (2), 191–218.
Rauch, James E., “Networks versus Markets in International Trade,” Journal of International
Economics, 1999, 48, 7–35.
62

, “Business and Social Networks in International Trade,” Journal of Economic Literature, December 2001, 39 (4), 1177–1203.
and Joel Watson, “Network Intermediaries in International Trade,” Journal of Economics &
Management Strategy, 3 2004, 13 (1), 69–93.
and Victor Trindade, “Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade,” Review of Economics
and Statistics, February 2002, 84 (1), 116–130.
Romalis, John, “Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity Trade,” American Economic
Review, 2004, 94, 67–97.
Ross, Michael L., “The Political Economy of the Resource Curse,” World Politics, 1999, 51 (02),
297–322.
Saint-Paul, Gilles, “Is Labour Rigidity Harming Europe’s Competitiveness? The Effect of Job
Protection on the Pattern of Trade and Welfare,” European Economic Review, 1997, 41, 499–506.
Shen, Leilei, “Global Sourcing and Credit Constraints,” Mimeo, University of Toronto April 2012.
Spencer, Barbara J., “International Outsourcing and Incomplete Contracts,” Canadian Journal of
Economics, 2005, 38 (4), 1107–1135.
Stole, Lars A. and Jeffrey Zwiebel, “Organizational Design and Technology Choice under
Intrafirm Bargaining,” American Economic Review, March 1996, 86 (1), 195–222.
Svaleryd, Helena and Jonas Vlachos, “Financial Markets, the Pattern of Industrial Specialization
and Comparative Advantage: Evidence from OECD Countries,” European Economic Review,
2005, 49, 113–144.
Tabellini, Guido, “Institutions and Culture,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2008, 6
(2–3), 255–294.
, “The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123
(3), 905–950.
Tang, Heiwai, “Labor Market Institutions, Firm-specific Skills, and Trade Patterns,” Journal of
International Economics, 2012, p. forthcoming.
Thoenig, Mathias, Nicolas Maystre, Jacques Olivier, and Thierry Verdier, “Product-Based
Cultural Change: Is the Village Global?,” 2009. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 7438.
Trefler, Daniel, “The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement,” American
Economic Review, September 2004, 94 (4), 870–895.
Tsui, Kevin K., “More Oil, Less Democracy: Evidence from Worldwide Crude Oil Discoveries,”
Economic Journal, 2011, 121, 89–115–22.
Williamson, Oliver E., The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, New York: The Free Press, 1985.
World Bank, Doing Business in 2004: Understanding Regulation, Washington, D.C.: World Bank and
Oxford University Press, 2004.
Xu, Bin, “Entrepreneurial Selection, Financial Markets, and the Patterns of International Trade,”
International Economic Journal, Autumn 2001, 157 (3), 147–167.
Yeaple, Stephen R. and Stephen S. Golub, “International Productivity Differences, Infrastructure, and Comparative Advantage,” Review of International Economics, 2007, 15 (2), 223–242.
63

