                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              EMPIRICAL RESEARCH ON SOVEREIGN DEBT AND DEFAULT

                                            Michael Tomz
                                           Mark L. J. Wright

                                         Working Paper 18855
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18855


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2013




This article is forthcoming at the Annual Review of Economics, doi: 10.1146/annurev-economics-061109-080443.
 We thank Ben Chabot for helpful conversations, Pol Antras, Gadi Barlevy and Alejandro Justiniano
for comments, and Todd Messer for outstanding research assistance. Tomz thanks the National Science
Foundation for support under grant SES-0548285. Wright thanks the National Science Foundation
for support under grant SES-1059829. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Michael Tomz and Mark L. J. Wright. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Empirical Research on Sovereign Debt and Default
Michael Tomz and Mark L. J. Wright
NBER Working Paper No. 18855
February 2013
JEL No. C82,E01,F21,F34,F51,F55,N20

                                           ABSTRACT

In this essay we review the empirical literature about sovereign debt and default. As we survey the
work of economists, historians, and political scientists, we also emphasize parallel developments by
theorists and recommend steps to improve the correspondence between theory and data.


Michael Tomz
Stanford University
tomz@stanford.edu

Mark L. J. Wright
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle St.
Chicago, IL 60604
and University of California, Los Angeles
and also NBER
mlwright@econ.ucla.edu
    1. Introduction
Sovereign states have borrowed money for hundreds of years. Sovereign debt
was one of the first financial assets ever traded, and it continues to comprise a
significant share of global financial assets. In this essay we review the empirical
literature about external sovereign debt, which arises when sovereigns borrow
from foreign investors.

The significance of external sovereign debt is remarkable considering that
sovereign debt is difficult to enforce. For centuries the legal doctrine of sovereign
immunity limited suit against defaulting sovereigns, and even today few
government assets are available for attachment in foreign jurisdictions.
Moreover, although governments have political incentives to serve the interests
of their own citizens, it is not obvious why they would also respect the wishes of
foreign investors. Why, then, do governments ever honor their debts to foreign
investors, and what gives private bondholders and banks the confidence to lend
to foreign sovereigns?

The long history of external sovereign debt and associated problems of
enforcement have attracted researchers in many fields. In this paper, we survey
empirical work by economists, historians, and political scientists. As we review
the empirical literature, we emphasize parallel developments in the theory of
sovereign debt and recommend steps to improve the correspondence between
theory and data.

    2. A Model of External Sovereign Borrowing
We organize our review around a now-standard model of external sovereign debt
and default.1 In this model, adapted from Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), a
sovereign country is represented by an agent that receives an exogenous
random flow of a single consumption good          each period, where is Markov
and indexes the state of nature. To smooth its consumption the sovereign can
borrow internationally by issuing one period zero coupon bonds. The bonds, with
face value , sell at a discount    , , a function of the level of borrowing and the
state of nature.

The sovereign enters a period with bonds and, after observing the new value of
 , decides whether to repay (R) or default (D). Its recursive value function ,
satisfies

                                ,     max        ,   ,      .


1
 Aguiar and Amador 2013 and Wright 2012a review the literature, following early papers by
Aguiar and Gopinath 2006, Arellano 2008, and Hamann 2004.
If the sovereign repays, it retains access to international capital markets and
chooses new borrowing ′ and consumption to maximize its welfare, subject to
a constraint that its consumption cannot exceed income plus the value of new
borrowing, minus repayment of previous debts. Hence

                               ,     max                     ,   | ,
                                       ,


subject to

                                                ,            ,

where is a concave period-utility function, is the sovereign’s discount factor,
and . | is an expectation operator conditioned on today’s state of nature.

If the sovereign defaults it suffers two costs: it is excluded from financial markets
for a period of time, and it loses a fraction of output. The proportion of lost output,
     , proxies for all other costs of default, such as domestic financial distress and
disruptions to trade. At the end of each period, with probability a country in
default regains the ability to borrow and all previous debts are forgiven. Hence

                               1                    0,           1        | .

Bond prices are determined by competition among risk neutral foreign creditors
who discount the future at rate , such that

                                            1        ,
                                      ,                  ,
                                                1

where        ′,   denotes the probability the sovereign will default in the next period.

This model provides a useful framework for organizing our review of the empirical
literature. In section 3 we focus on the volume and price of sovereign debt, which
are captured in variables and . We discuss how researchers have measured
the amount of debt; quantify sovereign debts in absolute terms and relative to
other assets; and review research about the price of sovereign bonds.

We conclude section 3 by discussing three extensions to the standard model.
First, the model assumes that all bonds last for only one period, but in reality
countries undertake both short term and long term borrowing. We describe how
researchers have measured the maturity of sovereign debt and consider the
causes and consequences of various maturity structures. Second, the standard
model expresses all transactions in terms of a single consumption good, but
countries actually borrow and repay in various currencies. We discuss why
countries often issue debt in foreign currencies and how this affects the likelihood
of default. Finally, the standard model overlooks variation in the legal details of
debt contracts. We discuss trends in the design of debt contracts and consider
the consequences of such provisions.

Section 4 focuses on the sovereign’s decision to repay or default. The model
describes two extreme options, R and D, which represent full compliance or
complete abrogation of the debt contract. The actual behavior of sovereigns is
more complex. Instead of renouncing their debts entirely, some sovereigns make
partial or delayed payments, with or without the consent of creditors.
Consequently, we review how empirical researchers have measured default and
summarize patterns across countries and over time. The standard model also
presumes that defaults end stochastically: in each period there is a probability
that the country emerges from default. Following this theme, we review the
empirical literature about how long defaults last.

We conclude section 4 by examining the costs of default. In the standard model,
defaulters lose access to international capital markets and pay an additional
penalty,          . Researchers have studied history to infer how default affects a
sovereign’s ability to borrow, and whether default triggers additional costs such
as trade sanctions or military intervention. We present the state of research on
these important questions.

Finally, the standard model depicts the sovereign as a unitary actor who
maximizes the aggregate consumption of the country as a whole. This
simplification overlooks the role of domestic politics. In Section 5 we discuss
recent empirical research about how voters, special interest groups, and
domestic political institutions affect the decision to repay or default. The essay
concludes by suggesting additional avenues for research.


    3. Sovereign Debt
In this section we describe research on the quantity and price of external
sovereign debt. We also discuss three features—currency composition, maturity
structure, and contractual clauses—that are missing from the standard model.


Measuring the Stock of External Sovereign Debt

In the introduction, we defined external sovereign debt as obligations that arise
when governments borrow from foreign investors. In practice, researchers may
not know, from moment to moment, the identity and location of investors who
own the debts of a particular sovereign. For this reason, most empirical
researchers measure external debt as debt issued in a foreign legal jurisdiction
or denominated in a foreign currency. We employ these measures when
presenting descriptive statistics about the quantity of external debt, while
acknowledging that the measures may not map perfectly onto the distinction
between foreign and domestic investors.

Data on the stock of sovereign debt are typically presented at face value. Defined
as the undiscounted sum of future principal repayments (including, in the case of
consols, principal that is repaid at infinity), face values have two problems. First,
they only capture principal repayments. Thus, two debts with equal cash flows
will have different face values if the debts involve different proportions of principal
versus interest. Second, face values are typically computed without discounting
future flows, and therefore treat similar-sized payments separated in time as
equivalent.

To correct for differences in the division of principal versus interest, analysts
should compute the face value of a common portfolio of debts that replicate the
cash flows of the original debt. For instance, motivated by the standard model,
they could treat each payment as if it were a maturing zero coupon bond and
compute zero coupon equivalent (ZCE) face values (Dias, Richmond and Wright
2011). To correct for differences in timing, analysts could compute either the
present value or the market value of the debt. Unfortunately, market values are
not available for small borrowers and untraded debts, such as official loans,
project credits, and many bank loans.

The ideal measure depends on the purpose for which the data will be used.
When assessing the sovereign’s debt burden, for example, we typically wish to
know the amount of contracted payments. Market values would be misleading,
because market values fall when traders expect the sovereign to default.
Conversely, when measuring how much creditors expect to recover following a
default, market values are more informative than contracted payments.

How Important Is Sovereign Debt as an Asset Class?

Sovereign debts have always been one of the largest classes of financial assets.
To illustrate their importance, Table 1 presents public debt as a share of all
financial assets from the 1850s to the present. Due to the limitations of available
data, the table combines external and internal obligations.

The first set of columns gives the face value of all securities on the London Stock
Exchange, the world’s preeminent capital market for most of the 19th and early
20th Centuries. In 1853, British public debt accounted for 70% of listed securities,
and foreign public debt totaled another 6%. Over the next 60 years the value of
sovereign debt continued to rise, but corporate stock grew at an even faster
pace. Consequently, on the eve of World War I, sovereign debt was only 35% of
the London market.

The next set of columns covers securities listed in London, plus sovereign
bonds—but not private securities—listed abroad. Here, the face value of public
debt was £10.9 billion (59% of the total) in 1933, and £11.9 billion (78% of the
total) in 1950. Many public debts traded at substantial discounts, however, due to
defaults during the Great Depression and World War II. Consequently, the
market value of sovereign debt (column 1950b) was lower than its face value
(column 1950a), not only in absolute terms but also as a share of total assets.

                Table 1: Sovereign Debt as a Share of All Financial Assets

                          Listed in London               London and Some Foreign                         World
                      a        a        a        a             a         a         b              c          c       d       d
                 1853     1873     1893      1913        1933      1950      1950          1950       1978       1990    2010
Total Assets     £1.2b    £2.3b    £4.9b     £11.2b      £18.5b    £15.2b    £14.3b          --         --        $54t   $212t

Public Debt        76%       59%       39%     35%         59%       78%      60%           22%      11%        17%     19%
Of which: UK       70%       38%       18%     14%         38%       66%      57%            --        --        --       --
Foreign &
                     6%      21%       21%     21%         21%       11%       3%            --        --        --       --
Colonial
a
  Data from Stock Exchange Official Intelligence as reported in Michie (2001) Tables 3.2 and 5.1. All securities at face
value. Data refer to securities listed on the London Stock Exchange, except for 1933 and 1950 which includes foreign and
colonial public sector securities listed abroad.
b
  Data from Stock Exchange Official Intelligence as reported in Michie (2001) Table 8.1. All securities at market value. Data
refer to securities listed on the London Stock Exchange, plus foreign and colonial public sector securities listed abroad.
c
  Data from Goldsmith (1985) Table 1 on share of government debt in financial assets, all measured at market values.
d
  Data from Roxburgh, Lund and Piotrowski (2011) Exhibit E1 on public debt securities at face value, relative to other debt
at face value and equities at market value.


The final group of columns gives the market value of financial assets worldwide.
Government debt made up almost 22% of the global total in 1950, but fell to 11%
in 1978. The change reflects, among other things, the decline of international
capital flows under the Bretton-Woods system and the inward-oriented
development strategies adopted by many countries.

From its nadir in the 1970s, sovereign debt has grown in prominence and now
accounts for about 19% of global financial assets. A number of factors help
explain this resurgence. Beginning in the 1970s, governments dismantled
controls that had impeded capital flows for much of the postwar period. At the
same time, the surge in oil prices left petroleum exporters with a windfall that
needed to be invested overseas (the so-called “recycling of petro-dollars”). In the
next section, we quantify the indebtedness of sovereign countries.


How Indebted Are Sovereign Governments?

For the most recent period, we can isolate external debt (operationalized as debt
issued in foreign jurisdictions) and quantify it in several ways. Figure 1 depicts
the evolution of external sovereign indebtedness for an aggregate of 72 low and
middle income countries (Dias, Richmond and Wright 2011, 2012). Each line
plots a different measure of debt scaled by the Gross National Income (GNI) of
the country. Although all measures peak in 1987 at the height of the debt crisis,
the measures convey different pictures about the magnitude of external
obligations. For example, ZCE face values peak at over 60% of GNI, whereas
contractual face values peak at around 40%. The market values of sovereign
debt (estimated using both a constant 10% rate, and market yields) lie below the
face values, with the discount declining toward the end of the sample.

If markets are imperfect, neither face values nor market values necessarily
indicate the true burden of servicing a country’s debt. Dias, Richmond and Wright
(2012) propose a more informative measure, the “equivalent variation” of debt
forgiveness, defined as the extra resources required to make a country as well
off as if it had no debt. For a variety of market imperfections, this can be
calculated by valuing the cash flows of a country’s debts using the consumption
capital asset pricing model. As shown in Figure 1, this internal country value
always lies below the market valuation. This is consistent with economic theory:
when capital markets are imperfect—for example, because of borrowing
constraints or default risk—borrowing countries will value current resources
more, and future resources less, on the margin than creditors.

Debts levels of the magnitude presented in Figure 1 are a challenge for the
standard model of sovereign debt. When researchers run simulations using the
standard model, they rarely generate face values greater than 10% of GNI (e.g.
Arellano 2008). More elaborate models that allow for long-maturity debt or
positive recovery rates in the event of default produce debt levels that more
closely approximate the empirical record (e.g. Chatterjee and Eyigungor 2012,
Benjamin and Wright 2008).

Measuring the Cost of Borrowing

Sovereign bonds have been traded on international capital markets for centuries.
Consequently, we have long series on the prices of sovereign debt, which
researchers have used to quantify the cost of borrowing. One common measure
is the current coupon yield, defined as the ratio of the nominal interest rate to the
market price of the bond. A second measure is the holding period return, which
adds any amortization payments and capital gains to the coupon yield. A third
measure is yield to maturity, defined as the rate of return investors would earn if
they bought the bond at is market price and held it to maturity, and if the
sovereign made all interest and principal payments on schedule.

In the standard model, the market price—and consequently the yield—reflect
expectations about the probability of default. Consequently, researchers have
examined why yields vary across countries and over time. Studies have shown
that countries with a history of default get charged higher yields than countries
with unblemished records.2 Scholars have also investigated how economic and
political institutions affect the cost of borrowing.

In an influential study, Bordo and Rockoff (1996) estimated the impact of the gold
standard on borrowing costs. Using a sample of 10 sovereigns between 1870

2
    See, e.g., Flandreau and Zumer 2004, Tomz 2007, Cruces and Trebesch 2012, but c.f. Ozler 1993.
and 1914, they found that annual coupon yields were 30 to 40 basis points lower
for countries that had adopted the gold standard, than for countries that had not.
The authors argued that the gold standard was a “good housekeeping seal of
approval,” which reduced the cost of borrowing by signaling to foreign investors
that the sovereign was fiscally responsible. Obstfeld and Taylor (2003) found
similar patterns in a sample of 20 countries from 1870 to 1914. These
conclusions are controversial, however. Follow-up studies have found no
relationship between the gold standard and yields, after controlling for differences
in monetary policies, fiscal policies, and common risk factors (Flandreau and
Zumer 2004; Alquist and Chabot 2011).

Historians have also studied the effect of colonial status on bond yields.
Ferguson and Schularick (2006) found that British colonies borrowed in London
at substantially lower interest rates than noncolonies. The savings, which
averaged between 100 and 175 basis points, existed because colonies carried a
lower default risk than fully independent states. Accominotti, Flandreau, and
Rezzik (2011) extended this line of research by showing that colonial status did
not simply cause an intercept-shift in borrowing costs. Instead, colonialism
reduced the marginal effect of standard economic variables, because investors
thought that colonies would repay regardless of their macroeconomic
fundamentals.

Although we have learned much from empirical research about borrowing costs,
two caveats must be mentioned. First, the standard model assumes that
sovereigns borrow by issuing bonds in competitive markets. In practice, many
sovereigns borrow from commercial banks that do not publicize the cost of
borrowing, and/or from governments and international organizations that extend
credit on concessionary terms. Moreover, not all sovereign bonds are actively
traded on liquid markets. Consequently, it can be hard to know the costs
sovereigns would face if they borrowed entirely in competitive markets.

Second, the standard model assumes that all bonds have the same contractual
features. In reality, bonds come in varying maturities, involve different currencies,
and contain diverse provisions for renegotiation. Moreover, some sovereign
bonds contain embedded options that make it hard to calculate yield to maturity.
In the 19th century, for instance, bonds included clauses that allowed borrowers
and lenders to accelerate the date on which the debt would be retired. With
embedded options, coupon yields can be a misleading measure of the cost of
borrowing.3


3
  Countries at risk of default typically issued bonds at a discount and with early repayment at par.
Consequently, their bond prices should rise, and coupon yields should fall, mechanistically over
time. If countries adopting the gold standard between 1870 and 1914 were poor credit risks,
adoption will be spuriously correlated with declining yields. This may explain why Alquist and
Chabot (2011)—who compute holding period returns that control for these trends—find no
evidence of a “gold standard” effect.
In the next few sections we document the heterogeneity in bond contracts and
their implications for debtor-creditor relations.


What is the Maturity of Sovereign Debt?

The standard model assumes that all debts mature in one period. In practice,
countries borrow at a range of maturities, and the mix of maturities is important.
Countries with large amounts of short term debt are vulnerable to “rollover
crises,” which occur when the government cannot issue new loans to repay
maturing ones (Cole and Kehoe 1999, 2000, Chang and Velasco 2000). In the
mid-1990s, Mexico, Indonesia, Korea, Thailand, Russia, and Brazil all
experienced debt crises that were exacerbated by having debts with short
maturities (Rodrik and Velasco 1999).

To summarize the maturity structure of sovereign debt, researchers often use
contractual maturity, the date of the last principal repayment. Another common
measure is Macaulay duration, defined as the elasticity of a debt’s present value
with respect to a constant discount rate (typically a market yield), and calculated
as the discounted cash flow weighted average of the dates of future cash flows.

Both measures are suboptimal for many purposes. Contractual maturities are
uninformative about the profile of cash flows over the life of a debt, and duration
has the counterintuitive property that, due to discounting, deferring some
payments to the distant future can actually shorten the debt’s duration. Moreover,
two countries with equivalent debt portfolios will have different durations, simply
because of different discount rates. Finally, duration fluctuates with interest rates,
even though debt contracts have not changed. An alternative measure that
avoids these problems is the undiscounted cash flow weighted average of the
dates of future cash flows, which we refer to as the zero coupon equivalent
weighted average life of a debt portfolio.

Using unpublished data from Dias, Richmond and Wright (2011, 2012), we
compute each of these measures for the year 2000 for a sample of 137 low and
middle income countries. Across countries, contractual maturity varied from 10 to
40 years (see also Broner, Lorenzoni and Schmukler 2010). In contrast,
duration—assuming a 5% discount rate—ranged from 3.4 to 14.2 years, with a
mean of 7.1. These durations exceed the estimates from previous studies with
smaller samples (Cruces, Buscaglia and Alonso 2002), and are longer than what
economists typically use to calibrate models of debt (Hatchondo and Martinez
2009, Chatterjee and Eyigungor 2008). Finally, the ZCE weighted average life in
the database was just over 9 years, with some countries as low as 3.9 and others
as high as 19.4
4
  The ZCE weighted average lives of sovereign bonds have changed substantially over time,
rising from 6 years during the 1980s, to 15 years during the Brady restructuring process, and
trending back to 10 years by the end of the sample.
As noted above, short-maturity sovereign debt could contribute to sovereign debt
crises. This concern is accentuated by the finding that maturities tend to shorten
during debt crises. Arellano and Ramanarayanan (2012) studied four emerging
market economies, and found that the duration (measured using a risk free rate)
of new bond issues fell by about 1-2 years during crises. In an illustration of
measurement problems, contractual maturities often lengthened during those
same crises.


Why Do Countries Issue Debt in Foreign Currencies?

The standard model assumes that all debts are denominated in real
consumption. In practice, countries borrow in a mix of currencies. At first glance,
the reason for foreign currency issuance seems obvious: if debt were issued in
domestic currency, the sovereign could implicitly default by unexpectedly
increasing the inflation rate. Issuing in foreign currency forecloses this option,
and presumably results in lower borrowing costs. However, when debts are
denominated in foreign currencies, the sovereign is vulnerable to exchange rate
risk.

How much borrowing is in foreign currencies? Eichengreen, Hausmann and
Panizza (2005a) report that between 93% and 100% of all developing country
debt is issued in foreign currencies, depending on the measure used. Moreover,
outside the main financial centers and Europe, developed countries have
between 70% and 90% of their obligations in foreign currencies.

Debts tend to be concentrated in a handful of currencies. Dias, Richmond and
Wright (2011) constructed a sample of long term debts owed by 100 developing
countries from 1979 to 2006. At any given time, countries had borrowed in about
75 different currencies. However, almost 70% of all debt in 2000 was
denominated in U.S. dollars, and the five most important currencies (Dollar, Yen,
Euro, Special Drawing Right, and Deutschmark) accounted for more than 90% of
the total.

Some have hypothesized that investors demand repayment in foreign currencies
from countries with histories of inflation, which would erode the real value of
payments in the sovereign’s own currency. However, researchers have found
surprisingly little relationship between foreign currency debt issues and measures
of inflation or currency depreciation (for example, Eichengreen and Hausmann
1999, or Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza 2005b). This led Eichengreen
and Hausmann (1999) to refer to the preponderance of foreign-currency debt as
“original sin,” in reference to the Christian theological doctrine that all of humanity
is in a state of sin as a result of the original “fall of man.”
Others have conjectured that domestic-currency debt markets are rare due to the
fixed costs of opening of such markets, and the need for a large market to
produce sufficient levels of liquidity. Consistent with this idea, Bordo, Meissner
and Redish (2003) argue that Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa
developed domestic-currency debt markets when major shocks—such as wars or
the breakdown of the Bretton-Woods System—made it worthwhile to pay the
necessary fixed costs. Furthermore, large countries are substantially more likely
to issue debt in their own currency (Eichengreen, Hausmann and Panizza
2005b).

Sovereign Debt Contracts and Clauses

The risk to creditors also depends on where debts are issued and how debt
contracts are written, a feature missing from the standard model. Das,
Papaionnou, and Trebesch (2012) studied the sovereign bonds of 43 emerging
market countries in 2009. The majority of bonds were governed by New York law
(66% by value, 67% by number). Around a quarter were governed by London law
(28% by value, 22% by number), and the remainder were governed by either
German or Japanese law. Each of these jurisdictions has its own norms for
handling defaults.

In recent decades, policymakers have designed contracts that would make it
easier to restructure debts, if necessary (Taylor 2002, Eurogroup 2011). They
have called for collective action clauses, which allow a supermajority of creditors
to impose a settlement on a minority of holdout creditors; engagement clauses,
which facilitate the formation of representative groups to negotiate with the
sovereign; and aggregation clauses, to help creditors negotiate collectively even
if they hold different debt securities.

To document the use of such clauses, Bradley and Gulati (2012) and Choi, Gulati
and Posner (2012a,b) collected details on bonds issued between 1990 and 2011.
They found that 34% required unanimity to change payment terms, but 66%
contained collective action clauses that permitted changes if a supermajority
(typically two-thirds, three-quarters, or 85%) of creditors consented. Moreover,
the frequency of collective action clauses has risen over time. Prior to the
Argentine default in 2001, roughly 95% of sovereign bonds (by number) issued in
New York required unanimity to change payment terms (see also Richards and
Gugiatti 2003). After the default, only 21% required unanimity.

Aggregation clauses, which allow the holders of diverse debt instruments to vote
collectively to restructure all debts, have now been included in the bonds of four
nations (Argentina, Dominican Republic, Greece, and Uruguay), with plans to
introduce them in all Eurozone bonds starting in 2013 (Eurogroup 2011).
Engagement clauses have also become more common, especially in bonds
issued in London. Between 1992 and 2002 only 5% of bonds included such
clauses, compared with 34% today.
Finally, researchers have studied pari passu clauses, which obligate sovereigns
to treat creditors equally. Holdout creditors have successfully used pari passu
clauses to obtain full repayment on bonds in a number of cases (Pitchford and
Wright 2012). Moreover, debt contracts increasingly contain versions of the
clause that are especially favorable to holdout creditors; these versions were
absent in sovereign bonds prior to 1981, but now exist in 74% of bonds issued by
the main emerging market borrowers, and in 21% of sovereign bonds generally
(Choi, Gulati and Posner 2012a; Gulati and Scott 2011). This trend is surprising:
if borrowers and lenders dislike the use of pari passu clauses by holdout
creditors, we might expect the clauses to become less common (Wright 2011
provides one interpretation).

    4. Sovereign Default

In this section we examine how often defaults occur, how long they last, and how
creditors and debtors fare in the aftermath of default.

What Is Sovereign Default?

Defined narrowly, default occurs when the debtor violates the legal terms of the
debt contract. For example, the debtor might fail to pay interest or principal within
the specified grace period. Although useful, this narrow definition overlooks
situations in which the sovereign threatens to default and creditors respond by
“voluntarily” revising the contract.

In recognition of this problem, credit ratings agencies like Standard and Poor’s
(S&P) define a default as beginning either when the sovereign breaks the
contract, or when the sovereign “tenders an exchange offer of new debt with less
favorable terms than the original issue” (Beers and Chambers 2006). We prefer
this broader definition.

To illustrate how definitions matter, consider the 2012 restructuring of Greek
sovereign debt. At the time of writing, Greece’s actions had not triggered a
narrow default: the government had not missed any payments, nor violated any
other contractual clauses. Nevertheless, Greece demanded new terms and
creditors consented, causing ratings agencies to conclude that a default had
occurred. The Argentine debt crisis provides another example. All three major
ratings agencies—S&P, Moody’s and Fitch—listed Argentina as defaulting in
November 2001, when it announced its intention to suspend payments, even
though the government did not break a contract until January 2002, when it failed
to make a required payment.

Finally, researchers use different criteria when grouping decisions into a single
default episode. If a country defaults within one year of restructuring its debts, we
treat the sequence as part of the same default episode. Our criteria imply that
Mexico was in continuous default from 1982 to 1990, a judgment shared by S&P.
However, other researchers reach different conclusions. For example,
Borensztein and Panizza (2009) record four distinct Mexican defaults during the
1980s, Cruces and Trebesch (2012) list five, and Arteta and Hale (2008) count
23.


How Often Do Countries Default?

We now summarize the frequency of defaults on external debt over the past two
centuries. Our data, which extend the work of Tomz and Wright (2007), cover
176 sovereign entities (counting countries and their historical counterparts as
separate entities) from 1820 to the present.5 The sovereigns were in existence
for a total of 17,202 country-years. In 83% of those observations, sovereigns had
external debt and were, therefore, candidates for default.

In building the database, we restricted attention to external debts that were
issued or guaranteed by the national government. We also focused on debts to
private creditors, although we also gathered data on the rescheduling of debts
owed to official creditors under the auspices of the Paris Club. Moreover, we
made no distinction between default and repudiation; between defaults on
interest and defaults on principal; or between defaults that covered only part of a
sovereign’s debts, versus defaults that affected all debts.6

In our database, there were 248 external defaults by 107 distinct entities. The
most frequent defaulters were Ecuador, Mexico, Uruguay, and Venezuela; each
experienced at least 8 distinct spells of default, exemplifying a phenomenon
Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) call “serial default.” Ecuador and Honduras have
each spent more than 120 years in default, beginning with their initial loans as
members of the Central American Confederation in the 1820s, and Greece has
been in default for more than 90 years of our sample. The largest default in
history (by present value) was the 2012 Greek restructuring that covered more
than €200b of privately held debt, followed by Argentina in 2001 and Russia in
1918.

Figure 2 documents the occurrence of sovereign default through history. The
solid line (left-hand scale) plots the proportion of borrowing countries that were in
default on their debts to foreign commercial creditors from the end of the
Napoleonic Wars to the present. The gray columns (right-hand scale) depict the
number of new defaults in each year. The dark gray captures defaults only on

5
  Alternative datasets of default events include: Purcell and Kaufman (1993), also used by Beim and
Calomiris (2001); Suter (1990,1992), which forms the basis of the S&P dataset (Beers and Chambers
2006); Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2007); Arteta and Hale (2008); Reinhart and Rogoff (2009); and
Cruces and Trebesch (2012).
6
  We also do not include “debt crises” without a sovereign default (Pescatori and Sy 2007).
commercial creditors; the light gray represents restructurings only of bilateral
debts of official creditors under the auspices of the Paris Club;7 and the medium
gray shows defaults on both commercial and official creditors.

The figure reveals four episodes in which at least 30% of the worlds’ debtors (by
number) have been in default, giving rise to the notion of a global default crisis.
The first episode began in the 1820s, when a number of newly independent
countries issued debt and immediately defaulted. The second episode, occurring
in the 1870s, was associated with wars in Central and South America, followed
by a fall in commodity prices. The third episode centers on the Great Depression,
and the fourth is the global debt crisis of the 1980s. Figure 2 also shows defaults
on official debts after World War II. To date, there have been 425 renegotiations
of official debts under the Paris Club.

The frequency of default is sensitive to the sample being analyzed. In our
database, the unconditional probability of a borrower defaulting on debts owed to
commercial creditors is 1.7% per year. This is similar to the 2% default probability
that is a target for many calibrated versions of the standard model. However, this
estimate averages over all countries, including many developed countries that
have never defaulted. It also averages over time periods in which there was little
borrowing (for example, the Bretton-Woods system of restricted capital flows). If
we restrict attention to countries that defaulted at least once and exclude the
years 1945-1980, the probability of default jumps to 3%, while for 1980-2012 the
probability more than doubles to 3.8%.

The frequency of default also depends on how one aggregates events. Our
method of aggregation produces fewer defaults of longer duration. Other
methods generate much higher default probabilities. For example, Arteta and
Hale (2008) record 100 restructuring episodes with commercial creditors by 30
countries over a 25 year period, resulting in a 13% default probability per year.

The fact that this moment of the data is sensitive to reasonable changes in the
definition of default suggests that an alternative moment—one more robust to
changes in definition—should be used to calibrate models of default. One
possibility is the fraction of time debtors spend in default, which is 18% across
the entire sample.


How Long Do Defaults Last?

Like the probability of default, the duration of a default is sensitive to the
definition researchers use. According to S&P, a default ends when “a settlement
occurs and … no further near-term resolution of creditors' claims is likely” (Beers

7
 The Paris Club was founded in 1956 to represent official creditors in debt restructuring negotiations. We
exclude defaults on other official debts such as the Inter‐Allied War Debts.
and Chambers 2006). Defined in this way, the mean length of a default across
the entire sample is 9.9 years, dropping to 7.8 years for the period since 1970.
The mean is driven by a small number of long lasting defaults, such as the
Russian repudiation of 1917. It may, therefore, be preferable to focus on the
median, which is 6.5 years over the entire sample of 248 defaults.

There is substantial variation in the observed lengths of defaults, with a standard
deviation of 10.5 years. The distribution is also right skewed, with a skewness
coefficient of 2.1. These facts suggest that the distribution of default lengths is
approximately exponential, a pattern we would expect if the probability of
emerging from default were constant through time. The standard model contains
this assumption, which is also predicted by the calibrated model of debt
restructuring in Pitchford and Wright (2008).


How Large Are Creditor Losses in a Sovereign Default?

The standard model assumes that creditors lose their entire claim when a
sovereign defaults. This is far from true. Defaults typically conclude with a
settlement in which old defaulted debt is exchanged for new debts.

Measures of creditor losses (“haircuts”) compare the value of the old securities to
the settlement offer. Nominal haircuts (Alesina and Weder 2002, Yue 2010) value
both old and new debts at face value, ignoring that defaulted debts trade at a
discount to face value, and that debts issued during a settlement tend to mature
over a longer time horizon. The market haircut instead compares the market
value of the settlement to the face value of the defaulted debt. This measure is
easy to compute and appropriate when pricing sovereign debt, but it overstates
the value of defaulted debt and hence exaggerates creditors’ losses. To correct
the problem, one should value old and new debts using the same discount rates,
as in Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2008), who use “exit yields” derived from
the prices of the settlement debts to value the defaulted debt, and thereby
estimate the SZ-haircut.

Several estimates of market haircuts (Cline 1995, Benjamin and Wright 2008)
use aggregate debt data from the World Bank’s Debtor Reporting System to
estimate creditor losses for as many as 90 defaults.8 However, these data do not
include losses due to maturity extensions. More recent estimates of creditor
losses have involved security-level data. Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2008),
for example, estimate both market and SZ-haircuts for 22 restructurings, while
Cruces and Trebesch (2012) provide estimates for 180 restructurings.



8
 Other haircut estimates for smaller samples were constructed using different data by Jorgensen and
Sachs (1989), Rieffel (2003), Bedford et al. (2005), Finger and Mecagni (2007) and Díaz‐Cassou et al.
(2008).
Despite the differences in definitions, and despite wide divergence in the
estimates for individual restructurings, all the measures give similar quantitative
results. Benjamin and Wright (2008) estimate an average market haircut of 38%,
while Cruces and Trebesch (2012) estimate a 40% market haircut and a 37%
SZ-haircut. Both measures also show that defaults by the low income countries
of sub-Saharan Africa resulted in larger haircuts.


How Does Sovereign Indebtedness Change After a Default?

The standard model assumes that default extinguishes past debts, such that the
sovereign emerges from default without any obligations. This is not true in
practice, and likely affects the quantitative performance of these models.

Benjamin and Wright (2008) show for their sample of 90 defaults that
indebtedness, measured by the ratio of the face value of debt to GDP, does not
fall and may even rise after a default. The median country ends the year of the
settlement with a debt-to-GDP ratio 5 percentage points higher than when they
entered default. The increases in indebtedness are largest for low income
countries (Easterly 2002 and Wright 2011a).

Even if the face value of debt rises, the restructuring of repayments may bring
relief to the borrower. Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer (2008) and Zettelmeyer,
Trebesch and Gulati (2012) propose a measure of debt relief that values a
country’s new debt stock at interest rates that would prevail during non-crisis
times. As these rates tend to be lower than those immediately following a
settlement, this measure produces values for debt relief that are smaller than
creditor losses. In the recent Greek restructuring, a 65% haircut for creditors was
associated with a 60% reduction in the value of debt to the sovereign, while in
Uruguay in 2003, a 13% haircut was associated with a 5% increase in the value
of the sovereigns debt. An alternative approach, based on the welfare cost of
indebtedness (Dias, Richmond, and Wright 2012), could be a topic of future
research.

Do debt restructurings improve a country’s welfare? Depetris, Chavin and Kraay
(2005) study 62 low-income countries between 1989 and 2003 and find no
relationship between debt relief and partial indicators of country welfare such as
GDP growth, investment rates, and public spending. Conversely, Arslanalp and
Henry (2005) find large appreciations in the stock markets of middle income
countries following debt relief under the Brady Plan. More research is needed to
know how debt restructuring affects sovereign welfare.
How Does Default Affect Access to International Debt Markets?

Although the standard model of sovereign debt assumes that default is punished
by disruption of capital market access, there is considerable controversy as to
whether this is true in practice (Borensztein and Panizza 2009 and Panizza,
Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer 2009). In part, this reflects the nature of the
problem: realized borrowing is affected by the country’s demand for credit, and
so different equilibrium outcomes need not reflect a reduced supply of credit. It
also reflects different notions of what “normal” credit market access looks like,
and hence different notions of what constitutes a disruption of access.

We begin by examining evidence on the quantity of borrowing. Data from the 19th
Century are unambiguous.9 In a study of 16 sovereign defaulters between 1820
and 1870, Tomz (2007) finds that only Greece was able borrow while in default.
Moreover, the Greek case is the “exception that proves the rule”: after having
defaulted in 1826, Greece was able to borrow in 1833 only after securing loan
guarantees from England, France, and Russia.

The picture for the early and mid 20th Century is muddled by disruptions to capital
markets from two world wars, followed by restrictions on capital flows under
Bretton-Woods. Following the end of World War II, few countries borrowed
internationally regardless of their credit history, leading some researchers to
suggest that defaulting countries were not punished (Jorgenson and Sachs 1989,
Eichengreen 1989).

Since the 1970s the picture has become more complicated, due to official lending
and bank decisions to roll over past-due debt to avoid capital charges. Gelos,
Sahay and Sandleris (2011) partially correct for this by defining a country as
having market access if the country borrows using either bonds or syndicated
bank loans, and if the face value of the country’s debts increases. They find that
being in default is associated with less market access, with the average country
taking 4.7 years to re-access markets following a default, declining to 2.9 years
more recently (not including unresolved defaults like Argentina 2001).

The debt stock of a country may increase without new borrowing if interest
arrears are capitalized, or if a country retires low face value debt by issuing high
face value debt. To correct for this, Dias, Richmond and Wang (2012) define
“normal” market access to be “net resource transfers” in excess of 1% of GDP.
By this measure, half of defaulting countries do not regain market access within
seven years of the end of the default. This echoes the finding of Levy Yeyati
(2009), who finds that net resource transfers fall by between 0.1% and 1% of
GDP following a default.



9
    Likewise for 16th Century Castilian borrowing (Drelichman and Voth, forthcoming).
Finally, the ability to borrow after default may depend on whether the sovereign
had a reasonable excuse, and the magnitude of losses that creditors suffered.
Dias, Richmond and Wang (2012) find faster market re-access following
excusable defaults: half of all defaulting countries experiencing a natural disaster
regained access within 3 years. Similarly, Cruces and Trebesch (2012) find that
market access was slower following defaults that imposed haircuts in excess of
50%.

We next turn to evidence on the price of sovereign borrowing. In a study of 30
sovereign borrowers in 1872, Tomz (2007) finds that previous defaulters and new
borrowers were charged in excess of 8%, whereas countries with a good credit
records were charged around 5.5%. Significant yield differences remained after
controlling for indebtedness and export earnings. For the modern period, Cruces
and Trebesch (2012) concluded that the average defaulter paid 3-4% more to
borrow than non-defaulters, with spreads above 5% for sovereigns that imposed
large haircuts. Ozler (1992,1993) finds that defaults in the 1930s did not
substantially increase the cost of borrowing in the 1970s, perhaps because the
events were separated by several decades.

By what mechanism does default lead to higher spreads? If default reveals only
that a country is a poor credit risk, higher yields should simply reflect the
increased risk of lending. If high yields reflect punitive interest rates, however,
then investors in these debts should earn excess returns. Lindert and Morton
(1989) studied the ex post realized returns to holding sovereign debt from 1850
to 1983 and found no evidence of excess returns. Likewise, Klingen, Weder and
Zettelmeyer (2004) found that returns on emerging market debt from 1970-2000
equaled those on US treasuries.

In summary, data from the past two centuries suggest that defaulters temporarily
lose access to international capital markets, as implied by the standard model,
and pay higher interest rates when they resume borrowing.

Other Costs of Default

Beyond losing access to capital, the standard model assumes that a country that
defaults suffers a loss of output. This is intended as a proxy for costs in other
areas of international relations. For instance, a country in default could become a
target of military intervention. The idea of using arms to extract repayment may
seem odd today, but many scholars believe this mode of enforcement prevailed
until the early twentieth century. Finnemore (2003), for example, writes that
militarized debt collection was “accepted practice” until the Second Hague Peace
Conference in 1907. Mitchener and Weidenmier (2010) add that gunboat
diplomacy was “effective and commonly used” to enforce debts before 1913.

Tomz (2007) maintains, however, that creditor governments generally did not
use—or even threaten to use—force on behalf of bondholders. Even the 1902
intervention against Venezuela, often cited as the main example of a bondholder
war, occurred because of tort claims, not debt default. Moreover, historical
patterns of lending and repayment contradict the gunboat hypothesis. Investors
lent to countries they had no chance of coercing, and debtors repaid militarily
strong creditors no more often than weak ones. Notwithstanding these historical
debates, all agree that today countries do not use military intervention to enforce
debt contracts.

Default may also lead to a decline in international trade (Bulow and Rogoff 1989).
Trade could suffer for at least three reasons. First, creditors could use tariff and
nontariff barriers to reduce trade with the defaulter. Second, default could lead to
the collapse of trade credit, thereby increasing the costs of trade (Kohlscheen
and O’Connell 2007). Finally, creditors could seize the debtor’s foreign assets,
including tradable goods.

Researchers have begun compiling evidence about the effect of default on trade.
When countries default on official Paris Club debt, they experience a decline in
trade relative to levels one would expect from the standard “gravity” model (Rose
2005; Borensztein and Panizza 2010). It remains unclear why these changes in
trade occur, however. If the decline were due to trade sanctions, trade with
creditor countries would fall faster than trade with other countries. But Martinez
and Sandleris (2011) found that default disproportionately depressed trade with
non-creditors, and Agronovsky and Trebesch (2009) showed that exports to
creditors actually rose after debt restructuring. Studies of earlier time periods cast
additional doubt on the trade sanctions hypothesis (English 1996, Tomz 2007).

The evidence on declines in trade credit is equally ambiguous. Commercial credit
shrinks in the aftermath of default, and exports of sectors that depend on external
credit tend to suffer the most (Zymek 2012). However, the impact on commercial
credit is brief and not sufficient to explain the total drop in trade (Borensztein and
Panizza 2009).

Finally, there is little evidence of asset seizures following a default. For much of
history, the doctrine of sovereign immunity prevented creditors from suing a
defaulter in foreign courts (Wright 2012). Moreover, even if creditors could win a
judgment they would find little to take, since most borrowing countries do not own
extensive assets in foreign jurisdictions. Several recent court cases have
illustrated the near impossibility of taking sovereign assets as compensation for
default (Wright 2001, Doemeland et al 2008, Pitchford and Wright 2012, and Kolb
2011). In 2012, for example, an Argentine naval ship detained in Ghana on
behalf of creditors was released after an appeal to the International Tribunal on
the Law of the Sea.10



10
  See Romig S “Argentina Navy Ship Remains Impounded in Ghana” Wall Street Journal 11th October
2012, and Romig S “Ghana Ordered to Release Argentine Ship” Wall Street Journal 15th December 2012.
Cole and Kehoe (1998) suggested a different mechanism in which default leads
to costs in other spheres of international relations. Default could signal that the
government is unreliable, not just in debt, but in international affairs more
generally. Foreigners might, therefore, be less willing to make direct investments
or enter into trade agreements, environmental pacts, and military alliances with
the offending state. The concept of reputational spillovers seems plausible, but
few have tried to test it empirically (Fuentes and Saravia 2010; Rose and Spiegel
2009; Tomz and Wright 2010). This seems like an especially promising area for
future research.


Do Countries Default in “Bad Times”?

The relationship between output and default is potentially informative about the
incentives of a sovereign to default. On the one hand, models of sovereign debt
with incomplete debt contracts—like the standard model of section 2—predict
that defaults occur when output is low. On the other hand, models with fully state
contingent securities imply that the temptation to default is strongest when output
is high (Kletzer and Wright 2001, Wright 2001).

The widespread belief that sovereigns default only in bad times was challenged
by Tomz and Wright (2007), who found a weakly negative relationship between
default and output in a sample of 175 sovereign borrowers from 1820 to 2005.
Defining low output as periods in which annual GDP data was below its Hodrick-
Prescott trend, Tomz and Wright showed that sovereigns defaulted when output
was below trend only 60% of the time, and that the average deviation of output
from trend at the start of a default was only -1.6%. This result was robust for
different time periods, samples of countries, and approaches to measuring trends
in output. By contrast, calibrated default models predict that defaults almost
always occur when output is below trend, with an average deviation from trend in
excess of 8%.

This finding remains controversial. While Benjamin and Wright (2009) and Durdu,
Nunes and Sapriza (2010) confirm these results using similar methods on
different samples, De Paoli, Hoggarth, and Saporta (2006) and Reinhart and
Rogoff (2011) find large output declines using different methods. Both of the
latter studies emphasize that output costs are larger when default is
accompanied by a banking or currency crisis, with defaults in isolation associated
with small output declines.

Tomz and Wright (2007) suggest ways to reconcile their findings with the
predictions of incomplete debt contract models. Perhaps bad times should be
measured by changes in exports, government revenues, or world interest rates,
rather than output. Another explanation is time aggregation: if sovereign default
is associated with short, sharp declines in output, the relationship may be more
clearly evident in quarterly data than in annual statistics (Mendoza and Yue
2011). Indeed, Levy Yeyati and Panizza (2011) find a strong negative
relationship at quarterly frequency in a sample of 23 defaults.


    5. Domestic Politics
Most theories of sovereign debt emphasize international enforcement
mechanisms. Governments repay foreign debts, it is said, to avoid adverse
international reactions such as exclusion from foreign credit or punishment in
other spheres of foreign affairs. In recent years, though, scholars have begun
examining how domestic politics affects the calculation to repay. This is a
welcome development. When governments appropriate funds to service the
foreign debt, they are making a political decision to prioritize foreign obligations
over alternative goals that might be more popular with domestic constituents. In
this section, we review recent work about the effect of domestic politics on
sovereign debt.


Do Governments Favor Domestic Creditors over Foreign Ones?

Why would citizens ever want their government to repay foreigners, instead of
defaulting on foreign debts and directing the savings toward domestic purposes?
One possibility is that governments cannot repay their debts selectively (Broner,
Martin and Ventura 2010; Broner and Ventura 2011; Guembel and Sussman
2009). If a government owes money to both foreigners and domestic citizens and
cannot honor obligations to one group while defaulting on the other, the
government might opt to pay creditors abroad, instead of declaring a
comprehensive default that would also hurt creditors at home.

The argument seems most plausible in situations when debts take the form of
bonds that are traded on secondary markets. If default ever loomed, foreign
investors could sell their bonds to citizens of the country that was contemplating
default. The transfer of ownership would increase the political costs of default, by
putting bonds in the hands of people who could pressure the government to
honor its debts. At the same time, the anonymity of secondary markets would
make discrimination difficult. Not knowing who owns the debt, the government
would find it hard to repay locals at the expense of foreigners.

Two facts seem consistent with this theory. First, many governments have large
stocks of domestic as well as foreign debt. Reinhart and Rogoff (2011)
assembled data on public debt for 64 countries beginning in 1914 and found that
nearly two-thirds of public debt had been issued domestically. The stock of
domestic debt has varied across countries and over time, however, in ways that
should affect the incentive to repay. Future researchers should study the size
and membership of the domestic creditor community, thereby offering new
insight into the political consequences of default.
Second, governments often borrow by issuing bonds that can be traded
domestically as well as internationally. Indeed, for most of recorded history,
private investors financed foreign governments almost entirely through bonds
that were traded on global capital markets. Although the situation changed in the
late 1960s, when commercial banks began lending to foreign governments on a
large scale, bond issues have outstripped bank loans in every year since the
mid-1990s. Moreover, emerging markets have repaid bondholders at a higher
rate than commercial banks (Tomz 2007).

However, other facts seem inconsistent with the hypothesis that governments
repay foreign creditors to avoid hurting domestic ones. Most importantly,
governments can—and often do—default selectively, by treating domestic
creditors better than foreigners. Gelpern and Sester (2004, 794) examined recent
defaults and concluded that, “in the world of sovereign debt, local and foreign
investors buying the same paper rarely achieve what anyone would recognize as
equal treatment.” Some governments discriminate among holders of identical
assets. Others transform their debt stocks in ways that permit discrimination. In
2000-2001, for example, Argentina induced domestic residents to shift into new
instruments, which received better treatment than the bonds foreigners continued
to hold.

Evidence from earlier periods supports the same conclusion. Waldenstrom
(2010) studied bond markets during World War II, a time when capital controls
segmented international markets. He found that yields on Danish bonds were
lower in Denmark, where only Danish citizens could trade, than in Sweden,
where foreign investors were active. The difference in yields is consistent with a
model in which sovereigns can favor domestic investors over foreign ones.11

Although governments can discriminate across types of creditors, they do not
always exercise the option. Erce and Diaz-Cassou (2011) analyzed ten recent
defaulters and found that four discriminated against foreign creditors; three
adopted a neutral approach; and three afforded preferential treatment to foreign
creditors. The authors admit, however, that the cases in the latter category—
Argentina, Russia, and Ukraine—are contentious. Indeed, some researchers
code those same countries as discriminating in favor of domestic residents (on
Argentina and Russia, see Gelpern and Sester 2004; on Ukraine, see
Sturzenegger and Zettelmeyer 2007).

Future research should investigate why governments discriminate in some cases
but not in others, and whether domestic creditors get better treatment on

11
   Governments also have the means to treat some foreigners more favorably than other
foreigners. In the interwar period, Germany offered full service to British investors but only partial
payment to Americans. Agents implemented this policy by stamping each bond to indicate “U.K.
domicile” or “U.S.A. domicile.” Likewise, Romania serviced British-owned bonds, while
withholding payment from American investors (Tomz 2007).
average. We expect that conclusions will depend on the definition of default. S&P
defines a domestic default as a situation in which the government explicitly
violates the loan contract and excludes bursts of inflation that reduce the value of
local currency debt. Applying the S&P definition, Kohlscheen (2010a) found that
governments defaulted on external debts twice as often as domestic debts.
Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) define domestic defaults to include government
abrogation of debt contracts or inflation rates above 20%. With this broader
definition, they found that defaults on external debt were no more common than
defaults on domestic debt.


Which Domestic Groups Want to Repay Foreign Debts?

Repaying foreign debt creates domestic winners and losers (Frieden 1989,
1991). On the one hand, repayment often requires fiscal adjustment that falls
more heavily on some citizens than on others. Governments in crises historically
have met their foreign obligations by imposing austerity programs that hurt
government employees, the unemployed, and the poor (Johnson and Salop
1980; Vreeland 2002). On the other hand, a government that honors its foreign
debts can preserve its international reputation, benefiting domestic constituents
who value future transactions with foreigners. These domestic preferences could
affect the government’s decision to repay or default.

As a first step toward testing these hypotheses, Tomz (2004) analyzed a unique
public opinion survey that was administered in Argentina during the debt crisis of
2001-2002. On average, the desire to default was stronger among public sector
employees than among private sector employees. Similarly, the poor or
unemployed were more inclined to default than people with greater assets and
more job security. On the other side of the ledger, citizens who assigned high
value to future inflows of capital had a stronger preference for debt repayment.
Finally, the correlation between economic self-interest and policy preferences
held most strongly for sophisticates, who scored well on a test of economic
knowledge that was embedded in the survey.

A second study, by Curtis, Jupille, and Leblang (2012), analyzed the 2011
referendum on debt repayment in Iceland. They found that citizens voted their
pocketbook interests. People with extensive investment assets, and those who
would suffer from higher borrowing costs, voted for repayment; the unemployed
voted for default. However, the connection between personal economic interest
and voting behavior did not depend on voter sophistication, perhaps because
extensive media coverage had made everyone knowledgeable about the issue.
Future research should take advantage of public opinion polls in developed and
developing countries to understand the preferences of voters and domestic
groups.
How Do Domestic Political Institutions Affect the Probability of
Default?

Some authors argue that countries with checks and balances, or veto points, are
more creditworthy than countries where political power is highly concentrated. In
an influential paper, North and Weingast (1989) argued that the Glorious
Revolution enhanced the creditworthiness of the British government by
empowering the parliament as a counterweight to the crown. Cox (2011) offered
a related historical account: British creditworthiness improved when the
parliament “established a workable system to hold the king’s advisors
accountable—what we now call ministerial responsibility.”

Additional research concurs that veto players increase creditworthiness. For
example, coalition governments default less often than unified ones (Saiegh
2009), and countries with strong courts are seen as more creditworthy than
countries without independent judiciaries (Biglaiser and Staats 2012).12

We offer three caveats, however. First, the effect of checks and balances should
depend on the preferences of citizens and interest groups. If domestic groups
agree on how to handle public debts, structural checks and balances should be
irrelevant. If, on the other hand, groups have diverse attitudes about debt default,
checks and balances could be consequential, as Stasavage (2003)
demonstrated in a detailed analysis of British and French history. Stasavage
(2011) subsequently examined the effect of representative assemblies in
medieval and early modern Europe. He showed that assemblies enhanced
creditworthiness in geographically small trade-dependent states, because those
states had powerful mercantile interests that monitored the public credit.

Second, the effect of veto points should vary, depending on the policy to which a
government would revert if one or more players exercised its veto. Does default
require an affirmative act by government officials, or could it occur passively
because leaders fail to appropriate the funds for debt repayment? If repayment
requires affirmative action, the presence of veto players could lead to a war of
attrition (Alesina and Drazen 1991) between competing groups, which could
delay payments to foreign creditors. Thus, the presence of veto players could
either increase or decrease the probability of default, depending on the reversion
point. This seems like an important area for future research.

Third, although most researchers treat checks and balances as generic features
of the political system, these constraints are likely to vary by issue. We need


12
   Research also shows that parliamentary regimes pay their debts more often than other types of
democracies (Kohlscheen 2010b, Van Rijckeghem and Weder 2009). It is not clear how to interpret these
findings, though. Many presidential regimes—in which bills typically require the consent of both the
executive and the legislature—have more veto points than parliamentary ones.
more cross-country research about who enjoys veto power when it comes to
sovereign debt, in particular.

In addition to studying the effects of checks and balances, researchers have
asked whether countries that hold elections are more creditworthy, perhaps
because voters would punish incumbents for defaulting on the foreign debt.
Research about the effect of electoral democracy has generated contradictory
conclusions, however. Schultz and Weingast (2003) offer historical examples of
democracies that could borrow more money, on better terms, than autocracies.
In a large-scale statistical test, though, Saiegh (2005) found that democracies
were more likely to reschedule their external debts and paid interest rates at least
as high as autocracies. Enderlein, Müller, and Trebesch (2011) add that
democracies are significantly more “aggressive” toward foreign creditors, as
measured by an index of the coerciveness of debt rescheduling. Archer,
Biglaiser, and DeRouen (2007) claim that democracies do not enjoy higher credit
ratings, but Beaulieu, Cox, and Saiegh (2012) find the opposite. More research is
needed to reconcile these contradictory findings.


   6. Conclusions and Future Directions
Empirical research on sovereign debt has advanced remarkably in recent years.
Progress has occurred for three reasons. First, researchers have assembled new
datasets that reveal previously unknown facts about sovereign debt. We now
have an unprecedented amount of information about the stock, maturity,
currency composition, and contractual features of sovereign debt for most
countries in the world, over longs sweeps of history. We also know how often
countries have defaulted, how long defaults have lasted, and how defaults have
been resolved. These discoveries would not have been possible without heroic
efforts to unearth data from archives, and to harmonize statistics from disparate
sources.

Second, researchers have used the new data to assess theories of sovereign
debt. The central puzzle in the literature is the problem of enforcement: what
motivates sovereigns to repay, and why do investors ever lend to them?
Theorists have posited that governments repay to avoid the loss of access to
international capital markets, the disruption of foreign trade, or damage to the
country’s reputation in other spheres of international affairs. Armed with new
data, researchers are beginning to quantify these costs. At the same time,
researchers are gaining insight about how investors fare when defaults occur.
Macroeconomists can and should use these facts to judge and recalibrate
models of debt.

Third, new data are shedding light on the economic and political conditions that
contribute to default. How do business cycles in the borrowing country or the
global economy affect the probability of default? Given that the choice between
default and repayment is partly political, how do the preferences of voters and
interest groups matter, and what role do political institutions play in determining
whether sovereigns repay? We suspect these questions will become major foci in
the literature, and will offer new opportunities for collaboration across the social
sciences.

Throughout this essay we have not only highlighted the discoveries that empirical
researchers have made, but also identified gaps between theory and data. To
some extent, the gaps exist for practical reasons: key measures remain
unavailable for some concepts, countries, and time periods. Addressing these
problems will require a continual, collaborative commitment to data collection.
Even without new data, it should be possible to improve the dialogue between
theoretical and empirical research. We have offered guidance for choosing
measures that speak most directly to theory. We have also cited recent empirical
findings that should inform the next generation of theoretical work. It is only by
combining theory and data that future research will advance our understanding of
sovereign debt, a central issue for economics, politics, and international relations.
References

  1. Accominotti O, Flandreau M, and Rezzik R. 2011. The spread of empire:
      Clio and the measurement of colonial borrowing costs. Economic History
      Review 64: 385–407.

  2. Agronovsky A, Trebesch C. 2009. Trade credit during financial crises: Do
      negotiated agreements work? In Credit, Currency, or Derivatives:
      Instruments of Global Financial Stability Or Crisis?, ed. JJ Choi, MG
      Papaioannou. London: Emerald Publishing Group

  3. Aguiar M, Amador M. 2013. Sovereign Debt. prepared for Handbook of
      International Economics 4.

  4. Aguiar M, Gopinath G. 2006. Defaultable Debt, Interest Rates and the
      Current Account. Journal of International Economics 69: 64-83

  5. Alesina A, Drazen A. 1991. Why are Stabilizations Delayed? American
      Economic Review 81: 1170-88

  6. Alesina A, Weder B. 2002. Do Corrupt Governments Receive Less Foreign
      Aid? American Economic Review 92: 1126-37

  7. Alquist R, Chabot B. 2011. Did gold-standard adherence reduce sovereign
      capital costs? Journal of Monetary Economics 58: 262-72

  8. Archer CC, Biglaiser G, DeRouen K. 2007. Sovereign Bonds and the
      “Democratic Advantage”: Does Regime Type Affect Credit Rating Agency
      Ratings in the Developing World? International Organization 61: 341-65

  9. Arellano C. 2008. Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging
      Economies. American Economic Review 98: 690-712

  10. Arellano C, Ramanarayanan A. 2012. Default and the Maturity Structure in
      Sovereign Bonds. Journal of Political Economy 120: 187-232

  11. Arslanalp S, Henry PB. 2005. Is Debt Relief Efficient? Journal of Finance
      60: 1017-52

  12. Arteta C, Hale G. 2008. Sovereign debt crises and credit to the private
      sector. Journal of International Economics. 74: 53-69

  13. Beers DT, Chambers J. 2006. Default Study: Sovereign Defaults At 26-
      Year Low, To Show Little Change In 2007. Standard & Poors
      RatingsDirect
14. Bedford P, Penalver A, Salmon C. 2005. Resolving sovereign debt crises:
    the market-based approach and the role of the IMF. Financial Stability
    Review: 91-99

15. Beim DO, Calomiris CW. 2001. Emerging Financial Markets. New York:
    McGraw-Hill

16. Benjamin D, Wright MLJ. 2008. Recovery Before Redemption: A Theory of
    Delays in Sovereign Debt Renegotiations. UCLA Working Paper.

17. Beaulieu E, Cox GW, Saiegh S. 2012. Sovereign Debt and Regime Type:
    Reconsidering the Democratic Advantage. International Organization 66:
    709-38

18. Biglaiser G, Staats JL. 2012. Finding the “Democratic Advantage” in
    Sovereign Bond Ratings: The Importance of Strong Courts, Property
    Rights Protection, and the Rule of Law. International Organization 66:
    515-35

19. Bordo MD, Rockoff H. 1996. The Gold Standard as a "Good
    Housekeeping Seal of Approval". Journal of Economic History 56: 389-428

20. Bordo MD, Meissner C, Redish A. 2003. How "Original Sin" Was
    Overcome: The Evolution of External Debt Denominated in Domestic
    Currencies in the United States and the British Dominions 1800-2000.
    NBER Working Paper 9841

21. Borensztein E, Panizza U. 2009. The Costs of Sovereign Default. IMF
    Staff Papers 56: 683-741

22. Borensztein E, Panizza U. 2010. Do Sovereign Defaults Hurt Exporters?
    Open Economies Review 21: 393-412

23. Bradley M, Gulati M. 2012. Collective Action Clauses for the Eurozone: An
    Empirical Analysis. Duke Working Paper

24. Broner F, Martin A, Ventura J. 2010. Sovereign Risk and Secondary
    Markets. American Economic Review 100: 1523-55

25. Broner F, Ventura J. 2011. Globalization and Risk Sharing. Review of
    Economic Studies 78: 49-82

26. Broner, FA, Lorenzoni, G, and Schmukler, SL. 2010. Why do emerging
    economies borrow short term? CREI working paper

27. Bulow J, Rogoff K. 1989. A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign
    Debt. Journal of Political Economy 97: 155-78
28. Chang R, Velasco A. 2000. Banks, Debt Maturity and Financial Crises.
    Journal of International Economics 51: 169-94

29. Chatterjee S, Eyigungor B. 2012. Maturity, Indebtedness and Default Risk.
    American Economic Review 102: 2674-99

30. Choi SJ, Gulati M, Posner EA. 2012a. The Evolution of Contractual Terms
    in Sovereign Bonds. Journal of Legal Analysis 4: 131-79

31. Choi SJ, Gulati GM, Posner EA. 2012b. The Dynamics of Contract
    Evolution. NYU Center for Law, Economics and Organization Working
    Paper 12-16

32. Cline WR. 1995. International Debt Reexamined. Washington, DC:
    Institute for International Economics.

33. Cole HL, Kehoe TJ. 2000. Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises. Review of Economic
    Studies 67

34. Cole HL, Kehoe TJ. 1999. A self-fulfilling model of Mexico's 1994–1995
    debt crisis. Journal of International Economics 41: 309-30

35. Cole HL, Kehoe PJ. 1998. Models of Sovereign Debt: Partial Versus
    General Reputations. International Economic Review 39: 55-70

36. Cox GW. 2011. War, Moral Hazard, and Ministerial Responsibility:
    England After the Glorious Revolution. Journal of Economic History 71:
    133-61

37. Cruces JJ, Trebesch C. 2010. Pricing Haircuts: Do Markets Punish Low
    Recovery Values in Sovereign Debt Restructurings? Unpublished Paper,
    Free University of Berlin

38. Cruces JJ, Buscaglia M, and Alonso J. 2002. The term structure of country
    risk and valuation in emerging markets. Working paper, Universidad
    Nacional de La Plata

39. Curtis KA, Jupille J, Leblang D. 2012. “I Save for Icesave: Self-Interest
    and Sovereign Debt Resettlement.” Unpublished manuscript, Univ.
    Colorado

40. Das US, Papaioannou MG, Trebesch C. 2012. Sovereign Debt
    Restructurings 1950–2010: Literature Survey, Data, and Stylized Facts.
    IMF Working Paper 12

41. De Paoli B, Hoggarth G, Saporta V. 2006. Costs of sovereign default.
    Bank of England Financial Stability Paper 1
42. Depetris Chauvin N, Kraay A. 2005. What Has 100 Billion Dollars Worth of
    Debt Relief Done for Low Income Countries. World Bank Working Paper

43. Dias DA, Richmond C, Wang T. 2012. Duration of Capital Market
    Exclusion: An Empirical Investigation. UIUC Working Paper

44. Dias DA, Richmond C, Wright MLJ. 2012. In For A Penny, In for 100
    Billion Pounds: Quantifying The Welfare Effects of Debt Relief. UCLA
    Working Paper.

45. Dias DA, Richmond C, Wright MLJ. 2011. The Stock of External
    Sovereign Debt: Can We Take the Data At 'Face Value'? NBER Working
    Paper 17551.

46. Díaz-Cassou J, Erce-Domínguez A, Vázquez-Zamora JJ. 2008. Recent
    Episodes of Sovereign Debt Restructurings: A Case-Study Approach.
    Bank of Spain Documentos Ocasionales 804

47. Doemeland D, Gil Sander F, Braga CAP. 2008. The Economics of Odious
    Debt. World Bank Report 402

48. Drelichman M, Voth HJ. forthcoming. Lending to the Borrower from Hell:
   Debt, Taxes, and Default in the Age of Philip II. Princeton: Princeton
   University Press

49. Durdu CB, Nunes R, Sapriza H. 2010. News and Sovereign Default Risk
    in Small Open Economies. Federal Reserve Board International Finance
    Discussion Paper 997

50. Easterly, W. 2002. "How did heavily indebted poor countries become
    heavily indebted? Reviewing two decades of debt relief." World
    Development 30(10): 1677-1696.

51. Easterly W. 2001. Growth implosions, debt explosions, and my Aunt
    Marilyn: Do growth slowdowns cause public debt crises? World Bank
    Policy Research Working Paper 2531.

52. Eaton J, Gersovitz M. 1981. Debt with potential repudiation: Theoretical
    and empirical analysis. Review of Economic Studies 48: 289-309

53. Eden M, Kraay A, Qian R. 2012. Sovereign Defaults and Expropriations:
    Empirical Regularities. Unpublished Paper, World Bank

54. Eichengreen B. 1989. The U.S. Capital Market and Foreign Lending,
    1920-1955. In Developing Country Debt and Economic Performance, ed.
    JD Sachs, pp. 107-55
55. Eichengreen B, Hausmann R. 1999. Exchange Rates and Financial
    Fragility. In New Challenges for Monetary Policy, pp. 329-68. Kansas City:
    Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City

56. Eichengreen B, Hausmann R, Panizza U. 2005b. The Mystery of Original
    Sin. In Other People's Money, ed. B Eichengreen, R Hausmann, pp. 233-
    65. Chicago: University of Chicago Press

57. Eichengreen B, Hausmann R, Panizza U. 2005a. The Pain of Original Sin.
    In Other People's Money, ed. B Eichengreen, R Hausmann, pp. 13-47.
    Chicago: University of Chicago Press

58. Enderlein H, Müller L, Trebesch C. 2011. Democracies Default Differently:
    Regime Type and Sovereign Debt Crisis Resolution. Unpublished
    manuscript

59. English WB. 1996. Understanding the Costs of Sovereign Default:
    American State Debts in the 1840's. American Economic Review 86: 259-
    75

60. Erce A, Diaz-Cassou J. 2011. Selective Sovereign Defaults. Unpublished
    manuscript, Banco de España

61. Ferguson N, Schularick M. 2006. The Empire Effect: The Determinants of
    Country Risk in the First Age of Globalization, 1880 1913. Journal of
    Economic History 66: 283-312

62. Finger H, Mecagni M. 2007. Sovereign Debt Restructuring and Debt
    Sustainability: An Analysis of Recent Cross-country Experience. IMF
    Occasional Paper 255

63. Finnemore M. 2003. The Purpose of Intervention: Changing Beliefs about
    the Use of Force. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press

64. Flandreau M, Zumer F. 2004. The Making of Global Finance 1880-1913.
    Paris: OECD

65. Frieden JA. 1989. Winners and Losers in the Latin America Debt Crisis. In
    Debt and Democracy in Latin America, ed. B Stallings, R Kaufman.
    Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press

66. Frieden JA. 1991. Debt, Development, & Democracy. Princeton, NJ:
    Princeton Univ. Press.

67. Fuentes M, Saravia D. 2010. Sovereign defaulters: Do international capital
    markets punish them? Journal of Development Economics 91: 336-47
68. Gelos RG, Sahay R, Sandleris G. 2011. Sovereign borrowing by
    developing countries: What determines market access? Journal of
    International Economics 83: 243-54

69. Gelpern A, Setser B. 2004. Domestic and external debt: the doomed quest
    for equal treatment. Georgetown Journal of International Law 35: 795-814

70. Goldsmith RW. 1985. Comparative national balance sheets: a study of
    twenty countries, 1688-1978. Chicago: University of Chicago Press

71. Guembel A, Sussman O. 2009. Sovereign Debt without Default Penalties.
    Review of Economic Studies 76: 1297-320

72. Gulati GM, Scott RE. 2011. The Three and a Half Minute Transaction:
    Boilerplate and the Limits of Contract Design. Manuscript.

73. Hamann F. 2004. Sovereign Risk, Macroeconomic Fluctuations and
    Default. Unpublished Paper, North Carolina State University

74. Hatchondo JC, Martinez L. 2009. Long-duration bonds and sovereign
    defaults. Journal of International Economics 79: 117-25

75. Johnson O, Salop J. 1980. Distributional Aspects of Stabilization
    Programs in Developing Countries. IMF Staff Papers 27: 1-23

76. Jorgensen E, Sachs J. 1989. Default and Renegotiation of Latin American
    Foreign Bonds in the Interwar Period. In The International Debt Crisis in
    Historical Perspective, ed. B Eichengreen, PH Lindert, pp. 48-85.
    Cambridge, MA and London: MIT Press

77. Kletzer KM, Wright BD. 2000. Sovereign Debt as Intertemporal Barter.
    American Economic Review 90: 621-39

78. Klingen C, Weder B, Zettelmeyer J. 2004. How Private Creditors Fared in
    Emerging Debt Markets, 1970-2000. IMF Working Paper 04

79. Kohlscheen E. 2010a. Domestic vs external sovereign debt servicing: an
    empirical analysis. International Journal of Finance & Economics 15: 93-
    103

80. Kohlscheen E. 2010b. Sovereign risk: constitutions rule. Oxford Economic
    Papers 62: 62-85

81. Kohlscheen E, O'Connell SA. 2007. A Sovereign Debt Model with Trade
    Credit and Reserves. Unpublished Paper, University of Warwick
82. Kolb RW. 2011. Sovereign Debt: Theory, Defaults, and Sanctions. In
    Sovereign Debt: From Safety to Default, ed. RW Kolb, pp.3-13. Hoboken:
    John Wiley & Sons.

83. Levy Yeyati E, Panizza U. 2011. The elusive costs of sovereign defaults.
    Journal of Development Economics 94: 95-105

84. Levy Yeyati E. 2009. Optimal Debt? On the Insurance Value of
    International Debt Flows to Developing Countries. Open Economies
    Review 20: 489-507

85. Lindert PH, Morton PJ. 1989. How Sovereign Debt Has Worked. In
    Developing Country Debt and Economic Performance. ed. JD Sachs, pp.
    39-106

86. Martinez JV, Sandleris G. 2011. Is it punishment? Sovereign defaults and
    the decline in trade. Journal of International Money and Finance 30: 909-
    30

87. Mendoza EG, Yue VZ. 2012. A General Equilibrium Model of Sovereign
    Default and Business Cycles. Quarterly Journal of Economics 127: 889-
    946

88. Michie R. 2001. The London Stock Exchange: A History. Oxford: Oxford
    University Press

89. Mitchener KJ, Weidenmier MD. 2010. Supersanctions and sovereign debt
    repayment. Journal of International Money and Finance 29: 19-36

90. North DC, Weingast BR. 1989. Constitutions and Commitment: The
    Evolution of Institutional Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century
    England. Journal of Economic History 49: 803-32

91. Obstfeld M, Taylor AM. 2003. Sovereign Risk, Credibility and the Gold
    Standard: 1870-1913 versus 1925-31. Economic Journal 113: 241-75

92. Özler Ş. 1992. The evolution of credit terms: An empirical study of
    commercial bank lending to developing countries. Journal of Development
    Economics 38: 79-97

93. Özler Ş. 1993. Have Commercial Banks Ignored History? American
    Economic Review 83: 608-20

94. Panizza U, Sturzenegger F, Zettelmeyer J. 2009. The Economics and Law
    of Sovereign Debt and Default. Journal of Economic Literature 47: 651-98

95. Pescatori A, Sy ANR. 2007. Are Debt Crises Adequately Defined? IMF
    Staff Papers 54: 306-37
96. Pitchford R, Wright MLJ. 2012. Holdout Creditors in Sovereign Debt
    Restructuring: A Theory of Negotiation in a Weak Contractual
    Environment. Review of Economic Studies 79: 812-37

97. Pitchford R, Wright MLJ. 2007. Restructuring the Sovereign Debt
    Restructuring Mechanism. UCLA Working Paper

98. Purcell JFH, Kaufman JA. 1993. The Risks of Sovereign Lending: Lessons
    from History. New York: Salomon Brothers

99. Rieffel L. 2003. Restructuring sovereign debt: the case for ad hoc
    machinery. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.

100. Reinhart CM, Rogoff KS. 2011. The Forgotten History of Domestic Debt.
   Economic Journal 121: 319-50

101. Reinhart CM, Rogoff KS. 2009. This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of
   Financial Folly. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

102. Reinhart CM, Rogoff KS. 2004. Serial Default and the "Paradox" of Rich-
   to-Poor Capital Flows. American Economic Review 94: 53-58

103. Richards A, Gugiatti M. 2003. Do Collective Action Clauses Influence
   Bond Yields? New Evidence from Emerging Markets. International
   Finance 6: 415-47

104. Rodrik D, Velasco A. 1999. Short-Term Capital Flows. NBER Working
   Paper 7364

105. Rose AK, Spiegel MM. 2009. Noneconomic Engagement and
   International Exchange: The Case of Environmental Treaties. Journal of
   Money, Credit and Banking 41: 337-63

106. Rose AK. 2005. One reason countries pay their debts: renegotiation and
   international trade. Journal of Development Economics. 77: 189-206

107. Roxburgh C, Lund S, Piotrowski J. 2011. Mapping Global Capital
   Markets 2011: McKinsey Global Institute

108. Saiegh SM. 2005. Do Countries Have a “Democratic Advantage”?
   Comparative Political Studies 38: 366-87

109. Saiegh SM. 2009. Coalition Governments And Sovereign Debt Crises.
   Economics and Politics 21: 232-54

110. Schultz KA, Weingast BR. 2003. The Democratic Advantage: Institutional
   Foundations of Financial Power in International Competition. International
   Organization 57: 3-42
111. Stasavage D. 2003. Public Debt and the Birth of the Democratic State:
   France and Great Britain, 1688–1789. New York: Cambridge Univ. Press.

112. Stasavage D. 2011. States of Credit: Size, Power, and the Development
   of European Polities. Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.

113. Sturzenegger F, Zettelmeyer J. 2007. Debt Defaults and Lessons from a
   Decade of Crises. Boston: MIT Press

114. Sturzenegger F, Zettelmeyer J. 2008. Haircuts: Estimating investor
   losses in sovereign debt restructurings, 1998-2005. Journal of
   International Money and Finance 27: 780-805

115. Sturzenegger F, Zettelmeyer J. 2006. Creditors Losses versus Debt
   Relief: Results from a Decade of Sovereign Debt Crises. Journal of the
   European Economic Association. 5: 343-51

116. Suter C. 1990. Schuldenzyklen in der Dritten Welt : Kreditaufnahme,
   Zahlungskrisen und Schuldenregelungen peripherer Lèander im
   Weltsystem von 1820 bis 1986. Frankfurt am Main: A. Hain.

117. Suter C. 1992. Debt cycles in the world-economy : foreign loans, financial
   crises, and debt settlements, 1820-1990. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press

118. Taylor JB. 2002. Sovereign Debt Restructuring: A US Perspective.
   Washington, DC

119. Tomz M. 2007. Reputation and International Cooperation: Sovereign
   Debt Across Three Centuries. Princeton: Princeton University Press

120. Tomz M. 2004. Interests, Information, and the Domestic Politics of
   International Agreements. Unpublished manuscript, Stanford

121. Tomz M, Wright MLJ. 2010. Sovereign Theft: Theory and Evidence about
   Sovereign Default and Expropriation. In The Natural Resources Trap:
   Private Investment Without Public Commitment, ed. W Hogan, F
   Sturzenegger, pp. 69-110. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press

122. Tomz M, Wright MLJ. 2007. Do Countries Default in "Bad Times"?
   Journal of the European Economic Association. 5: 352-60

123. Van Rijckeghem C, Weder B. 2009. Political institutions and debt crises.
   Public Choice 138: 387-408

124. Vreeland JR. 2002. The Effect of IMF Programs on Labor. World
   Development 30: 121-39
125. Waldenström D. 2010. Why does sovereign risk differ for domestic and
   external debt? Evidence from Scandinavia, 1938–1948. Journal of
   International Money and Finance 29: 387-402

126. World Bank. various. Global Development Finance. Washington D.C.:
   World Bank

127. Wright MLJ. 2012a. The Theory of Sovereign Debt and Default. In
   Encyclopedia of Financial Globalization. ed. Gerard Caprio.

128. Wright MLJ. 2012b. Sovereign Debt Restructuring: Problems and
   Prospects. Harvard Business Law Review forthcoming

129. Wright MLJ. 2011a. Restructuring Sovereign Debts with Private Sector
   Creditors: Theory and Practice. In Sovereign Debt and the Financial
   Crisis: Will This Time Be Different?, ed. CA Primo Braga, GA Vincelette,
   pp. 295-315. Washington, D.C.: World Bank

130. Wright MLJ. 2011b. The Pari Passu Clause in Sovereign Bond Contracts:
   Evolution or Intelligent Design? Hofstra Law Review 40: 103-14

131. Wright MLJ. 2001. Reputations and Sovereign Debt. MIT Working Paper.

132. Yue VZ. 2010. Sovereign default and debt renegotiation. Journal of
   International Economics 80: 176-87

133. Zymek R. 2012. Sovereign Default, International Lending, and Trade.
   IMF Economic Review 60: 265-394
Sidebar

Expropriation of Foreign Direct Investment

In addition to defaulting on their debts, sovereigns also expropriate foreign direct
investment (FDI), either directly through nationalization or indirectly by limiting
the property rights of foreign investors.

Some theories predict a close relationship between the occurrence of sovereign
default and expropriation (collectively referred to as “sovereign theft”). For
example, if sovereigns honor contracts in order to maintain a good reputation,
and if one form of sovereign theft is informative about the likelihood of the other,
sovereigns should default and expropriate together: the information revealed is
the same but the benefits to seizing both are larger. A similar prediction arises if
sovereign theft is deterred by retaliatory threats of denying access to
international debt and equity markets.

Surprisingly, Tomz and Wright (2010) found no short-run relationship between
default and the expropriation of US FDI; sovereigns rarely expropriated and
defaulted at the same time. They did, however, uncover a strong long-run
relationship: most countries consistently avoided both types of theft, or they
committed both types at varying points during the 20th century. Eden, Kraay, and
Qian (2012) documented similar patterns in a study of non-US FDI. They also
found no evidence that lending declines after expropriation, nor that FDI declines
after defaults (but contrast Fuentes and Saravia 2010).
Definitions
Debt Relief: A reduction of, or extension to the timing of, payments on a debt.

Default: Narrowly, a violation of the terms of a debt contract such as a failure to
pay within the specified grace period. Broadly, also includes voluntary
restructurings of debt that reduce the value of that debt to creditors.

Doctrine of Sovereign Immunity: A legal doctrine proscribing suit against a
sovereign state, and attachment of a sovereign state’s property, without the
sovereign’s consent.

External Debt: Debt owed to foreign investors. In the data, this is often
approximated by debt denominated in foreign currency, or debt issued in a
foreign legal jurisdiction.

Face Value of Debt: The undiscounted sum of future principal repayments of a
debt.

Haircut: The loss, in percentage terms, experienced by a creditor as a result of a
default. It is equal to one minus the recovery rate on the debt.

Sovereign State: A political organization with supreme independent authority
over a geographic area. Foreign sovereign immunity is extended to entities that
have been recognized as sovereign states by the sovereign state of the relevant
legal jurisdiction.

Sovereign Debt: Debt owed or guaranteed by the government of a sovereign
state.
                            Figure 1: The Evolution of Sovereign Indebtedness
             75%




             60%
                                                             Zero‐Coupon‐Equivalent
                                                             Face Value




             45%
Debt / GNI




                                                          Face Value




             30%
                                                                  Constant 10%
                                                                  Discount Rate


                                                                                                           Market Value
                                        Country Value
             15%




             0%
                   1979   1981   1983      1985    1987    1989        1991   1993    1995   1997   1999    2001    2003   2005
                                            Figure 2: The Frequency of Sovereign Default
                          60%                                                                                                              30
                                                                                                                         Countries With
                                                                                                                         Paris Club
                                                                                                                         Agreement (RHS)

                          50%                                                                                                              25
                                               Proportion of Borrowers In Default on
                                               Commercial Debt (LHS)


                          40%                                                                                                              20
    ortion of Borrowers




                                                                                            Countries Defaulting on




                                                                                                                                                  mber of Countries
                                                                                            Commercial Debt and With
                                                                                            Paris Club Agreement (RHS)


                          30%                                                                                                              15




                                                                                                                                                Num
Propo




                          20%                                                                                                              10




                          10%                                                                                                              5
                                       Countries Defaulting on
                                       Commercial Debt (RHS)


                          0%                                                                                                               0
                                1820 1830 1840 1850 1860 1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
