NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PATENT RIGHTS, PRODUCT MARKET REFORMS, AND INNOVATION
Philippe Aghion
Peter Howitt
Susanne Prantl
Working Paper 18854
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18854

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

We thank Ufuk Akcigit, Richard Blundell, Bronwyn Hall, Martin Hellwig, Rachel Griffith, Armin
Schmutzler, John Van Reenen, and seminar participants at the AEA Annual Meetings in Chicago,
MPI for Research on Collective Goods in Bonn, UNU Merit in Maastricht, University of Cologne,
University of Zurich, and the VfS Annual Conference in Frankfurt for very helpful comments and
discussions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Philippe Aghion, Peter Howitt, and Susanne Prantl. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Patent Rights, Product Market Reforms, and Innovation
Philippe Aghion, Peter Howitt, and Susanne Prantl
NBER Working Paper No. 18854
February 2013
JEL No. L1,L5,O3,O4
ABSTRACT
Can patent protection and product market competition complement each other in enhancing incentives
to innovate? In this paper, we address this question by investigating how innovation responses to a
substantial policy initiative increasing product market competition interact with the strength of patent
rights. We provide empirical evidence of innovation responding positively to the product market reform
in industries of countries where patent rights are strong, not where these are weak. The positive response
to the reform is more pronounced in industries in which innovators rely more on patenting than in
other industries, and in which the scope for deterring entry through patenting is not too large. Our
empirical findings are in line with step-by-step innovation models predicting that product market competition
enhances innovation and, more importantly, that patent protection can complement competition in
inducing innovation.

Philippe Aghion
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge St
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
paghion@fas.harvard.edu
Peter Howitt
Department of Economics
Brown University, Box B
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
peter_howitt@brown.edu

Susanne Prantl
Department of Economics
University of Cologne
Albertus-Magnus-Platz
D-50923 Cologne
Germany
prantl@wiso.uni-koeln.de

1

Introduction

Over the past three decades, numerous changes to patent systems have strengthened patent
protection worldwide.1 While this is in line with the common view that patent protection
should enhance innovation incentives, empirical studies investigating the e§ects of such regulatory changes on the level of innovation have hardly found evidence of positive average
e§ects (Sakakibara and Branstetter, 2001, Lerner, 2002 and 2009, and Qian, 2007, among
others). As Josh Lerner (2009, p. 347) put it: ìThe lack of a positive impact of strengthening of patent protection on innovation is a puzzling result. It runs (...) against our intuition
as economists that incentives a§ect behavior (...).î
In this paper we set out to study whether patent protection can foster innovation when
being complemented by product market competition. More speciÖcally, we investigate how
innovation responses to a competition-increasing product market reform depend upon the
strength of patent rights. The product market reform that we consider was part of the European Single Market Program (SMP). The European Commission designed this large scale
policy initiative to enhance competition, innovation and economic growth and implemented
it in 1992, a time with signiÖcant variation in patent protection across European Countries.
The product market reform created exogenous variation in product market conditions not
only across time, but also across industries and countries. Positive average e§ects on product
market competition have been documented (Badinger, 2007, Bottasso and Sembenelli 2001,
and Gri¢th, Harrison and Simpson 2010, among others).
In our empirical analysis, we Örst compare the innovation responses to the product market reform across two country groups. The Örst group covers the countries with strong patent
rights in our main sample of 13 manufacturing industries in 17 European countries between
1987 and 2003. These countries have had strong intellectual property rights (IPR) regimes
1
These changes involve, among others, improvements to patent enforcement, the lengthening of the patent
term or the broadening of patent scope. In addition, patent protection now also covers innovation types
that were previously largely non-patentable, and it is reaching out to public research communities in many
countries and to developing countries.

1

since the pre-sample period, 1980 until 1986, and are among the founder states of the European Patent Organisation (EPOrg). The second group covers the countries with weaker
patent rights before and during our observation period. The estimation results indicate
that innovation responds positively to the competition-enhancing product market reform in
industries that are located in countries with strong patent rights, but not so in industries
of countries with weaker patent rights.2 A concern with these reform e§ects which di§er
between country groups could be potential interactions between the product market reform
and factors other than the country-speciÖc strength of patent protection. We address this
concern by investigating the variation of the reform e§ects across industries. The reform
e§ect in countries with strong patent rights should be more pronounced in industries where
innovators are generally more prone to rely on patenting and are likely to value strong patent
protection more than in other industries.3 We Önd empirical evidence in line with this prediction. In addition, we Önd that the more pronounced innovation responses in industries with
higher patent relevance arise only as long as the scope for deterring entry through patenting
is not too large. In this paper, we argue that all these empirical Öndings are consistent
with Schumpeterian growth models with step-by-step innovation where patent protection
and product market competition can become complementary forces.
The view that patent protection and product market competition should act as complementary inputs to innovation and growth, is at odds with what early endogeneous growth
models would predict (e.g., Romer, 1990, and Aghion and Howitt, 1992). In these models
patent protection fosters innovation and growth as it enhances the rents from innovation,
whereas product market competition deters innovation and growth by reducing these rents.
Thus, patent protection is good for innovation for exactly the same reason that renders
competition bad for innovation. More recently, Boldrin and Levine (2008) have argued that
patent protection is detrimental to innovation because it blocks product market competition
2

We Önd consistent results when measuring innovation by research and development (R&D) intensity,
real R&D expenditures, or the number of patents.
3
To identify these industries in which patent relevance is high in general and for exogenous technological
reasons we use the pre-sample patent intensity in the corresponding US industries.

2

whereas competition is good for innovation because it allows the greatest scope to those who
can develop new ideas. Even though Boldrin and Levine (2008) depart here from the endogenous growth literature, they share the view that patent protection and competition are
counteracting (or mutually exclusive) forces: namely, whenever one is good for innovation
the other is detrimental to innovation.4
However, patent protection and product market competition can become complementary
forces in a Schumpeterian growth model with step-by-step innovation. Why? Because in
such a model a positive fraction of sectors involve neck-and-neck Örms, that is, Örms that
compete on an equal technological footing. Each Örmís incentive to innovate depends on the
di§erence between its post-innovation rent and its pre-innovation rent, and this di§erence
- the net innovation rent - is in turn a§ected by both, product market competition and
patent protection. More speciÖcally, in a neck-and-neck sector where Örms make positive
proÖts even if they do not innovate, tougher product market competition will reduce this
pre-innovation rent. It may also lower the post-innovation rents but to a lower extent. Thus,
overall, product market competition will increase the net innovation rents in a neck-andneck sector: this we refer to as the escape competition e§ect in Aghion, Harris, Howitt and
Vickers (2001) and Aghion, Bloom, Blundell, Gri¢th and Howitt (2005). On the other hand,
stronger patent protection will enhance post-innovation rents to a larger extent than preinnovation rents, especially when the latter are bogged down by competition. Hence, there
is complementarity between product market competition and patent protection in inducing
innovation. This contrasts with the model of Romer (1990) in which innovations are made
by outsiders who create a new variety, and with the model of Aghion and Howitt (1992) in
which innovators leap-frog incumbent Örms. In both these models, the pre-innovation rent
is zero and product market competition deters innovation by reducing the post-innovation
rent which represents the net innovation rent.
Our paper contributes to several strands of literature. First, it contributes to the lit4

See our discussion in Aghion, Howitt and Prantl (2013).

3

erature on competition and growth.5 Aghion et al. (2005) report empirical evidence of an
inverted-U relationship between product market competition and innovation in the United
Kingdom (U.K.). Aghion, Blundell, Gri¢th, Howitt and Prantl (2009) study how escapeentry e§ects on the productivity growth and patenting of incumbent establishments and
Örms in the U.K. vary with their level of technological development. Aghion, Burgess, Redding and Zilibotti (2008) show that the e§ect of an Indian product market deregulation on
industry output varies with the institutional characterstics of Indian states. Focussing on
the SMP, like we do,6 Bottasso and Sembenelli (2001) and Badinger (2007) show that this
product market intervention reduced mark-ups in manufacturing industries. Gri¢th et al.
(2010) report that the SMP enhanced product market competition which, in turn, led to an
increase in R&D expenditures, using panel data for manufacturing industries in OECD countries.7 None of these papers, however, examines how the impact of a competition-increasing
product market reform on innovation may interact with the strength of patent protection.
Our work also contributes to the empirical literature on the e§ects of intellectual property
rights (IPR), as well as IPR reforms, on the level of innovation.8 Sakakibara and Branstetter (2001) investigate consequences of the Japanese patent law reform in 1988. The reform
introduced the option of multiple, (in)dependent claims per patent and, thus, broadened the
scope of Japanese patents. They Önd no evidence of positive average reform e§ects on R&D
spendings of Japanese Örms. What they do not consider is a potential interaction between
the patent reform and product market competition. Branstetter, Fisman and Foley (2006)
focus on a di§erent research question, investigating how the extent of technology transfers
5
See Aghion et al. (2001) and Acemoglu, Aghion and Zilibotti (2006), in particular, but also Acemoglu
(2009), Aghion and Howitt (2009) and Acemoglu and Akcigit (2012). With regard to the related theoretical
literature in industrial organization, we refer the reader, among others, to Tirole (1988), Scotchmer (2004),
Gilbert (2006), Vives (2008), and Schmutzler (2010, 2012).
6
In Aghion et al. (2005, 2009), the SMP provides the excluded instruments that are used in instrumental
variable and control function models explaining innovation or productivity growth.
7
To capture product market competition, Gri¢th et al. (2010) use the following inversely related measure:
average proÖtability at the countryñindustryñyear level, deÖned as value-added divided by labour plus capital
costs.
8
Moser (2005) addresses an important, but di§erent question. She provides empirical evidence suggesting
that the existence of patent laws ináuences the direction of technological progress, as well as the pattern of
comparative advantages across countries.

4

within United States (U.S.) multinational Örms responds to IPR reforms in their a¢liatesí
host countries. Both these papers inspired our empirical approach in one respect. We allow for di§erences in innovation responses across industries that di§er in the propensity of
patenting, and therefore the relevance of patent protection, as this contributes to our identiÖcation of the interaction e§ects between patent rights and the product market reform. Qian
(2007) uses country-level panel data for the pharmaceutical industry in OECD countries to
show that introducing national patent protection does, on average, not stimulate pharmaceutical innovation. Interestingly, she Önds positive, often statistically signiÖcant coe¢cients
on interactions between patent protection and the country-level Fraser Institute index of economic freedom.9 To the extent that this index can reáect country-level freedom to compete
and trade the latter Önding for the pharamceutical industry provides a Örst hint towards
the interaction e§ects we are interested in. Against this background, we focus on identifying
the interactions between product market competition and patent protection, exploiting the
fact that the SMP product market reform created exogenous variation in product market
conditions across industries, countries and time.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we explain the
theoretical argument in greater detail. Section 3 presents the empirical model and, in section
4, we brieáy explain the data and show descriptive statistics. The empirical results and their
discussion follow in section 5. In section 6, we summarize and conclude.

9

This index is a composite measure which aggregates country-level proxies of the size of government,
access to money, regulation of credit, labor and business, legal structure and property rights, and freedom
to trade.

5

2

Theoretical argument

In this section, we sketch a simple model to think about the relationship between the strength
of patent rights, reforms increasing product market competition, and innovation.10

2.1

Basic setup

Time is discrete and the economy is populated by a continuum of people who all live for one
period. In each period t a Önal good Y; henceforth the numÈraire, is produced under perfect
competition from a continuum of intermediate inputs, according to the technology
Yt =

Z

1

Ait 1 xit  di

0

where xit is the quantity of the intermediate input produced in industry i in period t and
 2 (0; 1). With Ait we denote the productivity parameter associated with the latest version
of intermediate good i. The Önal good in turn is used for consumption, as an input to the
innovation process, and as an input to the production of intermediate goods.
In each intermediate industry i, only a monopolist produces in each period, using a oneto-one technology. Thus, the variable i refers both, to an intermediate industry, and to
the intermediate Örm which is active in that industry. As any other agent in the economy,
intermediate producers live for one period only and technological capabilities are transmitted
within dynasties. Each intermediate Örm chooses how much to produce in order to maximize
proÖts, taking into account that the price at which it can sell its intermediate good to the
Önal good production is equal to the value of the marginal product of that good in Önal good
production.
ProÖt maximization yields an equilibrium proÖt for each intermediate Örm i in period t
which is equal to
 it = qAit
where
10

The section builds on Acemoglu et al. (2006) and Aghion et al. (2001).

6

(1)

=



1




2

 1

and q is the probability that innovation proÖts are not expropriated (Acemoglu et al. 2006).
This variable reáects the strength of patent rights.
Before a Örm decides on production in period t, it can invest in R&D to increase its
productivity. A Örmís productivity at the beginning of period t is At1 and each innovation
increases the productivity by factor , assuming At = At1 with  > 1. For innovation to
be successful with probability z an intermediate Örm in period t must invest

ct = cz 2 At1 =2 where c < 1:

(2)

Intermediate Örms are subject to an entry threat from new producers. Let p denote the
probability that an entrant shows up. We take p to be exogenous and new entrants in period
t are assumed to operate with productivity At1 in t.
Entry is deterred with probability one if the incumbent in industry i innovates. If the
incumbent does not innovate and, therefore, the incumbent and the entrant have the same
productivity At1 , entry is deterred with probability q, where  indicates the marginal
deterrence e§ect of patent protection on entry. The idea is that the stronger the patent
system, the more likely will entry be deterred. This negative e§ect of patent protection on
entry is emphasized by Boldrin and Levine (2008).11 Therefore, the probability of actual
entry in an intermediate industry i; is equal to zero if the incumbent i has innovated, and
it is equal to p(1  q) otherwise. We assume that if entry occurs, the incumbentís proÖt
falls to zero through Bertrand competition. An increase in p, reáecting an increase in entry
threat, corresponds to an increase in product market competition.
11

We implicitly assume that potential entrants observe the post-innovation technology of the incumbent
Örm before deciding whether or not to enter. Then, the potential entrant will Önd it proÖtable to enter only
if the incumbent has not innovated. However, she will never enter in period t if the incumbent has innovated:

7

2.2

The interplay between patent protection and competition

Using equation (1) for the equilibrium proÖt, together with the innovation technology in
equation (2), we can analyze incumbent Örmsí R&D investment decisions. If an incumbent
Örm successfully innovates, then its proÖt will be At1 with probability q. If the incumbent
fails to innovate, then its proÖt will be At1 with probability q[1  p(1  q)] . This is the
probability that the incumbent is not expropriated times the probability that entry does not
occur or is not successful. Therefore, the incumbentís expected proÖt, including the cost of
innovation, is equal to

zqAt1 + (1  z) q[1  p(1  q)]At1  cz 2 At1 =2:
The incumbent Örm will choose the probability z that maximizes this expression. The
Örst-order condition of this maximization problem yields the probability
z=

q
[  1 + p(1  q)]:
c

(3)

Di§erentiation of the equilibrium innovation probability with respect to q yields
@z

= f  1 + p  2pqg:
@q
c

(4)

Accordingly, the strength of patent rights, as measured by q; has a priori an ambiguous
e§ect on innovation incentives, even though the e§ect is positive for  su¢ciently small
( < (  1 + p)=2pq).
Di§erentiation with respect to p yields:
@z
= q(1  q)=c > 0
@p

(5)

@2z

= (1  2q):
@p@q
c

(6)

and

8

Equation (5) shows that product market competition, measured by p, has a positive e§ect
on innovation incentives: this is the "escape competition" or "escape entry" e§ect pointed
out, for example, in Aghion et al. (2005) and Aghion et al. (2009). According to equation
(6), patent protection, measured by q, a§ects the magnitude of the escape competition e§ect
in two counteracting ways: (a) for given e§ective entry threat p(1  q), it increases the gain
from escaping competition through innovation; and (b) it reduces the e§ective entry threat
and therefore the incumbent Örmsí incentives to innovate in order to escape competition.
The former e§ect dominates for low values of q, and for all values of q if  is small enough
to fulÖll  < 1=2q.
Overall, the model predicts that product market competition, and, thus, policy reforms
that increase product market competition, have a positive e§ect on innovation incentives,
and all the more so when patent protection is stronger. The latter holds, in particular, if the
marginal e§ect of patent protection on the probability of entry () is su¢ciently small.12

3

Empirical model

Our empirical model is designed to identify heterogeneity in the e§ect of a competitionincreasing product market reform on innovation, depending on the strength of patent rights.
The product market reform that we focus on consists of the substantial policy prescriptions
that were part of the European Single Market Program in 1992. The reform was designed by
the European Commission, a supranational institution, to enhance competition, innovation
and economic growth. The e§ects of the reform were ex ante expected to vary across industries, as well as across countries, and the reform was repeatedly reported to reduce mark-ups
and to increase product market competition (see Section 4 and Appendix B for details).
We proceed in two steps, using panel data for 13 industries in 17 European countries
between 1987 and 2003. In the Örst step, we compare the e§ect of the product market
12

We do not study the e§ects on consumer welfare, which are a§ected by both p and q, not only because
they change the pace of innovation but also because they a§ect markups, since every time a patent is broken
or entry is successful the markup falls in that industry from 1
 to zero. See Acemoglu and Akcigit (2012)
for the welfare e§ects of a related model.

9

reform on innovation across two country groups: 1) countries with strong patent rights in
the pre-sample period, 1980 to 1986, and throughout the sample period; 2) countries with
weaker patent rights (see Section 4 and Appendix B for details). We estimate the following
equation:
weak
yict =  1 Rict  G(Pc;strong
presample (ps) ) +  2 Rict  G(Pc; ps ) + Xict + ct +  it + uict ;

(7)

where the explained variable yict measures innovation. Our main measure of innovation is
R&D intensity, deÖned as R&D expenditures over value added. In addition, we use real
R&D expenditures and a patent count. Countries are indexed by c, industries by i and
time by t. The main explanatory variable Rict is our measure of the product market reform.
It is set to zero in all years before the implementation of the SMP. From 1992 onwards
it takes values between zero and one, with a higher value indicating that ex ante experts
were expecting the respective county-industry unit to be a§ected more by the SMP than
other country-industries. We interact the reform measure with G(Pc;strong
presample (ps) ), a timeinvariant indicator for the country group where patent rights P are strong since the presample period, and also with G(Pc;weak
ps ), the corresponding indicator for the country group
with weaker patent rights. These indicators are constructed from information on patent law
reforms and related regulation.
Country-year Öxed e§ects, ct , are included to capture unobserved factors which may
trigger country-speciÖc changes of innovation over time. Industry-year Öxed e§ects,  it , are
used to pick up factors inducing industry-speciÖc trends over time. The vector Xict captures
further covariates, most importantly the pre-sample knowledge stock of country-industries
to capture their initial innovative potential. The error term is denoted by uict . We cluster
standard errors at the country-industry level to allow for unrestricted correlation between
annual observations within the same country-industry.
Our main focus in equation (7) is on the coe¢cients of the two product market reform
terms,  1 and  2 . If stronger patent rights are to reinforce the positive e§ect of a competitionincreasing product market reform on innovation, then the estimate of  1 should be positive
10

and larger than that of  2 . In our preferred model variant, the coe¢cients  1 and  2 are
identiÖed from data variation across time within country-industries and across countryindustries.13
In the second step of our empirical analysis, we address the concern that the estimates of
 1 and  2 , and the extent to which these di§er across the country groups, might be ináuenced
by interactions of the product market reform with other factors, besides the country-speciÖc
patent protection regime. Similar as Sakakibara and Branstetter (2001) and Branstetter
et al. (2006), we investigate whether the response of innovation to the product market
reform varies across industries. We distinguish between industries where, in general and for
exogenous technological reasons, innovators tend to rely strongly on patenting and, thus,
should value strong patent protection highly, and other industries. In line with our main
theoretical prediction, innovation in the former group of industries in countries with strong
patent rights should respond more positively to a competition-increasing reform than in
the other group of industries. We refer to these industries as industries with higher patent
relevance. To identify them, we use the proxy Ii; ps which indicates for each industry i the
level of the patent intensity in the corresponding US industry in the pre-sample period 1980
to 1986.
We consider the following estimation equation:
median
>median
yict =  11 Rict  G(Pc;strong
) +  12 Rict  G(Pc;strong
)
ps ; Ii; ps
ps ; Ii; ps

(8)

median
>median
+  21 Rict  G(Pc;weak
) +  22 Rict  G(Pc;weak
)
ps ; Ii; ps
ps ; Ii; ps

+ Xict + Gic + ct +  it + uict ;
where we estimate the innovation response to the product market reform separately for four
>median
country-industry groups. The dummy variable G(Pc;strong
) indicates the group of
ps ; Ii; ps

industries with high patent relevance in countries with strong patent rights. This group
13

Our empirical Öndings are robust to identifying the e§ects from several alternative sources of data
variation. We can, for example, vary the set of Öxed e§ects (see Section 5). In addition, we Önd stable
results when using alternative measures of the product market reform and of patent rights, and when using
an instrumental variable approach.

11

covers the industries where innovators rely more on patenting, and where therefore patent
protection should be more relevant, compared to the industry with median patent relevance.
median
The dummy variable G(Pc;strong
) indicates the complementing group in countries
ps ; Ii; ps

with strong patent rights, covering the industries with low patent relevance in these countries.
For countries with weaker patent rights we proceed analogously, constructing the indicators
median
>median
G(Pc;weak
) and G(Pc;weak
). To control for Öxed country-industry group
ps ; Ii; ps
ps ; Ii; ps

e§ects we include the vector of the group indicators, Gic .14
The coe¢cients of main interest in equation (8) are  11 and  12 . If stronger patent rights
are to enhance the positive e§ect of a competition-increasing product market reform on innovation, and the more so in industries where patent protection is more relevant, then the
estimate of  11 should be positive and larger than that of  12 . In addition, the coe¢cient
estimates for countries with strong patent rights,  11 and  12 , should be larger than the corresponding estimates for countries with weaker patent rights,  21 and  22 , and the di§erence
 11   12 should be larger than  21   22 .
In the Önal part of our empirical analysis, we extend our model speciÖcation to allow
for interactions of the product market reform with country- and industry-speciÖc Önancial
factors, as well as with the initial knowledge stock of country-industries.

4

Data

For our main sample we use panel data for 13 industries in 17 European countries between
1987 and 2003.15 The majority of countries, 11 out of the 17 countries for which we have
the relevant data, were EU member states in 1992 and participated in the European Single
Market Program, as shown in Table 1.16 The other six European countries include Finland
and Sweden that joined the EU in 1995. Among the 13 industries are nine two-digit industries
14

The results for the model speciÖcation in equation (8) are provided in Section 5.2, along with the results
for a speciÖcation where we allow the reform e§ect to vary more áexibly along the distribution of Ii; ps .
15
In this section, we brieáy introduce our data sources and main variables. Descriptive statistics are
provided in Appendix Table A-1.
16
For the twelfth EU member state in 1992, Luxembourg, data on R&D expenditures are missing.

12

and four more aggregate industries, all in manufacturing (see Table 2).17 In section 5.3, we
also use alternative samples which include the United States (US) or service industries.
Innovation
Our main measure of innovation is R&D intensity, deÖned as nominal R&D expenditures
over nominal value added. To construct this variable, we use country-industry-year level data
on research and development expenditures for the business enterprise sector from the 2011version of the OECD ANBERD database and data on value added from the 2008-version
of the EU KLEMS database (see also Appendix B.1). The second measure of innovation
is real R&D expenditures, that is R&D expenditures at year 2000 prices converted to US
dollars using purchasing power parity rates. The third measure is a count of patents taken
out per country-industry-year in the US Patent and Trademark O¢ce. The patent count
data that we use are part of the EU KLEMS 2008 database and these are constructed from
the NBER patent database with patents granted by the US Patent and Trademark O¢ce
(see also Appendix B.2 and Hall, Ja§e and Trajtenberg, 2001). Using data on US patents is
advantageous in our context as low-value inventions are less likely to be patented abroad.
To capture the initial innovation potential of country-industries, we use a continuous
measure of a patent-based knowledge stock built up until 1986, the end of the pre-sample
period.
Patent rights
To capture the strength of patent rights we separate between countries with strong patent
rights and those with weaker patent rights, based on information on patent law reforms and
related regulation (see also Appendix B.3). One group of countries in our dataset had strong
patent protection regimes already during the pre-sample period until 1986 and maintained
strong regimes throughout the whole sample period, 1987 to 2003. The group covers seven
out of the 11 countries in our sample that implemented the SMP, namely Belgium, Denmark,
France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, and the United Kingdom, and outside the area of the
17

We grouped up to four two-digit industries together if the underlying raw data required us to do so.
Industries are classiÖed according to the European NACE classiÖcation (version 1993, revision 1).

13

SMP it covers Sweden (plus the United States). All other sampled countries form the group
of countries with weaker patent protection regimes. This group includes four SMP countries,
namely Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain, as well as Öve non-SMP countries, namely the
Czech and Slovak Republics, Finland, Hungary, and Poland.
All European countries in our group with strong patent rights, except for Denmark,
were among those states that set up the European Patent Organisation (EPOrg) in October
1977.18 The countries in our group with weaker patent rights joined the EPOrg between
October 1986 and March 2004 (EPOrg, 2012) and none of these countries completed the
required reforms for a strong patent protection regime before 1992 (Branstetter et al. 2006,
Qian 2007, and World Intellectual Property Organization 2012, among others). Our classiÖcation is consistent with those used in Branstetter et al. (2006), Maskus and Penubarti
(1995) and Qian (2007). In addition, we compare our patent protection measure to the index
of patent protection that was developed by Ginarte and Park (1997) and updated by Park
(2008). The index is updated every Öve years between 1960 and 2005, it takes countryspeciÖc values between zero and Öve, with higher values indicating patent laws with stronger
IPR. In 1985, the countries in our group with strong patent rights have an index value of
about 3.5 or more, the average index value being 3.9.19 In 2000, their index values are at
least 4.5. All countries in the group with weaker patent rights have a much lower index value
(below 2.8) in 1985, except for Finland or countries with missing index data for that year.
The average index value for 1985 is 2.5. In 2000 only two countries in that group, Ireland
and Finland, scored above 4.5.
In the second part of our empirical analysis, when estimating the innovation response
to the product market reform separately for four country-industry groups, we use the fol18

The EPOrg is the intergovernmental organization that was created for granting patents in Europe under
the European Patent Convention of 1973; the European Patent O¢ce (EPO) acts as the executive body for
the EPOrg and the Örst patent applications were Öled in 1978. A European patent is a set of essentially
independent patents with national enforcement, national revocation, and central revocation or narrowing as
a group via two alternative uniÖed, post-grant procedures.
19
Columns 3 to 6 in Table 1 indicate the Ginarte-Park index values for the sampled countries in 1985,
1990, 1995 and 2000.

14

lowing industry grouping. First, we single out the industries with high patent relevance
where, in general, innovators tend to rely more on patenting, and where therefore patent
protection should be more relevant, compared to an industry with median patent relevance.
Our preferred proxy for patent relevance, Ii; ps , ranks each industry i according to the patent
intensity in the corresponding US industry in the pre-sample period, 1980 to 1986.20 Second,
we form the complementing industry group with low patent relevance. In a more áexible
model speciÖcation, we consider three industry groups, respectively with low, medium and
high patent relevance. Column 3 of Table 2 provides for each sampled industry information
on the patent intensity in the corresponding US industry in 1983, and column 4 summarizes
the ranking with three industry groups based on the US patent intensity data for the whole
pre-sample period.
Product market reform
The product market reform that we focus on was part of the SMP implemented in 1992,
a time with signiÖcant variation in patent protection across European Countries. Designed
by the European Commission and therefore at a supra-national level, the SMP aimed at
bringing down barriers to the free movement of products and production factors within the
EU in order to foster competition, innovation and economic growth. Main components of the
SMP include changes to national legislation meant to harmonize technical product standards
within the EU; to simplify the physical movements of goods, labor, and other production
factors across borders; and to reduce public sector discrimination in favor of national Örms,
for example due to mandatory international tendering for high-value procurement. Several
empirical studies support the view that product market competition has increased in response
to the SMP reform (Badinger 2007, Bottasso and Sembenelli 2001 and Gri¢th et al. 2010,
among others).
The SMP was o¢cially implemented in all sampled countries that had joined the EU
before 1992. For these SMP countries, the European Commission report by Buigues, Ilzkovitz
20

Using data on U.S. industries is advantageous here as the U.S. is the technology leader in most industries
and it is not included in our main sample. See Appendix B.3 for details.

15

and Lebrun (1990) provides a common list of 40 three-digit manufacturing industries that
were ex ante expected to be a§ected by the product market reform. Additions to and
removals from the common list are also reported for each sampled country. These additions
and removals reáect recommendations of experts, who were asked whether they expected
the reform to change the product market conditions in an individual industry in a speciÖc
country di§erently than in the corresponding average industry in SMP countries. The reform
measures that can be derived from the information in Buigues et al. (1990) vary across SMP
countries, industries and time; a fact which we exploit to identify the reform impact from
confounding ináuences. Further data variation is available as our main data set covers also
non-SMP countries, not only SMP countries.
To construct our main measure of the product market reform we aggregate the information in Buigues et al. (1990) into a measure which is set equal to zero in all years before the
implementation of the SMP. From 1992 onwards it is equal to the share of the three-digit
classes in a two-digit industry of a SMP country that were ex ante expected to be a§ected
by the SMP.21
In column 4 of Table 2, we show the product market reform intensity in 1992 for all 13
industries in our data set, averaged across the 11 sampled SMP countries. The industries
that were expected to be a§ected least are ëcoke, reÖned petroleum, and nuclear fuelí, ëbasic
metalsí, and ëfood, beverages, and tobaccoí. Those that were expected to be a§ected most
are ëmotor vehicles, trailers, and semi-trailersí, ëelectrical and optical equipmentí, ëchemicals including pharmaceuticalsí, and ëgeneral and special purpose machinery n.e.c., engines,
turbines & domestic appliances n.e.c., machine tools, weaponsí.
Financial variables
The Önancial variables which we use in section 5.3 are explained in that section and in
Appendix B.5.
21

Note that the industry ranking based on our main SMP measure corresponds to the ranking based on
the SMP measure of Gri¢th et al. (2010) for all industries in our data set, up to two deviations. Gri¢th
et al. (2010) constructed their SMP measure di§erently than we do due to di§erent data availability. See
Appendix B.4 for details.

16

5

Empirical results

5.1

Baseline results

We start by separately estimating the average e§ect of the competition-increasing product
market reform which is part of the European Single Market Program and the average e§ect
of patent protection on innovation. This prepares the ground for analyzing e§ects of the
interaction between the two factors on innovation. We report OLS estimation results in Table 3 for the main sample, an unbalanced panel of 2,761 observations for 13 manufacturing
industries in 17 European countries between 1987 and 2003. All model speciÖcations include
country, industry and year indicators to capture country, industry and year e§ects. Standard errors are robust and clustered on the country-industry level to allow for unrestricted
correlation between annual observations within the same country-industry.
Our Örst Önding is that of a positive average e§ect of the product market reform intensity
on R&D intensity in column 1 of Table 3.22 The coe¢cient estimate indicates that enhancing
the reform intensity by one standard deviation (0.3076) increases R&D intensity by 0.0108
(=0.0352*0.3076).23 This represents about 23 percent of the mean value of R&D intensity
(0.0464), a reasonable e§ect size. Such an average e§ect estimate is consistent with the
theoretical prediction of an escape competition e§ect, as discussed in Section 2. In addition,
it Öts with the empirical results of Gri¢th et al. (2010).24
Our second Önding is that there does not seem to be any positive (or negative) signiÖcant
average e§ect of patent protection on R&D intensity. In column 2, we show the coe¢cient
estimate on a time-varying indicator which equals one in case of strong patent rights, and zero
otherwise. The estimate is small, positive and not signiÖcantly di§erent from zero.25 This
is consistent with previous empirical evidence, in particular by Sakakibara and Branstetter
22

See Section 4 for the deÖnitions of the variables.
See Appendix Table A-1 for descriptive statistics on the reform intensity.
24
Gri¢th et al. (2010) use data on a similar set of industries in a di§erent set of countries (Belgium,
Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Netherlands, United Kingdom and the United States) and a di§erent,
although related, measure of the SMP product market reform.
25
Using the time-varying patent protection index provided by Ginarte and Park (1997) and Park (2008)
yields a very similar coe¢cient estimate. The result is available upon request.
23

17

(2001) for the manufacturing sector in Japan or by Qian (2007) for the pharmaceutical
industry in OECD countries.
These two Öndings are robust to including both terms on the right hand side of the
estimation equation, the linear term for the competition-increasing product market reform
and the linear term for patent protection (see column 3).

5.2

Main results

Our main interest in this paper is the response of innovation to the interplay between the
strength of patent rights and the competition-enhancing product market reform. As shown
in Figure 1, our raw data directly hints at heterogeneity in the response to the reform,
depending on patent protection. The left-hand graph refers to countries with strong patent
rights since the pre-sample period, the right-hand graph refers to countries with weaker
patent rights. The vertical axes indicate R&D intensity, the horizontal axes indicate the
SMP reform intensity. Circles represent the country-industry-year data points between the
Öfth and the ninety-Öfth percentile of the R&D intensity distribution in the sample. The
regression line for countries with strong patent rights has a more positive slope than the
corresponding line for countries with weaker patent rights.26 Overall, the raw data pattern
is consistent with the view that innovation responds more strongly to the competitionenhancing reform if patent rights are stronger.
Next, we estimate equation (7) of Section 3. The estimation results in Table 4 indicate
a positive e§ect of the product market reform intensity on R&D intensity for countries with
strong patent rights. For countries with weaker patent rights we Önd no such e§ect. These
Öndings are stable across the following four variants of the empirical model: a) the model
variant in column 1 of Table 4, where we control for country, industry, and year Öxed e§ects;
b) the one with the interaction term Product market reforms (Rcit ) G(Protection (P )strong
)
c
and the level term Rcit in which the coe¢cient on the former indicates how the reform e§ect
26

Each of these regression lines indicates the linear predictions from a country group-speciÖc linear regression of R&D intensity on the product market reform intensity as the sole explanatory variable.

18

for the country group with strong patent rights deviates from the reform e§ect for the group
with weaker patent rights (column 2); c) the one with time-varying country e§ects and timevarying industry e§ects (column 3); d) and, Önally, the model variant with the knowledge
stock in country-industries in 1986 as explanatory variable (column 4).
Our Öndings are also robust to several changes in the way we measure our main explanatory variables. We can, for example, replace our pre-sample measure of patent protection
by the Ginarte-Park index (Protection GP
ct ). Column 5 of Table 4 provides the respective
OLS estimates and column 6 the second stage estimates of a 2SLS regression. We implement an instrumental variable approach as the contemporaneous Ginarte-Park index may
reáect regulatory changes that are endogenous to innovation during our sample period. As
excluded instrument, we use the interaction of the country-speciÖc pre-sample indicator of
strong patent rights and the product market reform intensity.27 The second stage estimates
on the two product market reform terms indicate that the reform e§ect on R&D intensity
increases with the strength of patent rights and is positive for index values above 3.7. About
65% of all sample observations in 1992 have higher index values than 3.7 and in later years
the percentage is even higher.28
All our estimation results in Table 4 suggest a complementarity between the competitionenhancing product market reform and the strength of patent rights, in line with our theoretical prediction in Section 2. A potential concern with these results is that the coe¢cient
estimates on the product market reform terms for countries with strong patent rights, and
their deviation from those for countries with weaker patent rights, could be driven by reform
interactions with factors other than the country-speciÖc patent protection regime.
To address this concern, we investigate how the positive e§ect of the product market
reform on R&D intensity which is speciÖc to countries with strong patent rights varies
27

The coe¢cient estimate (s.e.) on the excluded instrument in the Örst stage equation is 0.7336***
(0.1254). The test statistic for the F-test on the irrelevance of the excluded instrument takes a value of
34.24 and we reject the null hypothesis.
28
The weak identiÖcation test result at the bottom of column 6 indicates that the null hypothesis of the
2SLS bias exceeding 10 percent of the OLS bias can be rejected (see also Stock and Yogo, 2005).

19

across industries. As argued in Section 3, we expect the interaction between the reform
intensity and the strength of patent rights to be stronger in industries where innovators
rely more on patenting and where, therefore, patent protection should be valued more than
in other industries. We refer to these industries as industries with higher patent relevance
and proxy patent relevance in industry i with the patent intensity in the corresponding US
industry during the pre-sample period 1980 to 1986.29
Column 1 of Table 5 provides the estimation results for the model speciÖcation of equation
(8), allowing for di§erent innovation responses to the competition-increasing product market
reform in four country-industry groups. The Örst group covers the industries with above me>median
dian patent relevance in countries with strong patent rights, denoted by G(Pc;strong
)
ps ; Ii; ps

and the second group covers the industries with lower patent relevance in these countries, inmedian
dicated by G(Pc;strong
). For countries with weaker patent rights, two corresponding
ps ; Ii; ps

groups are considered. We Önd positive e§ects of the competition-increasing product market
reform on R&D intensity in both industry groups for countries with strong patent rights.
More importantly, we Önd a higher reform e§ect for industries with above median patent
relevance than in the complementing group of industries.30 For countries with weaker patent
rights, we Önd small and non-signiÖcant reform e§ect estimates that do not di§er between
the two industry groups.31 Replacing these two terms with the level term of the product
market reform measure Rcit in column 2, we Önd consistent evidence.32
In column 3, we consider a model speciÖcation which allows for di§erential reform effects on R&D intensity across three industry groups in countries with strong patent rights,
respectively with high, medium and low patent relevance. For countries with weaker patent
29

Recall our discussion in Sections 3 and 4 and see the Data Appendix.
The F-test statistic for the test of the null hypothesis "N0 :  11   12 = 0" is 4.02 (p-value: 0.0462). In
addition, we Önd that the e§ect estimates for countries with strong patent rights di§ered signiÖcantly more
than those for countries with weaker patent rights. The corresponding F-test statistic for the test of the null
hypothesis "N0 : ( 11   12 )  ( 21   22 ) = 0" is 3.10 (p-value: 0.0796).
31
The F-test statistic for the null hypothesis "N0 :  21   22 = 0" is 0.22 (p-value: 0.6402).
32
The reform e§ect estimates for both industry groups in countries with strong patent rights are signiÖcantly higher than the estimate of the coe¢cient on the Rcit -term which reáects the reform e§ect for
countries with weaker patent rights. The latter estimate deviates most from the estimate for the industry
group with patent relevance above the median in countries with strong patent rights.
30

20

rights, we estimate the average e§ect of the product market reform.33 We Önd further support for complementarity between the competition-increasing product market reform and
the strength of patent rights: R&D intensity responds more strongly to the product market
reform in country-industries where patent rights are strong and where patent relevance takes
medium or high values, rather than low values.
More precisely, we observe for countries with strong patent rights that the response is
stronger in industries with an intermediate level of patent relevance than in those with high or
low levels.34 That the complementarity between the competition-increasing product market
reform and the strength of patent rights weakens in our group of industries with highest
patent relevance values is in line with our theoretical argument if this group covers industries
where the scope for entry deterrence through patenting is large enough. In such industries
the marginal deterrence parameter  in Section 2 takes high values, indicating that entry
can be (partly) deterred through patent thickets, dense webs of overlapping patent rights
caused by strategic patenting and technological conditions.35 Support for the view that our
industries with high patent relevance are industries where patent thickets are most likely to
be prevalent and that, therefore, -values are likely to be high follows, for example, from
the work of von Graevenitz, Wagner and Harho§ (2011a, 2011b). All the technologies for
which their measure of patent thicket density takes high values can be linked to our group of
industries with highest patent relevance values: audiovisual technology, telecommunications,
semiconductors, information technology, optics, electrical machinery and electrical energy,
33
The average e§ect estimate in column 3 turns out to be small and insigniÖcant. In column 4, allowing for
e§ect variation across three industry groups in countries with weaker patent rights leads to small, insigniÖcant
e§ect estimates for all three groups, and these are not signiÖcantly di§erent from each other.
34
F-test results indicate that the reform e§ect estimates for the industry groups with intermediate and
low patent relevance di§er signiÖcantly (p-value: 0.0102), but those for the groups with high and low patent
relevance fail to di§er at the 10%-signiÖcance level (p-value: 0.1272). Further support for the non-linear
pattern follows from the extensions to the main empirical analysis in section 5.3 (see column 3 in Table 6,
columns 2 and 4 in Table 7, and panel B in Table A-2).
35
Empirical evidence on the e§ect of patent thickets on Örm entry is scarce. Hall, Helmers, von Graevenitz
and Rosazza-Bondibene (2012), however, show that the density of a patent thicket in a technology area is
associated with reduced entry into patenting in that technology area, using data on patenting Örm entities
with at least one patent application at the IPO in the UK or at the EPO during the years 2001to 2009.

21

engines, pumps and turbines.36
Overall, the above results provide compelling evidence of a complementarity between the
strength of patent rights and the competition-enhancing product market reform. First, we
Önd a positive average reform e§ect on R&D intensity in industries of countries with strong
patent rights, not in industries of countries with weak patent rights. Second, we observe
that the complementarity is more pronounced in industries where innovators rely more on
patenting than in other industries, and where the scope for deterring entry through patenting
is not too large.

5.3

Extensions

In addition to R&D intensity, we also explain alternative measures of innovation. First, we
consider real R&D expenditures in order to show that our previous Öndings do not simply
reáect value added responding to product market reforms (Table 6, columns 1, 2 and 3).37
Second, we use a patent count (Table 6, columns 4, 5 and 6).38 We Önd a positive e§ect of
the competition-increasing product market reform on real R&D expenditures, as well as on
the number of patents, in countries with strong patent rights since the pre-sample period
(Table 6, columns 1 and 4). These results are in line with the Öndings for the R&D intensity
models in Table 4. In addition, the positive innovation response to the product market
reform in countries with strong patent rights is more pronounced in industries with medium
or high rather than low patent relevance (Table 6, columns 2, 3, 5 and 6). In the model with
real R&D expenditures in column 3 of Table 5 we Önd a similarly non-monotonic pattern of
36

Von Graevenitz et al. (2011a, 2011b) measure the density of a patent thicket with a count of blocking
relationships identiÖed from patent citations, speciÖcally X and Y references in search reports of the European
Patent O¢ce. Type X or Y references refer to prior art documents, which call the novelty or the inventive
step of a patent claim into question. A blocking relationship is deÖned as a set of patent links where three
Örms mutually block each other according to X or Y references, called a triple. The technologies that we
list in the main text represent all those with high mean triple values, i.e. values between 18.53 and 93.68 in
Table 1 of von Graevenitz et al. (2011a). See also Hall (2005).
37
The results for the real R&D expenditures model are robust to including a control for real value added,
that is, value added at constant prices in 2000 in US dollar purchasing power parities.
38
The patent count model is estimated on a smaller sample with a shorter time horizon, namely the period
for which patent data are available to us (1987 to 1999). We estimate a linear probability model where
including country-year Öxed e§ects and industry-year Öxed e§ects is straightforward (Wooldridge, 2010).

22

reform e§ect estimates as for the R&D intensity models of columns 3 and 4 of Table 4.
A lingering concern with our estimation results so far, is that these might be driven by
a di§erent mechanism causing similar heterogeneity in reform e§ects across countries, as
well as across industries. In particular, if Örms need to borrow to Önance their innovative
investments, a competition-enhancing product market reform may increase innovation more
in countries with more developed Önancial sectors than in other countries. And the impact
of Önancial sector development should be disproportionately larger in industries where Örms
typically rely more on external Önance than in other industries.
To address this concern, we add further covariates to our set of explanatory variables,
namely interaction terms of the product market reform intensity with the relevant Önancial
variables. To measure Önancial sector development at the country-level, we use a private
credit ratio from the November 2010 version of the Financial Development and Structure
Database by Beck, Demirg¸c-Kunt and Levine (2000, 2010b). The ratio is deÖned as the
claims of deposit money banks and other Önancial institutions on the private sector, relative
to gross domestic product (GDP).39 It is available for all sampled countries, excluding the
Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic, for at least four pre-sample years between 1980 and
1986. To construct the required pre-sample indicator of high Önancial sector development
we proceed as follows: we average all pre-sample ratio values per country and classify the
countries with averages at or above the 75 percentile of the sample distribution as having
a highly developed Önancial sector. These countries are France, Germany, the Netherlands
and Sweden.40 To distinguish between industries according to their reliance on external
Önance, we follow Rajan and Zingales (1998) and use industry-level data on the share of
capital expenditures Örms cannot Önance internally: the ratio of Örmsí capital expenditures
minus cash áow from operations, divided by capital expenditures. Rajan and Zingales (1998)
provide those data for US industries during the 1980s. We link the industries in our sample
39

See Appendix B for further details.
We also construct an alternative measure involving the median as a cut-o§ point and a measure based
on stock market capitalization relative to GDP. Reestimating the model of column 1 in Table 7 with these
alternative measures, we Önd support for the main results reported below.
40

23

to the corresponding US industries and distinguish three industry groups: the group with low
reliance on external Önance covers the industries with ratios below the 25th percentile of the
sample distribution, the group with high reliance on external Önance covers the industries
with ratios above the 75th percentile, and the remaining industries form the intermediate
group.
Column 1 of Table 7 provides the estimates for a model speciÖcation which adds the following interaction term to the speciÖcation of column 4 in Table 4: the interaction between
the product market reform intensity and the indicator for countries with highly developed
Önancial sectors, Rcit  G(F inancial development (F D)high
c; ps ). In line with our previous Öndings, the response of R&D intensity to the competition-increasing product market reform is
stronger in countries with strong patent rights than in countries with weaker patent rights.
Moreover, the coe¢cient estimate on the reform term speciÖc to countries with high Önancial
sector development is positive and statistically signiÖcant.
Column 2 of Table 7 provides the estimates for the model speciÖcation which adds three
interaction terms to the speciÖcation of column 4 in Table 5: the interaction between the
product market reform intensity and the indicator for industries with high reliance on external Önance in countries with highly developed Önancial sectors, Rcit  G(F Di;high
ps ; External
high
medium
f inance (E)high
)
i; ps ); and the two complementing interactions, namely Rcit G(F Di; ps ; Ei; ps
low
and Rcit G(F Di;high
ps ; Ei; ps ). Again, our main Öndings hold up: in countries with strong patent

rights, R&D intensity responds more strongly to the competition-enhancing product market
reform in industries with medium or high patent relevance than in industries with low patent
relevance and the response is most pronounced in industries with medium patent relevance.41
In addition, we Önd that high Önancial sector development enhances the innovation response
to the product market reform more the stronger an industryís Örms rely on external Önance.
The innovation response to the competition-enhancing product market reform may also
41

The coe¢cient estimate on the reform term for industries with intermediate patent relevance is largest
and statistically signiÖcant. Second comes the one for industries with high patent relevance and third the
one for industries with low patent relevance, but both these estimates fails to pass the 10%-signiÖcance level.

24

depend upon initial conditions of country-industries. To capture this, we proceed as follows. We interact the product market reform intensity with an indicator for those countryindustries that are at or above the median of the sample distribution of our knowledge
stock measure.42 We then add the new interaction term, denoted by Rcit  G(Knowledge
high
stockci;
1986 ), to the model speciÖcation of column 4 in Table 4. The respective coe¢cient

estimate turns out to be positive, but remains insigniÖcant with a p-value of 0.1717 (Table
7, column 3). Most importantly, allowing for the additional interaction does not challenge
our main Önding of R&D intensity responding more strongly to the reform in countries with
strong patent rights. In column 4 of Table 7 we augment the model speciÖcation of colhigh
umn 4 in Table 5 with the same interaction term, Rcit  G(Knowledge stockci;
1986 ). The

empirical results then conÖrm that the innovation response to the competition-increasing
product market reform is strongest in the country-industry group with strong patent rights
and intermediate patent relevance.
Finally, we modify the data variation that we use for identifying the product market
reform e§ects on innovation. Our main identiÖcation strategy involves using data variation
within 11 countries that fell under the SMP product market reform, as well as variation
between these SMP countries and six other countries. If we reduce the variation by using
data for the 11 SMP countries only, our main results turn out to be stable (see Table A-2 in
the Appendix, column 1, panels A and B). When extending the sample by adding the US, a
large non-European country with high innovative potential, we also Önd support for our main
results (Table A-2, column 2). Our empirical Öndings remain robust as well if we reestimate
on a much larger sample with 8 service industries, in addition to the 13 manufacturing
industries in our main sample (Table A-2, column 3).43 Finally, the main Öndings are also
stable when reestimating on the 47 samples that result if we exclude individual industries,
countries or years one by one.
42
43

Note that the estimation results are similar if we use the 75th percentile as cut-o§ point.
Note that our product market reform measure is always equal to zero in service industries.

25

6

Conclusions

In this paper, we contributed empirical evidence suggesting that strong patent rights can
complement competition-increasing product market reforms in inducing innovation. Our
main Öndings are as follows. First, the product market reform that was part of the European
Single Market Program in 1992 enhances innovation in industries that are located in countries
where patent rights are strong, but not in industries of countries where patent rights are weak.
Second, the positive innovation response to the product market reform is more pronounced
in industries in which innovators rely more on patenting than in other industries, and in
which the scope for deterring entry through patenting is not too large.
These empirical Öndings are in line with the predictions of growth models with step-bystep innovation in which product market competition encourages Örms to innovate in order
to escape competition. In such a model, patent protection and product market competition
can act as complementary engines of innovation, rather than as counteracting forces. The
complementarity arises as product market competition typically lowers the pre-innovation
rent, possibly also the post-innovation rent, but may enlarge the net innovation rent, and
the more so the stronger patent rights protect the post-innovation rent.
Our analysis has implications for the long-standing policy debate on the need for and
the design of patent systems. Complementarity of patent protection with competition in
product markets, as well as with competition-enhancing product market interventions, need
to be taken into account when assessing the e§ects of patent policies. More generally, our
work provides support for the importance of interaction e§ects between di§erent types of
institutions and policies in the growth process.

26

References
Acemoglu, D., 2009, Introduction to Modern Economic Growth, Princeton University
Press, Princeton, New Jersey.
Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, and F. Zilibotti, 2006, “Distance to Frontier, Selection and
Economic Growth,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 4, 37–74.
Acemoglu, D., and U. Akcigit, 2012, “Intellectual Property Rights, Competition and
Innovation,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 10, 1–42.
Aghion, P., N. Bloom, R. Blundell, R. Griffith, and P. Howitt, 2005, “Competition and
Innovation: An Inverted U Relationship,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120, 701–
728.
Aghion, P., R. Blundell, R. Griffith, P. Howitt, and S. Prantl, 2009, “The E↵ects of Entry
on Incumbent Innovation and Productivity,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 91,
20–32.
Aghion, P., R. Burgess, S. J. Redding, and F. Zilibotti, 2008, “The Unequal E↵ects
of Liberalization: Evidence from Dismantling the License Raj in India,” American
Economic Review, 98, 1397–1412.
Aghion, P., C. Harris, P. Howitt, and J. Vickers, 2001, “Competition, Imitation and
Growth with Step-by-Step Innovation,” Review of Economic Studies, 68, 467–492.
Aghion, P., and P. Howitt, 1992, “A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction,”
Econometrica, 60, 323–351.
Aghion, P., and P. Howitt, 2009, The Economics of Growth, MIT Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts.
Aghion, P., P. Howitt, and S. Prantl, 2013, “Revisiting the Relationship Between Competition, Patenting, and Innovation,” in: Acemoglu, D., M. Arellano, and E. Dekel (eds.),
Advances in Economics and Econometrics , chap. 15, 451–455, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Badinger, H., 2007, “Has the EU’s Single Market Programme Fostered Competition?
Testing for a Decrease in Mark-up Ratios in EU Industries,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 69, 497–519.
Beck, T., A. Demirgüc-Kunt, and R. Levine, 2000, “A New Database on Financial Development and Structure,” World Bank Economic Review, 14, 597–605.
Beck, T., A. Demirgüc-Kunt, and R. Levine, 2010a, “Financial Development
and Structure Database (November 2010 version),” http://econ.worldbank.
org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/0,,contentMDK:20696167~pagePK:
64214825~piPK:64214943~theSitePK:469382,00.html.
Beck, T., A. Demirgüc-Kunt, and R. Levine, 2010b, “Financial Institutions and Markets
across Countries and over Time: The Updated Financial Development and Structure
Database,” World Bank Economic Review, 24, 77–92.
27

Boldrin, M., and D. K. Levine, 2008, Against Intellectual Monopoly, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Bottasso, A., and A. Sembenelli, 2001, “Market Power, Productivity and the EU Single
Market Program: Evidence from a Panel of Italian Firms,” European Economic Review,
45, 167–186.
Branstetter, L. G., R. Fisman, and C. F. Foley, 2006, “Do Stronger Intellectual Property Rights Increase International Technology Transfer? Empirical Evidence from U.S.
Firm-Level Panel Data,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 321–349.
Buigues, P., F. Ilzkovitz, and J.-F. Lebrun, 1990, European Economy: Social Europe,
The Impact of the Internal Market by Industrial Sector: The Challenge of the Member
States, European Communities, Special Edition.
EU KLEMS, 2008, “EU KLEMS Growth and Productivity Accounts (2008 version),”
http://www.euklems.net/index.html; last access: December 22nd, 2012.
European Patent Organisation, 2010, “List of Contracting States (version of August 18th,
2010),” http://www.epo.org/about-us/organisation/member-states/date.html;
last access: October 2nd, 2012.
Gilbert, R., 2006, “Looking for Mr. Schumpeter: Where Are We in the CompetitionInnovation Debate?,” in: Ja↵e, Adam B., J. L., and S. Stern (eds.), Innovation Policy
and the Economy, vol. 1, , chap. 4, 159–215, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Ginarte, J. C., and W. G. Park, 1997, “Determinants of Patent Rights: A Cross-National
Study,” Research Policy, 26, 283–301.
Griffith, R., R. Harrison, and H. Simpson, 2010, “Product Market Reform and Innovation
in the EU,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 112, 389–415.
Hall, B. H., 2005, “Exploring the Patent Explosion,” Journal of Technology Transfer, 30,
35–48.
Hall, B. H., C. Helmers, G. von Graevenitz, and C. Rosazza-Bondibene, 2012, “A Study
of Patent Thickets,” Project Report, IPO UK.
Hall, B. H., A. B. Ja↵e, and M. Trajtenberg, 2001, “The NBER Patent Citations Data
File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools,” NBER Working Paper 8498.
Lerner, J., 2000, “150 Years of Patent Protection,” NBER Working Paper 7478.
Lerner, J., 2002, “Patent Protection and Innovation over 150 Years,” NBER Working
Paper 8977.
Lerner, J., 2009, “The Empirical Impact of Intellectual Property Rights on Innovation:
Puzzles and Clues,” American Economic Review (Papers & Proceedings), 99, 343–348.

28

Maskus, K. E., 2000, Intellectual Property Rights in the Global Economy, Insitute for
International Economics, Washington, DC.
Maskus, K. E., and M. Penubarti, 1995, “How Trade-Related are Intellectual Property
Rights?,” Journal of International Economics, 39, 227–248.
Moser, P., 2005, “How Do Patent Laws Influence Innovation? Evidence from NineteenthCentury World’s Fairs,” American Economic Review, 35, 1214–1236.
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), 2002, “NBER Patent Data Project (2002
version),” http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~bhhall/patents.html; last access: December 22nd, 2012.
O’Mahony, M., C. Castaldi, B. Los, E. Bartelsman, Y. Maimaiti, and F. Peng, 2008,
“EUKLEMS - Linked Data: Sources and Methods,” mimeo, University of Birmingham.
O’Mahony, M., and M. P. Timmer, 2009, “Output, Input and Productivity Measures at
the Industry Level: The EU KLEMS Database,” Economic Journal, 119, F374–F403.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 2011, “OECD ANalytical Business Enterprise Research and Development database (ANBERD) (August
2011 edition),” www.oecd.org/sti/anberd; last access: December 22nd, 2012.
Park, W. G., 2008, “International Patent Protection: 1960-2005,” Research Policy, 37,
761–766.
Qian, Y., 2007, “Do National Patent Laws Stimulate Domestic Innovation in a Global
Patenting Environment?,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 89, 436–453.
Rajan, R. G., and L. Zingales, 1998, “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American
Economic Review, 88, 559–586.
Romer, P. M., 1990, “Endogenous Technical Change,” Journal of Political Economy, 98,
S71–S102.
Sakakibara, M., and L. G. Branstetter, 2001, “Do Stronger Patents Induce More Innovation? Evidence from the 1988 Japanese Patent Law Reforms,” RAND Journal of
Economics, 32, 77–100.
Schmutzler, A., 2010, “Is Competition Good for Innovation? A Simple Approach to An
Unresolved Question,” Foundations and Trends in Microeconomics, 5, 355–428.
Schmutzler, A., 2012, “Competition and Investment - A Unified Approach,” mimeo, University of Zurich.
Scotchmer, S., 2004, Innovation and Incentives, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Stock, J. H., and M. Yogo, 2005, “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regressions,” in: Andrews, D. W. K., and J. H. Stock (eds.), Identification and Inference for
Econometric Models , 80–108, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
29

Tirole, J., 1988, The Theory of Industrial Organization, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Vives, X., 2008, “Innovation and Competitive Pressure,” Journal of Industrial Economics,
56, 419–469.
von Graevenitz, G., S. Wagner, and D. Harho↵, 2011a, “How to Measure Patent Thickets
- A Novel Approach,” Economics Letters, 11, 6–9.
von Graevenitz, G., S. Wagner, and D. Harho↵, 2011b, “Incidence and Growth of Patent
Thickets - The Impact of Technological Opportunities and Complexity,” SFB/TR 15
Discussion Paper No. 356, forthcoming: Journal of Industrial Economics.
Wooldridge, J. M., 2010, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data, MIT
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
World Intellectual Property Organization, 2012, “WIPO Lex,” http://www.wipo.int/
wipolex/en/; last access: October 3rd, 2012.

30

Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Patent rights, product market reforms and innovation
- A first look at the raw data -

Weak patent protection

0

0

.05

.05

R&D intensity
.1

R&D intensity
.1

.15

.15

.2

.2

Strong patent protection

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
Product market reform intensity

1

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
Product market reform intensity

1

Notes: In this figure we show the relation between product market reforms and innovation in countries with strong
patent protection during the pre-sample period (left graph) and in countries with weaker patent protection (right
graph). The horizontal axes refer to our measure of product market reform intensity, the vertical axes to R&D
intensity and the circles indicate all country-industry-year data points between the fifth and the ninety-fifth
percentile of the R&D intensity distribution in our raw data for the sample period 1987 to 2003. The lines
represent linear predictions of R&D intensity from country group-specific linear regressions of R&D intensity on
product market reform intensity as the sole explanatory variable.

31

Table 1: Patent protection per country
Adoption
of strong patent
protection

Patent protection index
1985
1990
1995
2000

EU member states with SMP reform in 1992
Belgium (BEL)

early

4.0917

4.3417

4.5417

4.6667

Denmark (DNK)

early

3.6333

3.8833

4.5417

4.6667

France (FRA)

early

3.7583

3.8833

4.5417

4.6667

Germany (GER)

early

3.8417

3.9667

4.1667

4.5000

Greece (GRC)

late

2.3250

2.8667

3.4667

3.9667

Ireland (IRL)

late

2.2000

2.3250

4.1417

4.6667

Italy (ITA)

early

3.6833

4.0083

4.3333

4.6667

Netherlands (NLD)

early

3.7667

4.2167

4.5417

4.6667

Portugal (PRT)

late

1.6657

1.6657

3.3490

4.0050

Spain (ESP)

late

2.8080

3.5583

4.2083

4.3333

United Kingdom (UK)

early

3.8833

4.3417

4.5417

4.5417

Finland (FIN)

late

3.3083

3.3083

4.4167

4.5417

Sweden (SWE)

early

3.4833

3.8833

4.4167

4.5417

Czech Republic (CZE)

late

n.a.

n.a.

2.9583

3.2083

Hungary (HUN)

late

n.a.

n.a.

4.0417

4.0417

Poland (POL)

late

n.a.

n.a.

3.4583

3.9167

Slovak Republic (SVK)

late

n.a.

n.a.

2.9583

2.7583

4.6750

4.6750

4.8750

4.8750

European countries outside EU until 1995

European countries outside EU until 2003

Non-European countries (not in main estimation sample)
United States (US)

early

Notes: In column 2 we indicate whether a sampled country adopted strong patent protection early
or late in time, distinguishing between countries that fell under the product market reforms of the
EU Single Market Program (SMP) and those that didn’t. Countries with strong patent rights in
the pre-sample period and throughout the sample period are classified as early adopters. Countries
with weaker patent rights are late adopters, completing their reforms relevant to a strong patent
protection regime in 1992, or even later. For comparison, columns 3 to 6 provide information on
the patent protection index by Park (2008) and Ginarte and Park (1997); it takes values between
zero and five and higher values indicate stronger patent protection. The term ‘n.a.’ indicates a
missing index value.

32

Table 2: Patent relevance and product market reform per industry

US patent intensity
Industry

share

rank (group)

15-16:

food, beverages, and tobacco

0.0040

1 (low)

17-19:

textiles, leather, and footwear

0.0053

2 (low)

23:

coke, refined petroleum, and nuclear fuel

0.0276

6 (medium)

24:

chemicals including pharmaceuticals

0.0672

10 (medium)

25:

rubber and plastics

0.0604

9 (medium)

26:

other non-metallic mineral products

0.0287

7 (medium)

27:

basic metals

0.0117

3 (low)

28:

fabricated metal products

0.0533

8 (medium)

0.0904

11 (high)

29:

Product market
reform
share
(s.e.)
0.3075
(0.1201)
0.5727
(0.1281)
0.0000
(0.0000)
0.7227
(0.1311)
0.4675
(0.1292)
0.5455
(0.1623)
0.0749
(0.1536)
0.3409
(0.1776)
0.7409
(0.1020)

general & special purpose machinery n.e.c.,
engines, turbines & domestic appliances n.e.c.,
machine tools, weapons
30-33: electrical and optical equipment incl.
computing machinery, radio, television
and (tele)communication equipment
34:
motor vehicles, trailers, and semi-trailers

0.0948

12 (high)

0.7112
(0.0489)

0.0182

5 (medium)

35:

other transport equipment

0.0150

4 (medium)

36-37:

furniture, jewelery, games & toys, musical
instruments, sports goods, recycling

0.1238

13 (high)

0.6970
(0.1798)
0.4659
(0.1590)
0.4545
(0.0934)

Notes: In column 3 of this table we provide the industry-specific US patent intensity in 1983, and in column 4 the
industry-specific patent relevance ranking based on the US patent intensity data for the pre-sample period, 1980
to 1986. In column 5 we show the product market reform intensity in 1992 in the sampled 13 two-digit industries,
averaged across the 11 countries that fell under the product market reform of the SMP (see Table 1). The measure
is defined as the share of three-digit classes per two-digit industries of SMP-countries that were ex ante expected to
be a↵ected by the reform. The measure is set to zero in all years before the implementation of the reform, from 1992
onwards it takes a positive value in country-industries that were ex ante expected to be a↵ected, otherwise zero.
Country-industries with higher values were expected to be a↵ected more than others.

33

Table 3: Basic models explaining R&D intensity
Dependent variable: R&D intensitycit
OLS
OLS
OLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
Explanatory Variables:
Product market reformscit

0.0352***
(0.0099)
0.0003
(0.0062)

0.0356***
(0.0099)
0.0027
(0.0061)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

2,761

2,761

2,761

Patent protectionct
Country e↵ects
Industry e↵ects
Year e↵ects
Observations

Notes: In this table we provide OLS estimates of basic models explaining R&D intensity
in our main sample, an unbalanced panel of 2,761 observations on 13 manufacturing
industries in 17 European countries between 1987 and 2003.
R&D intensitycit is defined as R&D expenditures over value added. The product market
reform intensity, Product market reformscit , equals zero in all years before the implementation of the SMP, from 1992 onwards it takes positive values up to 1 with higher values
for country-industries that were ex ante expected to be a↵ected more by the SMP than
others. The measure Patent protectionct is coded one as soon as a country completed its
reforms preparing the ground for a strong patent protection regime, and zero otherwise.
Standard errors in parentheses are robust and clustered to allow for unrestricted correlation between annual observations within country-industries. Statistical significance at
the 1% level is indicated by ***.

34

Table 4: Main models explaining R&D intensity: Part 1

OLS
(1)

Dependent variable: R&D intensitycit
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

IV
(6)

Explanatory Variables:
Product market reforms (R)cit
*G(Protection (P)strong
c, pre sample (ps) )
weak
Rcit *G(Pc, ps )

0.0525***
(0.0115)
0.0074
(0.0125)

Rcit

0.0451***
(0.0132)

0.0870***
(0.0229)

0.0885***
(0.0241)

0.0074
(0.0125)

-0.0060
(0.0219)

-0.0065
(0.0220)

-0.1466**
(0.0676)
0.0482***
(0.0162)

-0.4467***
(0.1437)
0.1206***
(0.0344)

-0.0008
(0.0037)

0.0008
(0.0037)

-0.0002
(0.0033)

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Rcit *ProtectionGP
ct
Knowledge stockci,1986
Country-year e↵ects
Industry-year e↵ects
Country e↵ects
Industry e↵ects
Year e↵ects

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
No
No

Weak identification test:
Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F
Statistic
Observations

34,236 [1]
2,761

2,761

2,761

2,761

2,761

2,761

Notes: In this table we provide OLS and IV estimates of R&D intensity models for our main sample, an unbalanced panel of 2,761 observations on 13 manufacturing industries in 17 European countries between 1987 and
2003.
R&D intensitycit is defined as R&D expenditures over value added. The product market reform measure Rcit
equals zero in all years before the implementation of the SMP, from 1992 onwards it takes positive values up to 1
with higher values for country-industries that were ex ante expected to be a↵ected more by the SMP than others.
Country groups are indicated by G(·). The group G(Pc,strong
pre sample (ps) ) covers the countries where patent protection P is strong in the pre-sample period and throughout the sample period. The group G(Pc,weak
pre sample (ps) )
covers the countries with weaker patent protection.
The measure ProtectionGP
ct is the patent protection index of Ginarte and Park (1997) and Park (2008). In column
5, we exclude the instrument Rcit *G(Pstrong
c, ps ). The number of first stage equations is given in brackets at the
bottom of column 5.
The variable Knowledge stockci,1986 is the patent-based knowledge stock per country-industry in 1986.
Standard errors in parentheses are robust and clustered to allow for unrestricted correlation between annual
observations within country-industries. Statistical significance at the 1% and 5% level is indicated by *** and **.

35

Table 5: Main models explaining R&D intensity: Part 2
Dependent variable: R&D intensitycit
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Explanatory Variables:
Product market reforms (R)cit
> med.
*G(Protection (P)strong
)
c, ps , Patent relevance (I)i, ps
strong  median
Rcit *G(Pc, ps , Ii, pre sample(ps) )
> median
Rcit *G(Pweak
)
c, ps , Ii, ps
 median
Rcit *G(Pweak
)
c, ps , Ii, ps

0.1163***
(0.0274)
0.0591**
(0.0228)
-0.0028
(0.0220)
-0.0140
(0.0265)

0.1205***
(0.0267)
0.0682***
(0.0250)

high
Rcit *G(Pstrong
c, ps , Ii, ps )

0.0643**
(0.0295)
0.0853***
(0.0257)
0.0184
(0.0237)

medium
Rcit *G(Pstrong
)
c, ps , Ii, ps
low
Rcit *G(Pstrong
c, ps , Ii, ps )
high
Rcit *G(Pweak
c, ps , Ii, ps )
medium
Rcit *G(Pweak
)
c, ps , Ii, ps
low
Rcit *G(Pweak
c, ps , Ii, ps )

Rcit
Knowledge stockci,1986

0.0628*
(0.0343)
0.0730***
(0.0262)
0.0087
(0.0232)
0.0076
(0.0301)
-0.0167
(0.0225)
-0.0102
(0.0227)

-0.0022
(0.0037)

-0.0060
(0.0208)
-0.0022
(0.0038)

-0.0094
(0.0211)
-0.0025
(0.0040)

-0.0026
(0.0040)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

2,761

2,761

2,761

2,761

Controls for G(*)ci -groups
Country-year e↵ects
Industry-year e↵ects
Observations

Notes: In this table we provide OLS estimates of R&D intensity models for our main sample, also used
in Table 4.
Country-industry groups are indicated by G(·). We divide the country-group with strong pre-sample
patent protection, as well as the one with weaker protection, into industry-specific sub-groups based on
the patent relevance in industry i, Patent relevance (I)i,ps . Measure Ii,ps reflects for each industry i the
level of the patent intensity in the corresponding US industry in the pre-sample period, 1980 to 1986.
The group with above median patent relevance covers the six industries that constitute in all pre-sample
years the industries with the six highest patent intensities, and the other group complements. The group
with high patent relevance covers the three sampled industries that constitute in all pre-sample years
the industries with the three highest patent intensities. The group with low patent relevance covers the
three industries that score lowest, and the remaining seven industries form the intermediate group.
All other variables are defined as in Table 4. Standard errors in parentheses are robust and clustered
to allow for unrestricted correlation between annual observations within country-industries. Statistical
significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level is indicated by ***, ** and *.

36

Table 6: Models explaining alternative outcome variables

Dependent variables:
Real R&D expenditurescit
Patent countcit
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

OLS
(6)

Explanatory Variables:
Product market reforms (R)cit
*G(Protection (P)strong
c, pre sample (ps) )

0.9503**
(0.4061)

Rcit *G(Pstrong
c, ps ,
med.
Patent relevance (I)i, ps
)
strong < median
Rcit *G(Pc, ps , Ii, ps
)

0.0592*
(0.0320)
1.4065***
(0.4411)
1.0305**

0.1245***
(0.0473)
0.0032

(0.4902)

(0.0208)

high
Rcit *G(Pstrong
c,ps , Ii,ps )

0.7271*
(0.3905)
1.4546***
(0.5137)
0.2265
(0.2551)

medium
Rcit *G(Pstrong
)
c, ps , Ii,ps
low
Rcit *G(Pstrong
c, ps , Ii,ps )

Rcit
Knowledge stockci,1986
Controls for G(*)ci -groups
Country-year e↵ects
Industry-year e↵ects
Observation period
Observations

0.0886
(0.0552)
0.0637*
(0.0336)
-0.0044
(0.0190)

-0.1711
(0.3002)
0.6337***
(0.1370)

-0.2725
(0.3033)
0.6587***
(0.1423)

-0.1901
(0.3038)
0.6761***
(0.1405)

0.0048
(0.0245)
0.2711***
(0.0155)

0.0086
(0.0245)
0.2671***
(0.0163)

0.0021
(0.0245)
0.2703***
(0.0158)

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

87-03
2,761

87-03
2,761

87-03
2,761

87-99
2,031

87-99
2,031

87-99
2,031

Notes: In this table we provide OLS estimates of models explaining real R&D expenditures for our main sample,
also used in Table 4. The OLS estimates of models explaining patent counts are for the sub-sample with all
2,031 observations for the years 1987 to 1999.
The variable Real R&D expenditurescit is defined as R&D expenditures at constant prices in 2000 converted to
US dollars using purchasing power parity rates (in billion). The measure Patent countcit is a fractional count
of patents taken out per country-industry-year in the US Patent Office.
All other variables are defined as in Tables 4 and 5. Standard errors in parentheses are robust and clustered to
allow for unrestricted correlation between annual observations within country-industries. Statistical significance
at the 1%, 5% and 10% level is indicated by ***, ** and *.

37

Table 7: Models accounting for alternative explanations
Dependent variables: R&D intensitycit
OLS
OLS
OLS
OLS
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Explanatory Variables:
Product market reforms (R)cit
*G(Financial development (FD)high
c, ps )

0.0729**
(0.0368)

high
Rcit *G(FDhigh
c, ps , External finance (E)i, ps )

0.0652**
(0.0384)
0.0569
(0.0433)
0.0551
(0.0424)

medium
Rcit *G(FDhigh
)
c, ps , Ei, ps
low
Rcit *G(FDhigh
c, ps , Ei, ps )

Rcit *G(Knowledge stockhigh
ci, 1986 )
Rcit *G(Protection (P)strong
c, pre sample (ps) )

0.0339
(0.0247)
0.0589**
(0.0249)

high
Rcit *G(Pstrong
c,ps , Patent relevance (I)i,ps )

low
Rcit *G(Pstrong
c, ps , Ii,ps )

Rcit
Knowledge stock control as in Table 5
Controls for G(*)ci -groups
Country-year e↵ects
Industry-year e↵ects
Observations

0.0667**
(0.0292)
0.0437
(0.0318)
0.0607**
(0.0298)
0.0199
(0.0251)

medium
Rcit *G(Pstrong
)
c, ps , Ii,ps

0.0252
(0.0260)

0.0482
(0.0306)
0.0675**
(0.0326)
0.0161
(0.0279)

-0.0110
(0.0261)

-0.0116
(0.0242)

-0.0185
(0.4183)

-0.0185
(0.0228)

Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
No
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

2,592

2,592

2,761

2,761

Note: In columns 1 and 2 we provide OLS estimates of R&D intensity models with financial
interaction terms for the sub-sample where all observations with missing values of the private credit
measure are eliminated from the main sample, as used in Table 4. Country-industry groups are
indicated by G(·). The variable Financial Development(FD)high
c, ps is coded one for countries where
the private credit measure takes values at or above the 75 percentile of the sample distribution,
otherwise zero. We divide the country-group with high financial development into industry-specific
sub-groups according to our measure of reliance on external finance, External finance (E)high
i, ps : the
group with low (high) reliance covers the industries below the 25th percentile (at or above the 75th
percentile) of the sample distribution of the reliance measure, and the group with medium reliance
covers the remaining industries. Reliance on external finance in industry i is defined as reliance
in the corresponding US industry during the 1980s, provided by Rajan and Zingales (1998).
In columns 3 and 4 we provide OLS estimates of R&D intensity models with knowledge stock
interaction terms for the main sample. The country-industry group G(Knowledge stockhigh
ci,1986 )
consists of the country-industries where the knowledge stock control, defined as in Table 4, takes
values at or above the median of the sample distribution, otherwise zero.
All other variables are defined as in Tables 4 and 5. Standard errors in parentheses are robust
and clustered to allow for unrestricted correlation between annual observations within countryindustries. Statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level is indicated by ***, ** and *.

38

Appendix A: Additional Tables
Table A-1: Definitions of variables and descriptive statistics
Variable

Definition

Mean/
share

Standard
deviation

R&D intensitycit

nominal R&D expenditures divided by nominal
value added in industry i in country c and year y
R & D expenditures at constant prices in 2000 converted to
US dollars using purchasing power parity rates (in billion)
fractional count of patents taken out in 1000
in US Patent Office

0.0464

0.0734

0.4443

1.1583

0.1036

0.3012

share of 3-digit classes in industry i that are ex ante
expected to be a↵ected by the SMP reforms from 1992
onwards; 0: otherwise

0.3027

0.3076

patent protection index (Park, 2008, Ginarte & Park,
1997) taking values 0 to 5 & higher values in country-years ct with patent laws providing stronger IPR
1: country c with strong patent rights since
the pre-sample period, 1980 to 1986 0: otherwise
1: country c with weaker patent protection in the
pre-sample period and later on, 0: otherwise

3.9029

0.7067

Real R&D expenditurescit
Patent countcit
Product market reformscit

Ginarte/P ark

Protectionct

Protectionstrong
c, pre sample (ps)
Protectionweak
c, ps

0.5389
0.4611

Patent intensity U S, i, 1983

number of patents divided by nominal value added
in million US dollar in US-industry i in year 1983

0.0463

0.0367

Knowledge stockci, 1986

knowledge stock in country-industry ci in 1986
(perpetual inventory method, depreciation rate: 20 %)
average claims of deposit money banks & other financial
institutions on the private sector relative to GDP
in 1980-1986 (Beck et al., 2010b)
1: country c with private credit ratio in pre-sample
period at or above 75 percentile of the sample
distribution, 0: otherwise
share of capital expenditures that firms
in US-industry i during the 1980s can’t finance
through internal cash flow (Rajan and Zingales, 1998)
average value of listed shares relative to GDP in
1989-1990 (Beck et al., 2010b)

0.3684

1.0725

0.6279

0.1938

Ratio of private creditc, ps

Financial developmentc, ps

Ratio of external
finance U S, i, ps
Ratio of stock market
capitalizationc, 89/90

0.3111

0.3049

0.2490

0.3182

0.2612

Notes: This table provides non-weighted descriptive statistics for our main sample, an unbalanced panel of
2,761 observations on 13 manufacturing industries in 17 European countries between 1987 and 2003.

39

Table A-2: Identification using alternative sources of data variation

Dependent variable: R&D intensitycit
Sample including...
...SMP-countries ...the United States ...service industries
only
Panel A

OLS
(1)

OLS
(2)

OLS
(3)

0.0775***
(0.0244)
-0.0109
(0.0312)

0.0859***
(0.0233)
-0.0180
(0.0228)

0.0864***
(0.0149)
0.0029
(0.0132)

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Observations

2,025

2,982

4,030

Panel B

OLS
(4)

OLS
(5)

OLS
(6)

0.0755**
(0.0305)
0.0811***
(0.0263)
0.0190
(0.0261)
-0.0182
(0.0323)

0.0653**
(0.0263)
0.0718***
(0.0242)
0.0378
(0.0262)
-0.0181
(0.0212)

0.0381
(0.0259)
0.0668***
(0.0207)
0.0038
(0.0149)
0.0054
(0.0125)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
n.a.
Yes
Yes

2,025

2,982

4,030

Explanatory Variables:
Product market reforms (R)cit
*G(Protection (P)strong
c, pre sample (ps) )
Rcit
Knowledge stock control as in Table 4
Country-year e↵ects
Industry-year e↵ects

Explanatory Variables:
high
Rcit *G(Pstrong
c, ps , Patent relevance (I)i, ps )
medium
Rcit *G(Pstrong
)
c, ps , Ii, ps
low
Rcit *G(Pstrong
c, ps , Ii, ps )

Rcit
Controls for the G(*)ci -groups
Knowledge stock control as in Table 4
Country-year e↵ects
Industry-year e↵ects
Observations

Notes: The R&D-intensity model estimates in column 1 is for the sub-sample, resulting after eliminating
all non-SMP countries from the main sample, as used in Table 4. The estimates in column 2 are for
the extended sample covering the main sample plus the data for the US. For the estimates in column
3 we add data for all 8 available service industries to the main sample; note that patent data is not
available for service industries and, thus, we estimate models without the patent-based controls for the
initial innovative potential of country-industries.
All variables are defined as in Tables 4 and 5. Standard errors in parentheses are robust and clustered
to allow for unrestricted correlation between annual observations within country-industries. Statistical
significance at the 1% and 5% level is indicated by *** and **.

40

Appendix B: Data sources and variables
B.1 Research and development expenditures
Our main measure of innovation is R&D intensity, that is nominal R&D expenditures as a
percentage of nominal value added. For calculating that measure we use country-industryyear level data on research and development expenditures from the OECD ANBERD
database (edition 2011, www.oecd.org/sti/anberd)1 and data on value added from the
EU KLEMS database (2008 version, http://www.euklems.net/index.html).2 We also
consider real R&D at constant prices of the year 2000 converted to United States (US)
dollars using purchasing power parity rates.3
B.2 Patenting
The country-industry-year-specific patent counts which we use were constructed by the
EU KLEMS consortium. They aggregated the NBER patent data (2002 version, http:
//elsa.berkeley.edu/~bhhall/patents.html) on patents granted by the US Patent
and Trademark Office per year at the country-industry level, including data for patents
applied for up to the year 1999 (O’Mahony, Castaldi, Los, Bartelsmann, Mainaiti and
Peng, 2008; Hall et al., 2001). Patents are assigned to years according to the application
date recorded in the patent document and to countries according to the country of the
first inventor. For our main empirical analysis we use the fractional patent count where
each patent is counted in all n OTAF classes it is assigned to with a weight of 1/n. The
patents are assigned to up to 7 OTAF classes and all classes (41 OTAF classes, plus one
“other industries” class) are mapped into EU KLEMS industry classes (see O’Mahony et
al., 2008, for further details).4
To construct the knowledge stock built up during the pre-sample period in each countryindustry we use pre-sample patent information, the perpetual inventory method, and an
annual knowledge depreciation rate of 20 percent. The knowledge stock is defined as the
sum of the fractional patent counts, refer to the pre-sample period, are depreciated to the
last year of the pre-sample period and divided by 1000.5
1

For Denmark and Sweden we add in the data from ANBERD 2009. These countries have been
missing in ANBERD 2011 until we completed the empirical analysis that we provide here.
2
The EU KLEMS Growth and Productivity Accounts provide country-industry level panel data based
on data from national statistical offices and designed to ensure international comparability. The EU
KLEMS project was a joint initiative of several academic institutions and national economic policy
research institutes, supported from various statistical offices and the OECD, and funded by the European
Commission (O’Mahony and Timmer, 2009).
3
To calculate the required series of value added at year 2000 prices converted to US dollars, we draw
nominal value added and the related price index, re-based from 1995 to 2000, from EU KLEMS 2008
and convert to US dollars using the economy-wide purchasing power parity rates as provided along with
ANBERD 2011.
4
Our main empirical findings are robust to using total patent counts where each patent is counted
with full weight in each class it is assigned to.
5
Our main empirical findings are robust to using alternative depreciation rates; we also tested 10
percent and 30 percent.

41

B.3 Patent Rights
To measure the strength of patent rights, that is intellectual property rights (IPR) as laid
down in patent laws,6 we prefer to distinguish between countries with strong and weak
patent rights using information on patent law reforms and related regulation.7 The following countries had strong patent protection regimes before 1987 and maintained strong
regimes throughout the whole sample period: Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy,
Netherlands, Sweden, and the United Kingdom (plus the United States). The countries
with weaker patent protection regimes completed the major patent law reform preparing
the ground for a strong patent protection regime in 1992, or even later: Czech Republic,
Finland, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Poland, Portugal, Spain, and the Slovak Republic.
All European countries that we classified as having strong patent rights, except for Denmark, have been among the initital contracting states of the European Patent Organisation (EPOrg) since October 1977. The EPOrg is the intergovernmental organization
that was created in 1977 by its contracting states to grant patents in Europe under the
European Patent Convention of 1973; the European Patent Office (EPO) acts as the executive body for the Organization. All the countries classified as having weaker patent
rights joined the EPOrg between October 1986 and March 2004 (EPOrg, 2012) and none of
these countries completed the reforms preparing the ground for a strong patent protection
regime before 1992 (Branstetter et al., 2006, Qian, 2007, WIPO, 2012). Our classification
is fully consistent with the groupings in Branstetter et al., 2006 or Qian, 2007. It also
fits with the patent right index constructed by Maskus and Penubarti (1995): The patent
laws of all the countries that we classify as countries with strong patent rights were fully
conforming with the minimum standards of the US Chamber of Commerce Intellectual
Property Task Force in 1984 (Maskus and Penubarti, 1995); the patent laws of all other
countries did not fulfill it in 1984 or were planned economies not covered by Maskus and
Penubarti (1995).
For robustness checks, we also use the index of patent protection that was developed by
Ginarte and Park (1997) and updated by Park (2008). Park (2008) provides the index
data for 110 countries, updating it quinquennially between 1960 and 2005. The index
takes values between zero and five and higher values indicate patent laws with stronger
IPR. The index coding scheme aggregates information on 1) membership in international
patent agreements (Paris Convention 1883, International Convention for the Protection
of New Varieties of Plants 1961, Patent Cooperation Treaty 1970, Budapest Treaty 1977,
Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) 1994), 2)
provisions for loss of protection (working requirements, compulsory licensing, revocation of
patents), 3) enforcement mechanisms (preliminary injunctions, contributory infringement
pleadings, burden of proof reversal), 4) duration of protection and 5) extent of coverage (pharmaceuticals, chemicals, food, surgical products, microorganisms, utility models,
software, plant and animal varieties). Relevant in the context of our study is the updated
6

The strength of patent rights and the strength of other forms of IPR, in particular copyrights and
trademarks, tend to be strongly correlated.
7
See, in particular, Branstetter, Fisman and Foley, 2006, Lerner, 2000, Maskus, 2000, Maskus and
Penubarti, 1995, Qian, 2007, and World Intellectual Property Organization, 2012.

42

coding scheme described in Appendix A of Park (2008); Ginarte and Park (1997) give
details on the original coding scheme.
We classify industries according to the extent to which innovators rely on patenting and,
thus, should respond to the strength of patent rights, forming industry groups with di↵erent levels of patent relevance. To do so, we first calculate the nominal patent intensity for
US industries in all pre-sample years 1980 to 1986, dividing the fractional patent counts
by nominal value added in million US dollars.8 Then, we form industry groups, exploiting
the fact that the ranking of US industries based on the calculated patent intensity is very
persistent across the pre-sample years: the group with high patent relevance covers the
three sampled industries that constitute in all years the industries with the three highest
patent intensities; the group with low patent relevance covers the three industries that
score lowest, and the remaining seven industries form the intermediate group. Alternatively, we form two groups. One group consists of the six industries that constitute in
all years the industries with the six highest patent intensities and are, thus, above the
median, and the other group complements.
B.4 Product market reform
The product market reform that we focus on constitutes a substantial part of the largescale European Single Market Program. With the SMP, as designed by the European
Commission and, thus, at a supra-national level, the EU aimed at bringing down barriers
to the free movement of products and production factors within the EU in order to foster
competition, innovation and economic growth. Recent empirical evidence supports the
view that product market competition increased in response to the SMP product market
reform.9 The SMP was officially implemented in 1992 in all sampled countries that had
joined the EU before 1992: Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy,
Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, United Kingdom.
For these SMP countries, the European Commission report by Buigues et al. (1990) provides a common list of 40 three-digit manufacturing industries that were ex ante expected
to be a↵ected di↵erently by the SMP. Additions to and removals from the common list
are also reported for each sampled country. These additions and removals reflect recommendations of experts, who were asked whether they expected the reform to change the
product market conditions in an individual industry in a specific country di↵erently than
in the corresponding average industry in SMP countries. The reform measures that can
be derived from the information in Buigues et al. (1990) vary across countries, industries
and time; a fact which we exploit to identify the reform impact from confounding influences. As our main data set covers non-SMP countries as well, we can also use further
data variation across countries.10
To construct our main measure of the product market reform we aggregate the information
8

Using data on US industries is advantageous here as the US is the worldwide leading innovator in
most industries and it is not included in our main sample.
9
See, for example, Bottasso and Sembenelli (2001), Badinger (2007), or Griffith et al. (2010).
10
In section 5.3, we show the estimation results for the sample of SMP countries only.

43

in Buigues et al. (1990) as follows:
Rict =

(

1
ni

P

j2i

Ajct if t 1992
P
0 if t < 1992 or j2i Ajct = 0

The measure is set to zero in all years before the implementation of the SMP, from 1992
onwards it is equal to the share of three-digit classes j per two-digit industry i of SMPcountry c that were ex ante expected to be a↵ected by the SMP. The dummy variable
A is coded one from 1992 onwards if a three-digit industry j in a country c was ex ante
expected to be a↵ected. The number of three-digit industries per two-digit industry is
denoted by ni .
Using our measure of the SMP product market reform, we can rank all industries in our
data set. The resulting rank order corresponds to the rank order of Griffith et al. (2010),
except for two deviations. Griffith et al. (2010) constructed a related, but di↵erent
product market reform measure. In their data set the industry ‘furniture, jewelery, games
& toys, environmental technology, recycling’ is missing; in ours the industry ‘pulp, paper,
printing & publishing’ is missing. They used the information in Buigues et al. (1990) for
the common list of a↵ected industries, the removals from that list, the industry groups
as used by the report, and the data on employment shares for weighting purposes. We,
instead, also use the information on additions to the common list, but neither the industry
grouping nor the employment shares for the following reasons: Greece and Portugal, for
example, had many additions and these countries are included in our data set; Buigues
et al. (1990) provide neither the industry grouping nor the employment shares for the
industries that are added to the common list.
To address concerns regarding our main product market reform measure, we also consider
alternative measures. First, we replace the reform intensity measure with an indicator
which equals one for all values of the product market reform intensity above the median
of the sample distribution in SMP-a↵ected country-industries, and else zero. Then, the
estimation results turn out to be consistent with those in columns 4 of Tables 4 and 5.
Second, while we prefer to use the main SMP implementation year (1992) as switching
point from zero to positive reform intensity values,11 we also construct an indicator that
takes values above zero already from 1988 onwards. This adds as SMP years the years
where first information on expected SMP e↵ects became available and where some initial implementation steps were undertaken.12 When using that alternative measure, the
estimation results are again in line with those in columns 4 of Tables 4 and 5.

11
The empirical findings of Badinger (2007), among others, provide support for this decision and Griffith
et al. (2010) also chose that approach.
12
Bottasso and Sembenelli (2001) and Aghion et al. (2009) took that approach.

44

B.5 Financial variables
For the financial variables which we use in section 5.3 of the paper we use data from the
November 2010 version of the Financial Development and Structure Database by Beck et
al. (2000, 2010b) and from Rajan and Zingales (1998).13
First, we classify countries according to the level of their financial sector development
using data on the channeling of savings to investors by financial intermediaries relative
to the size of the economy. Our preferred measure from the Financial Development and
Structure Database is the following private credit ratio: claims of deposit money banks
and other financial institutions on the private sector, relative to gross domestic product
(GDP). The ratio is available for all sampled countries, except the Czech Republic and the
Slovak Republic, for at least four pre-sample years between 1980 and 1986. We average
all pre-sample entries per country and classify the countries with averages at or above
the 75 percentile of the sample distribution as having a highly developed financial sector.
These countries are France, Germany, the Netherlands and Sweden.
Our alternative measure of high financial sector development is based on stock market
capitalization, that is the value of listed shares, relative to GDP. As data on this stock
market measure is hardly available before 1989, we average across the years 1989 and
1990.14 The countries with averages at or above the 75 percentile of the sample distribution are classified as those with high financial sector development, namely Belgium,
Netherlands, Sweden and the United Kingdom.
Second, we separate between industries that di↵er in their reliance on external finance.
To that aim we use industry-level data on the share of capital expenditures that firms
cannot finance internally: the ratio of firms’ capital expenditures minus cash flow from
operations, divided by capital expenditures. Rajan and Zingales (1998) provide that
data for US industries during the 1980s. We link the industries in our sample to the
corresponding US industries and then distinguish three industry groups. The group with
low reliance on external finance covers the industries with ratios below the 25th percentile
of the sample distribution, the group with high reliance on external finance covers the
industries with ratios at or above the 75th percentile, and the remaining industries form
the medium group.

Appendix C: Construction of main estimation sample
Our main estimation sample is an unbalanced panel of 13 industries in 17 countries between 1987 and 2003. We apply the following standard data cleaning routines. We drop
country-industry-year observations with missing values of variables that are relevant to
our regression analysis. In addition, we eliminate a few observations with negative R&D
expenditures or unreasonably small, positive R&D expenditures (below 1500 Euro) and all
13
See
http://econ.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/0,,contentMDK:
20696167~pagePK:64214825~piPK:64214943~theSitePK:469382,00.html.
14
Even for these years, missing data prevents us from calculating the measure of stock market capitalization for the Czech Republic, Hungary, Ireland, Poland, and the Slovak Republic.

45

observations with absolute R&D expenditure growth of more than 200 percent. Finally,
we eliminate all country-industries where we observe less than five consecutive years.15
Due to restrictions regarding patent data availability, our patent sample is limited to
the observation period between 1987 and 1999. When setting up the patent sample, we
eliminate all country-industries of the 13 industries in the 17 countries where we observe
less than five consecutive years within this time period.16

15
In case of country-industries with two separate series with at least five observations, we select the
earlier one.
16
Cases with two separate series of sufficient length do not arise.

46

