NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW DO HOSPITALS RESPOND TO NEGATIVE FINANCIAL SHOCKS? THE
IMPACT OF THE 2008 STOCK MARKET CRASH
David Dranove
Craig Garthwaite
Christopher Ody
Working Paper 18853
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18853

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2013

The authors would like to thank Jen Brown and Jon Skinner for valuable comments and guidance as
well as Katie Johnson from the National Research Corporation and Laura Johnson from the Kaiser
Family Foundation for providing useful data. Stephanie Holmes and Matt Schmitt provided valuable
research assistance. All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by David Dranove, Craig Garthwaite, and Christopher Ody. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How do Hospitals Respond to Negative Financial Shocks? The Impact of the 2008 Stock Market
Crash
David Dranove, Craig Garthwaite, and Christopher Ody
NBER Working Paper No. 18853
February 2013
JEL No. I1,I11,I18,L0,L21
ABSTRACT
The theory of cost-shifting posits that nonprofit hospitals respond to negative financial shocks by raising
prices for privately insured patients. We examine how hospitals responded to the sharp reductions
in their endowments caused by the 2008 stock market collapse. We find that the average hospital
did not engage in cost-shifting, but average hospitals that likely have substantial market power did
cost-shift. Investigating further how hospitals responded to the financial setback, we found no evidence
of reductions in treatment costs. However, hospitals with large endowment losses delayed purchases
of health information technology and curtailed the offering of unprofitable services.

David Dranove
Department of Management and Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
d-dranove@kellogg.northwestern.edu
Craig Garthwaite
Department of Management and Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
c-garthwaite@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Christopher Ody
Department of Management and Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
c-ody@kellogg.northwestern.edu

1. Introduction
Firms that experience negative lump sum financial shocks may respond in several ways. They
can do nothing, cut expenses, or attempt to raise revenues. Economists usually presume that
profit maximizing firms have fully exploited all opportunities to reduce costs or raise revenues,
so absent a fundamental rethinking of the firm’s strategy, they will have to absorb the negative
shock.1 In the healthcare sector, however, it is often hypothesized that providers respond to
negative financial shocks by raising prices for the privately insured patients, a practice
commonly described as “cost shifting.”
Proponents of the cost-shifting hypothesis point to data showing that providers lose
money treating Medicaid patients and, possibly, Medicare patients, but cover these losses with
high private prices. This cross-sectional pricing data demonstrates that hospitals price
discriminate but does not provide clear evidence of cost-shifting because it does not tell us
whether providers would further increase private prices after experiencing a negative shock—an
action Morrisey (1994) describes as “dynamic” cost shifting. If firms do not engage in dynamic
cost-shifting, it remains an open empirical question how they respond to financial shocks. Any
nonprice responses could have important distributional implications but to date have been largely
unexplored.
The theory of cost-shifting is often invoked in health policy discussions. In the 1970s,
supporters of all-payer state hospital rate setting programs argued that if states slashed Medicaid
payments, hospitals would cost-shift and privately insured patients would bear the burden (Cone
and Dranove, 1986). Nearly forty years later, the theory of cost-shifting again found
considerable traction during the debate over the Affordable Care Act (ACA), where it was
consistently invoked to describe the broad benefits of the proposed reform.2 For example,
President Barack Obama stated that the “average family pays a thousand dollars in extra
premiums to pay for people going to the emergency room who don’t have health insurance. So
you’re already subsidizing other folks; it’s just you’re subsidizing the most expensive care”

1

Borenstein and Farrell (2000) posit that profitable firms may suffer from X-inefficiency and will attempt to remove
slack if profits fall. Profit shocks can also affect capital investments by firms that utilize internal capital markets.
2
A good review of the arguments for the ACA, including the federal government argument about cost-shifting and
the opponents’ response, can be found at http://www.ncsl.org/issues-research/health/us-supreme-court-and-thefederal-health-law.aspx There are literally dozens of blogs and other Internet articles advancing the cost-shifting
rationale for the individual mandate. For example, see http://www.americanprogress.org/wpcontent/uploads/issues/2012/02/pdf/individual_mandate.pdf

1

(Malcolm, 2009).3 The practical implication of this statement is that the privately insured
already bear the financial externality arising from the large number of uninsured Americans, and
therefore they will benefit from policies such as the ACA that are designed to reduce the number
of uninsured patients. This externality-based cost shifting argument also served as support for
the majority opinion of the United States Supreme Court upholding the constitutionality of ACA
(National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius).
Despite the strong presumption of cost-shifting underlying the arguments for a variety of
major health policy initiatives, few convincing studies exist showing that hospitals actually
behave in this manner in the modern healthcare market. Certainly, the oft-cited presence of
static price discrimination provides little evidence that hospitals engage in dynamic cost-shifting.
By analogy, airlines commonly price discriminate between business and leisure travelers, but we
would not conclude that a negative shock resulting from the intensification of competition in the
leisure segment would cause airlines to raise business-class airfares. Indeed, if airlines did raise
business-class fares in response to this shock, we would wonder why they had previously
declined to exert their pricing power. Instead, we expect airlines to respond in other ways,
perhaps by accepting lower profits, reducing quality, or making fewer investments.
We will not push this analogy too far, as the institutional features of hospitals may
generate different behaviors. One particular and important institutional feature is that most
hospitals are non-profit firms that are required to provide a community benefit through activities
such as the provision of charity care or the offering of unprofitable services. With institutional
features such as this in mind, Dranove (1988) develops a theoretical model in which a utilitymaximizing nonprofit organization that experiences a negative lump sum financial shock
engages in dynamic cost-shifting. This theory is best described as “share the gain/share the
pain.” When hospitals have positive financial shocks, they “share the gain” with their patients
by setting prices below profit maximizing levels. When they experience negative shocks, they
“share the pain” by increasing prices to recover some of their losses. However, hospitals lacking
market power are constrained from increasing prices and must bear the burden in another way.
3

Similar logic is even embedded in the text of the ACA legislation, which states, “… the cost of providing
uncompensated care to the uninsured was $43,000,000,000 in 2008. To pay for this cost, health care providers pass
on the cost to private insurers, which pass on the cost to families. This cost-shifting increases family premiums by
on average over $1,000 a year. By significantly reducing the number of the uninsured, the requirement, together
with the other provisions of this Act, will lower health insurance premiums” (PPACA, 42 U.S.C. § 18091(2)(F).)
Justice Roberts echoed this view in the majority opinion upholding the Act.

2

While Dranove (1988) found empirical support for his model, numerous changes in the
healthcare sector over the last thirty years make it difficult to predict if hospitals still behave in
this manner. For example, hospital markets have grown more competitive while many analysts
argue that today’s nonprofits often behave like “for profits in disguise” (Gaynor and Town,
2012; Ballou and Weisbrod, 2003). Both of these factors limit the ability of hospitals to cost
shift following a financial shock. Thus, whether cost-shifting currently exists, as well as the
broader concern of who bears the burden of negative hospital financial shocks in the current
health care market, remain open and important empirical questions.
The lack of evidence on whether today’s hospitals cost-shift is understandable. Testing
for this phenomenon requires identifying large exogenous shocks to a provider’s finances that do
not affect all providers equally and estimating the subsequent changes in private prices. As we
discuss in the next section, such plausibly exogenous shocks have proven difficult to find.
Even those studies that have identified and exploited exogenous variation in finances to
examine price changes have generally ignored other dimensions hospitals could use to adjust to
these shocks. For example, hospitals could decrease operating costs by lowering staffing levels,
decrease investments in their physical infrastructure, or curtail the offering of unprofitable
services. As a result, these previous studies provide at best an incomplete consideration of
hospital behavior and the incidence of financial shocks. These non-price responses are
interesting from a distributional and welfare standpoint. If hospitals change quality or service
offerings the burden of negative shocks falls on all patients rather than only the privately insured.
We address the gaps in the existing cost-shifting literature by exploiting a recent, large,
and plausibly exogenous shock to hospital finances – the stock market collapse of 2008. As a
result of this collapse, some hospital endowments suffered large losses while others remained
relatively unharmed. Nearly all hospitals rely on income from their investments to help defray
operating costs. Thus, the most recent recession created a large and unexpected decrease in
hospitals’ financial well-being that varied substantially across otherwise similar hospitals,
allowing us to empirically identify how hospitals respond to financial shocks.
In order to consider the full range of impacts from hospital financial shocks we examine
several categories of hospital responses. First, we focus on two categories of operational
responses: pricing changes (i.e., dynamic cost-shifting) and service levels changes (e.g.,
staffing). Profit-maximizing firms should not be able to increase profits by engaging in dynamic
3

cost-shifting and, unless they fundamentally change their business strategy, should not be
expected to change their staffing. Among firms that were not previously profit-maximizing,
those without market power will find it difficult to cost-shift or alter their variable inputs.
Therefore it should not be surprising that we find no evidence that the average hospital costshifts or reduces staffing.
Hospitals with market power that were not setting a profit maximizing price prior to the
recession may share the pain of their financial shocks with their customers by raising prices
and/or reducing variable inputs. Accordingly, we find evidence of price increases among a small
subset of high quality hospitals that likely have some degree of market power. Importantly for
policy purposes, these hospitals represent less than 10 percent of all non-profit hospitals and treat
less than 20 percent of patients in the United States.
Given that the average hospital did not dynamically cost-shift following a financial
shock, we next consider whether these firms changed other aspects of their operations.
Specifically, we examine the decision to offer low profit services such as trauma centers or
inpatient psychiatric services. Similar to setting lower prices prior to a shock, non-profit
hospitals may choose to offer unprofitable services during more profitable time periods as a
means of sharing their gains with the community. After the recession, we find that non-profit
hospitals suffering larger financial shocks are more likely to eliminate services that are relatively
unprofitable. Unlike standard dynamic cost shifting, whose incidence is primarily borne by
privately insured patients, the closing of these unprofitable service areas has previously
unexplored distributional consequences for individuals without private insurance.
Finally, we examine changes in investments in electronic medical records, a capital
intensive technology. Profit-maximizing hospitals that rely on internal capital markets to fund
these investments might reduce them following a financial shock. We find evidence of reduced
investments in advanced electronic medical records for hospitals suffering large losses from the
2008 recession. Similar to the closing of unprofitable services, delays in implementing these
technologies could negatively impact the entire patient population.

2. Cost Shifting and other Responses to Financial Shocks
The idea that hospitals would respond to negative financial shocks by increasing private prices
dates back at least 30 years. In 1982, the Hospital Association of America described cost4

shifting as a “hidden tax” paid by insured patients whenever state governments cut Medicaid
payments (Health Insurance Association of America, 1982). Hadley and Feder (1985) view costshifting as a survival response by hospitals trying to offset Medicaid cutbacks. The theory of
cost-shifting has survived many changes in the healthcare system, notably the growth of
managed care, the rise of provider systems, and the spread of for-profit medicine.
The theory of cost-shifting has profound policy implications. Dranove and Cone (1986)
argue that when states threatened to slash Medicaid patients, private insurers agreed to
participate in all-payer state rate setting plans rather than suffer from cost-shifting. In 1992, the
Medicare Prospective Payment Assessment Commission played down the impact of cutbacks in
Medicare payments by noting that hospitals could recoup their losses by cost-shifting (ProPAC,
1992). During the recent debate about the PPACA, several industry groups submitted studies
claiming that half of all Medicaid and Medicare payment shortfalls were borne by private payers
(Frakt, 2011). This theory also served as partial support for the recent Supreme Court decision
upholding the constitutionality of the personal mandate component of PPACA. In the majority
opinion, Justice Roberts wrote that to recoup the losses from uncompensated care, “hospitals
pass on the cost to insurers through higher rates, and insurers, in turn, pass on the cost to policy
holders in the form of higher premiums. Congress estimated that the cost of uncompensated care
raises family health insurance premiums, on average, by over $1,000 per year.” Similarly,
Justice Ginsburg wrote in the minority opinion, “[h]ealth-care providers do not absorb these bad
debts. Instead, they raise their prices, passing along the cost of uncompensated care to those who
do pay reliably: the government and private insurance companies” (National Federation of
Independent Business v. Sebelius).
Dranove (1988) offers a formal model of cost-shifting by nonprofit hospitals that we use
to motivate our analysis.4 In this model, a hospital maximizes some combination of its own
profits and its privately insured patients’ utility. The hospital faces downward sloping demand
from privately insured patients. Thus, when balancing its two objectives, the hospital sets a price
below the profit maximizing level. An exogenous lump sum negative financial shock causes the
hospital to re-optimize by raising prices so as to partially offset its losses. In this model, a
hospital would not distinguish between a financial shock caused by Medicaid cutbacks and a
shock from some other source, such as a stock market collapse. We discuss in section 5.2
4

Clement (1997) and Zwanziger et al. (2000) present similar models.

5

whether there could be practical differences among different types of financial setbacks that
would require refinement of Dranove’s model.
An important takeaway from Dranove’s model is that a hospital observed to cost-shift
must not have been previously maximizing profits; had it been profit-maximizing prior to the
negative shock, then any increase in private prices would have further reduced profits. Put
another way, hospitals will not cost shift unless they have market power and did not fully exploit
this power prior to the negative financial shock. Dranove uses this theory to motivate an
estimate of the magnitude of cost-shifting by Illinois hospitals in the wake of a sharp reduction in
state Medicaid payments, which he treats as a lump sum negative shock. His point estimate
suggests that cost-shifting allowed hospitals to make up about half of their lost Medicaid
revenue.
As modeled by Dranove (1988), cost-shifting hospitals “share the pain” of negative
financial shocks by raising prices to privately insured patients. However, hospitals may also
“share the pain” with their patients in other ways, for example by reducing the quality of care or
portfolio of service offerings. This is a natural extension of Dranove’s model in which nonprofit hospitals, instead of setting a price below the profit maximizing level, offer a level of
quality or service provisions above the profit maximizing level. Following a financial shock,
hospitals may reduce quality, curtail unprofitable services, or reduce charity care. Few studies to
date have investigated whether hospitals pursued these or other strategies.
Morrisey (1994) coins the term “dynamic cost-shifting” to distinguish the causal
relationship between financial shocks and private prices posited by Dranove (1988) from the
simple fact of price discrimination. This is a critical distinction because Medicare and especially
Medicaid have often set prices below the levels paid by private insurers and the gap between
government and private prices has varied over time. Many analysts take such price
discrimination as prima facie evidence of cost-shifting, and most empirical studies of costshifting are little more than cross-sectional studies demonstrating price discrimination.5 This
static pricing pattern can be understood through a simple model of price discrimination in which
a seller faces two groups of customers, one of which has downward sloping demand and the
other has perfectly elastic demand at a preannounced price. Moreover, if marginal cost is
5

See Frakt (2011) for a discussion of this issue. Some studies, such as Gowrisankaran and Town (1997) posit a
mechanism whereby cuts in government payments can indirectly trigger increases in private prices, for example by
leading to consolidation and enhanced market power. This does not fit the classic description of cost-shifting.

6

constant or increasing in a simple price discrimination model, a decrease in the government price
will lead to a decrease in the private price, which is exactly opposite what is predicted by costshifting.6 Thus, it is impossible to infer from the evidence on price-discrimination whether
hospitals will engage in dynamic cost-shifting.
A number of empirical studies examine the dynamic relationship between government
reimbursements and the price for private patients. For example, Zuckerman (1987) provides
evidence that markups by hospitals to private insurers increased between 1980 and 1982, as
Medicare reimbursements were cut. At the individual hospital level, however, the correlation is
not strong. Zwanziger et al. (2000) examine pricing by California hospitals in the wake of
legislation that encouraged price competition in California’s health care system. They find
evidence that price increases to privately insured patients were strongly correlated with
reductions in Medicare payments. Lee et al. (2003) document that revenues from privately
insured and Medicare patients tend to be negatively correlated over time and view this as
conclusive evidence of dynamic cost-shifting. But this correlation can be obtained from a price
discrimination model in which profit maximizing hospitals have increasing marginal costs and
experience shocks to private demand, as well as from a model in which changes in Medicare
prices are accompanied by entry and other rent seeking behavior, so that total profits remain
relatively constant. Without any obvious exogenous shocks to motivate their analysis, these
decidedly non-experimental data are hardly dispositive of the cost-shifting theory.
Since Dranove (1988), there have been a handful of studies that exploit exogenous
financial shocks. Dranove and White (1998) study how hospitals in California responded to
sharp cutbacks in Medicaid payments in the early 1990s, finding hospitals that were highly
dependent on Medicaid revenues did not raise private prices. This was a period of rapid growth
of managed care, however, which confounds any definitive interpretation of their findings.
Other cost-shifting studies examine responses to fluctuations in Medicare payment rates, but
most of these present weak tests of cost shifting because changes in Medicare rates tend to be
small and transient. Wu (2009) examines a large cut to Medicare rates following the Balanced
Budget Act of 1997. As these cuts are correlated with hospital characteristics (such as teaching
status) that could independently affect private prices (because of the managed care backlash, for
example), it is difficult to interpret the results as causal. In his review of this literature, Frakt
6

See Garthwaite (2012) for an example of this model.

7

(2011) concludes: “…as a whole, the evidence does not support the notion that cost shifting is
both large and pervasive. Instead, it reveals that cost shifting can occur but may not always do
so.”
There are several reasons why we wish to revisit the question of cost-shifting. First the
current policy debate about the PPACA demands a fresh look at an issue for which the empirical
evidence is far from overwhelming. This is particularly true given that changes in the American
health care system over time should result in different patterns of responses by health care
providers.7 Second, the theory of cost-shifting suggests that hospital pricing policies depend
critically on their objectives and their market power; both may have substantially changed since
the last wave of studies which focused on hospital pricing in the 1990s. Finally, other than
Dranove (1988) and Wu (2009), the exogenous financial shocks that underlay empirical studies
of cost-shifting have been relatively small. We study a recent, dramatic exogenous financial
shock – the 2008 collapse on Wall Street.8 Many nonprofit hospitals suffered large endowment
losses pursuant to the collapse, while others were relatively unscathed. This provides an
excellent setting for empirically testing the cost-shifting hypothesis.
Hospitals were not the only nonprofit organizations to suffer endowment losses in 2008.
Art museums also suffered large losses and several, including the Art Institute of Chicago, the
Brooklyn Art Museum, and the Philadephia Art Museum raised admission fees; the fee in
Chicago jumped by 50 percent (Kaufman, 2009). Art museums also cut staff and cancelled
costly exhibitions (Henning, 2013). Many universities took big hits to their endowments.
While there is no evidence, anecdotal or otherwise, that universities imposed unusually large
tuition increases, there is considerable evidence of cost cutting. Harvard University, which
suffered a 22 percent endowment decline over a four month period, immediately instituted a
hiring freeze and slowed construction projects (Marks and Wu, 2008). Other universities
postponed construction, curtailed landscaping and cut back on air conditioning (Hand, 2008). In
a more systematic analysis, Brown et al. (2010) found that an endowment shock equal to 10
percent of a university’s budget led to an approximately 3 percent reduction in the number of
7

This point was demonstrated in Cutler (1998) which found different responses by hospitals to Medicare cuts in
1980-1985 and 1990-1995. Cutler attributes this difference to the growing role of managed care in the 1990s.
8
At the mean, the lost profits from the stock market collapse were substantially smaller than the lost profits from the
1997 BBA Medicare cutbacks. The strength of our measure is that there is a great deal of variation in the stock
market losses. Wu doesn't provide information on the distribution of revenue losses from BBA. However, she finds
a strong negative correlation between cuts in a hospital’s Medicare prices and the percent of the hospital’s patients
covered by Medicare. This strongly reduces the variation across hospitals in the Medicare profit shock.

8

tenure-track faculty during the year of the shock following by an approximately 6 percent decline
in the following year. There were also meaningful declines in support employees. These costcutting responses by museums and universities are consistent with the “share the gain/share the
pain” model in which nonprofits respond to financial shocks by reducing quality, where the level
of quality prior to the shock exceeded the profit maximizing level.9
The responses by art museums and universities suggest that if hospitals do not cost-shift,
or do not cost-shift by enough to recover their losses, they may respond to financial shocks in
other ways. Hospitals might consider a quality reduction, for example through a reduction in
staffing. Hospitals may also curtail unprofitable services or charity care. We also consider one
response that is not indicative of the “share the gain/share the pain” hypothesis but does have a
potentially large impact on patient welfare. Hospitals that rely on internal capital markets may
curtail capital investments (Stein, 1997). During the time period that we study, many hospitals
were investing in costly Health Information Technology (HIT) in the form of advanced
electronic medical records (EMR). We will test whether hospitals experiencing large stock
market price shocks reduced investments in HIT.

3. Data
3.1 Data Sources and Key Variables
We draw our data from a variety of sources, including Medicare Cost Reports, CMS impact files,
the American Hospital Association Annual Survey, the Healthcare Information and Management
Systems Society (HIMSS) dataset and some additional sources. We compute our main
predictors and dependent variables at the hospital/year level. We supplement these data with a
variety of market level controls. Hospital financial data notoriously have outliers, so we censor
all time varying variables.10 In our main specifications, we restrict ourselves to the years 20032010, so as to begin after the smaller recession of the early 2000s.

9

Note that in a simple model of quality choice, profit maximizing firms will decrease quality when price-cost
margins fall. Several studies show that when government reimbursements fall, hospitals cut back on the quality of
care delivered to government-insured patients. For example, see Langa and Sussman (1993). The stock market price
shock that we study does not directly affect margins, however, so any accompanying quality reduction would not
reflect this simple model.
10
Specifically, no residuals from regressions with facility and year fixed effects are outside of the 5th and 95th
percentiles of residuals.

9

Our main dependent variable, Price, is constructed from Medicare Cost Reports. Price is
revenue per non-Medicare discharge and is identical to a measure constructed by Dafny (2009),
except that Dafny’s measure is case-mix adjusted, whereas we include case mix as an
independent regressor. One shortcoming of Price is that it is an average over different types of
patients, including Medicaid and privately insured patients. Thus, changes in Price may
confound changes in private prices with changes in Medicaid prices. At a minimum, this
introduces noise into our dependent variable and reduces the precision of our estimates. This
may also introduce bias if changes in Medicaid reimbursements are correlated with endowment
losses. For example, a handful of states cut Medicaid reimbursements after the recession. If our
measure of 2008 stock market losses is, for some reason, correlated with state-specific Medicaid
cuts or a hospital’s Medicaid share, then results using Price would be biased.
We took several steps to deal with this potential bias. First, although several states
attempted to cut Medicaid prices, successful injunctions filed by hospitals prevented most of
these cuts from taking effect. Nonetheless hospitals may have cost shifted in anticipation of
eventual cuts. Therefore, we obtained data from the Kaiser Family Foundation on whether states
announced changes in their Medicaid hospital prices in 2008-2010. Our results remain similar
when we re-estimate our price analysis excluding the states that announced cuts in any of those
years. For some states, Kaiser reports the magnitudes of the announced decreases. We
confirmed that our results were further robust to adding back the states for which we could
calculate Medicaid price changes using Kaiser’s data to directly control for the Medicaid price
changes. Third, we restricted our analysis to hospitals with below average Medicaid market
shares in 2007. If our results were confounded by the inclusion of Medicaid pricing, the results
for these low-Medicaid hospitals would be different than those for all hospitals. In fact, the
results are nearly identical. Finally, we construct an alternative measure of prices, Price2. Price2
results from an analysis that decomposes annual changes in Price into a hospital specific and a
statewide component. The latter captures the change in Medicaid reimbursements; the former is
Price2. Appendix 1 describes this construction in more detail. Our results using Price2 are
similar, albeit less precise, to those using Price and are available upon request.
Our main predictor variable, Endowment, is also constructed from Medicare Cost
reports. We construct this variable for each system c, treating each non-system hospital as its
own system. We use system definitions from the 2007 AHA for all years, so that we maintain a
10

consistent definition of system membership across our analysis. When computing Endowment,
we restrict attention to changes in the value of investments and exclude changes in the
endowment resulting from operating income or losses. Thus, Endowment represents a true
lump sum, exogenous, shock.11 We also scale Endowment to size, based on the system’s
operating costs. We do this because if the theory of dynamic cost shifting is correct, a large
hospital suffering a given investment loss would not change price by as much as a small hospital
suffering the same magnitude loss. We measure Endowment for hospital chain c as follows:


=
=

Medicare Cost Reports do not directly report unrealized investment income but it can be
inferred as follows. First, we compute the annual change in the hospital’s net assets. Net assets
can change for three reasons (a) investment income, (b) operating income, and (c), a transfer
from a related organization, usually a parent company. We are unable to address (c), so we
present separate results for hospitals that do not belong to systems and are therefore unlikely to
receive this type of transfer. We also exclude government hospitals and for-profit hospitals
because they do not have endowments and therefore the impact of 2008 recession will not come
in the form of observable reductions in investment income. For the remaining nonprofit
hospitals in our study, we compute investment income by subtracting non-investment related
income from the change in net assets. We scale these losses by the predictable component of a
system’s operating costs.12 On average, annual operating costs and net assets are similar in
magnitude, but some hospitals have small or even negative net assets, making it inappropriate to
scale by a hospital’s net assets.
11

Alternatively, one might compute the change in “nonoperating revenue,” which consists largely of transfers from
the endowment into the operating fund. This is problematic, however, because many hospitals transfer money into
the operating fund during the year, realize revenues in excess of costs, and transfer the extra revenues back to the
endowment. Hospitals that engage in such accounting practices are not materially different from hospitals that do
not transfer endowments. Thus, by measuring changes in operating revenues one creates an artificial distinction
based on accounting, rather than economic, differences.
12
Operating costs are reported directly in the Medicare Cost Reports.
is a predicted
measure of daily operating costs from a model of log daily operating on a full set of hospital and year fixed effects.
We use predicted, rather than actual operating costs because actual operating costs may be endogenously affected by
endowment returns and would be mechanically endogenous in regressions studying the effect of losses on costs.

11

Each of the system level variables used to construct 

is a sum over the

same variable for all hospitals in the system. Because there is more uncertainty in our measure
of endowment losses for systems, especially because some endowments may be held by a parent
organization that we cannot observe, we present system results separately.13 As we discuss
further below, the data on systems yield similar conclusions to the non-system hospitals, but are
less precisely measured. This is consistent with classical measurement error in our construction
of the system endowment losses.
In some analyses below, we examine the ability of a hospital system to withstand profit
shocks using their endowments. Specifically, we measure the number of years a hospital system
could cover its operating costs solely off of its net assets:

.

Hospital system operating costs are very high relative to endowments; even the best endowed
hospital systems could only cover one or two years of operating costs with their net assets alone.

3.2 Additional Dependent Variables
As discussed in the previous section, the burden of a negative profit shock may be expressed in a
number of ways. In addition price changes, we consider the following dependent variables:

Costs per Discharge and other cost measures
Hospitals suffering a financial setback may reduce the quality of care they provide to patients.
There are many ways to measure quality and most are problematic for our purposes, either
because they are not systematically available or because they are measured with substantial
noise. As suggested by Dranove and White (1998), we assume that the level of services
provided to patients, as measured by the cost of care per discharge, is a proxy for quality. We
obtain Cost per Discharge from the Medicare Cost Reports.14 Cost per Discharge is an “all-in”
cost that includes amortized fixed costs. To focus on changes in variable costs, we compute
Salaries per Discharge, which equal the total labor costs per discharge for a hospital. From the

13

We exclude two systems from our analysis: Advocate Healthcare (because of data errors) and Kaiser Permanente
(because the cost shifting predictions do not cleanly translate to a vertically integrated insurer).
14
Revenue numbers are reported separately for inpatient and outpatient by revenue center. Costs are not.
Therefore, for estimating inpatient costs, we assume that inpatient costs for each cost center are: costs*(inpatient
revenues)/(inpatient revenues + outpatient revenues) and then sum over cost centers.

12

AHA data, we construct additional staffing measures. The variable RNs gives the number of
registered nurses and the variable LPNs gives the number of Licensed Practitioner Nurses.15

Charitable Services
Our datasets lack clean or well-populated measures of charity care. For this reason, we focus our
analysis on whether the stock market losses affect the offering of relatively unprofitable services.
Non-profit hospitals may chose profit maximizing price and quality levels for private patients,
but then use the subsequent profits to fund other activities such as the offering of unprofitable
services that provide a community benefit. This analysis is guided by Horwitz (2005), which
examines the provision of relatively profitable and unprofitable services based on tax status of
the hospital. Horwitz finds that for profit hospitals are more likely to offer profitable services and
less likely to offer unprofitable services than nonprofit hospitals.
We examine the three unprofitable services for which Horwitz found the strongest
relationship between ownership status and the probability of the service being offered: trauma
care, emergency psychiatric care, and drug and alcohol treatment. We also consider changes in
service offerings for three more profitable services: adult cardiac surgery, extracorporeal shock
wave lithotripter, and adult interventional cardiac catheterization.16 Each of these is a binary
variable taking a value of one if a hospital offers the service and zero if it does not.

Health Information Technology
In the past two decades, hospitals have made substantial investments in HIT. Two HIT
technologies that have been widely adopted since the mid-2000s are computerized provider order
entry (CPOE) and physician documentation (PD). Both CPOE and PD may cost upwards of $10
million to purchase and install. We obtain data on CPOE and PD adoption from the Healthcare
Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS) Analytics data base.17 HIMSS reports

15

The AHA data contains two variables for each staffing measure. In the first, hospitals give “reported FTEs.” In
the second, hospitals give “estimated FTEs” which equal full time employees + .5 * reported part time employees.
We use reported FTEs, rather than the estimated number.
16
Prior to 2004, the AHA asks whether hospitals provided “Open-heart surgery” rather than adult cardiac surgery
and a “Cardiac catheterization lab” rather than “adult interventional cardiac catheterization”. Therefore, these
variables may be slightly different from the ones used by Horwitz. Furthermore, for these two dependent variables
we therefore begin our analysis in 2004 rather than 2003.
17
To reduce the role of coding errors, we do not consider a hospital to have adopted if they report adoption in just
one year and re-report that they have not adopted in the next year. If a hospital reports adoption in at least two

13

different stages of HIT adoption. We define CPOE and PD as dummy variables that equal 1 if
the hospital has entered into a contract to install the technology in the year in question or has
already begun or completed the adoption process.18

3.3 Control Variables
Many of our specifications include an array of commonly used control variables that could
plausibly impact hospital revenues and pricing decisions, including a measure of local labor
market costs computed by Medicare; a measure of the average severity, or the “case mix index,”
of Medicare patients treated at the hospital (CMI); the percent of discharges from deliveries;
lagged county unemployment; and the ratio of medical residents to hospital beds.
Because we draw on a variety of data sets, each with some incomplete data, and because
we make some sample restrictions, sample sizes differ from regression to regression. Table 1
illustrates the effects of our sampling restrictions in our Price regressions. Our sample consists
of private, nonprofit, acute care hospitals for which we could obtain all relevant variables all of
our datasets. CMS does not report CMI for critical access hospitals (CAHs), so they are
excluded. It is important to note that our sample is likely weighted towards those hospitals
which are most likely to cost shift. For-profit hospitals should exploit their market power at all
times, and government hospitals and CAHs are unlikely to have any market power. Therefore,
finding no evidence of price changes in this sample makes it highly unlikely that cost-shifting is
a broad phenomenon in the modern healthcare market.
Given the concerns about the accuracy of the reported assets in the Medicare cost reports
we will present the results based on system status. The final six rows of Table 1 describe that
distribution of hospitals in our sample based on their system affiliation.

4. The 2008 Stock Market Crash and Hospital Endowments
Before we examine how changes in assets affected hospitals, it is important to demonstrate that
hospitals did in fact experience a large financial shock as a result of the 2008 recession. At a
minimum, such a shock should be apparent in hospital investment returns. Figure 1a illustrates
the percentage return on investments for hospitals based on their system affiliation alongside the
adjacent years, we take the first of these to be the adoption year (i.e. we study time until first adoption, taking reports
of unadoption – which we understand never actually happens – as reporting errors).
18
For further discussion see Dranove et al. (2012).

14

returns on the overall S&P 500. We present all results in this section for non-system hospitals,
those in systems with fewer than seven facilities, and those in large systems.
On average, hospitals experienced small negative returns during the 2002 recession and
then a far larger decline during the 2008 recession.19 Hospital investments appear to be
relatively diversified with respect to stock market risk, as evidenced by the dramatically larger
movements in the S&P 500. These average losses mask a large amount of heterogeneity in
investment performance across hospitals. For example, the 75th percentile non-system hospital
in 2008 experienced a slight investment gain of 0.5 percent while the 25th percentile hospital
experienced an investment loss of 7.7 percent. At the extreme, the 5th percentile non-system
hospital saw a 2008 investment loss of 22 percent. For comparison, in 2006 the 5th percentile
non-system hospital lost only 6.8 percent and the 75th percentile gained 8 percent. This
substantial heterogeneity should not be surprising. Hospitals with little exposure to stock market
risk should suffer small losses even during a downturn while those with larger exposures should
see greater variation in their year to year performance.
Figures 1(b)-1(d) show net assets, operating costs, and reserves (the ratio of net assets to
operating costs) for a balanced panel of hospitals for the period 1998-2010 by hospital system
status. Across all hospital types there is a small decline in net assets associated with the
recession of the early 2000s, and a much larger decline in 2008. Because operating costs climb
steadily, reserves fall slightly in the early 2000s and then experience a larger decline in 2008.
This drop is greatest for non-system hospitals which experienced an approximately 11
percentage point decline in reserves compared to a 7.5 percent point decline for small system
hospitals and a 7.7 percentage point decline for large system hospitals.
We measure the impact of the 2008 recession on hospital finances with the variable



i2008,

which is the change in the endowment of system c of which hospital i is a

member in 2008. To illustrate the impact of the 2008 crash on hospital reserves over time we
estimate the following system level equation on hospital data from the years 1998-2010:
19

We do not exploit variation in investment income in years other than 2008 for three reasons. First, in other years
we are more concerned that firm investment decisions and pricing decisions are correlated with unobservable factors
influencing a hospital’s business decisions (i.e. a change in hospital management could lead to changes in the
riskiness of a hospital’s investment strategy as well as how aggressive the hospital is in negotiations with insurers).
Second, there is far less variation in investment performance in other years. Finally, only unexpected changes in
wealth should affect pricing and it is unclear how to model firm expectations for investment income in ordinary
years.

15



(1)

where αc is a hospital system fixed effect, αt is a year fixed effect, and βt represents a series of
coefficients for each year from 1999 to 2010, with 1998 serving as the omitted year. Thus, we
ask the relationship between reserves in all years to the investment losses in 2008. Figure 2a
plots the estimated βt coefficients and confidence intervals for each year for non-system
hospitals. Note that the coefficient has a positive and significant increase in 2008 and 2009, as
well as in 2001 and 2002. The latter likely reflects correlated investment strategies, i.e. hospitals
pursuing investment strategies subject to stock market risk in 2008 were likely pursuing similar
strategies in 2001. We will discuss this correlation in more detail during the analysis of hospital
pricing behavior. As would be expected if our measure of losses was capturing the impact of the
2008 recession on hospital finances, β2008 - β2007 is approximately equal to 1. A generally similar
pattern is seen in Figure 2b for hospitals that are in systems with fewer than 7 facilities and for
Figure 2c for large systems.
The estimates depicted in Figures 2(a) – 2(d) are especially noteworthy because they
presage our results about cost-shifting for the average hospital. If hospitals were unable to
respond to the investment losses by cost-shifting, and if there was not an immediate recovery of
investment losses (i.e. firms with big losses in 2008 did not have commensurately larger gains in
2009), then we would expect

0 for t<=2007 and

1 for t>=2008. Indeed, this is

approximately what we observe – particularly for non-system hospitals.
Our analysis of the causal impact of financial shocks on hospital behavior rests on the
assumption that the losses resulting from the 2008 recession were exogenous. This assumption
is primarily supported by the fact that the primary causes of the recession were far removed from
the healthcare market. To further examine the plausibility of our identifying assumption, the first
panel of Table 2 contains summary statistics based on whether a hospital had above or below
average changes in its endowment. Statistics are provided for a variety of the dependent and
independent variables described above for the years 2003 to 2006. Overall, the two groups of
hospitals are very similar. While the means of many of the variables are statistically different at
a p-value of 0.05 they are of similar magnitude and the statistical differences are primarily driven
by the precision of the estimates. That being said, hospitals with below average losses had larger
staffing levels for both RNs and LPNs. Similarly, these below average loss hospitals were more
likely to have psychiatric emergency departments as well as the three relatively profitable
16

services described above. Importantly, the two groups of hospitals had price levels that were
very similar and statistically indistinguishable.

5. Results
We are interested in how hospitals change their behavior across a variety of dimensions in
response to financial shocks. In the analysis below, we measure the size of the shock for each
hospital through the change in its respective endowment and we begin with a preliminary
exploration of the relationship between these losses and the different dependent variables in all
years. Specifically, we estimate the following regression on a sample of data from 2003 to 2010:



(2)

where Yit is the respective dependent variable, αi are hospital fixed effects, αt are year fixed
effects, Xit are a variety of time varying hospital level controls that are chosen for the specific
dependent variable,

are a series of year coefficient for the years 2004 to 2010, and

ΔEndowmenti2008 is the change in the endowment from 2007 to 2008 as described above.20,21
We assess the results of equation (2) by plotting the λt coefficients and comparing the
values before and after 2008. The λt coefficients indicate the relationship between 2008 hospital
endowment losses and the average hospital’s behavior. For t<2008, we ask whether there is a
relationship between the investment strategy of the hospital that led to large 2008 losses and their
past behavior with respect to the dependent variables. Similarly, for t>2008 we examine whether
hospital financial losses in 2008 are systematically related to the dependent variable and
therefore provide evidence of cost-shifting.
To obtain a more definitive test of changes in hospital behavior such as cost-shifting, we
then aggregate the λt coefficients into a pre- and post- period and estimate the following
regression:
∗

2008 ∗ 

(3)

Note that while in these hospital level regressions, 
has a hospital level subscript i, this
variable is calculated at the system level and independent hospitals are treated as a system with a single unit.
Therefore, each hospital in a chain has the same change in investment levels. For this reason, we show results for a
sample containing only independent hospitals and for the full sample.
21
When the dependent variable in a regression is an average (e.g. the price per non-Medicare discharge), we weight
each facility in the regression by the facility’s average value of the dependent variable’s denominator (e.g. the
facility’s average non-Medicare discharges). When the dependent is not an average, we leave the regression
unweighted.
20

17

where I(year > 2008) is an indicator variable for the years after 2008 and all other variables are
defined as in equation (2).22 For each dependent variable below our estimate of λpost documents
the change in behavior following the recession for a hospital based on its endowment losses.

5.1 Effect of Stock Market Losses on Private Prices
Our primary question is whether hospitals raise prices for non-Medicare patients after an
unexpected financial shock. As a preliminary exploration of this topic we estimate equation (2)
with a dependent variable equal to the log non-Medicare price described above.23 If hospitals
suffering large 2008 investment losses raised prices in response to their losses at a faster rate
than did other hospitals, then λt for t ≥ 2008 should be smaller than λt for t < 2008. However, if
hospitals are unable to raise prices in response to investment losses these coefficients should be
similar before and after the recession.
Figure 3a presents estimates of λt by year for non-system hospitals. This figure shows no
meaningful change in prices driven by investment losses resulting from the 2008 recession.
There is also no pre-trend in the λt coefficients, suggesting that the average hospital’s pricing
decisions prior to the recession were unrelated to the investment strategy resulting in 2008
investment losses. Figure 3b contains a similar analysis for all hospitals in our sample and also
reveals no evidence of an impact of the 2008 recession on hospital pricing decisions.
Table 3 contains the estimated coefficients from equation (3) for a dependent variable
equal to the log non-Medicare price. Estimates from our preferred specification are presented in
columns (3) and (4) for non-system hospitals and the entire sample, respectively. Regardless of
the included controls, our results are consistent with the null hypothesis of no cost-shifting.

5.2 Do These Results Rule Out Cost-Shifting in all Settings?
These results indicate that the average hospital did not raise prices to recoup losses on its
investments. This is inconsistent with the predictions of the Dranove (1988) “share the
gain/share the pain” model of dynamic cost-shifting. Thus, we are inclined to conclude that
based on existing theory, the average hospital in the contemporary health care system does not
22

For these results we remove 2008 as a transition year. If we include the transition year in the post period, the
evidence against cost shifting is even stronger.
23
We log price both because the variable is highly skewed and because the log specification does a better job of
predicting price changes. (This is based on a comparison of price predictions, and is not a simple comparison of R2
across log and linear models.)

18

cost-shift in response to other financial setbacks, such as reductions in Medicaid or Medicare
prices.
However, there may be other behavioral factors that allow hospitals to cost-shift in
response to some types of financial shocks and not others. For example, hospitals may view
financial shocks from government reimbursement cutbacks as a kind of “focal point” in a
dynamic pricing game. Suppose that no hospital in a competitive market would raise prices
unilaterally but also that every hospital believes that its rivals will raise prices in response to
these cuts. In this case, dynamic cost-shifting becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy that follows
changes in government reimbursement systems. Another possibility is that non-profit payers and
non-profit hospitals view the increased prices following a government price cut as a portion of
their respective community benefit responsibilities and this changes the dynamics of their
bilateral negotiations.
The need to expand the existing cost shifting theories to explain our results makes it clear
that to the degree cost shifting is present in the modern healthcare market, it is a limited
phenomenon related to a subset of all financial shocks. This is important for considering the
impacts of important policy changes such as the ACA. The primary cost-shifting argument
supporting the ACA is not the result of a government reimbursement change but is instead the
result of a potential reduction in uncompensated care. While our results are not a direct test of
this phenomenon, they clearly demonstrate that support for the ACA based on uncompensated
care related cost shifting must rely on more nuanced theories than currently exist.

5.3 Do a Subset of Hospitals Cost-Shift?
While there may be a need for new theories of cost shifting for specific types of financial shocks,
the lack of a response for the average hospital is also consistent with existing cost-shifting
theories. Recall from Dranove (1988) that hospitals engaging in dynamic cost-shifting must both
possess pricing power and, prior to the financial shock, they must have not fully exploited this
power.24 In our full sample it is likely that the majority of hospitals fail on at least one of these
24

We focus on whether there is heterogeneity in the response to cost shifting that is consistent with the Dranove
(1988) model. Other models might suggest other subsets of hospitals within which to test for cost shifting. For
example, a loose interpretation of the theory of cost shifting might suggest that hospitals will not raise prices unless
they “really have to.” While translating this hypothesis into an empirical test is imprecise at best, we made two
attempts. First, we split the sample by the size of the 2007 endowment – hospitals with smaller initial endowment
might “really have to” increase profits. Second, we split hospitals based on their 2007 operating margins from non-

19

two dimensions. While it is not possible to determine ex ante whether hospitals are profit
maximizing, we are able to identify hospitals that plausibly have market power.25 Finding
evidence of price changes among hospitals with market power would suggest that the lack of an
effect for the remaining hospitals is not solely a result of endowment losses being viewed as
distinct from other financial shocks.
Since there is no obvious method of measuring the relative market power of hospitals in a
nationwide sample, we pursue two ad hoc approaches. First, we ask whether a hospital was
either nationally ranked in the US News and World Report annual hospital rankings or whether
the hospital serves as the main teaching affiliate of a medical school (hereafter referred to as high
quality hospitals). It is reasonable to assume that high quality hospitals have more pricing power
than the average hospital. Figure 3c contains the estimated coefficients from two specifications
of equation (2) for non-system hospitals based on this proxy measure of market power. The
solid line depicts the βt coefficients for the high quality hospitals sample while the dashed line
represents the coefficients for the remaining hospitals.
There is a definitive pre-trend from 2003 up to 2007 where high quality hospitals with
larger 2008 endowment losses decreased their prices compared to hospitals with smaller
endowment losses. This pre-trend could result from correlation in the investment returns from
strategies resulting in greater endowment losses in 2008. Under a “share the gain” model,
hospitals would return some portion of these investment returns in earlier periods to privately
insured patients in the form of lower prices. We find evidence of this potential channel in an
unreported analysis of the investment returns of the sample of high quality hospitals.
Specifically, a hospital which had endowment losses of 1 percent of operating costs in 2008 had
previously earned an extra 0.27 percent of operating costs in investment returns from 2003 up to
2007—the years of the pre-trend. Following 2008 there is a clear trend break where high quality
hospitals suffering large investment losses discontinued their previous pattern of decreasing

investment activities. Hospitals with worse non-investment performance might be more reliant on investment
activities to cover their costs, and therefore might “really have to” increase profits. We did not uncover any
important heterogeneity in response based upon these hospital characteristics. Results from these specifications are
available upon request..
25
Conventional wisdom says that government and religious hospitals behave more like non-profits than do other
non-profit hospitals. Government facilities are excluded from our analysis. In unreported results, we failed to find
any break from pricing trends from the stock market crash among religious non-profits. The religious non-profits
have both smaller average losses and less dispersion in their losses (for example, there is a 90-10 difference in

of 0.18 in for the non-religious nonprofits vs. 0.12 for religious non-profits).

20

prices. This would be consistent with a “share the pain” model where these hospitals raise prices
in response to a financial shock. Therefore, both the pre-trend and the post-2008 deviation from
this trend provide evidence in support of the “share the gain/share the pain” model of hospital
pricing behavior in this high quality sub sample.
In order to estimate the statistical significance of this trend break we re-estimated a
specification of equation (3) including an interaction between 

i2008

and a linear

time trend. In this specification, a statistically significant and negative λpost coefficient would
serve as evidence that hospitals suffering large financial shocks broke from the positive pre-trend
in pricing behavior. This would result in prices that were higher following 2008 than would
have been expected in the absence of the investment losses. Columns (5) and (6) of Table 4
contains the estimates from this specification for non-system high quality hospitals and the full
sample of high quality hospitals, respectively. These estimates show a statistically significant (pvalue < 0.05) change in pricing behavior for these hospitals. This negative coefficient means
that high quality hospitals suffering larger investment losses in 2008 exhibited some cost shifting
behavior. For comparisons sake, a similar pre-trend analysis for all hospitals is contained in
columns (5) and (6) of Table 3. These estimates are small and statistically insignificant.
The dashed lined in Figure 3c depicts the estimates for the remaining hospitals not
included in these high quality rankings. These facilities display neither a pre-trend nor evidence
of cost-shifting. An unreported analysis of these hospitals also demonstrated correlation between
2008 investment losses and returns in earlier years. However, if these hospitals truly do not
possess market power we would not expect that they “shared the gain” of these earlier returns –
given that they cannot subsequently share the pain through higher prices when they suffer
financial shocks. Therefore, if our ad hoc measure of market power is accurate we would not
expect these hospitals to exhibit a positive pre-trend in Figure 3c. Importantly, the hospitals
represented by the dashed line comprise approximately 94 percent of the facilities and treat 82
percent of the patients in our sample, demonstrating that the vast majority of patients did not face
higher prices as a result of the 2008 financial shock.
One concern with the above results is that high quality hospitals with large investment
losses were fundamentally different from similar quality hospitals with smaller losses and our
estimates are just picking up this difference. To examine this possibility, the second panel of
Table 2 contains summary statistics for high quality hospitals based on the size of the
21

endowment losses. These hospitals are all very similar across a wide variety of characteristics
suggesting that the changes in pricing behavior are not the results of systematic differences in
this group of hospitals based on investment returns.
Another concern about our high quality hospitals results is that our proxy for market
power may be too narrow and therefore our control group contains a mix of hospitals with and
without market power. To address this concern we developed a broader measure derived from a
national survey of consumer perceptions of hospital quality. These data, the Market Insights
survey by the National Research Corporation (National Research), are an annual survey of
approximately 270,000 respondents in 250 geographic markets. All respondents are over the age
of 18 and the sample is weighted according to age, population density, income, race, presence of
children in the home and marital status. National Research asks consumers about the
characteristics of hospitals in their area and we treat the hospitals that respondents identify as
having the “Best Overall Quality” as the facility that they prefer. Importantly, this question
focuses on overall quality and not which hospital patients actually attend and thus abstracts away
from insurance networks and prices. We use this measure of patient preferences to construct a
pseudo-“patient flows” hospital HHI. More specifically, we calculate a zip code HHI and then
calculate a hospital HHI as a patient weighted average of the zip code HHIs.26 Despite this
measure suffering from some degree of bias and measurement error (Kessler and McClellan,
2000), it provides an approximate measure of hospitals that face more versus less competition.27
We group hospitals by terciles of this measure of consumer preferences. Figures 4a and
4b present the estimates from a specification of equation (2) for non-system hospitals in the first
and third terciles of this proxy measure for hospital market power. The pricing behavior of these
groups of hospitals is similar and does not provide any evidence of cost-shifting. Figures 4c and
4d provide similar estimates for all hospitals in the first and third terciles and similarly portray no
evidence of cost shifting among the hospitals in the top tercile of our HHI measure.

26

We match the National Research data and the Cost Reports on facility name, hospital zip code and the zip codes
of patients choosing the hospital. This process works imperfectly. We use all National Research facilities to
calculate HHIs, using system affiliation in calculating HHIs when we successfully match across the datasets. We
successfully match 87% of hospitals in our final sample to the National Research data and restrict the analysis to this
subset.
27
We also constructed private patient HHIs using Dartmouth Atlas Health Referral Regions (HRR) as our unit of
geography. It is important to note that given the size of this geographic error, this measure of market power suffers
from a great deal of measurement error. We found no connection between pricing and stock market losses for
hospitals in less competitive markets, or for the hospitals with larger shares of private patients within an HRR.

22

Our estimates using two different proxy measures of market power demonstrate that only
a small subset of hospitals cost shift after their investment losses. These hospitals are
exceptionally high quality and this pricing behavior may be a result of their market power.
Importantly for policy considerations, these high quality hospitals represent less than 10 percent
of United States hospitals.

5.4 Effect of Stock Market Losses on Operating Costs
In this section, we study whether hospitals responded to endowment losses by cutting costs.
Similar to our analysis of price, we run two sets of regressions for each of our cost measures.
We concentrate on four cost and staffing related outcomes: ln(Cost per Discharge), ln(Salaries
per Discharge), ln(1+RNs) and ln(1+LPNs).28 We plot the results from the pre-trend analysis
using our preferred set of controls in Figures 5 and 6.29 Estimates from the pooled posttreatment specification are presented in Table 5.
Figure 5a and 5b illustrate that 

does not affect Cost per Discharge

trends in both the pre or post period for non-system hospitals and the full sample respectively.
Using column (1) of Table 5 as our preferred specification, we can rule out cost decreases for
non-system hospitals of greater than 0.15 percent in response to an endowment loss equal to 1
percent of operating costs.
Figure 5c and 5d plots λt by year from our preferred specification of the effect of



on logged salaries per discharge. Again, there is no pre-trend and no

evidence of a change in labor costs after the stock market crash.
There is also little relationship between the number of employees and investment losses.
Figure 6a and 6b and the results contained in the last panel of Table 5 examine the effect of the
crash on the number of full time equivalent registered nurses (RNs) at a hospital.

Figure 6a and

6b illustrate that there is no pre-trend in the effect of endowment losses on RN staffing, and that
there is no effect after the losses.
28

The controls are similar, but not identical across specifications. In particular, we use a measure of volume from
the AHA (Cost Reports) data as a control when our dependent variable is from the AHA (Cost Reports) data. The
variable "adjusted" discharges is defined in the AHA data as Inpatient Days + (Inpatient Days * (Outpatient
Revenue/Inpatient Revenue)). Our results are not sensitive to this decision and the estimates from alternate
specifications are available upon request.
29
These preferred controls correspond to the controls in columns (1) and (2) of Table 5 for the cost measures. The
preferred controls are in columns (1) and (2) of Table 6 for the staffing measures. The results are not sensitive to
this choice.

23

Figures 6c and 6d illustrate that there is no pre-trend in the effect of endowment losses on
the number of licensed practical nurses (LPNs), but suggests that non-system hospitals with
larger endowment losses decreased the number of LPNs that they hired in the post period.
Taking column (5) of Table 5 as our point estimate, a hospital with endowment losses equal to 1
percent of operating costs decreased LPNs by a statistically significant 0.4 percent (p-value <
0.10). It is important to note that, despite their statistical significance, these changes in LPN
staffing are not economically meaningful in terms of the ability of a hospital to recoup large
investment losses. Table 2 illustrates that over 80 percent of nurses in our sample are RNs.
Overall, there is little economically meaningful adjustment of patient costs following a
financial shock. As a caveat, these costs results are less generalizable to other types of profit
shocks such as Medicare and Medicaid price cuts than our price results. Profit maximizing
hospitals would not respond to wealth shocks with “cost shifting” or “cost cutting,” but could be
expected to respond to price changes (i.e., Medicare and Medicaid price cuts) by decreasing per
patient costs. This is because when margins fall, profit maximizers have incentives to reduce
costs, which normally entails reductions in quality.

5.5 Effect of Stock Market Losses on Hospital Service Offerings
In this section, we examine whether hospitals respond to financial shocks by changing the mix of
services they offer, with a focus on changes to relatively unprofitable services. We begin by
estimating equations (2) and (3) using the full set of control variables. Next, we reestimate these
equations without two control variables, CMI and % Deliveries, which are likely to be
endogenously determined by the mix of services. The results across these specifications are
remarkably similar and therefore we report the specifications without the potentially endogenous
variables. Since all of the variables in these specifications come from only AHA data, we are
able to use data through 2011. Given that it may take longer for hospitals to adjust service
offerings than to adjust prices or costs, estimates from this longer sample present a more accurate
picture of hospital responses than data only through 2010.30
Figure 8a presents the estimates from equation (2) for non-system hospital trauma
centers. There is little evidence of a pre-trend, but beginning in 2008 there is a notable change in
30

Estimates from the sample containing the years up to 2010 are generally similar to those from 2011. For example,
the coefficient (standard error) on λpost for a sample to 2010 for trauma centers, psychiatric facilities, and alcohol and
drug treatment are 0.214 (0.138), 0.217 (0.145), and 0.251 (0.130), respectively.

24

the pattern of the estimates suggesting that hospitals suffering larger financial losses in 2008
were relatively less likely to have a trauma center following the recession. The statistically
significant (p-value <0.10) estimate for non-system hospitals in column (1) of Table 6 is 0.257
and suggests that a hospital which had a one standard deviation (0.07) greater endowment loss
was 1.8 percentage points less likely to have a trauma center in the post period.
Generally similar results are seen in Figure 8b and column (2) of the first panel in Table
6. However, for the full sample of hospitals there is a pre-trend which shows that hospitals with
larger 2008 losses were relatively more likely to have trauma centers prior to the recession. This
again serves as further evidence of the “share the gain” model. Hospitals with larger losses in
2008 also larger gains earlier in our sample and this pre-trend is consistent with these hospitals
channeling some of these gains into societally valuable but unprofitable services. Similar to the
high quality hospital price analysis, the impact of the 2008 financial shock on service offerings in
the presence of this pre-trend can be estimated through a specification of equation (3) that
includes an interaction between the endowment losses variables and a linear time trend. The
estimated coefficient (standard error) on λpost from this specification is 0.263 (0.162) with a pvalue 0.104. The estimate from this specification for non-system hospitals is a statistically
significant (p-value < 0.10) 0.369 (0.210).
Figure 8(b)-8(c) and columns (1) and (5) of the first panel of Table 6 present estimates
for the two remaining unprofitable service types for non-system hospitals: psychiatric emergency
services and drug and alcohol outpatient services. For both of these service types, it is
impossible to definitively rule out or rule in pre-trends: both have point estimates for
which are within 0.01 of the 2003 level. Hospitals with larger endowment losses were relatively
less likely to offer these services after 2008. For drug and alcohol outpatient services, this result
is statistically significant at a p-value of 0.10. For psychiatric emergency services, the estimates
are suggestive but statistically insignificant at conventional levels. We test whether the post
period values are jointly statistically significant across the three service types, and obtain a pvalue of 0.0605. A similar test for specifications containing a linear time trend has a p-value of
0.0550.
These estimates suggest that the average hospital suffering a large financial shock is more
likely to eliminate some unprofitable service offerings than a similar hospital suffering a smaller
shock. An open question is whether hospitals will also begin offering more profitable services
25

following investment losses. Figures 7(d) and 8(d) contain the estimates from a specification of
equation (2) for adult cardiac surgery centers for non-system facilities and all hospitals,
respectively. These graphs show neither a pre-trend nor a reaction to the 2008 financial shock.
Panel B of Table 6 contains the estimates from equation (3) for three of the relatively profitable
services identified in Horwitz (2005). Neither the non-system hospitals nor the full sample
increased their provision of relatively profitable services in response to the 2008 financial shock.

5.6 Effect of Stock Market losses on Electronic Medical Records Adoption
Hospitals that use internal capital markets to fund capital expenditures might decrease these
investments following a financial shock. We now turn our attention to the decision by a hospital
to make investments in two types of advanced electronic medical records (EMR): computerized
provider order entry (CPOE) and physician documentation (PD). HIMSS data report CPOE and
PD adoption beginning in 2003 and 2005, respectively. We restrict our sample to hospitals
which had not adopted as of the first year data were collected.31 As a result of a number of
factors, including but not limited to explicit federal policy incentives, adoption has progressed at
a rapid pace and is nearing saturation by the end of our sample period.
Given the nature of the question, specifically whether hospitals choose to adopt a
particular technology, we document basic adoption patterns by first running a simple Cox
proportional hazard model. The probability that a hospital i that has not adopted by t-1 adopts by
time t is given by:


The function

(4)

is not estimated. Instead, the Cox model only identifies off of variation

within observations with the same t and therefore the same
control variables, so

gives the only the effect of 

. Notably, we include no
on the hazard function,

i.e. these results document the adoption patterns in all time periods for hospital implementing
investment strategies that result in large 2008 investment losses. Table 7 reports

from these

regressions. Columns (1) and (3) are restricted to the non-system facilities, whereas (2) and (4)
include all facilities. Overall, the estimated coefficients are generally less than one, indicating
that facilities with larger endowment losses were more likely to adopt advanced EMR. However,
About 19% of hospitals for which we have our measure of Δendowments adopted CPOE by 2003. About 27% of
hospitals which we have Δendowments adopted PD by 2005. Our results are very similar if we include these
hospitals and set adoption to that first year.

31

26

the point estimates from 2008 are notably larger (particularly in the case of CPOE) indicating
that these hospitals were less likely to adopt during this year. This is consistent with reports that
hospitals put off EMR investment because of the stock market crash (HIMSS, 2011).
While hospitals experiencing large 2008 investment losses might have generally been
more likely to adopt advanced EMR, we are interested in the causal impact of the financial shock
from the 2008 recession on these investment decisions. Following our previous analyses, we
next estimate a model that both controls for the effect of 
adoption hazard and allows for the effect of 

on the baseline
to differ in the post period by

estimating the following specification:


where

∗ 

∗

gives the average effect of 

effect on adoption in 2008,

∗

on adoption,

∗ 

(5)

gives the additional

gives the additional effect on adoption for the years after 2008.

We also add a number of controls (

: ARRA is an estimate of the benefits from the American

Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 on adoption32 and ACGME is an indicator variable for
whether a hospital is every listed as accredited for Graduate Medical Education in the AHA data.
For each of these variables we include the variable’s average effect in the pre period, its
additional effect in 2008 and its additional effect in the year after 2008. For the analysis which
includes systems, we also include interactions between whether a facility is in a system and the
pre period, 2008, and post-2008 variables.
The results, presented in Table 8, suggest that the endowment losses had an immediate
negative effect on adoption of CPOE. To facilitate interpretation t-statistics are reported in
parentheses. The coefficient of less than one on

implies that hospitals with large 2008 losses

were more likely to adopt in the pre period. Importantly, the large coefficient on

2008

means

that, after controlling for the baseline probability of adopting, hospitals with larger investment
losses were less likely to adopt CPOE in 2008 compared to hospitals with smaller investment

32

The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act gave certain hospitals financial incentives to adopt advanced
EMR. We define ARRA to be a standardized variable giving a hospital’s 2011 Medicare incentive payment for
meaningful adoption divided by the hospital’s average operating costs. Under the ARRA, hospitals with 1,15023,000 discharges per year and a high Medicare share have stronger incentives to adopt. More specifically, a
hospital’s incentive payments are:
2,000,000
∈ 1150,23000 ∗
1150 ∗ 200
23000 ∗ 21851 ∗ 200 }*(% Medicare)
We calculate this incentive using averaged hospital characteristics. Then we divide the incentive payments by a
hospital’s average operating costs and then standardize the measure.

27

losses. In this sample, 

2008

has a standard deviation of 0.07. The coefficient of

290.6 in column (3) of Table 8 implies that a non-system hospital with losses one standard
deviation below the mean would have an adoption probability that was 67 percent (

.07∗ln 290.6

of the adoption probability of a hospital at the mean in 2008 when compared with in the pre
period. This result is only marginally significant (p-value <0.10), which is unsurprising as this
exercise imposes relatively weak assumptions and therefore pushes the data hard.
The other coefficients in the CPOE regressions are also as would be expected. In
particular, hospitals receiving large financial incentives to adopt under ARRA were less likely to
adopt prior to the passage of the legislation and more likely to adopt afterwards. The effects are
substantially muted in the whole sample. The adoption decisions of facilities within systems are
highly (but not perfectly) correlated, meaning the decisions of a few large systems can have a
large effect on the full results. Furthermore, differences among the decisions of systems are
likely to be important but difficult to control for in the data. The second panel in Table 8
illustrates no statistically significant effect of endowment losses on PD, although the coefficients
move in a similar direction to the CPOE estimates. The controls, such as ARRA, also appear
less successful in explaining the pattern of PD adoption.
While Cox models are in some respects more flexible than fully parametric hazard
models, the estimates require careful interpretation. Note that if a hospital has observable
characteristics that make adoption more likely but has not adopted early, the proportional hazards
model will continue to predict the hospital to be a likely adopter. Therefore, if the hospital has
not adopted because of unobserved characteristics that make adoption unattractive, our estimates
may be biased. We document that hospitals with large 2008 losses were more likely to be early
adopters of advanced EMR. If they had not adopted by 2008, that may be explained by
unobservable characteristics. It is important to note that if our results were driven by such a
survivor bias, then we would expect a smooth change in how 

affects

adoption over time. The change we observe is stark, suggesting that they are not simply the
result of a survivor bias. Still, to further alleviate concerns about potential bias from our
modeling choice, we illustrate that our results are robust to a fully parametric specification. We
assume a hazard function of:


(6)

28

where v is a randomly distributed variable drawn from the inverse normal distribution. In this
specification, hospitals which ought to have adopted (based on observables) but haven’t are less
likely to adopt in the future because they likely have unobservables that make adoption
unattractive. This model is more flexible than the Cox because it weakens the assumption that
current adoption probabilities cannot depend upon past adoption probabilities. Without
specifying the hazard function, this model is no longer identified. Therefore, we impose the
restriction that the hazard function,

, is a Weibull distribution.

Results from this model are presented in Table 9. Column 5 of the CPOE results implies
that a non-system hospital with losses one standard deviation below the mean would have an
adoption probability that was 62 percent (

.07∗ln

.

of the adoption probability of a hospital

at the mean in 2008 when compared with in the pre-period. This is generally similar in
magnitude, but more precise, to our results in Table 8. Overall the estimates in Table 9
demonstrate that our finding that non-system hospitals decreased capital expenditures in
response to the 2008 financial shock are not driven by the specification choice in equation (5).

7. Conclusion
The 2008 recession led to large endowment losses for non-profit hospitals. This
exogenous variation in wealth provides a unique opportunity to examine hospital responses to
lump sum financial shocks. It is often assumed that hospitals absorb the impact from financial
shocks from policy changes such as Medicare or Medicaid reimbursement reductions by raising
prices on privately insured patients. If hospitals do raise prices, the incidence of these policy
changes falls primarily on privately insured patients and not the program’s direct beneficiaries.
However, we find no evidence that the average hospital raises prices in response to losses in
endowments.
Existing theories of cost shifting suggest that the failure to observe a price increase could
indicate either (a) the average hospital lacks market power, or (b) the average hospital previously
set prices at profit maximizing levels and therefore should not raise prices following a financial
shock. Therefore, we examine a smaller sample of high quality hospitals that likely have some
market power over private insurers. We find that these hospitals raised their prices compared to
what they would have been in the absence of the financial shock. Given that these hospitals

29

represent only less than 10 percent of all facilities and treat less 20 percent of patients in our
sample, it is unclear how important their response is for the average privately insured patient.
Hospitals may not cost shift in response to negative financial shocks but they may
respond in other ways. We find no evidence that hospitals cut staffing, which stands in contrast
with how universities responded to the financial crisis. We do find that hospitals decreased large
capital expenditures on advanced medical records and curtailed the offering of unprofitable
services such as trauma centers and alcohol and drug treatment facilities. These reactions
provide valuable information for evaluating the incidence of policies generating financial shocks
for hospitals. Rather than simply impacting the prices paid by privately insured patients, these
policies can result in broad changes in the quality and availability of health services for all
patients. For example, the closing of trauma centers can limit access to critical health services
for vulnerable and disadvantaged populations. Hsia and Chen (2011) document that the closures
of trauma centers between 2001 and 2007 have already increased the travel time to such a facility
for communities with high numbers of uninsured, poor, and African American residents. Future
closures of trauma centers or other unprofitable services from financial shocks to hospitals could
exacerbate these disparities. By documenting these non-price responses, we are among the first
studies to explore the variety of alternate avenues by which hospitals adjust their operations to
react to financial shocks.

30

Initial observations in HCRIS data

Table 1
Impact of Sample Restrictions on Sample Size
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
6,223 6,221 6,218 6,178 6,199 6,176 6,175 5,906

Number of observations in HCRIS data after dropping observations
with:
Duplicates, missing addresses, Long-Term Care, psych and
rehabilitation hospitals, Outlying territory hospitals.
Without any matches to the AHA data
Ownership type other than non-government nonprofits
Critical access, specialty and children's facilities
Missing key X variable (2008 losses)
Missing price or preferred controls

4,931 4,962 4,947 4,892 4,884 4,857 4,834 4,635
4,856
2,830
2,320
1,907
1,776

4,895
2,828
2,218
1,924
1,803

4,895
2,814
2,095
1,932
1,816

4,848
2,769
2,018
1,952
1,822

4,832
2,769
2,014
1,980
1,857

4,801
2,758
1,998
1,988
1,823

4,789
2,740
1,970
1,942
1,793

4,587
2,610
1,873
1,829
1,702

Remaining observations by 2007 system size:
Non-system
Under seven hospitals
Seven or more hospitals

801
463
512

812
476
515

810
478
528

811
473
538

822
492
543

819
479
525

800
478
515

760
452
490

Remaining Systems x years by 2007 system size:
Non-system
Under seven hospitals
Seven or more hospitals

815
167
41

821
167
41

827
167
41

832
166
41

840
167
41

842
168
41

819
167
41

776
161
41

Table 2
Summary Statistics
Full sample
Below average
Above average
Δendowment2008 Δendowment2008
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
8039
4111
8158
14775
6726
1980
6433
2028
3482
1858
3372
2754
479
4996
323
379
115
4338
32
35
0.55
0.50
0.47
0.50
0.40
0.49
0.41
0.49
0.16
0.36
0.15
0.36
0.43
0.50
0.37
0.48
0.43
0.50
0.35
0.48
0.54
0.50
0.44
0.50
0.65
0.36
0.59
0.38

Dependent Variables
Price per non-medicare discharge
Cost per Discharge
Salaries per discharge
RNs
LPN
Psychiatric Emergency hospital
Trauma Hospital
Drug and Alcohol Outpatient services
Adult Cardiac surgery Hospitals
Extracorporeal shock wave lithrotripter
Adult interventionalist cardiac cath
Reserves
Independent Variables
wage
1.01
0.15
0.99
CMI
1.41
0.24
1.36
% deliveries
0.16
0.12
0.17
Lagged Unemployment
0.06
0.01
0.06
Residents Per Bed
0.07
0.15
0.06
Non Medicare discharges
7653
7510
6591
% Medicaid
0.41
0.11
0.41
% Medicare
0.13
0.09
0.16
Unit of observation is the hospital by year for the years 2003 to 2006.

0.16
0.25
0.13
0.02
0.14
7334
0.12
0.10

0.63
0.00
0.04
0.11
0.32
0.00
0.42
0.75
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

"High Quality" Sample
Below average
Above average
Δendowment2008 Δendowment2008
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
12801
5795
12867
6005
9326
2607
9395
2231
5264
2341
5272
1783
1122
695
1106
509
55
69
46
49
0.78
0.41
0.86
0.35
0.71
0.46
0.80
0.40
0.21
0.41
0.19
0.40
0.89
0.31
0.94
0.25
0.64
0.48
0.67
0.47
0.93
0.25
0.93
0.26
0.60
0.31
0.52
0.32

0.00
0.00
0.1
0
0
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.04
1.75
0.14
0.06
0.36
20131
0.33
0.13

Pvalue

0.13
0.21
0.11
0.01
0.26
11128
0.08
0.10

1.07
1.80
0.15
0.06
0.4
20234
0.32
0.15

0.15
0.20
0.1
0.01
0.27
9157
0.09
0.10

Pvalue
0.90
0.76
0.97
0.80
0.16
0.04
0.02
0.58
0.17
0.39
0.89
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.12
0.73
0.08
0.91
0.08
0.01

32

Table 3
OLS Estimates of the Impact of Financial Shocks on Log Prices
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
investment returnsi2008*(year>2008)
-0.0961
-0.0762
-0.135
-0.0939
0.0165
-0.0466
(0.114)
(0.0886)
(0.119)
(0.0894)
(0.143)
(0.118)
ln(wage)
0.297**
0.368**
0.292**
0.367**
(0.138)
(0.112)
(0.137)
(0.112)
ln(CMI)
0.249**
0.388***
0.254**
0.389***
(0.103)
(0.0676)
(0.103)
(0.0678)
0.751***
0.649***
0.751***
0.650***
% deliveries
(0.122)
(0.0867)
(0.123)
(0.0868)
Lagged Unemployment
0.740
0.193
0.726
0.190
(0.623)
(0.392)
(0.623)
(0.391)
Residents Per Bed
-0.0686
-0.0545
-0.0716
-0.0553
(0.430)
(0.288)
(0.432)
(0.288)
Sample
non-system
All
non-system
all
non-system
all
Include investment returnsi2008*(year)
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
5762
13031
5556
12484
5556
12484
R-sq
0.368
0.372
0.386
0.395
0.386
0.395
Unreported covariates include facility and year fixed effects. Regressions are restricted to 2003-2010, excluding 2008. Regressions
are weighted by non-Medicare discharges. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered on hospital system (with each nonsystem facility its own cluster).
* P-value <= 0.10 ** P-value <=0.05 *** P-value <=0.001

33

Table 4
OLS Estimates of the Impact of Financial Shock on Log Prices
High Quality Hospitals
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
investment returnsi2008*(year>2008)
-0.00467 -0.0521
0.0913
-0.00903 -0.813** -0.544**
(0.300)
(0.215)
(0.299)
(0.218)
(0.395)
(0.270)
ln(wage)
-0.00131
0.236
-0.00158
0.240
(0.388)
(0.256)
(0.405)
(0.258)
ln(CMI)
0.187
0.319
0.144
0.320
(0.358)
(0.221)
(0.351)
(0.219)
0.898
0.490*
1.114
0.502*
% deliveries
(0.748)
(0.288)
(0.743)
(0.288)
Lagged Unemployment
0.926
0.389
1.197
0.422
(1.757)
(0.935)
(1.630)
(0.928)
Residents Per Bed
1.359*
0.625
1.450**
0.662
(0.734)
(0.507)
(0.701)
(0.509)
Sample
non-system
all
non-system
all
non-system
all
Include investment returnsi2008*(year)
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
360
873
332
826
332
826
R-sq
0.468
0.532
0.486
0.542
0.502
0.546
investment returnsi2008*(year>2008)
-0.00467 -0.0521
0.0913
-0.00903 -0.813** -0.544**
Unreported covariates include facility and year fixed effects. Regressions are restricted to 2003-2010, excluding 2008. Regressions
are weighted by non-Medicare discharges. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered on hospital system (with each nonsystem facility its own cluster).
* P-value <= 0.10 ** P-value <=0.05 *** P-value <=0.001

34

Table 5
OLS Estimates of the Impact of Financial Shocks on Hospitals Costs
ln(Salaries per
ln(Cost per Discharge)
ln(1+LPNs)
ln(1+RNs)
Discharge)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.0172
0.0233
-0.0273
0.0208
0.394*
0.196
-0.0923
-0.0122
investment
returnsi2008*(year>2008)
(0.0644)
(0.0526)
(0.0735)
(0.0596)
(0.239)
(0.169)
(0.0972)
(0.139)
ln(wage)
0.251***
0.349***
0.275**
0.478***
-0.0942
0.0168
0.297**
0.310**
(0.0718)
(0.0578)
(0.0879)
(0.0922)
(0.246)
(0.182)
(0.104)
(0.108)
ln(CMI)
0.447***
0.482***
0.341***
0.385***
0.106
-0.0391
0.156*
0.217**
(0.0515)
(0.0405)
(0.0640)
(0.0486)
(0.185)
(0.137)
(0.0922)
(0.0729)
0.504***
0.444***
0.596***
0.514***
0.139
0.100
-0.0807
-0.113
% deliveries
(0.0688)
(0.0456)
(0.0767)
(0.0505)
(0.181)
(0.135)
(0.108)
(0.0774)
Lagged Unemployment
0.588*
0.389
1.040**
0.622**
-2.275**
-2.582***
-0.385
-0.213
(0.339)
(0.238)
(0.336)
(0.299)
(0.957)
(0.685)
(0.438)
(0.393)
Residents Per Bed
-0.231
0.0206
-0.0134
0.140
-1.016
-0.295
-0.785*
-0.539*
(0.242)
(0.160)
(0.260)
(0.172)
(0.972)
(0.618)
(0.435)
(0.302)
0.435***
0.430***
0.370***
0.441***
ln("adjusted"
(0.0795)
(0.0610)
(0.0394)
(0.0331)
discharges)
Sample
non-system
all
non-system
all
non-system
all
non-system
all
N
5627
12592
5622
12572
4250
9486
4233
9450
R-sq
0.725
0.719
0.548
0.520
0.183
0.206
0.172
0.182
Unreported covariates include facility and year fixed effects. Regressions are restricted to 2003-2010, excluding 2008. Regressions
are weighted by non-Medicare discharges. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered on hospital system (with each nonsystem facility its own cluster).
* P-value <= 0.10 ** P-value <=0.05 *** P-value <=0.001
35

Table 6
OLS Estimates of the Impact of Financial Shocks on Service Offerings
Panel A: Less Profitable Services
Psychiatric Emergency
Trauma
Alcohol and Drug
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.184
0.153
0.257*
0.152
0.244*
0.0658
investment returnsi2008*(year>2008)
(0.135)
(0.106)
(0.148)
(0.0978)
(0.130)
(0.0935)
ln(wage)
0.400*
0.127
0.0866
-0.0760
0.0821
-0.0681
(0.156)
(0.114)
(0.195)
(0.139)
(0.132)
(0.0860)
Lagged Unemployment
0.600
0.398
-1.747**
-1.055*
-0.0469
-0.0282
(0.519)
(0.430)
(0.669)
(0.457)
(0.412)
(0.272)
Sample
non-system
All
non-system
all
non-system
all
N
5844
13260
5845
13262
5845
13263
R-sq
0.005
0.001
0.008
0.008
0.008
0.005
Panel B: More Profitable Services
Extracorporeal Shock
Adult Interventional
Adult Cardiac Surgery
Wave Lithotripter
Cardiac Catheterization
-0.111
-0.0985
0.0194
0.0421
-0.0928
-0.0103
investment returnsi2008*(year>2008)
(0.119)
(0.0880)
(0.177)
(0.145)
(0.144)
(0.118)
ln(wage)
0.0348
0.00549
0.219
0.134
-0.147
-0.186
(0.143)
(0.0899)
(0.207)
(0.167)
(0.166)
(0.114)
Lagged Unemployment
1.329***
0.651**
0.850
0.331
-0.0182
0.0406
(0.423)
(0.317)
(0.780)
(0.497)
(0.620)
(0.431)
Sample
non-system
All
non-system
all
non-system
All
N
5844
13260
5845
13262
5845
13263
R-sq
0.005
0.001
0.008
0.008
0.008
0.005
Unreported covariates include facility and year fixed effects. Regressions are restricted to 2003-2011, excluding 2008. Regressions
are unweighted. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered on system (with each non-system facility its own cluster).
* P-value <= 0.10 ** P-value <=0.05 *** P-value <=0.001

Table 7
Cox Proportional Hazard Model Estimates of the
Effect of 2008 Investment Losses on EMR Adoption
Computerized Physician
Physician Documentation
Order Entry
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
investment returnsi2008*(year==2004)
investment returnsi2008*(year==2005)
investment returnsi2008*(year==2006)
investment returnsi2008*(year==2007)
investment returnsi2008*(year==2008)
investment returnsi2008*(year==2009)
investment returnsi2008*(year==2010)
investment returnsi2008*(year==2011)

0.113
0.876
(-1.55)
(-0.12)
0.131
0.268
(-1.28)
(-1.20)
0.167
0.229
(-0.86)
(-1.16)
0.0273*
0.0396**
(-1.89)
(-2.55)
18.46
2.567
(1.21)
(0.57)
0.00380** 0.00301***
(-2.64)
(-3.92)
0.592
0.111
(-0.30)
(-1.62)
0.719
0.202
(-0.13)
(-0.82)
non-system
all

0.194
(-1.00)
0.0317**
(-2.05)
0.262
(-0.68)
0.0218**
(-2.00)
0.0264**
(-2.14)
0.276
(-0.49)
non-system

2.418
(0.76)
0.255
(-1.11)
0.128
(-1.47)
0.00751***
(-3.75)
0.0957*
(-1.85)
0.00137***
(-3.75)
all

Sample
3295
7016
2709
5655
Number of subject x years
736
1596
661
1443
Number of subjects
569
1296
413
999
Number of adoptions
Reported coefficients are Hazard Ratios. Run using “exact” method for accounting for ties in Stata.
P-values are reported in parentheses.
* P-value <= 0.10 ** P-value <=0.05 *** P-value <=0.001
37

Table 8
Effect of 2008 Investment Losses on Advanced HIT Adoption (Cox Model)
Computerized Physician Order Entry
Physician Documentation
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
investment returnsi2008
0.0959** 0.251** 0.174**
0.375
0.0813**
0.906
0.102*
1.096
(-2.77)
(-2.32)
(-2.02)
(-1.62)
(-2.13)
(-0.11)
(-1.90)
(0.11)
192.0**
12.88
290.6**
13.66
3.227
0.153
8.322
0.208
investment returnsi2008*(year==2008)
(2.05)
(1.44)
(2.13)
(1.44)
(0.51)
(-1.14)
(0.89)
(-0.93)
investment returnsi2008*(year>2008)
1.425
0.154*
1.404
0.147*
0.487
0.0204**
0.989
0.0320**
(0.24)
(-1.74)
(0.23)
(-1.75)
(-0.44)
(-3.27)
(-0.01)
(-2.85)
ARRA
0.730*** 0.681***
0.843
0.868
(-3.45)
(-4.88)
(-1.55)
(-1.47)
ARRA*(year==2008)
1.061
1.222
0.831
0.901
(0.32)
(1.20)
(-0.95)
(-0.61)
ARRA*(year>2008)
1.131
1.291**
0.854
0.865
(0.97)
(2.27)
(-1.11)
(-1.14)
ACGME
1.411** 1.308**
0.852
1.078
(2.32)
(3.18)
(-0.75)
(0.63)
ACGME*(year==2008)
0.775
1.104
1.179
0.993
(-0.64)
(0.41)
(0.42)
(-0.03)
ACGME*(year>2008)
0.684
1.019
1.149
1.222
(-1.47)
(0.12)
(0.48)
(1.20)
nonnonnonnonSample
all
all
all
all
system
system
system
system
N
3291
7016
3291
7016
2707
5655
2707
5655
N_sub
735
1596
735
1596
660
1443
660
1443
N_fail
568
1296
568
1296
412
999
412
999
Reported coefficients are Hazard Ratios. T-statistics are reported in parentheses. Regressions with system facilities also include as controls
interactions between system size category and the three time categories.

38

Table 9
Weibull Model Estimates of the Effect of 2008 Investment Losses on Advanced HIT Adoption
Computerized Physician Order Entry
Physician Documentation
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
0.0398*** 0.0883** 0.116**
0.240* 0.00184*** 0.0177** 0.00403*** 0.0633**
investment returnsi2008
(-4.22)
(-3.07)
(-2.69)
(-1.68)
(-5.74)
(-2.93)
(-4.43)
(-2.11)
210.4**
284.9
314.0**
15.47
investment returnsi2008*(year==2008) 2598.0*** 413.4** 903.9** 69.18**
(3.51)
(3.02)
(2.61)
(2.07)
(3.20)
(1.15)
(2.52)
(1.09)
7.905**
3.868
5.361
1.023
203.6***
35.50**
212.3**
8.763
investment returnsi2008*(year>2008)
(2.08)
(1.29)
(1.59)
(0.02)
(4.02)
(1.96)
(2.98)
(1.07)
0.745*** 0.590***
1.210**
0.512***
ARRA
(-3.77)
(-5.07)
(2.00)
(-3.74)
0.898
1.626**
0.567***
1.751**
ARRA*(year==2008)
(-0.92)
(2.91)
(-3.58)
(2.07)
1.124
1.606***
0.418***
1.804**
ARRA*(year>2008)
(1.43)
(3.84)
(-4.67)
(3.07)
1.550*** 1.353**
1.813**
1.478**
ACGME
(3.49)
(3.14)
(2.62)
(3.09)
0.513**
0.825
0.511*
0.626
ACGME*(year==2008)
(-2.45)
(-0.90)
(-1.84)
(-1.55)
0.577***
0.834
0.308**
0.676
ACGME*(year>2008)
(-3.32)
(-1.29)
(-3.24)
(-1.57)
nonnonall
all
non-system
all
non-system
all
Sample
system
system
3291
7016
3291
7016
2707
5655
2707
5655
N
735
1596
735
1596
660
1443
660
1443
N_sub
568
1296
568
1296
412
999
412
999
N_fail
Unreported covariates in specifications with systems include an interaction between system membership and the pre, transition and
post periods. Reported coefficients are Hazard Ratios. P-values are reported in parentheses. Standard are clustered on hospital
system (with each non-system facility its own cluster).
* P-value <= 0.10 ** P-value <=0.05 *** P-value <=0.001
39

Figure 1a
Investment Returns of Hospitals Compared to the S&P 500

Figure 1c
Small Systems

0.4
0.2
$ (billions)

0
‐0.2
‐0.4
‐0.6

Change in value of S&P 500
Investment returns (non‐systems)
Investment returns (small systems)
Investment returns (big systems)

160

0.8

140

0.7

120

0.6

100

0.5

80

0.4

60

0.3

40

Net Assets
Operating Costs
Reserves

20
0

‐0.8

0.2
0.1
0

1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

Figure 1b
Non- systems
0.8
0.7
0.6

$ (billions)

180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

0.5
0.4
0.3
Net Assets
Operating Costs
Reserves

0.2
0.1
0

1998199920002001200220032004200520062007200820092010
Notes: Total fund balances and operating costs for a balanced panel of 535 non-system
hospitals present in all years from 1998-2010.

Notes: Total fund balances and operating costs for a balanced panel of 535 hospitals
present in all years from 1998-2010 and 212 systems with under 7 hospitals in 2007
(with a mean of 2.47 hospitals per system year).

Figure 1d
Big Systems
140

0.8

120

0.7

100

0.6
0.5

$ (billions)

Notes: S&P 500 value is measured as of year end. Hospital investment returns are
measured as realized & unrealized investment returns divided by total investment assets
as of prior year. Hospital investment returns are weighted by prior year end
investments, so give the average return on a dollar. Hospital investment returns are
censored at the 1st and 99th percentile by year.

80

0.4

60
40
20

0.3
Net Assets
Operating Costs
Reserves

0

0.2
0.1
0

1998199920002001200220032004200520062007200820092010
Notes: Total fund balances and operating costs for a balanced panel of 42 systems with
7 or more hospitals in 2007 (average of 14 hospitals in 2007), present in all years from
1998-2010.

Figure 2a
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Reserves
Non-System Hospitals

Figure 2c
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Reserves
Large System Hospitals

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

‐0.5

‐0.5

‐1

‐1
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

Figure 2b
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Reserves
Small System Hospitals

1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

Figure 2d
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Reserves
All Hospitals

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

‐0.5

‐0.5

‐1

‐1
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

41

Figure 3a
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Non-Medicare
Prices, Non-System Hospitals

Figure 3c
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Non-Medicare
Prices, Non-System Hospitals Based High Quality Status

0.4
2
0.2

1.5
1

E‐15

0.5

‐0.2

0
‐0.4
‐0.5
‐0.6
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Figure 3b
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Non-Medicare
Prices, All Hospitals
0.4

‐1
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Figure 3d
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Non-Medicare
Prices, All Hospitals Based on High Quality Status
2
1.5

0.2

1

E‐15

0.5
‐0.2
0
‐0.4

‐0.5

‐0.6
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

‐1
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

42

Figure 4a
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Non-Medicare
Prices, Non System Hospitals in Third Tercile of Quality
1

Figure 4c
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Non-Medicare
Prices, All Hospitals in Third Tercile of Quality
0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6
0.4

0.4
0.2

0.2

0

0

‐0.2
‐0.2

‐0.4
‐0.6

‐0.4

‐0.8

‐0.6

‐1

‐0.8

‐1.2
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Figure 4b
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Non-Medicare
Prices, Non System Hospitals in First Tercile of Quality
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
‐0.2
‐0.4
‐0.6
‐0.8
‐1
‐1.2

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Figure 4d
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Non-Medicare
Prices, All Hospitals in First Tercile of Quality
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
‐0.2
‐0.4
‐0.6
‐0.8

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

43

Figure 5a
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Costs per
Discharge, Non-System Hospitals

Figure 5c
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Salaries per
Discharge, Non-System Hospitals

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

‐0.1

‐0.1

‐0.2

‐0.2

‐0.3

‐0.3

‐0.4
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Figure 5b
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Costs per
Discharge, All Hospitals

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Figure 5d
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Salaries per
Discharge, Non-System Hospitals

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

‐0.1

‐0.1

‐0.2

‐0.2

‐0.3
‐0.4

‐0.3
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

44

Figure 6a
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Registered
Nurses, Non-System Hospitals
0.5

Figure 6c
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Licensed
Practitioner Nurses, Non-System Hospitals
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
‐0.2
‐0.4
‐0.6
‐0.8

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
‐0.1
‐0.2
‐0.3
‐0.4
‐0.5
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Figure 6b
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Registered
Nurses, All Hospitals
0.5

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Figure 6d
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Licensed
Practitioner Nurses, All Hospitals
1.2
1

0.4

0.8

0.3

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.1

0.2

0

0

‐0.1

‐0.2

‐0.2
‐0.3

‐0.4

‐0.4

‐0.6

‐0.5

‐0.8
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

45

Figure 7a
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Trauma
Centers, Non-System Hospitals

Figure 7c
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Inpatient
Alcohol and Drug Treatment, Non-System Hospitals

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0

‐0.2

‐0.2

‐0.4

‐0.4

‐0.6

‐0.6

‐0.8

‐0.8
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 7b
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Inpatient
Psychiatric Services, Non-System Hospitals

2003

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 7d
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Adult Cardiac
Survey, for Non-System Hospitals

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0

‐0.2

‐0.2

‐0.4

‐0.4

‐0.6

‐0.6

‐0.8

2004

‐0.8
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

46

Figure 8a
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Trauma
Centers, All Hospitals

Figure 8c
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Inpatient
Alcohol and Drug Treatment, All Hospitals

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0

‐0.2

‐0.2

‐0.4

‐0.4

‐0.6

‐0.6

‐0.8

‐0.8
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 8b
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Inpatient
Psychiatric Services, All Hospitals

2003

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0

‐0.2

‐0.2

‐0.4

‐0.4

‐0.6

‐0.6

‐0.8

‐0.8
2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 8d
OLS Estimates of Impact of Investment Losses on Adult Cardiac
Survey, for All Hospitals

0.8

2003

2004

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

47

References
Ballou, Jeffrey P., and Burton A. Weisbrod. 2003. “Managerial rewards and the behavior of forprofit, governmental, and nonprofit organizations: evidence from the hospital industry”.
Journal of Public Economics 83:1895-1920.
Borenstein, S. and J. Farrell 2000, “Is Cost-Cutting Evidence of X-Inefficiency?” American Economic Review,
90(2): 224-7.
Brown, Jeffrey Stephen G. Dimmock, Jun-Koo Kang. 2010. “How University Endowments
Respond to Financial Shocks: Evidence and Implications.” NBER Working Paper #15861.
Clement, J. (1997). “Dynamic cost shifting in hospitals: Evidence from the 1980s and 1990s,”
Inquiry, 34(4): 340-350.
Cutler, D. 1998. Cost Shifting or Cost Cutting? The Incidence of Reductions in Medicare Payments. Tax
Policy and the Economy 12:1-28, J. Poterba, ed.
Dafny, L. (2009). “Estimation and Identification of Merger Effects: An Application to Hospital
Mergers,” The Journal of Law & Economics, 52, 523–550.
Dranove, D. 1988. Pricing by Non-Profit Institutions: The Case of Hospital Cost Shifting. Journal of Health
Economics 7:47–57.
Dranove, D. and K. Cone (1986), "Why Did States Enact Hospital Rate Settings Laws?" Journal
of Law and Economics Vol. 29
Dranove. D.. and W. White (1998). "Medicaid-dependent hospitals and their patients: How have
they fared?". Health Services Research 33:163-185.
Dranove , D, C Forman, A Goldfarb, and S. Greenstein (2012). “The Trillion Dollar Conundrum:
Complementarities and Health Information Technology,” NBER Working Paper #18281
Frakt, A. (2011), “How Much do Hospitals Cost-Shift? A Review of the Evidence” Milbank Quarterly 89)1):
90-130.
Garthwaite, C. (2012). “The Doctor Might See You Now: The Supply Side Effects of Public
Health Insurance Expansions,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(3): 190-215.
Gaynor, M. and R. Town, 2012, “Competition in Healthcare Markets” in Handbook of Health Economics, 2nd
Edition, McGuire, T., J. Newhouse, and P. Barros, eds., Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Gowrisankaran, G., and B. Town. 1997. Dynamic Equilibrium in the Hospital Industry. Journal of Economics
& Management Strategy 6(1):45–74.
Hand, E. 2008, “Universities Struggle as Value of Endowments Fall” Published online 31 December 2008 |
Nature 457, 11-12 (2009) | doi:10.1038/457011a
Henning, Joel. 2013. “A Michigan Avenue Institution,” The Wall Street Journal, Feb 13, 2013.
Hsia RY and YC Chen (2011). “Rising closures of hospital trauma centers disproportionately
burden vulnerable populations,” Health Affairs 30(10): 1912-1920.

Health Insurance Association of America (1982) Sourcebook of Health Insurance Data,
Washington, DC: 1982.
Hadley, J. and J. Feder (1985) “Hospital Cost-shifting and Care for the Uninsured” Health Affairs 4:67-80.
HIMSS Analytics. 2011. Essentials of the U.S. Hospital IT Market, 6th Edition
Horwitz, J. 2005 “Making Profits and Providing Care: Comparing Nonprofit, For-Profit, and
Government Hospitals,” Health Affairs 24-3.
Kaufman, J. 2009 “Troubles deepen for museums: layoffs, budget cuts and cancelled shows”
http://www.theartnewspaper.com/articles/Troubles-deepen-for-museums-layoffs-budget-cuts-andcancelled-shows/17148 Searched 2/17/2013
Langa, K. and E. Sussman, 1993, “The Effect of Cost-containment Policies on Rates of Coronary
Revascularization in California” New England Journal of Medicine 329:1784-9.
Lee, J., R. Berenson, R. Mayes, and A. Gauthier. 2003. Medicare Payment Policy: Does Cost Shifting Matter?
Health Affairs, October. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.w3.480.
Lohr, S. (2009). “Electronic Health Records: How to Spend the Money Wisely,” New York
Times, Feb 10 2009.
Marks, Clifford and June Wu. 2008. “Harvard Endowment Fell 22 Percent in Four Months,” The Harvard
Crimson, Dec 2 2008.
Morrisey, M. 1994. Cost Shifting in Health Care: Separating Evidence from Rhetoric. Washington, DC: AEI
Press
National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius, No. 11-393 (slip op.) 16 (June 28,
2012).
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, 42 U.S.C. § 18091(2)(F).
ProPAC (1992). Optional Hospital Payment Rates. Congressional Report C-92-03.Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1992.
Smith, et al (various years), "Results from a 50-State Medicaid Budget Survey for State Fiscal",
Kaiser Family Foundation.
Stein, J. “Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate Resources” 1997, Journal of Finance,
52(1): 111-33.
Wu, V. 2009. Hospital Cost Shifting Revisited: New Evidence from the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.
International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics, published online, August 12.
Zuckerman, S. (1987). “Commercial insurers and all-payer regulation. Evidence on hospitals'
responses to financial need,” Journal of Health Economics, 6(3): 165-187.
Zwanziger, J. et al. 2000. Can Cost Shifting Continue in a Price Competitive Environment?
Health Economics 9: 211-225.

49

ONLINE APPENDIX – NOT FOR PUBLICATION
Appendix 1: Constructing a measure of private prices
This appendix details the construction of our estimate of private prices. Using the Hospital Cost
Reports data, we construct a price per non-Medicare admission.33 This price is a weighted average of the
price for private patients and for Medicaid patients. Our interest is specifically in private prices. By
assuming that average Medicaid prices vary only at the state/year level, but not across hospitals within a
state/year, we recover an estimated private price.
More specifically, letting R = total revenue, P = price, N = number of patients, CMI = case mix
index, r = Medicare, d = Medicaid, p = private, t = year, s = state, and i = hospital.

We observe

,

,

,

,

and

directly from the data.

is used instead of

Case Mix indices for each type of patient because CMIs are only calculated by CMS for Medicare
patients. Our goal is to recover

. Let % priv

be the percent of a facility’s non-Medicare patients

with private insurance. We re-arrange to create a non-Medicare price per admission (
1

% priv

):

% priv

This states that the CMI adjusted price per non-Medicare admission is a patient weighted average of the
state level Medicaid price and hospital specific private prices. To recover an estimate of private prices,
we temporarily impose the restriction that private price growth rates are the same at all facilities within a
state34:
1
Therefore,
1

We then estimate the unknowns (

,

% priv

and

1

% priv

) using non-Medicare discharge weighted non-linear

least squares. To cut on the influence of particularly large facilities, we truncate these weights at the 5%
tails by year. We impose a number of sample restrictions. First, we restrict ourselves to those facilities
with non-missing CMI, price per non-Medicare discharge and discharge numbers. Second, we drop the
5% tails of price per non-Medicare discharge in each year. Finally, as facilities exiting from the data
33

The construction of this measure follows the methodology laid out in Dafny(2009) and is also used by Wu(2009).
For some states, our estimation sample is too small for us to separately identify a private price trend and a Medicaid trend
(or, if technically identified, the objective function is too flat). We pair these states up with a neighboring state, forcing the
private trend to be the same. The grouped states are North Dakota/South Dakota, DC/Delaware/Maryland, New
Hampshire/Vermont, Connecticut/Rhode Island and Idaho/Montana. We drop Alaska and Hawaii.
34

50

exhibit different time trends, as well as to cut down on the number of parameter estimates, we restrict
ourselves to facilities present in at least 9 of the 13 years of data.
Neither private prices, nor Medicaid prices are observed. We are able to identify the relative
growth in private prices vs Medicaid prices by looking at how growth in revenues per patient varies with
the percent of a hospital's non-Medicare patients with have private insurance. Identification of the
hospital specific private price intercept is less clear. In particular, if a hospital has more private patients
and higher prices, this suggests that private prices must be high at this specific hospital.
Using the recovered estimates of Medicaid prices, we construct private prices estimates as:
1 % priv
% priv

51

