NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF DECEPTIVE ADVERTISING ON CONSUMPTION OF THE ADVERTISED
GOOD AND ITS SUBSTITUTES
THE CASE OF OVER-THE-COUNTER WEIGHT LOSS PRODUCTS
John Cawley
Rosemary Avery
Matthew Eisenberg
Working Paper 18863
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18863
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013

This research was supported by an unrestricted educational grant to Cornell University from the Merck
Company Foundation, the philanthropic arm of Merck & Co. We also thank Cornell’s Institute for
Health Economics, Health Behaviors, and Disparities for financial support. We thank Donald Kenkel,
Dean Lillard, and Alan Mathios for their generosity in sharing the PhADS database. For helpful comments,
we thank Sahara Byrne, Dhaval Dave, Phil DeCicca, Michael Grossman, Don Kenkel, Annabelle Krause,
Jeff Niederdeppe, Edward Norton, Jeff Smith, and conference participants at the American Economic
Association meetings, IZA Conference on the Economics of Risky Behaviors, and the Conference
on the Economics of Obesity at the Paris School of Economics, and seminar participants at Yale, Cornell,
University of Melbourne, University of Michigan, University of Minnesota, University of Pennsylvania,
University of Sydney, University of York, McMaster, Case Western, Kenyon College, City University
of New York Graduate Center, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. Corresponding author: John
Cawley. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by John Cawley, Rosemary Avery, and Matthew Eisenberg. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Deceptive Advertising on Consumption of the Advertised Good and its Substitutes:
The Case of Over-the-Counter Weight Loss Products
John Cawley, Rosemary Avery, and Matthew Eisenberg
NBER Working Paper No. 18863
March 2013
JEL No. D83,I1,I18,M37,M38
ABSTRACT
This paper is the first to estimate the impact of exposure to deceptive advertising on consumption of
the advertised product and its substitutes. We study the market for over-the-counter (OTC) weight-loss
products, a market in which deceptive advertising is rampant and products are generally ineffective
with potentially serious side effects. We control for the targeting of ads using indicator variables for
each unique magazine read and television show watched.
Our estimates indicate that exposure to deceptive advertising is associated with a lower probability
that women, and a higher probability that men, consume OTC weight loss products. We find evidence
of spillovers; exposure to deceptive print ads is associated with a higher probability of dieting and
exercising for both men and women. We also find evidence that better-educated individuals are more
sophisticated consumers of advertising and use it to make more health-promoting decisions.
John Cawley
3M24 MVR Hall
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
and Department of Economics
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
jhc38@cornell.edu
Rosemary Avery
3M04 MVR Hall, Dept of PAM
Cornell University
Ithaca NY 14850
rja7@cornell.edu

Matthew Eisenberg
H. John Heinz III College
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
meisenbe@andrew.cmu.edu

Introduction
The research question of this paper is: to what extent does advertising, and
deceptive advertising in particular, affect consumption of the advertised good and its
substitutes? Deceptive advertising is difficult to define (Peltzman, 1981) but typically
consists of a firm misrepresenting the attributes of the advertised product (e.g., Nagler,
1993), and thus the expected utility from using the product. The U.S. Federal Trade
Commission Act prohibits “unfair or deceptive acts or practices”, including both
misstatement of facts and failure to disclose important information that consumers should
know (Correia, 2004).
The research literature on deceptive advertising spans economics, marketing, and
consumer policy. Much of it focuses on factors that alter firm incentives to engage in
deceptive advertising (e.g. Posner, 1973; Darby and Karni, 1973; Nagler, 1993; Kopalle
and Lehmann, 2006; Zinman and Zitzewitz, 2012) and the impact of specific regulatory
policies on ad content (e.g. Byrd-Bredbenner et al., 2001; Sauer and Leffler, 1990).
Marketing researchers have conducted lab experiments with small samples to determine
how subjects perceive deceptive advertisements constructed by the researcher (e.g.
Compeau et al., 2004; Johar, 1995; Burke et al., 1988; Olson and Dover, 1978). The
contribution of this study is to estimate the impact of individual-specific exposure to
deceptive advertising on consumption of the advertised good and its substitutes.
This study contributes to the larger literature on the impact of advertising and
deceptive advertising. Several papers have measured the impact of market-level
advertising on purchases of the advertised good; see the review in Bagwell (2007).

2

Zinman and Zitzewitz (2012) find that ski resorts exaggerated fresh snowfall on
weekends (when skiers may be more elastic to fresh snowfall) relative to weekdays, but
this declined after the introduction of an iPhone app that allowed consumers to
communicate with each other about the true amount of fresh snowfall. Peltzman (1981)
examines FTC cases during 1960-75 and finds that FTC action regarding deceptive
advertising tends to depress the market share of the involved brand.
Whether and how much deceptive advertising impacts consumption is unclear a
priori because firms can counter-advertise to reveal deceptive claims by their rivals and
consumers may be sufficiently savvy to disregard exaggerated claims (e.g., Posner,
1973). Moreover, advertising in general and deceptive advertising in particular can be
cooperative, increasing total consumption, or competitive (predatory), increasing market
share at the expense of rivals, or both (Bagwell, 2007; Dave, 2013).
We study unique individual-level data that include measures of consumption,
health-related behaviors, magazine readership, and television viewing. Information on
the ads that ran in the magazines that respondents report reading, and during the TV
shows that respondents report watching, is merged to the individual data. We have coded
the advertisements for deceptive content using explicit guidelines that the Federal Trade
Commission (FTC) developed for the specific market in question (over-the-counter
weight loss products). Each individual’s exposure to deception is used to predict
consumption, controlling for demographic factors and other variables used by marketers
to target their ads.

The Market for Over-the-Counter Weight Loss Products

3

We examine advertising in the market for over-the-counter (OTC) weight loss
products, which is a heterogeneous market, with products in the form of pills, powders,
creams, gels, patches, and jewelry. 2 In the U.S. during 2009-2010, the prevalence of
overweight was 64.5% for women and 74.1% for men (Flegal et al. 2012). 3 Given those
statistics, it may not be surprising that 60% of American women and 36% of American
men are trying to lose weight (Baradel et al., 2009). Safe and effective methods of
weight loss involve behavior modification: decreased calorie intake and increased
physical activity resulting in weight loss of 1-2 pounds per week (NHLBI, 2000). Such
“lifelong effort” (NHLBI, 2000, p. 1) and gradual weight loss are not particularly
appealing, and as a result some people consume OTC weight loss products that promise
rapid weight loss with little or no effort. OTC weight loss products have been consumed
by 20.6% of adult women and 9.7% of adult men (Blanck et al., 2007), and by 14.4% of
adolescent females and 7.2% of adolescent males (Wilson et al., 2006). These are
percentages of the entire U.S. population, not just of the subpopulation that is overweight
or trying to lose weight. Among those who have ever made a serious weight-loss
attempt, 33.9% used an OTC weight loss product (Pillitteri et al., 2008).
OTC weight loss products are only loosely regulated and have a history of little
efficacy and dangerous side effects. OTC weight loss products are governed by the 1994
Dietary Supplements Health and Education Act (DSHEA) and are treated as foods
(Correia, 2004; GAO, 2002). They are sold OTC in supermarkets and pharmacy aisles as
well as through the mail and over the Internet. Because they are regulated as foods,
manufacturers need not show any benefit from the product but also cannot make specific
2

This category does not include meal replacements.
Overweight is defined as a body mass index (BMI) of greater than or equal to 25, and obesity is defined
as a BMI of greater than or equal to 30; NHLBI (2000).

3

4

disease claims. Manufacturers bear no responsibility for proving safety before marketing;
like food, the product is assumed to be safe. Advertising of OTC weight loss products is
subject to the same regulations that govern advertising of food 4; they are not subject to
the far more stringent regulations on the advertising of prescription medications. 5 As a
result, manufacturers of OTC weight loss products have considerable latitude in the
marketing of their products.
OTC weight loss products are generally ineffective and can have severe, even
potentially fatal, side effects (GAO, 2002). 6 Two active ingredients that were common in
this class of products have since been banned by the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) for increasing the risk of stroke and cardiac events: ephedra in 2005 and
phenylpropanolamine (PPA) in 2000. Although these and similar active ingredients have
little effect on calorie expenditure and therefore weight loss, they do increase heart rate,
which could be interpreted by a poorly-informed consumer as an increase in metabolism
that will burn fat. In fact, they have little if any impact on weight but do increase the risk
of heart attack and stroke. 7 To increase the sensation that metabolism has increased
manufacturers often include caffeine that further raises the risk of cardiac events. Even
after the FDA removed PPA and ephedra from the market these products continue to

4

The FDA and FTC have joint authority over the regulation of dietary supplements; the FTC has primary
authority over advertising and the FDA has primary authority over labeling (FTC, 2010).
5
During the period we examine, the OTC weight loss market did not yet include Alli, the OTC version of
the prescription weight loss drug Xenical that was introduced June 15, 2007 and is the only weight loss
product approved by the FDA for OTC sale.
6
A review of the evidence on the safety and efficacy of OTC weight loss products concluded, “The
evidence for most dietary supplements as aids in reducing body weight is not convincing. None of the
[twelve] reviewed dietary supplements can be recommended for over-the-counter use” (Pittler et al., 2004).
7
Awareness of the fatal side effects associated with OTC weight loss products was increased by the highlypublicized deaths of several professional athletes (Korey Stringer of the Minnesota Vikings football team
whose death led the NFL to ban players’ use of ephedra; Steve Bechler of the Baltimore Orioles baseball
team; Rashidi Wheeler, a Northwestern University football player; and Devaughan Darling, a Florida State
football player) who were consuming the products to try to lose weight they had gained during the offseason; see Sheinin (2003).

5

have active ingredients with negligible efficacy and substantial side effects (Dwyer et al.,
2005; Pittler and Ernst, 2004; Bouchard et al., 2005). Analysis of a dozen weight-loss
supplements sold on the internet in 2007 found that two-thirds contained one or more
ingredients associated with multiple incidents of life-threatening cardiac complications or
death, but none of the products’ advertisements, labels, or accompanying materials
warned of such adverse events (Nazeri et al., 2009).
The market for OTC weight loss products is characterized by incomplete
information. OTC weight loss products can be experience goods (consumers do not
know how well the product will work for them until they consume it) or even credence
goods (consumers aren’t sure how well it worked even after they consume it). Drugs and
supplements can have person-specific effects, so even information from friends and
family who have consumed the product may be of uncertain relevance. Consumers are
also poorly informed about government regulation of these products; roughly half of
Americans believe that OTC weight loss products must be approved for safety and
efficacy before being sold to the public (Pillitteri et al., 2008; Harris Interactive, Inc.,
2002). 8
The market failure of imperfect information makes deceptive advertising
potentially profitable. In general, deceptive advertising is more advantageous to firms
selling experience or credence goods (Nelson, 1974). Whether because of a lack of
information or other reasons, “Deceptive weight loss claims have long plagued the
supplement industry” (FTC, 2010, p. 9).

8

Consumers’ confusion about regulation of OTC weight loss products could be due in part to similar
confusion among physicians; a survey found that 37% of physicians in residency training programs were
unaware that OTC dietary supplements do not require FDA approval before sale (Ashar et al., 2007).

6

Deceptive advertising of OTC weight loss products could have several negative
consequences, the magnitudes of which depend on the effect of deceptive advertising on
consumption. If deceptive advertising is cooperative (increases the probability of use)
then the negative consequences may be substantial; those induced by the deceptive ads to
begin consuming OTC weight loss products face a risk of adverse, even potentially fatal,
side effects. Even if deceptive advertising is merely competitive or predatory (causing
existing users to change brands but not convincing any abstainers to begin using the
products) it still may create a “lemons market” in which deceptively advertised products
drive the more honestly advertised products out of the market (Akerlof, 1970; Carlton
and Perloff, 2000). 9
Given the large number of Americans taking OTC weight loss products, the
products’ ineffectiveness, history of substantial side effects (including death), and the
frequency with which these products have had to be withdrawn from the market for
safety reasons, the effect of deceptive advertising on consumption of these products is of
considerable interest for public policy and public health.

Conceptual Framework
We set aside the decision of the firm to engage in deceptive advertising (Posner
1973; Darby and Karni, 1973; Nagler, 1993; Kopalle and Lehmann, 2006) and focus on
how deceptive advertising affects consumer behavior. The conceptual framework for the
analysis is based on economic models of body weight (e.g. Cawley, 2004a; and
9

The FTC has written, “…if the entire field of weight-loss advertising is subject to widespread deception,
then advertising loses its important role in the efficient allocation of resources in a free-market economy. If
the purveyors of the “fast and easy fixes” drive the market place, then others may feel compelled to follow
suit or risk losing market share to the hucksters who promise the impossible. Public health suffers as well.”
(FTC, 2002).

7

Lakdawalla, Philipson, and Bhattacharya, 2005). In these models, utility is a function of
food consumption, the allocation of time to various pursuits, body weight, health, and a
composite good (all other goods).
One cannot directly choose body weight or health – these stocks can be affected
only through the following flows: food consumption (caloric intake), the allocation of
time (which determines caloric expenditure), and consumption of weight loss products.
Individuals are assumed to allocate their time and money in such a way as to maximize
their utility subject to constraints on their time, budget, and biology (the biological
constraint states that changes in weight are determined by the excess of calories
consumed over calories expended).
The demand for weight loss products is a derived demand, derived from the
demand for weight and health. Weight loss is produced by combining time and effort
with market goods (such as weight loss products). Factor substitution is possible because
there is more than one way to lose weight – one can decrease food consumption, increase
exercise, and consume weight loss products, in any combination. The utility-maximizing
consumption of weight loss products is characterized by the “last dollar rule”: the last
dollar spent on each good (including inputs into weight loss such as OTC weight loss
products, gym memberships, and so on) provides equal marginal utility. If this were not
the case, consumers could rearrange their spending to achieve higher utility with the same
budget. However, because weight loss products are experience or credence goods,
consumers do not know with certainty the benefits and costs of consuming OTC weight
loss products. We assume that consumers’ beliefs regarding the marginal costs and
benefits of consumption are based in part on the advertisements to which they are

8

exposed. As a result, consumers may over consume OTC weight loss products (and
participate less in substitute weight loss methods such as dieting and exercise) relative to
what would maximize the present discounted value of lifetime utility.
It is unclear a priori whether advertising in general, and deceptive advertising in
particular, increase consumption of OTC weight loss products (cooperative effects), or
simply increase market share for the advertised brand without increasing overall
consumption (competitive or predatory effects). It is possible that exposure to nondeceptive ads and exposure to deceptive ads could have different effects. Because we
consider this to be an empirical question we do not have a strong a priori hypothesis.
Other methods of weight loss, such as dieting and exercise, could be either
complements to, or substitutes for, OTC weight loss products. 10 Thus, it is ambiguous
whether exposure to advertising for OTC weight loss products will increase or decrease
the probability of dieting and/or exercising. Ultimately, these are empirical questions that
can only be answered by examining the data.

Data
National Consumer Survey
Our individual-level data are from the Simmons National Consumer Survey from
2001-2007. The NCS provides detailed information on Americans’ consumption,
magazine reading, and television viewing. The NCS is a repeated cross-sectional survey,
in which each wave is an independently drawn multistage stratified probability sample of

10

Even the advertisements are not consistent on this point. Among the print ad appearances in our sample,
45.8% advise the consumer to use a sensible diet and exercise but 5.5% say that the product can help the
consumer lose weight without diet or exercise and 3.2% say that the product can help consumers lose
weight no matter how much they eat.

9

all telephone households in the United States (excluding Hawaii and Alaska); see
Simmons NCS (various years). In order to minimize respondent fatigue, the data are
collected in several phases. In phase I, face-to-face interviewers collect demographic data
and data on magazines reading and TV shows watched. During a subsequent part of
phase I, respondents report, by filling out a questionnaire, whether they purchase and use
specific products, including weight loss products. In Phase II, which is typically
conducted about eight weeks after the phase I interview, interviewers collect and review
with the respondent his/her answers to the consumption questionnaire. Survey response
rates in the NCS are generally high (approximately 70%).
Respondents provide information about a host of demographic characteristics
such as age, gender, race, marital status, number of children, and census region, and
socioeconomic characteristics such as education, income, employment status, and work
hours.
Respondents are asked a series of questions about weight loss methods, but not
everyone in the sample is asked every question. The entire sample is asked, “Are you
presently watching your diet?” Those who respond positively to this question are asked
whether they used non-prescription weight loss products (e.g. pills). 11 It is an inherent
limitation of the data that not every respondent is asked about consumption of weight loss
products.
The entire sample is asked whether they engaged in a wide range of activities in
the past 12 months; we code a person as having engaged in exercise if they participated in
aerobics, fitness walking, jogging/running, used cardio machines, or weight training.

11

Respondents are separately asked if they have used meal replacements for weight loss; those are not
considered in this analysis.

10

The entire sample is asked whether they have had specific medical conditions in
the past 12 months, including whether they were obese (asked 2001-2002) or 30 or more
pounds overweight (2003-2007).
Respondents are shown copies of the covers of over 100 magazines and are asked,
on average, how frequently they read each magazine over the past six months, expressed
in terms of how many issues they read out of the last four (i.e., one, two, three, or four).
Respondents were asked about their viewing habits for a list of approximately 400
broadcast television programs and nearly 400 cable television programs. For broadcast
television programs, the NCS asks respondents how many episodes of that show they
have watched out of the total aired in the past month (for weekly shows) or past week
(daily shows). For each cable TV show, respondents indicate whether they have watched
it in the past week or in the past month.
We pool data from the 2001-2007 cross sections of the NCS. We assign
households to Designated Marketing Areas (DMAs) based on their county of residence.
Our sample includes only those living in the top 75 DMAs (in 2001) or top 100 DMAs
(in 2002-2007) because we can only assign DMAs for those respondents. Our final
samples consist of roughly 59,000 women and 47,000 men.

Magazine Advertisements
Images of the magazine advertisements were drawn from the Pharmaceutical
Advertising Database (PhADS) archived at Cornell University. 12 The PhADS archive
contains a digital collection of all print advertisements for medications that appeared

12

The authors thank Donald S. Kenkel, Dean Lillard, and Alan Mathios for their generosity in sharing the
PhADS database. For more on this database, see Avery et al. (2007).

11

between January 1985 and January 2007 in 26 consumer magazines: Better Homes &
Gardens, Black Enterprise, Business Week, Cosmopolitan, Ebony, Essence, Family
Circle, Glamour, Good Housekeeping, Jet, McCall's (name changed to Rosie’s on
January 1, 2001), Modern Maturity, Money, National Geographic, Newsweek, People,
Playboy, Readers Digest, Rolling Stone, Seventeen, Sports Illustrated, Time, TV Guide,
U.S. News &World Report, Vogue, and Women's Day.
The 26 PhADS magazines were selected to include the magazines most frequently
read by specific demographic groups (defined by race, education, income, age, and
gender). Although 20 demographic groups were defined, members of each group often
read the same magazines. Consequently, the final set of magazines used to create the
digital archive includes the above 26 magazines.
The 26 magazines in PhADS account for between 30% and 60% of total U.S.
magazine circulation, and probably a higher fraction of all magazine advertisements
(Avery et al., 2007). Although the PhADS magazines are a substantial portion of the
market, the sample of advertisements in PhADS is not a random sample of all magazine
advertisements. However, advertising in PhADS closely tracks total national advertising
expenditures, and the variation in the PhADS data explains most of the variation in
advertising expenditures over the same time period (Avery et al., 2007).
All print advertisements for weight-loss products (OTC and Rx) that appeared in
every issue of these 26 magazines between 2000 and 2007 were matched to the NCS
data. It amounted to 466 unique magazine ads for OTC weight loss products with a total
of 686 ad appearances.

12

Television Advertisements
The data on television advertisements for OTC weight loss products (OTC and
Rx) come from a commercial source, Kantar TNS Media Intelligence. The TNS data
provide information on the exact time and program during which specific OTC weight
loss product ads aired. We use TNS data on advertisements that aired from 2000-2007 on
national networks, cable, and spot markets identified by Designated Marketing Areas
(DMAs). The TNS data cover the largest 75 DMAs in 2001 and the 100 largest
Designated Marketing Areas (DMAs) from 2002-2007. The data include 1,115 unique
television ads for OTC weight loss products, with a total of 1,151,089 ad appearances.

Definition of Deceptive Advertising of OTC Weight Loss Products
Undoubtedly, one reason for a lack of previous empirical research on the impact
of deceptive advertising on consumption is the difficulty in defining “deception”
(Peltzman, 1981). One advantage to studying the market for OTC weight loss products is
that the FTC issued specific definitions of deception for this market. Specifically, the
FTC issued a list of seven weight-loss claims that it deems “not scientifically feasible,”
“facially false,” “bogus,” and “too good to be true” (FTC, 2003, 2005). The FTC calls
these claims “red flags” because the claims are so outrageous that they should raise a red
flag for magazine publishers and television stations. These seven false claims are that a
weight-loss product will:

13

1) Cause weight loss of two pounds or more a week for a month or more without
dieting or exercise 13;
2) Cause substantial weight loss no matter what or how much the consumer eats;
3) Cause permanent weight loss (even when the consumer stops using product);
4) Block the absorption of fat or calories to enable consumers to lose substantial
weight;
5) Safely enable consumers to lose more than three pounds per week for more than
four weeks 14;
6) Cause substantial weight loss for all users;
7) Cause substantial weight loss by wearing it on the body or rubbing it onto the
skin.
These definitions of deception seem reasonable to us. However, even if one disagrees
with them the FTC standards remain policy relevant because they are the official
definitions of deception by the relevant governing agency.
In the Reference Guide for Media on Bogus Weight Loss Claim Detection (FTC,
2003), the FTC provides detailed instructions for identifying each of the above deceptive
claims and clear examples so that media can avoid running advertisements that contain
them. Our researchers used those FTC instructions to identify which deceptive claims (if
any) appear in the sample of 466 unique magazine ads and 1,151 unique television ads
for OTC weight loss products. To ensure the accuracy of the coding, a second researcher
independently coded the same advertisements and, if a significant number of
13

This is deceptive not so much because of the rate of weight loss - the NHLBI (2000) recommends weight
loss of 1-2 pounds per week - but because of the promise that weight loss can be achieved without dieting
or exercise.
14
This is deceptive because of the rate of weight loss; the NHLBI (2000) recommends weight loss of 1-2
pounds per week.

14

discrepancies were found, a third researcher coded them as well and resolved the
discrepancy. Thanks to the clarity of the FTC guidelines we obtained inter-coder
reliability over 90% for six out of the seven coded dimensions for print ads (with an
outlier of 69.6% agreement for the seventh), and agreement over 98% for each of the
seven coded dimensions for the television ads.

Measures of Exposure to Advertisements
We construct measures of individual exposure to advertisements for OTC weight
loss products in the following manner. The variable Readim is the fraction of the last four
issues of magazine m read by person i, and Watchediv is the fraction of daily or weekly
episodes of television show v watched by person i. 15 The number of ads for OTC weight
loss products that appeared in magazine m during year t is Adsmt and the number of OTC
weight loss advertisements that were shown during television show v during year t is
Adsvt.
To estimate potential exposure to print ads for OTC weight loss products, we
multiply the fraction of issues read of each magazine by the number of ads that ran in that
magazine in the past year and sum across all 26 magazines. To estimate potential
exposure to television ads for OTC weight loss products, we multiply the fraction of
episodes watched of each television show by the number of ads that ran during that show
in the past year and sum across all 700+ shows.

15

Specifically, based on the questions that the Simmons NCS asks about TV viewing, we match ads to
network TV shows and to cable TV “day parts” (times of the day respondent reports watching television for
each day of the week).

15

M

OTC _ Magazine _ Ad _ exposureit = ∑ Adsmt * Readim
m =1

V

OTC _ TV _ Ad _ exposureit = ∑ Adsvt *Watchediv
v =1

A similar process was used to estimate potential exposure to advertisements for
prescription (Rx) weight loss drugs, in print and on television.
M

Rx _ Magazine _ Ad _ exposureit = ∑ Rx _ Adsmt * Readim
m =1

V

Rx _ TV _ Ad _ exposureit = ∑ Rx _ Adsvt *Watched iv
v =1

In these calculations, we assume that reading and television viewing habits in
recent months reflect those over the past year. We also assume that most of the impact of
an advertisement occurs within a year; consistent with this, Bagwell (2007) describes
empirical evidence that the average effect of advertising on sales is mostly depreciated
within 6-9 months (Bagwell, 2007).
By matching individual magazine reading and television viewing over specific
periods of time to the ads that ran in those magazines and during those television
programs at the time that the respondent reported viewing them, our individual-level
calculation of advertising exposure is far more accurate than in the previous literature on
the effects of advertising which almost exclusively uses market-level (DMA) advertising
volume or expenditure, implicitly assuming that all individuals in a large market are
exposed to the same advertising (see the review in Bagwell, 2007). The exceptions are
Avery et al. (2007), which examines individual-level effects of advertisements for
smoking cessation products and Avery et al. (2012), which examines individual-level
effects of advertisements for antidepressant medications. Our measures of individual
exposure are more accurate than market level analyses, but (as with the previous
16

literature) they still represent potential exposure rather than actual exposure. That is,
even though these ads ran in magazines the respondents read and the television shows
that they watched, respondents might have missed them while read the magazine issue or
watching the TV program.
We also calculate the percentage of the ads for OTC weight loss products to
which one was potentially exposed that contained at least one deceptive statement (which
we refer to as ‘deceptive ads’).
M

Pct _ Deceptive _ OTC _ Magazine _ Adsit = ∑ Deceptive _ Adsmt * Readim

M

∑ Ads

mt

=
m 1=
m 1
V

Pct _ Deceptive _ OTC _ TV _ Adsit = ∑ Deceptive _ Adsvt *Watched iv

V

∑ Ads

=
v 1=
v 1

vt

*Watchediv

This measure treats all deceptive ads equally, irrespective of whether they contained one
or multiple deceptive statements. Although this is a limitation, we chose to use the
percent of ads that were deceptive rather than a count of number of deceptive statements,
because the latter is highly correlated with other regressors that reflect total ad exposure.
Our deception measures concern only OTC weight loss products. Advertising of
prescription weight loss drugs is heavily regulated by the FDA and deceptive statements
do not appear in these ads. 16

Empirical Model and Identification
Our ideal research design would be to conduct a randomized experiment, in which
thousands of people, in the normal course of their lives, were exposed to randomly
varying numbers of advertisements and deception regarding OTC weight loss products.
16

Our review of advertisements for Rx weight loss drugs in the sample confirms that they do not contain
deceptive statements as defined by the FTC for the OTC weight loss market.

17

* Readim

We would then estimate how consumption of OTC weight loss products varied with this
exogenously-generated variation in exposure, controlling for all relevant individual
characteristics.
Such a randomized experiment is not feasible. Instead, we use opportunistic data
in which exposure is not experimentally manipulated but varies based on differences over
time in the number and deceptiveness of ads that run in the same magazines or during the
same television shows. We use these data to estimate reduced-form logit models of
whether the respondent consumes an OTC weight loss drug as a function of exposure to
advertising and deception:

Pr(Consumeit= 1)= F (α1 +
OTC _ Magazine _ Adsit βOM + OTC _ TV _ Adsit βOV
+ Rx _ Magazine _ Adsit β RM + Rx _ TV _ Adsit β RV
+ Pct _ Deceptive _ OTC _ Magazine _ Adsit β DM + Pct _ Deceptive _ OTC _ TV _ Adsit β DV
+ X it χ )
where F ( z ) =

ez
1 + ez

The binary outcome Consumeit is set equal to one if respondent i reports having
consumed an OTC weight loss product in the past year t. In subsequent models we also
test for spillovers to dieting and exercise.
OTC _ Magazine _ Adsit and OTC _ TV _ Adsit , controlling for exposure to

deceptive advertising, measure potential exposure to non-deceptive advertisements for
OTC weight loss products in magazines and on television. Rx _ Magazine _ Adsit and
Rx _ TV _ Adsit measure the respondent’s potential exposure to advertisements for

prescription weight-loss medications in magazines and on television.

18

Pct _ Deceptive _ OTC _ Magazine _ Adsit and

Pct _ Deceptive _ OTC _ TV _ Adsit are the percent of ads (in magazines and on

television, respectively) to which the respondent was potentially exposed that contain at
least one deceptive statement (i.e., Red Flag statement as defined by the FTC). 17
The vector X includes the following control variables: age (indicator variables for
18-24, 25-34, 35-44, and 45-54, where 55 and older is the reference category), race
(African-American, Hispanic, Asian, and Other, with White the reference category),
education (less than high school, some college, college degree or higher, with high school
degree the reference category), income ($32,501-$55,000; $55,001-$87,500; $87,501$125,000; $125,001 and higher; with $32,500 and under the reference category), survey
wave (there are two survey waves per year) 18, marital status (single,
divorced/separated/widowed, with married the reference category), household size,
employment status (employed full time, employed part time, with unemployed or out of
the labor force the reference category), Census region (Midwest, South, West, with
Northeast the reference category), and work hours (31-40 hours, 41+ hours, with 30 hours
or less the reference category). We lack data on the price of OTC weight loss products;
however, nationwide annual changes in prices will be reflected in the coefficients on the
indicator variables for survey wave.

17

We also experimented with other measures of exposure to deceptive and non-deceptive content, such as:
a) exposure to non-deceptive ads and number of deceptive ads; and b) exposure to ads and exposure to
deceptive statements (there may be more than one per ad). However, in both cases the two measures of
exposure were highly collinear (correlation coefficients of .75 in case a and .84 in case b). In contrast, the
correlation coefficient for the regressors we use in this paper (exposure to ads and percent of ads that were
deceptive) is -0.06.
18
Our controls for survey wave also pick up any changes in use due to changes over time in FTC regulation
of the OTC weight loss market; see Avery et al. (2012).

19

We also control for indicator variables for whether respondents said that in the
past 12 months they were obese (2001-2002) or 30 or more pounds overweight (20032007); the wording of the question changed from 2002 to 2003.
To control for intensity of reading/watching that implies greater exposure to ads
in general, we control for the total number of magazine issues read in the past 12 months,
and the average hours of television watched per week. These also are likely control for
whether the respondent has a sedentary lifestyle.
A second model adds further controls for targeting; specifically: whether the
respondent reads any magazines in specific categories (women’s, young adult, African
American, or general interest) and whether the respondent watches any television shows
in specific categories (including news programs, soap operas, sitcoms, dramas, court TV
shows, celebrity news programs, and cartoons).
Our third, and preferred, model drops the indicator variables for categories of
magazines and television shows and replaces them with indicator variables for each
magazine and television show.
All models are estimated separately by gender for several reasons. Women face
greater penalties than men for obesity, e.g., in terms of depression and mental health
(Granberg, 2011), stigma and discrimination (Puhl, 2011), lower wages (Cawley, 2004b),
and higher health care costs (Cawley and Meyerhoefer, 2012). As a result, women are
more likely to engage in weight loss attempts (e.g. Baradel et al., 2009). These gender
differences suggest that the relationship between advertising and weight loss practices
may differ by gender. Standard errors are clustered at the household level.

20

The main threat to identification is the non-random nature of exposure to
advertisements and deception; in particular, advertisers targeting their ads to people likely
to consume the products. We address targeting in the following ways:
1) In our preferred model, we control for indicator variables for each magazine and
each television show. Therefore, identification will come from: year-to-year
variation in ads and deception in ads that run in each specific magazine and
television program; among people who read the same magazine, reading a
different number of issues of that magazine controlling for the overall number of
magazine issues read; among people who watch the same television shows,
watching a different number of episodes of that show controlling for the overall
amount of time spent watching television. We control for whether the respondent
reports being obese or 30 pounds overweight, in order to address targeting of
these ads to overweight or obese individuals.
2) To the extent that ads in general and deceptive ads in particular are targeted to the
same individuals, controlling for both reduces any omitted variable bias due to
targeting.
3) To the extent that prescription and over-the-counter weight loss products are
targeting the same individuals, controlling for both reduces omitted variable bias
due to targeting.
4) We use the NCS, the very database used by advertisers to target their ads. The
NCS website states: “The product usage, media usage, consumer demographic,
psychographic and lifestyle profiles measured and reported by Simmons are the
basic building blocks of virtually every major marketing firm and advertising

21

agency in the U.S.” (NCS, 2013). The NCS allows us to control for the very
variables used by advertisers to target their ads, ensuring that our coefficient
estimates suffer from a minimum of omitted variable bias due to targeting. As a
result, we have the same set of variables as those commercial entities targeting the
advertisements. Although nothing is observed by the advertiser that is not
observed by the econometrician, we acknowledge that we may use the variables
in different ways and thus not fully adjust for targeting.
As an extension, we examine whether results differ for individuals of high and
low education. Individuals with higher education tend to be in better health, in part
because they make better decisions about their health, i.e., they enjoy allocative
efficiency in the production of health (Grossman and Kaestner, 1997; Grossman, 2000).
This suggests the possibility that better-educated individuals are more sophisticated
consumers; they may be more critical of deceptive advertising, and less influenced by
advertising in general for OTC weight loss products (given their lack of efficacy and
history of adverse side effects). To investigate this possibility, we estimate models
separately by gender for those with a high school diploma or less, and those with some
college or more education.

Empirical Results
Use of Weight Loss Methods in the NCS

22

Table 1 contains summary statistics for the Simmons National Consumer Survey,
2001-2007. 19 OTC weight loss products were consumed in the past year by 11.9% of
women and 8.4% of men in the sample. These reports are similar to those found in
surveys that are not conditional on dieting; e.g., Blanck et al. (2007) found that 11.3% of
women and 6.0% of men have used OTC weight loss products in the past year.
Table 1 also contains information about other substitute or complementary
behaviors to consuming OTC weight loss products; 45.3% of women and 30.1% of men
report that they are currently watching their diet, and 59.1% of women and 50.4% of men
report that they exercise.
Exposure to Ads and Deceptive Ads
Table 1 also lists the summary statistics for the measures of advertising exposure.
Annual exposure to television advertisements for OTC weight loss products averaged
64.0 for women and 49.2 for men; exposure to print advertisements for these products
averaged 11.1 for women and 5.4 for men. For both women and men, 25.2% of the
television ads to which they were exposed had at least one deceptive statement; the
percent of print ads to which they were exposed that contained at least one deceptive
statement averaged 16.4% for women and 12.8% for men.
There are considerably fewer ads for prescription weight loss products. In the
past year exposure to such ads on television averaged 12.6 for women and 7.8 for men,
and exposure to print ads averaged less than one for both women and men.

The Impact of Deceptive Advertising on Consumption of the Advertised Product
19

Simmons NCS sample weights are used in generating the sample statistics in Table 1 but are not used in
estimating the regressions, on the grounds that the sampling probability is a function of the explanatory
variables (Solon et al., 2013).

23

We now examine the impact of exposure to advertising and deception on the
probability of using an OTC weight loss product in the past 12 months. An indicator for
using an OTC weight loss product in the past 12 months was regressed on exposure to
ads for OTC weight loss products (separately for television and print ads), exposure to
deception regarding OTC weight loss products (specifically, the percentage of such ads
that contained at least one deceptive statement), and exposure to advertising for Rx
weight loss drugs (separately for television and print ads), plus controls for
demographics, socioeconomic status, and targeting. Results for women are provided in
Table 2, and results for men are contained in Table 3. Table cells list the marginal effects
associated with the coefficients in a logit regression.
We focus attention on our preferred specification that controls for each individual
magazine read and television show watched; column 3 reports results from a logit model
and column 4 reports results from a linear probability model (the LPM is reported
because for smaller subsamples the logit model would not converge). 20
Table 2, column 3 indicates that, for women, exposure to ads themselves is not
significantly correlated with the probability of use. In models with fewer controls for
targeting (reported in columns 1 and 2) exposure to ads was positively correlated with use
of the products, but with the strong controls for targeting (columns 3 and 4) the sign flips
to negative and is not close to statistically significant. However, even in the model with
strong controls for targeting (columns 3 and 4) exposure to deception in television ads for
OTC weight loss products is associated with a lower probability of consuming such
products. Controlling for one’s exposure to television ads for OTC weight loss products,
20

In some cases, the sample size for the logit and LPM models that include indicator variables for
television shows and magazines differs slightly; this is due to certain shows perfectly predicting the
dependent variable in the logit model, which leads STATA to drop the observation.

24

increasing the proportion of television ads that are deceptive by 50% is associated with a
1.5 percentage point lower probability of use. One possible explanation is that deceptive
television ads may unintentionally send a signal to women that the product cannot
possibly deliver the weight loss that is claimed in the ad and thus increase consumer
skepticism and deter purchase. The sign of the marginal effect on exposure to deceptive
print ads is also negative, but is not close to being statistically significant.
We also estimate models separately by education subgroup; specifically: those
with a high school degree or less education, and those with some college or more
education. In tables of results that are available upon request, we find that exposure to
deceptive advertising on television is associated with a lower probability of using OTC
weight loss products among the college educated, but not less educated, women. This is
consistent with the hypothesis that better educated women are more sophisticated
consumers of the messages in deceptive advertising, and may be suspicious of products
that are deceptively advertised.
Table 3 presents results for models estimated for men. For men, the logit model
with indicator variables for each magazine and television show would not converge, so
column 3 is left blank, and the results of a linear probability model are provided in
column 4. No measure of exposure to ads (either television or print) is associated with
men using OTC weight loss products. However, exposure to deceptive print ads is
associated with a higher probability of use by men. The magnitude of the coefficient
suggests that, controlling for number of print ads to which one is exposed, increasing the
share that are deceptive by 50% would increase the odds that a man consumes such
products by roughly 1.25 percentage points (compared to a base of 8.4 percentage points

25

of men using the products). These results are in contrast to what was found for women,
which raises the question of whether there are gender differences in the response to
deceptive advertising in general, or the difference we observe is specific to the market in
question. The previous empirical literature on deceptive advertising does not offer much
guidance on this question, as there are not studies of individual-level data with models
estimated separately by gender.
We also estimate these models separately by education subgroup for men. In
tables of results that are available upon request, we find no significant differences in the
relationship between exposure to deceptive advertising and consumption of OTC weight
loss products. However, among males with some college education, exposure to
television ads for Rx weight loss drugs is negatively correlated with the consumption of
OTC weight loss products.
So far, we have discussed the associations of using OTC weight loss products
with ad exposure and deception separately, controlling for the other. However, one can
also use the regression results to investigate the changes in the outcomes associated with
exposure to an additional 10 deceptive ads. Specifically, for a given medium (print or
television): we sum: a) the OLS coefficient on number of ads (divided by 10); and b) the
product of the OLS coefficient on percent deceptive and the change in the percent
deceptive that results from seeing 10 additional deceptive ads. We then average that sum
(i.e., the total change) across all respondents. The results indicate that exposure to an
additional 10 deceptive television ads is associated with women being 0.8 percentage
points less likely to consume an OTC weight loss product, and seeing an additional 10

26

deceptive print ads is associated with men being 1.5 percentage points more likely to
consume an OTC weight loss product.

Testing for Spillover Effects: Dieting and Exercise
Exposure to ads for OTC weight loss products may impact the use of substitute or
complementary methods of weight loss; specifically: dieting and exercise. In this section,
we examine whether exposure to ads for OTC weight loss products has such spillover
effects. The directions of such spillovers are ambiguous a priori, and depend on whether
consumers perceive these practices to be substitutes for, or complements to, OTC weight
loss products.
Dieting
Table 4 presents results for dieting among women. Results for our preferred
model that control for individual magazine and television show fixed effects (presented in
column 3 for logit and column 4 for LPM) indicate that greater exposure to television ads
for OTC weight loss products is associated with a lower probability that women diet.
Specifically, exposure to an additional 10 such television ads is associated with a 0.04
percentage point in reduction in the probability of dieting (on a base of 45.3%). In
contrast, exposure to television ads for prescription weight loss drugs is associated with a
higher probability of use; exposure to an additional 10 such ads is associated with a 3.0
percentage point increase in the probability of dieting (column 3). (Subgroup analyses
indicate that this correlation exists only for the better educated women.) Moreover,
greater exposure to deception in print OTC weight loss ads (controlling for exposure to
ads) is associated with a higher probability of dieting. The marginal effect in Table 4,

27

column 3 suggests that, controlling for number of print ads to which one is exposed,
increasing the share that are deceptive by 50% would increase the odds that a woman
diets by slightly more than 2 percentage points. One explanation consistent with this
pattern is that women are suspicious of deceptive statements, which lead them to seek
substitute methods of weight loss such as dieting.
Results of models of dieting for men are presented in Table 5. We find that
exposure to print ads for OTC weight loss products is associated with a higher probability
of dieting; the marginal effect in column 3 suggests that exposure to an additional 10
such ads is associated with a roughly 4 percentage point increase in the probability of
dieting (on a base of 30.1%). Subgroup analyses reveal that it is only for better-educated
men that exposure to print ads for OTC weight loss products is associated with a higher
probability of dieting. We also find, consistent with the results for women, that exposure
to deception in print advertising is associated with a higher probability of dieting.
We also calculate the change in the probability of dieting associated with
exposure to an additional 10 deceptive print ads, taking into account the effect through
exposure to ads in general and the effect through exposure to deception. The results
indicate that exposure to an additional 10 deceptive print ads is associated with a
probability of dieting that is 2.2 percentage points higher for women and 2.0 percentage
points higher for men.
Exercise
Models examining the impact of exposure to ads and deception on exercise
participation are presented in Tables 6 (women) and 7 (men). For both men and women,
exposure to print ads for OTC weight loss products is associated with a significantly

28

lower probability of exercising. Exposure to an additional 10 such ads is associated with
a decrease in the probability of dieting by roughly 3.5 percentage points for women (on a
base of 59.1%) and 4.8 percentage points for men (on a base of 50.4%).
However, exposure to greater deception in print ads for OTC weight loss products
(controlling for exposure to the ads themselves) is associated with a higher probability of
exercise. A 50% increase in deception in the ads to which one is exposed is associated
with an increase in the probability of exercise of roughly 1.8 percentage points for
women and 1.5 percentage points for men.
We calculate the change in the probability of exercising associated with exposure
to an additional 10 deceptive print ads, taking into account the effect through exposure to
ads in general and the effect through exposure to deception. The results indicate that
exposure to an additional 10 deceptive print ads is associated with a probability of
exercise that is 1.9 percentage points higher for women and 1.5 percentage points higher
for men.
One explanation for these results is that people see OTC weight loss products as
substitutes for exercise. When they see more ads for OTC weight loss products, they
decrease exercise, but when they see deceptive statements in such ads they are suspicious
and switch towards alternate methods of weight loss such as exercise.

Discussion
It has long been recognized that advertising can fulfill two functions: 1) provide
information to consumers, and 2) persuade or mislead consumers (Bagwell, 2007; Dave,
2013). This dual nature of advertising led Lester Telser to write that “Hardly any

29

business practice causes economists greater uneasiness than advertising” (Telser, 1964, p.
537). This paper contributes to the empirical economic literature on advertising by
producing the first estimates of the effect of individual-level exposure to deceptive
advertising on consumption of the advertised good and its substitutes.
Previous literature has examined whether advertising has cooperative effects,
expanding the overall market, or competitive (predatory) effects, in which advertising
increases market share of the advertised product at the expense of rival products. We
find no evidence that exposure to additional ads affects the probability of using OTC
weight loss products. We also find evidence that deceptive television advertising of OTC
weight loss products is associated with a lower probability that women consume such
products. Deceptive advertising that is implausible may unintentionally send a signal to
consumers that the product is suspect, discouraging consumption. If advertising in
general has no effect on consumption, and deceptive advertising lowers consumption
among women, then what incentive do firms have to engage in these practices?
Deceptive advertising must do something to increase firm profits or firms would not
engage in it so frequently (e.g., in 2001-02, 60.2% of all magazine ads, and 42.3% of all
television ads, for OTC weight loss products contained at least one deceptive statement;
see Avery et al., 2013). Although we cannot test for it directly, we assume that
advertising and deceptive advertising must have competitive or predatory effects,
increasing market share of the deceptively advertised product at the expense of rivals. If
true, deceptive ads in this market are similar to ads for soda pop, which are also
competitive (Gasmi, Laffont, and Vuong, 1992).

30

We also find a negative spillover of print advertising of OTC weight loss
products: greater exposure to such ads is associated with a lower probability of exercise
for both men and women. Specifically, exposure to an additional 10 print ads for OTC
weight loss products is associated with a decrease in the probability of dieting by roughly
3.5 percentage points for women (on a base of 59.1%) and 4.8 percentage points for men
(on a base of 50.4%). One possibility is that consumers see OTC weight loss products as
a substitute for exercise. Although 45.7% of print ads in our sample advise consumers to
use a sensible diet and exercise in conjunction with their product, 5.5% of them claim
that their product will help consumers lose weight without diet or exercise. The latter
claim may be more influential on consumer behavior. However, print ads do not have a
detectable impact on the probability of consuming OTC weight loss products themselves.
Among women, exposure to television ads for weight loss products is associated
with a lower probability of dieting. Better understanding these gender differences should
be a priority for future research to determine whether these results are specific to weight
loss markets given gender differences in the prevalence, consequence, and interpretation
of obesity (e.g. see Puhl, 2011; Granberg, 2011; Cawley, 2004b) or are general to
advertising.
We also find some evidence of positive spillovers from advertising of prescription
weight-loss medications; exposure to such ads on television is associated with a higher
probability that women diet.
Men and women also seem to respond differently to exposure to deceptive
advertising. Greater exposure to deception in television ads for OTC weight loss
products is associated with a lower probability that women consume such products, but

31

deception in print ads is associated with a higher probability that men consume such
products.
This paper also documents a wide variety of spillover effects from deceptive
advertising in this market. Specifically, exposure to deception in print ads is associated
with a higher probability of dieting and exercise for both men and women. There are
several possible explanations for this finding. Deception may make consumers
suspicious of the product, and lead them to attempt substitutes to the advertised product
(in this case, dieting, exercise, and getting professional advice). Alternatively, deceptive
advertising that makes weight loss seem easy through the advertised product may
unintentionally make weight loss in general seem easier (e.g., even through other means).
Advertising, and even deceptive advertising, of questionable products apparently has the
potential of a beneficial unintended consequence of inspiring people to undertake healthy
and responsible approaches to weight loss.
These findings are relevant for public policy. The FTC has targeted deceptive
advertising in the market for OTC weight loss products. However, manufacturers may be
trapped in a prisoner’s dilemma of advertising: the dominant strategy is to advertise
deceptively, which shrinks sales to women, because for a firm to refrain from deceptive
advertising might mean even greater loss of sales because of erosion of market share. If
this is correct, then an FTC initiative that successfully reduced deceptive advertising
could unintentionally lead to increased consumption of these ineffective and potentially
harmful products by women, and decrease the probability of dieting and exercise for both
women and men.

32

Based on the literature on education and health (see for example, Grossman and
Kaestner, 1997), we hypothesized that education may mediate the relationship between
advertising and weight loss behaviors; specifically, that better-educated consumers would
make more health-promoting decisions in response to advertising and deceptive
advertising. Subgroup analyses confirm this hypothesis. It is only among bettereducated women that exposure to deceptive television ads is associated with a lower
probability of using OTC weight loss products. This suggests that better-educated
women are better able to distinguish false claims in advertising and is consistent with
allocative efficiency of education in the production of health. Spillovers also vary by
education. It is only among better-educated men that exposure to print ads for OTC
weight loss products is associated with a higher probability of dieting, and it is only
among the better educated that exposure to television ads for Rx weight loss medications
is associated with a higher probability of dieting (for women) and a lower probability of
using OTC weight loss products (for men).
Our results suggest that exposure to ads in different media (print and television)
may have different associations with consumer behavior. Research in communication
has found similar differences by medium of advertising (Liu & Eveland, 2005). An
important difference concerns the pace of the message; in television ads, the pacing is
dictated by the advertiser, whereas viewers set their own pace of experiencing print ads
(Dijkstra, Buijtels, & van Raaji, 2005). Communications researchers also recognize a
role of viewer involvement or interest; television ads are thought to be better for
influencing viewers who are less involved (or more distracted); see Salomon & Leight

33

(1984) and Dijkstra & van Raaij (2001). Future research should further how the impact of
deceptive advertising differs by the medium of the ad.
Our analysis has several limitations. First, although we control for each magazine
read and each television show watched in order to address targeting of ads, we do not
have exogenous variation in ad exposure. Second, there is measurement error in our
estimates of exposure. For example, we are unable to determine if the ad that ran in the
magazine the respondent reported reading or during the TV show the respondent reported
watching was actually seen by the respondent; thus, they are most accurately described as
measures of potential exposure. Thus, we overestimate actual exposure to ads in the
claimed magazines and television shows. There are also factors leading us to
underestimate exposure: we do not have ad data for the full universe of magazines,
people may underreport their television watching, and we have no information about
exposure via the radio or internet. We lack data on the prices of OTC weight loss
products; nationwide variation over time is captured by the indicator variables for survey
wave, but we cannot control for geographic heterogeneity in prices within years. Our
data, while unusually rich, do not contain the exact brand of OTC weight loss product
consumed; as a result we are not able to examine brand-competitive effects. Despite
these limitations, this paper provides the most direct evidence to date on the effect of
individual exposure to advertising in general, and deceptive advertising specifically, on
consumption of the advertised good and its substitutes.

34

Works Cited
Akerlof, George A. 1970. “The Market for 'Lemons': Quality Uncertainty and the
Market Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3): 488-500.
Anthony, Sheila. 2003. “Let’s Clean Up the Diet-Ad Mess.” Advertising Age, 74(5): 18.
Ashar, Bimal H., Tasha N. Rice, and Stephen D. Sisson. 2007. “Physicians
Understanding of the Regulation of Dietary Supplements.” Archives of Internal
Medicine, 167: 966-969.
Avery, Rosemary, Donald Kenkel, Dean R. Lillard, and Alan Mathios. 2007. “Private
Profits and Public Health: Does Advertising of Smoking Cessation Products
Encourage Smokers to Quit?” Journal of Political Economy, 115(3): 447-481.
Avery, Rosemary J., Matthew D. Eisenberg, and Kosali I. Simon. 2012. “The Impact of
Direct-to-Consumer Television Advertising on Antidepressant Use.” Journal of
Health Economics, 31(5):705-718.
Avery, Rosemary J., John Cawley, Matthew Eisenberg, and Jonathan Cantor. 2013. “The
Change in Deceptive Advertising of Weight Loss Products After the Federal
Trade Commission’s 2003 Red Flags Initiative.” Journal of Public Policy and
Marketing, forthcoming. ( doi: 10.1509/jppm.11.115 )
Bagwell, Kyle. 2007. “The Economic Analysis of Advertising.” In: M. Armstrong and
R. Porter (eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, volume 3. (New York:
Elsevier).
Baradel, Lesley A., Cathleen Gillespie, Jana R. Kicklighter, Michele M. Doucette, Meera
Penumetcha, Heidi M. Blanck. 2009. “Temporal changes in trying to lose weight
and recommended weight-loss strategies among overweight and obese
Americans, 1996–2003.” Preventive Medicine 49 (2009) 158–164.
Blanck, H.M., M.K. Serdula, C. Gillespie, D.A. Galuska, P.A. Sharpe, J.M. Conway,
L.K. Kahn, and B.E. Ainsworth. 2007. “Use of Nonprescription Dietary
Supplements for Weight Loss is Common Among Americans,” Journal of the
American Dietetic Association, 107: 441-447.
Bouchard NC, Howland MA, Greller HA, Hoffman RS, Nelson LS. 2005. “Ischemic
stroke associated with use of an ephedra-free dietary supplement containing
synephrine.” Mayo Clinic Proceedings 80(4): 541–5.
Burke, Raymond R., 1988. “Deception by Implication: An Experimental Investigation.”
Journal of Consumer Research, 14(4): 483-94.
Byrd-Bredbenner, Carol; Grasso, Darlene. 2001. “The Effects of Food Advertising
Policy on Televised Nutrient Content Claims and Health Claims.” Family
Economics and Nutrition Review, 13(1): 37-49.
Carlton, Dennis W. and Jeffrey M. Perloff. 2000. Modern Industrial Organization, 3rd
Edition. (New York: Addison-Wesley).
Cawley, John. 2004a. “An Economic Framework for Understanding Physical Activity
and Eating Behaviors.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 27(3S): 117125.
Cawley, John. 2004b. “The Impact of Obesity on Wages.” Journal of Human Resources,
39(2): 451-474.
Cawley, John and Chad Meyerhoefer. 2012. “The Medical Care Costs of Obesity: An
Instrumental Variables Approach.” Journal of Health Economics, 31(1): 219-230.

35

Compeau, Larry D., Joan Lindsey-Mullikin, Dhruv Grewal, and Ross D. Petty. 2004.
“Consumers’ Interpretations of the Semantic Phrases Found in Reference Price
Advertisements.” Journal of Consumer Affairs, 38(1): 178-87.
Correia, Edward. 2004. “The Federal Trade Commission’s Regulation of Weight-Loss
Advertising Claims.” Food and Drug Law Journal, 59: 585-594.
Darby, Michael R. and Edi Karni. 1973. “Free Competition and the Optimal Amount of
Fraud.” Journal of Law and Economics, 16(1): 67-88.
Dave, Dhaval M. 2013. “Effects of Pharmaceutical Promotion: A Review and
Assessment.” NBER Working Paper #18830.
Dijkstra, Majorie & van Raaij, W. Fred. 2001. “Media Effects by Involvement Under
Voluntary Exposure: A Comparison of Television, Print, and Static Internet,”
Journal of Euro-Marketing, 11 (2): 1-21.
Dijkstra, M., Buijtels, H.E.J.J.M., & Raaij, W.F. van. 2005. “The separate and joint
effects of medium type on consumer responses: a comparison of television, print
and the Internet.” Journal of Business Research, 58(3): 377-386.
Douketis JD, C Macie, L Thabane, and DF Williamson. 2005. “Systematic review of
long-term weight loss studies in obese adults: clinical significance and
applicability to clinical practice.” International Journal of Obesity (2005) 29,
1153–1167.
Dwyer, Johanna T., David B. Allison, and Paul M. Coates. 2005. “Dietary Supplements
in Weight Reduction.” Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 105: S80S86.
Federal Trade Commission. 2003. Red Flag Bogus Weight-loss Claims: A Reference
Guide for Media on Bogus Weight Loss Claim Detection.
Federal Trade Commission. 2005. 2004 Weight Loss Advertising Survey.
Federal Trade Commission. 2010. Prepared Statement of the Federal Trade Commission
on: Deceptive Marketing of Dietary Supplements; FTC Enforcement Activities.
Before the Special Committee on Aging, United States Senate. May 26.
Flegal, Katherine M., Margaret D. Carroll, Brian K. Kit, and Cynthia L. Ogden. 2012.
“Prevalence of Obesity and Trends in the Distribution of Body Mass Index
Among US Adults, 1999-2010.” JAMA, 307(5): E1-E7.
Gasmi, F., J.J. Laffont, and Q. Vuong. 1992. “Econometric Analysis of Collusive
Behavior in a Soft Drink Market.” Journal of Economics & Management
Strategy, 1(2): 277-311.
Government Accounting Office. 2002. Dietary Supplements for Weight Loss: Limited
Federal Oversight Has Focused More on Marketing than on Safety. GAO-02985T.
Granberg, Ellen. 2011. “Depression and Obesity.” Chapter 20 in: John Cawley (editor),
The Oxford Handbook of the Social Science of Obesity. (New York: Oxford
University Press).
Grossman, Michael. 2000. “The Human Capital Model.” In A.J. Culyer and J. P.
Newhouse (eds.), Handbook of Health Economics, volume 1A (New York:
Elsevier).
Grossman, M. and R. Kaestner. 1997. "Effects of Education on Health" in J.R. Behrman
and N. Stacey (eds.) The Social Benefits of Education, pp. 69-123.

36

Harris Interactive, Inc. 2002. “Widespread Ignorance of Regulation and Labeling of
Vitamins, Minerals, and Food Supplements.” Health Care News, 23(2): 1-5.
Johar, Gita Venkataramani. 1995. “Consumer Involvement and Deception from Implied
Advertising Claims.” Journal of Marketing Research, 32: 267-279.
Kopalle, Praveen K., and Donald R. Lehmann. 2006. “Setting Quality Expectations
When Entering a Market: What Should the Promise Be?” Marketing Science,
25(1): 8-24.
Lakdawalla, Darius, Tomas Philipson, and Jay Bhattacharya. 2005. “Welfare-Enhancing
Technological Change and the Growth of Obesity.” American Economic Review,
95(2): 253-257.
Liu, Yung-Liu. & Eveland, William P. 2005. “Education, Need for Cognition, and
Campaign Interest as Moderators of News Effects on Political Knowledge: An
Analysis of the Knowledge Gap,” Journalism and Mass Communication
Quarterly, 82 (4): 910-929.
McLaren, L. 2007. Socioeconomic status and obesity. Epidemiologic Reviews 29:29-48.
Nagler, Matthew G. 1993. “Rather Bait Than Switch: Deceptive Advertising with
Bounded Consumer Rationality.” Journal of Public Economics, 51(3): 359-78.
National Consumer Survey. 2013. http://www.experian.com/simmonsresearch/consumer-study.html (accessed February 25, 2013).
National Heart Lung and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health. 2000. The
Practical Guide: Identification, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and
Obesity in Adults.
Nazeri, Alireza, Ali Massumi, James M. Wilson, Christopher M. Frank, Michael Bensler,
Jie Cheng, Mohammad Saeed, Abdi Rasekh, Mehdi Razavi. 2009.
“Arrhythmogenicity of weight-loss supplements marketed on the Internet.” Heart
Rhythm, 6:658-662.
Nelson, Philip. 1970. “Information and Consumer Behavior,” Journal of Political
Economy, 78(2): 311-329.
Nelson, Philip. 1974. “Advertising as Information.” Journal of Political Economy, 81:
729-754.
Olson, Jerry C. 1978. “Cognitive Effects of Deceptive Advertising.” Journal of
Marketing Research, 15(1): 29-38.
Peltzman, Sam. 1981. “The Effects of FTC Advertising Regulation.” Journal of Law and
Economics, 24(3): 403-448.
Pillitteri, J.L., S. Shiffman, J.M. Rohay, A.M. Harkins, S.L. Burton, and T.A. Wadden.
2008. “Use of Dietary Supplements for Weight Loss in the United States: Results
of a National Survey.” Obesity, 16: 790-796.
Pittler, M.H. and E. Ernst. 2004. “Dietary Supplements for Body-weight Reduction: A
Systematic Review,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 79: 529-536.
Posner, Richard. 1973. Regulation and Advertising by the FTC (Washington D.C.:
American Enterprise Institute).
Puhl, Rebecca M. 2011. “Bias, Stigma, and Discrimination.” Chapter 33 in: John Cawley
(editor), The Oxford Handbook of the Social Science of Obesity. (New York:
Oxford University Press).

37

Roberts, Mark, and Larry Samuelson. 1988. “An Empirical Analysis of Dynamic,
Nonprice Competition in an Oligopolistic Industry.” RAND Journal of
Economics, 19(2): 200-220.
Sauer, Raymond D. and Keith B. Leffler. 1990. “Did the Federal Trade Commission’s
Advertising Substantiation Program Promote More Credible Advertising?”
American Economic Review, 80(1): 191-203.
Sheinin, Dave. 2003. “Athletes’ Deaths Led to Ephedra Ban,” Washington Post,
December 31, p. D01.
Simmons NCS. Various Years. “Description of Methodology: General Information.”
Solon, Gary, Steven J. Haider, and Jeffrey Wooldridge. 2013. “What Are We Weighting
For?” NBER Working Paper #18859.
Telser, Lester G. 1964. “Advertising and Competition.” Journal of Political Economy,
72(6): 537-562.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2001. The Surgeon General’s call to
action to prevent and decrease overweight and obesity. [Rockville, MD]: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Office of the
Surgeon General; [2001]. Available from: U.S. GPO, Washington.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2010. The Surgeon General’s Vision for
a Healthy and Fit Nation. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Office of the Surgeon General, January.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2012. Summary Health Statistics for
U.S. Adults: National Health Interview Survey, 2010. Vital and Health Statistics,
Series 10, Number 252.
Wilson, K.M., J.D. Klein, T.S. Sesselberg, S.M. Yussman, D.B. Markow, A.E. Green,
J.C. West, and N.J. Gray. 2006. “Use of Complementary Medicine and Dietary
Supplements Among U.S. Adolescents.” Journal of Adolescent Health, 38: 385394.
Zinman, Jonathan and Eric Zitzewitz. 2012. “Wintertime for Deceptive Advertising?”
NBER Working Paper #17829.

38

Table 1:
Summary Statistics

Dependent Variables
Took OTC weight loss pill in past
12 months
Currently watching diet
Participate in exercise
Ad Exposure Variables
Exposure to TV ads for OTC
weight loss products
% of TV ads for OTC weight loss
products to which one was
exposed that were deceptive
Exposure to TV ads for Rx
weight loss drugs
Exposure to print ads for OTC
weight loss products
% of print ads for OTC weight
loss products to which one was
exposed that were deceptive
Exposure to print ads for Rx
weight loss drugs

Mean
.119

Females
S.D.
.324

Males
S.D.
.277

N
26,951

Mean
.084

N
14,275

.453
.591

.498
.492

59,482
59,482

.301
.504

.459
.500

47,383
47,383

64.018

127.286

59,482

49.191

107.849

47,383

.252

.207

59,482

.252

.224

47,383

12.633

38.758

59,482

7.815

26.230

47,383

11.049

18.492

59,482

5.401

13.231

47,383

.164

.217

59,482

.128

.245

47,383

.718

2.583

59,482

.341

1.799

47,383

Data: Simmons National Consumer Survey merged with data from Kantar TNS Media Intelligence, 20002007. Data are weighted using Simmons NCS sample weights.

39

Table 1 (cont.):
Summary Statistics

Other Regressors
Obese
>30 pounds overweight
Age 18-24
Age 25-34
Age 35-44
Age 45-54
Age 55+
White
Black
Hispanic
Asian
Other Race
Less than High School
High School
Some College
College or more
Income < $32,500
Income $32,501 - $55,000
Income $55,001 - $87,500
Income $87,501 - $125,000
Income > $125,001
Single
Married
Divorced/Separated/Widowed
Number in household
Employed full-time
Employed part-time
Not employed
Work 30 hours or less
Work 31-40 hours
Work 41+ hours
North
South
Midwest
West
Total magazine issues read in past
12 months
Average number of hours of TV
watched per week

Mean
.056
.155
.098
.155
.204
.204
.339
.634
.067
.261
.029
.013
.144
.281
.244
.332
.247
.222
.241
.158
.132
.144
.650
.200
3.400
.406
.161
.432
.632
.241
.128
.247
.302
.223
.229
5.460

Females
S.D.
.230
.362
.298
.361
.403
.403
.473
.482
.249
.439
.167
.112
.351
.449
.429
.459
.431
.415
.428
.365
.338
.352
.477
.400
1.85
.491
.368
.495
.482
.427
.335
.431
.459
.416
.420
5.726

N
15,015
44,467
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482
59,482

Mean
.025
.082
.102
.153
.204
.205
.337
.631
.055
.271
.030
.015
.162
.254
.222
.364
.193
.217
.263
.117
.149
.155
.737
.105
3.514
.632
.094
.275
.426
.259
.316
.241
.298
.227
.234
4.425

Males
S.D.
.155
.274
.302
.340
.403
.404
.473
.483
.229
.445
.172
.121
.369
.435
.415
.472
.395
.412
.440
.382
.356
.362
.440
.306
1.815
.482
.291
.446
.495
.438
.465
.428
.457
.419
.423
5.319

N
11,951
35,432
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383
47,383

18.359

16.754

59,482

15.366

14.877

47,383

40

Table 2:
Consumption of OTC Weight Loss Products,
Women
Regressor

OTC TV Ads/10
OTC Print Ads/10
OTC TV % Deceptive
OTC Print % Deceptive
Rx TV Ads/10
Rx Print Ads/10
Demographic variables
Socioeconomic variables
Overweight/obesity variables
Magazine, TV intensity variables
Magazine, TV category variables
Magazine, TV program dummies
Observations
Mean of Dependent Variable

(1)
Women
Logit

(2)
Women
Logit

(3)
Women
Logit

(4)
Women
LPM

0.000213
(0.000136)
0.00323***
(0.00109)
-0.0320***
(0.0105)
0.0259***
(0.00989)
0.00111
(0.000707)
0.00280
(0.0102)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

9.39e-05
(0.000144)
0.00215*
(0.00111)
-0.0313***
(0.0104)
0.0112
(0.0108)
0.000402
(0.000733)
0.00574
(0.0102)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

1.93e-05
(0.000154)
-0.000539
(0.00119)
-0.0295***
(0.0101)
-0.00182
(0.0106)
0.00106
(0.00110)
0.00922
(0.0101)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-1.37e-05
(0.000176)
-0.000165
(0.00163)
-0.0296***
(0.0101)
-0.00374
(0.0130)
0.00151
(0.00148)
0.00900
(0.0128)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

26686
.119

26951
.119

26951
.119

26951
.119

Notes: table lists marginal effects from logit regressions.
Standard errors clustered at the household level are listed in parentheses.
Asterisks indicate statistical significance: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Data: Simmons National Consumer Survey merged with data from Kantar TNS Media Intelligence.
Demographic variables: indicator variables for age group, race, marital status, household size, and Census
region.
Socioeconomic variables: work hours, indicator variables for education, income category, year, and
employment status.
Overweight/obesity variables: indicator variables for whether the respondent said that in the past 12 months
they were obese (2001-2002) or 30 or more pounds overweight (2003-2007).
Magazine, TV intensity variables: total magazine issues read in the past 12 months, average hours of
television watched per week.
Magazine, TV category variables: indicator variables for whether the respondent reads any magazines in
specific categories (women’s, young adult, African American, or general interest) and whether the
respondent watches any television shows in specific categories (including news programs, soap operas,
sitcoms, dramas, court TV shows, celebrity news programs, and cartoons).

41

Table 3:
Consumption of OTC Weight Loss Products,
Men
Regressor

OTC TV Ads/10
OTC Print Ads/10
OTC TV % Deceptive
OTC Print % Deceptive
Rx TV Ads/10
Rx Print Ads/10
Demographic variables
Socioeconomic variables
Overweight/obesity variables
Magazine, TV intensity variables
Magazine, TV category variables
Magazine, TV program dummies
Observations
Mean of Dependent Variable

(1)
Men
Logit

(2)
Men
Logit

0.000199
(0.000149)
-0.00114
(0.00195)
-0.00853
(0.0107)
0.0217**
(0.00944)
0.000333
(0.00134)
-0.0347
(0.0219)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.000180
(0.000164)
-0.00116
(0.00204)
-0.00695
(0.0106)
0.0185*
(0.0104)
-0.000657
(0.00144)
-0.0326
(0.0221)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

14275
.084

14275
.084

See Notes to Table 2.

42

(3)
Men
Logit

(4)
Men
LPM

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.000173
(0.000231)
-0.00319
(0.00255)
-0.00780
(0.0109)
0.0252*
(0.0138)
-0.00326
(0.00221)
-0.0256
(0.0182)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
14275
.084

Table 4:
Dieting, Women
Regressor

OTC TV Ads/10
OTC Print Ads/10
OTC TV % Deceptive
OTC Print % Deceptive
Rx TV Ads/10
Rx Print Ads/10
Demographic variables
Socioeconomic variables
Overweight/obesity variables
Magazine, TV intensity variables
Magazine, TV category variables
Magazine, TV program dummies
Observations
Mean of Dependent Variable

(1)
Women
Logit

(2)
Women
Logit

(3)
Women
Logit

(4)
Women
LPM

-0.000487**
(0.000194)
0.00239
(0.00152)
0.0103
(0.0123)
0.0750***
(0.0124)
0.00388***
(0.000849)
0.00726
(0.0121)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.000607***
(0.000195)
0.00164
(0.00157)
0.00170
(0.0125)
0.0166
(0.0137)
0.00270***
(0.000887)
-0.00486
(0.0121)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.000403**
(0.000205)
-0.00256
(0.00174)
0.00251
(0.0130)
0.0433***
(0.0138)
0.00301**
(0.00129)
-0.00342
(0.0129)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.000354**
(0.000178)
-0.00208
(0.00139)
0.00445
(0.0104)
0.0389***
(0.0115)
0.00239**
(0.000992)
-0.00722
(0.0107)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

59466
.453

59482
.453

59482
.453

59482
.453

See Notes to Table 2.

43

Table 5:
Dieting, Men
Regressor

OTC TV Ads/10
OTC Print Ads/10
OTC TV % Deceptive
OTC Print % Deceptive
Rx TV Ads/10
Rx Print Ads/10
Demographic variables
Socioeconomic variables
Overweight/obesity variables
Magazine, TV intensity variables
Magazine, TV category variables
Magazine, TV program dummies
Observations
Mean of Dependent Variable

(1)
Men
Logit

(2)
Men
Logit

(3)
Men
Logit

(4)
Men
LPM

2.62e-05
(0.000196)
0.00535***
(0.00206)
-0.000838
(0.0105)
0.0309***
(0.00941)
0.00394***
(0.00121)
-0.00901
(0.0147)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-2.37e-05
(0.000201)
0.00901***
(0.00218)
-0.00921
(0.0106)
-0.00531
(0.0101)
0.00181
(0.00126)
-0.0177
(0.0149)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

4.23e-05
(0.000208)
0.00393*
(0.00224)
-0.0108
(0.0109)
0.0201*
(0.0116)
0.00237
(0.00185)
-0.0170
(0.0157)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

3.00e-05
(0.000223)
0.00551***
(0.00193)
-0.00465
(0.0103)
0.0190*
(0.0105)
0.000935
(0.00133)
-0.0252*
(0.0134)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

47337
.301

47383
.301

47383
.301

47383
.301

See Notes to Table 2.

44

Table 6:
Exercising, Women
Regressor

OTC TV Ads/10
OTC Print Ads/10
OTC TV % Deceptive
OTC Print % Deceptive
Rx TV Ads/10
Rx Print Ads/10
Demographic variables
Socioeconomic variables
Overweight/obesity variables
Magazine, TV intensity variables
Magazine, TV category variables
Magazine, TV program dummies
Observations
Mean of Dependent Variable

(1)
Women
Logit

(2)
Women
Logit

(3)
Women
Logit

(4)
Women
LPM

-1.79e-05
(0.000187)
-0.00221
(0.00150)
0.00768
(0.0116)
0.107***
(0.0122)
0.000309
(0.000830)
0.00175
(0.0121)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.000105
(0.000191)
-0.00116
(0.00151)
-0.000261
(0.0117)
0.0125
(0.0130)
-2.98e-05
(0.000859)
-0.0156
(0.0118)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-6.59e-05
(0.000199)
-0.00703***
(0.00166)
-0.00255
(0.0121)
0.0366***
(0.0132)
-0.00113
(0.00120)
-0.0279**
(0.0124)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-8.36e-05
(0.000180)
-0.00651***
(0.00137)
-0.00235
(0.0107)
0.0412***
(0.0115)
-0.00109
(0.00104)
-0.0171
(0.0111)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

59474
.591

59482
.591

59482
.591

59482
.591

See Notes to Table 2.

45

Table 7:
Exercising, Men
Regressor

OTC TV Ads/10
OTC Print Ads/10
OTC TV % Deceptive
OTC Print % Deceptive
Rx TV Ads/10
Rx Print Ads/10
Demographic variables
Socioeconomic variables
Overweight/obesity variables
Magazine, TV intensity variables
Magazine, TV category variables
Magazine, TV program dummies
Observations
Mean of Dependent Variable

(1)
Men
Logit

(2)
Men
Logit

(3)
Men
Logit

(4)
Men
LPM

3.62e-05
(0.000248)
-0.0120***
(0.00232)
0.0353***
(0.0122)
0.0947***
(0.0117)
0.00252**
(0.00127)
0.0476***
(0.0182)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-8.27e-05
(0.000251)
-0.00274
(0.00243)
0.0257**
(0.0123)
0.0321***
(0.0120)
0.000833
(0.00132)
0.0292*
(0.0174)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

2.12e-05
(0.000260)
-0.00960***
(0.00255)
0.0245*
(0.0128)
0.0297**
(0.0137)
-0.00209
(0.00188)
0.00570
(0.0182)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

7.03e-06
(0.000230)
-0.00893***
(0.00223)
0.0226**
(0.0115)
0.0316***
(0.0120)
-0.00166
(0.00157)
0.00677
(0.0155)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

47383
.504

47383
.504

47383
.504

47383
.504

See Notes to Table 2.

46

