NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DISABILITY, EARNINGS, INCOME AND CONSUMPTION
Bruce D. Meyer
Wallace K.C. Mok
Working Paper 18869
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18869
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013

This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10-M-98363-1-01
to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium.
The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views
of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. We would like to thank Sasha Achen,
David Autor, Richard Burkhauser, Kerwin Charles, Paul Gao, Luojia Hu, Austin Nichols, James Poterba,
Harvey Rosen, Zahra Siddique, Christopher Taber, Sergio Urzúa, Burton Weisbrod, Laura Wherry,
April Wu, Martin Zelder and seminar participants at NBER Summer Institute, Northwestern University,
the University of Chicago, the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, the University of British
Columbia, Stockholm University, the Stockholm School of Economics, Shanghai University of Finance
and Economics, the Institute for Research on Poverty, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, the
Guanghua School of Management of Peking University, and the Association for Public Policy and
Management meetings for helpful comments. We also thank Mark Aguiar and Erik Hurst for useful
programs and CSFII data.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Bruce D. Meyer and Wallace K.C. Mok. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Disability, Earnings, Income and Consumption
Bruce D. Meyer and Wallace K.C. Mok
NBER Working Paper No. 18869
March 2013
JEL No. H53,H55,I3,J22,J26,J68
ABSTRACT
Using longitudinal data for 1968-2009 for male household heads, we determine the prevalence of preretirement age disability and its association with a wide range of outcomes, including earnings, income,
and consumption. We then employ some of these quantities in the optimal social insurance framework
of Chetty (2006) to study current compensation for the disabled. Six of our findings stand out. First,
disability rates are high. We divide the disabled along two dimensions based on the persistence and
severity of their work-limiting condition. We estimate that a person reaching age 50 has a 36 percent
chance of having been disabled at least temporarily once during his working years, and a 9 percent
chance that he has begun a chronic and severe disability. Second, the economic consequences of disability
are frequently profound. Ten years after disability onset, a person with a chronic and severe disability
on average experiences a 79 percent decline in earnings, a 35 percent decline in after-tax income, a
24 percent decline in food and housing consumption and a 22 percent decline in food consumption.
Third, economic circumstances differ sharply across disability groups. The outcome decline for the
chronically and severely disabled is often more than twice as large as that for the average disabled
head. Fourth, our findings show the partial and incomplete roles that individual savings, family support
and social insurance play in reducing the consumption drop that follows disability. Fifth, time use
and detailed consumption data further indicate that disability is associated with a decline in well-being.
Sixth, using the quantities we have estimated, we provide the range of behavioral elasticities and preference
parameters consistent with current disability compensation being optimal within the Chetty framework.
Bruce D. Meyer
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
bdmeyer@uchicago.edu
Wallace K.C. Mok
Department of Economics
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Shatin, Hong Kong
wallacemok@cuhk.edu.hk
An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18869

1. Introduction
This paper examines the lifetime prevalence of disability and how the disabled fare
before and after the onset of disability. Disability is one of the main risks individuals face
during their lifetime. The Social Security Administration (SSA) estimates that a twenty year
old worker has nearly a 30 percent chance of becoming disabled before reaching age 65.1
Disability is also one of the primary reasons for public insurance spending. In 2006, Social
Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) payments equaled $92 billion and the share of
Supplementary Security Income (SSI) for the blind and the disabled was $36 billion.2
Private spending on the disabled was also high, with $55 billion spent on Workers’
Compensation in 2005.3 Looking forward, Autor and Duggan (2006) predict that the SSDI
receipt rate will rise 71 percent before reaching a steady state rate of approximately 7 percent
of non-elderly adults.
Despite high disability rates and high costs, there are major gaps in our understanding
of the economic consequences of disability. The dynamic nature of disability calls for
longitudinal measures that reflect its persistence and prevalence over an individual’s lifetime.
To date, however, few studies examine the long-term economic circumstances of the
disabled.4 Our study aims to bridge this gap in the literature.
This information is needed to design and evaluate disability policies. In the
framework of Chetty (2006), optimal disability benefits depend on the fall in consumption
with disability, the frequency of disability, and the moral hazard effects of disability benefits
(as well as utility function parameters).5 While there is an extensive literature on the moral
hazard effects of disability,6 we have less information on lifetime disability rates and the fall
in consumption with disability. This framework, which guides our analyses, also emphasizes
1

See Baldwin and Chu (2006) who also estimate that the probability of receiving Social Security Disability
Insurance by age 67 is 38 percent for men and 31 percent for women.
2
Specifically, the federal government spent $33 billion on SSI for the blind and the disabled (age 0-64), while
another $3 billion was spent in state supplementation (U.S. Social Security Administration 2007).
3
See Sengupta et al. (2007). The $55 billion includes payments for medical treatment and cash benefits.
4
Important past work on this topic includes Haveman and Wolfe (1990) who study the difference between the
incomes and earnings of the disabled and non-disabled using the Current Population Survey. Bound and
Burkhauser (1999) also compare earnings of the disabled and the non-disabled. Bound and Waidman (2002)
look at employment rates among the disabled. Charles (2003) examines earnings, hours and wages after
disability. Stephens (2001) analyzes some of these outcomes as well as food consumption. There is also related
work by Rupp and Davies (2004) and others.
5
Other important research that examines the adequacy of insurance for disability includes Chandra and
Samwick (2005) and Low and Pistaferri 2010).
6
See for example, Parsons (1984, 1991), Haveman and Wolfe (1984a, b), Bound (1989, 1991), Gruber (2001),
Black et al. (2002), and Autor and Duggan (2003).

1

that even though disability is endogenous, the endogenous rate of disability and the
accompanying fall in consumption are among the most important features to measure when
assessing the optimality of disability compensation.
Our study differs from the literature in several ways. First, by using 42 years of
longitudinal data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) we are able to estimate
the risk of disability over a household head’s lifetime. Second, we comprehensively examine
the economic circumstances of the disabled: we investigate changes in earnings, income,
public transfer receipt, poverty rates, work hours, employment, food consumption, housing
consumption, home production, and leisure time.7 In taking this wider view, we obtain a
better picture of the well-being of the disabled. Third, our estimates account for public
transfer under-reporting, an issue that can lead researchers to overestimate the income
decline as well as the poverty rate of the disabled. Fourth, we go beyond a uniform
characterization of the disabled by dividing the population based on a disability’s duration
(persistence) and severity. We then examine the lifetime prevalence of and changes in
welfare from different degrees of disability. To our knowledge, almost all previous economic
studies have examined the disabled as a single homogeneous group or only along a single
disability dimension – persistence or severity. Fifth, going beyond theoretical discussions of
benefit optimality in the literature, we quantitatively examine the implications for optimality
of estimated disability rates and changes in consumption in the Chetty framework.
This study has many findings. First, disability rates are high. A male household head
reaching age 50 has a 36 percent chance of having been disabled at least once during his
working years and about a 22 percent chance of experiencing a chronic disability that lasts at
least four years. We also estimate that by age 50, about 9 percent of male household heads
have begun a chronic and severe disability. By age 56, that number rises to 15 percent
Second, disability is associated with bad economic outcomes. Ten years after
disability onset, those with a chronic and severe disability condition have on average seen
their earnings drop by 79 percent, their after-tax income drop by 35 percent, their family food
and housing consumption drop by 24 percent, and their consumption of food alone fall by 22
percent. In addition, about two-thirds of these most disabled individuals never return to work
in the long run. Third, there are sharp outcome differences across disability groups; those
with chronic and severe disabilities often experience a percentage decline in these economic
outcomes more than twice as large as those of the average disabled.
7

Our companion paper, Meyer and Mok (2012), focuses on earnings, income and public benefit receipt.

2

Fourth, our findings indicate the partial but incomplete roles that individual savings,
family support, and government and private insurance play in reducing the consumption drop
that follows disability. Despite the various government programs available, the incomes of
one-sixth of families with a chronically and severely disabled head drop below the poverty
line in the long term, even after accounting for in-kind transfers and the under-reporting of
benefits. Fifth, we find a noticeable fall in earnings and income prior to the onset of a
reported disability. Consumption also falls somewhat prior to reported onset, indicating that
future disability is partially but incompletely predictable in the short run.
Sixth, recent research suggests that the dollar expenditures of the retired may
understate their true consumption because they get more for their money through increased
shopping and home food preparation (Aguiar and Hurst 2005). Evidence from time-use
surveys does not suggest that the disabled and their spouses do more shopping. We also find
that instead of working more on food and other home production, the disabled spend more
time using medical services, watching television, relaxing, and sleeping. Together these
findings suggest a true decline in material well-being after the onset of disability, especially
for those who are more disabled. To further assess our finding that consumption declines
following disability, we examine food surveys and find suggestive evidence that the diet of
the disabled is worse than that of the non-disabled in many dimensions.
Seventh, we use our estimates in the Chetty (2006) optimal benefit formula that
balances insurance against moral hazard. We find the set of behavioral elasticities and utility
function parameters consistent with the current compensation for the most disabled being
optimal. While the values of the key risk preference parameters that are not settled in the
literature, there is a substantial range over which current compensation is lower than is
optimal.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our dataset and
sample, and how we define and categorize the disabled. This section also discusses lifetime
prevalence of disability, and outlines the empirical strategy for the rest of the paper. Section
3 examines the change in earnings and employment following disability onset. Section 4
examines the fall in income following disability onset, the rise in poverty and public transfer
receipt. Section 5 summarizes the changes in consumption of food and housing. Section 6
discusses a series of robustness checks, revisits the change in food consumption and
considers the time use of the disabled. Section 7 outlines the Chetty model of optimal social
insurance and examines the optimality of current provisions for the disabled in this
3

framework, while Section 8 concludes. The appendices include additional results concerning
the impact of disability on food quantity and quality, as well as the usage of time.8

2. Data, Categorizing the Disabled and the Prevalence of
Disability
A. Data
We use the PSID, a longitudinal dataset begun in 1968 with an initial sample of about
4,800 U.S. households and 18,000 individuals. The initial sample had two components, both
of which we use: a nationally representative sample (Survey Research Center sample) and a
national sample of low-income families (Survey of Economic Opportunity sample). The
latter group included about 1,800 households.
Households were interviewed annually between 1968 and 1997, and biannually since
then.9 Children in sample households are followed as they leave and form their own families.
Since the survey’s initial focus was the dynamics of poverty, questions are asked about
benefits received, work hours, earnings, income, health, and other outcomes. A particularly
attractive feature of the PSID is that it collects information on housing and family food
expenditures, variables that are available in few other microeconomic surveys. Many authors
have used this particular feature to measure the material well-being of individuals. As of
2009, the PSID has collected information on 71,285 individuals.
In this study, we use the entire PSID panel, beginning with 1968 and continuing
through the 2009 wave. Most of our analysis focuses on male household heads who are 2261 years old in the survey year.10 We focus on those 22 and older because those below this
age are unlikely to be household heads. The choice to focus on male household heads is
necessary because the PSID did not ask disability questions of spouses until 1981. The PSID
defines the household head in a married couple family to be the male, except when he is so
8

The appendices can be accessed online at http://harrisschool.uchicago.edu/directory/faculty/bruce_meyer
Some data are available for intervening years. For example, the 1999 survey asked about both 1998 and 1997
earnings.
10
We retain any data on disability for people outside this age range because it may be useful in determining the
persistence or severity of an individual’s disabling condition. As we will explain later, the degree of persistence
is determined based on the frequency of positive limitation reports after disability onset. Thus, ignoring
information after the age of 61 may lead to an individual being misclassified, especially if his age of disability
onset is close to 61. Similarly, the onset age cannot be correctly determined if we exclude all data outside the
age range. For example, a person whose disability began at age 18 could have his onset age mistakenly set to
22 if we disregard the responses to the disability question outside the age range.
9

4

severely disabled that he is unable to respond to the survey. In order to assure sufficient
information about the variables of interest, we select male household heads who are
interviewed for at least six years and who are 22-61 years old for at least four interviews,
three of which are consecutive.

B. Disability Questions, Limitations and Severity
The main disability question in the PSID is, “Do you have any physical or nervous
condition that limits the type or amount of work you can do?” This question is asked of
household heads consistently throughout the life of the survey.11 After determining the
presence of a work-limiting condition, a severity question asks the extent that this condition
limits the work capability of the head. We group the responses to this question into two
categories: “Severely Disabled” and “Not Severely Disabled.” We define Not Severely
Disabled in Year t to be those who respond “Just A little,” “Somewhat,” “Not Limiting,” or
“Not at all” to the severity question in the year t survey. Severely Disabled in Year t are
those who respond “Can do nothing,” “Completely,” “A lot,” or “Severely.”
Table 1 tabulates the unweighted and weighted disability rates for male household
heads aged 22-61 during the 1968-2009 period. These rates are usually between 11-15
percent and are comparable to those found by Burkhauser et al. (2006).12 The table also
reports the share of the disabled with a severe disability. The fraction of the disabled
classified as severe is usually about one-third. However, during the 1977-1985 period the
possible responses to the severity question in the survey were more limited, apparently
leading to a higher fraction of respondents indicating that their condition limited their work
capability “A lot.”13 We have investigated the sensitivity of our disability rates and
outcomes to reduced reliance on these years, and have found only small impacts given the
averaging over time and classification system we use, as discussed in the Appendix.

11

In the period 1973-1975, this disability question was asked only of new entrants to the survey. We assume
the disability status of these new entrants has not changed until the 1976 survey.
12
These authors find that PSID disability rates are higher than those in the March CPS, but are generally lower
than those found using the Survey of Income Program Participation (SIPP) or the National Health Interview
Survey (NHIS).
13
See the data appendix (Appendix 3) for the exact wording of the question in different periods. No severity
question was asked during 1969-1971.

5

C. Self-Reported Disability and its Validity
1) Self-Reported Disability Status
Many researchers have argued that self-reported disability status is the preferred way
to define disability given that a large share of disabilities, even those compensated by SSDI,
cannot be determined by an explicit physical marker (because they are psychological or
driven by pain).14 Other authors question the validity of self-reported disability status and
choose to focus instead on those who receive benefits such as SSDI or SSI.15 Such an
approach is not without its limitations, however. First, some disabled individuals may not
file for SSDI or SSI because of the paperwork and the requirement that the disabling
condition is expected to last for at least 12 months. Others may be unwilling to receive
government benefits or if they do, they may omit reporting them in surveys. Second, not all
disabled individuals will meet these programs’ qualifications. For example, SSDI requires
the applicant to have worked sufficiently during the years prior to disability,16 and SSI has a
stringent asset limit. SSDI and SSI benefits are unavailable to those who earn above certain
amounts despite their disabilities. In 2006, an SSDI recipient could not earn more than $860
after a trial period, and SSI recipients had their monthly benefits reduced by 50 percent of the
amount of any monthly earnings above $85 (U.S. Social Security Administration 2006).
Third, the denial of an SSDI or SSI application does not necessarily imply that an individual
is not disabled (Nagi 1969; Bound 1989), as indicated by the high acceptance rates for those
who appeal denials (Benitez-Silva et al. 1999 report that in 1993, of the 48 percent of denied
SSDI claimants who requested reconsideration, 50 percent were accepted).17
Past research, however, has also pointed out the merits of self-reported disability
measures. Benitez-Silva et al. (2004) suggest that self-reported disability responses are an
unbiased indicator of SSDI eligibility decisions. Stern (1989) finds that a self-reported
disability question is close to exogenous. To the extent self-reported disability was
endogenous, the relationship was the opposite of what had been hypothesized in the literature
14

Autor and Duggan (2006) report that more than half of SSDI awards in 2003 were for either mental disorders
or musculoskeletal disorders (e.g. back pain).
15
See Bound et al. (2007), Kreider and Pepper (2007), and Kreider (1999) for discussions of the limitations of
self-reported disability.
16
Only about 80 percent of working age individuals are insured by SSDI (Autor and Duggan, 2006).
17
Bound (1989) suggests that many rejected SSDI applicants are in fact incapable of work. Citing the study by
Nagi (1969), Bound states: “Of the population denied benefits, 35.6 percent were found incapable of any work,
and another 12.3 percent were only capable of work at home or in sheltered environments.” In addition, Bound
cites the study of Treitel (1976), which suggests that many rejected applicants did not work despite the SSDI
denials. Using administrative follow-up records, he shows that 13.8 percent of those denied benefits in 1967
died within the next six years.

6

(i.e. health tended to deteriorate when working rather than disability being used to justify not
working). In their comparison of the Current Population Survey (CPS) and the National
Health Interview Survey (NHIS), Burkhauser et al. (2002) argue that the self-reported worklimitation-based definition of disability may even underestimate disability rates. Given that
alternative definitions have their own endogeneity problems or are often too narrow, we
believe that self-reported disability status responses, while not perfect, offer the best
available method of measurement.18

2) Self-Reported Severity
The main difficulty in using self-reported disability severity responses is that they are
necessarily subjective. One may argue that more objective measures, such as the number of
everyday tasks the individual has difficulty with, should be used instead (see Bound 1989).
For example, the Census Bureau partly bases its definition of severely disabled on how many
Activities of Daily Living (ADL), Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL) and
functional activities an individual cannot perform.19 Surveys such as the PSID or the CPS,
however, do not ask these questions on a regular basis.
The PSID asked questions about physical limitations and specific medical conditions
diagnosed by a health professional in 1986, and the 1999-2009 surveys. In Appendix 1, we
provide extensive comparisons of our disability measures to these measures of health
limitations. We show that the severely disabled group in our sample has on average much
greater numbers of physical and health limiting conditions, as well as more serious forms of
these conditions, relative to the non-severe group and the non-disabled. For example, the
average number of activity limitations (difficulty walking, bending, driving, etc.) is 2.74 for
the Severe group, 1.15 for the Not-Severe group and 0.11 for the non-disabled. The average
number of doctor diagnosed severe health conditions (high blood pressure, diabetes, asthma,
etc.) is 1.17 for the Severely disabled, 0.19 for the Not-Severely disabled and 0.01 for the
18

Bound (1991) argue that there are biases in both self-reported and objective measures and that the biases from
the endogeneity of and measurement error in self-reported health measures tend to cancel each other out.
19
Specifically, using the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), the Census Bureau (McNeil 2001)
defines severe disability using the following criteria: 1) The person used a wheelchair, a cane, crutches or a
walker, 2) The person had any other mental or emotional condition that seriously interfered with everyday
activities, 3) The person received federal benefits based on an inability to work, 4) The person had
Alzheimer’s disease, 5) The person had developmental disability or mental retardation, 6) The person was
unable to perform or needed help to perform one or more of the functional activities, ADLs or IADLs, 7) The
person was unable to do housework, 8) The person was in the age range 16-67 and had a condition that made it
difficult to work at a job or business. A person who falls in any one of the above criteria is considered to be
severely disabled.

7

Non-Disabled. These results strongly indicate that self-reported disability severity captures
important features of the true severity of individual disabilities.

D. Sample Construction
Our focus is on disabilities that begin during the working years; accordingly, we
exclude those whose onset age is under 18 or above 56.20 In order to have sufficient
information after onset, we require that a disabled individual in our sample be in the survey
for a minimum of three years during the ten years after onset. This restriction is important to
determine the disability persistence and severity groups (which we introduce in Section E
below). Due to the restrictions that we impose in selecting our sample, we slightly understate
the extent of work limitations, as discussed further below. We replace missing demographic
information (age, marital status, years of education, number of family members, number of
children and state of residence) by the non-missing value in the nearest wave. We exclude,
however, individuals who are missing key demographic variables (education, age and marital
status).21
Determining the year of limitation onset for the disabled requires combining
information from multiple years of data. A valuable feature of the PSID is a retrospective
question on when a work limitation began that is available for the 1969-1978 waves (except
1976 and 1977). For those disabled on or before 1978, we use the responses to this question
to determine their year of onset.22 For those who first report having a disability after 1978,
we require that such individuals report no limitations in the two consecutive survey years
immediately prior to the year in which they first report having a work limitation.23 The
application of these restrictions results in a primary sample of 6,741 male household heads,
1,937 (29 percent) of whom are classified as ever disabled.

20

Our main estimation sample includes the person-year observations prior to disability onset for those who
became first disabled after age 56 as they enter disability rates and are part of the implicit comparison group for
the disabled.
21
We exclude 117 individuals (1.2 percent of the main estimation sample) because key demographic
information is unavailable.
22
Some individuals may have more than one response due to the panel nature of the data. Because the possible
responses to these questions were coded in intervals (except in the 1978 survey, when the exact number of years
is given), we determine the intersection of the intervals given by these questions and take the earliest year
within the intersection as the year of disability onset.
23
For example, if an individual first reports having a limitation in 1980, then the year of onset would be 1980 if
he has no limitations in 1978 and 1979. Since there is only one survey per year, we also adjust the year of onset
by determining the midpoint in time of adjacent interviews. See the data appendix.

8

E. Categorizing the Disabled
Besides determining how the disabled fare around disability onset, we examine how
economic outcomes evolve for different types of disabilities. We divide the extent of
disability along two dimensions: persistence and severity.
We divide the disabled into three persistence groups, building on Charles (2003). The OneTime Disabled are those who report a disability once, but do not report a disability again
during the next ten years. The Temporarily Disabled are those who have one or two
positive limitation reports within the ten years after disability onset. Thus, including the
onset report, a temporarily disabled individual will have at most three positive limitation
reports through the tenth year after onset. The Chronically Disabled are those who have
three or more positive limitation reports during the ten years after disability onset. To reduce
the dependence of the definition on time in survey, we use all the survey waves and require
that a disabled individual be in the survey for at least three years within the ten years after
onset.24
The severity questions are asked nearly every year of reported disability, giving us
multiple reports. We rely on average severity throughout the paper.25 Specifically, we define
the severity ratio as the fraction of the time the individual reports he is severely disabled in
the year of onset and the subsequent ten years after onset.26 We then define the Severely
Disabled to be those whose severity ratio is greater than 0.5. In the case where exactly half
of the responses indicate severe disability (a severity ratio of 0.5), we classify the disabled
head based on the first severity report.27
We combine the two disability dimensions in our main analyses by splitting the
Chronically Disabled into two groups. Hence, this classification yields four groups of

24

If we require more than three (four to six) post-onset positive limitation reports to be in the chronic group, the
results are very similar. Our disability persistence classification differs from that of Charles (2003), who
defines his most chronically disabled group to be those who report a positive limitation in every year after onset
(as long as they are in the survey). Thus, in his classification system, whether an individual is chronic partly
depends on the number of years an individual is in the survey, and his use of a shorter panel (1968-1993)
increases this dependence. Thus, a disabled person is more likely to be in the most chronic group the closer his
year of onset is to 1993.
25
The results are similar if we use only the initial severity report.
26
22 individuals in the main analyses are dropped who never respond to the severity question in this 11-year
period (year of onset and the subsequent 10 years).
27
Of the 1,937 disabled, 109 have a severity ratio of 0.5. Of the 877 chronically disabled individuals, only 43
have a severity ratio of 0.5.

9

interest – One-time, Temporary, Chronic-Not Severe and Chronic-Severe, which we
collectively call the Extent of Disability groups.28
To further motivate the need for a multiyear definition of disability and to summarize
the dynamic nature of disability status, Table 2 reports a modified second-order Markov
transition matrix for disability group. A given row conditions on disability status (nondisabled, Currently Not Severely Disabled, Currently Severely Disabled) during the previous
two years. The probability of the various outcomes over the next two years are then reported.
The results indicate both patterns of mobility and persistence, depending on past history. We
see that there is strong persistence over time in disability status for those who are nondisabled or Severely Disabled in two consecutive years. There is a 0.97 probability that
someone non-disabled for the past two years will be non-disabled this year, and the
probability is 0.95 next year. However, someone Severely Disabled the past two years has a
0.80 probability of being severely disabled this year and a 0.73 probability of being severely
disabled next year. Among those becoming severely disabled who were previously nondisabled, future disability status is fairly uncertain. It is almost equally likely that they will
be in any of the three states the following year. Table 3 reports the descriptive statistics for
the extent of disability groups. Of the 1,937 disabled individuals, 465 (24 percent) are OneTime disabled, 595 (31 percent) are Temporary disabled, 548 (28 percent) are Chronic-Not
Severe and 329 (17 percent) are Chronic-Severe. The average age at disability onset is
highest for the Chronic-Severe group (41.7 years), followed in descending order by the
Chronic-Not Severe group (37.0 years), the Temporary group (35.6 years) and the One-Time
group (35.7 years). The Chronic-Severe group is also the least educated group – only 19
percent have ever attended college; by comparison, 46 percent of the One-Time group have
attended college.
Members of each of the four disabled groups have participated on average in the
survey for at least 10 years after disability onset, though the Chronic-Not Severe participated
on average 6.3 more years than the One-Time group. It is also encouraging to see that all
four disabled groups have participated in a similar number of surveys, at least 17 on average.
This similarity in years in the survey, especially after onset, should reduce any concerns that
the One-Time group members are categorized as such because they are more likely to have
exited the survey after disability.
28

In principle, these four groups are not fully ordered. We cannot say, a priori, that the Chronic-Not Severe
group is “more disabled” than the Temporary group. In practice, though, the Chronic-Not Severe group fares
much worse than the non-chronic groups, as we see in our analyses.

10

In much of the paper, we focus on the Chronic-Severe group. While this group is
defined in a restrictive way, it still includes a much smaller share of a given age group than is
receiving Social Security disability payments as we will see shortly. Members of the
Chronic-Severe group have more persistent disabilities on average than the Chronic-Not
Severe group. The Chronic-Severe group reports a mean of 6.2 positive limitation reports
within ten years after disability, while the Chronic-Not Severe group reports a mean of 5.4.
The average severity ratio of the Chronic-Severe group (0.84) is almost seven times that of
the Chronic-Not Severe group (0.12).

F. Disability Rates and Lifetime Prevalence
We saw in Table 1 that roughly one in seven male household heads experiences a work
limitation in a given year. However, the statistic that more naturally feeds into calculations
of the insurance value of disability insurance is the probability that a person becomes
disabled some time during his working life.29 With data currently spanning 42 years, the
PSID is ideally suited for this calculation. We define the lifetime prevalence of disability as
the probability that an individual becomes disabled during his working years by a given age.
We calculate this measure for all ages 28-64. For this purpose we use the information on
disability reports and severity in a rolling ten-year-ahead window to classify an individual’s
current disability for each survey year. Accordingly, this measure fully accounts for the
potential worsening of a condition over time. We then classify individuals by the most
serious form of disability ever experienced, ranking the disability types in increasing order of
seriousness as follows: One-Time, Temporary, Chronic-Not Severe and Chronic-Severe. In
these analyses, we use sample weights to better approximate U.S. averages.30
As the number of years after 1968 increases, so does the number of years of past
information in the PSID. In addition, we use up to ten years of future information on
persistence and severity to classify a person’s current condition. Thus, in order to have the
best data to summarize disability histories, we focus on those individuals in the survey’s
middle years (1980-1992) who have been in the survey for at least ten prior years. Using the
survey’s initial waves would understate the prevalence rate because we do not have

29

The information relevant in a full life-cycle model of insurance might be more extensive, including
probabilities of disability at each age, the duration of the disability or the probability of recovery, the change in
consumption, and any effects on the mortality rate.
30
We use the current year weights in these analyses. Using the initial year weights (the first observed weight in
the 1980-90 window) yields almost identical percentages.

11

information about the individual prior to 1968 and many will have had a disabling condition
well before the PSID began.31 By contrast, using the most recent years would not give us the
full ten years of data after onset to classify a given disability.
We first report the chance of experiencing disability by the time an individual reaches
a given age in Table 4 for the 1980-1992 subsample.32 Not surprisingly, the chance of
experiencing disability rises with age. By the time a person reaches age 50, there is a 36
percent chance that he has experienced some kind of disability during his working years. In
particular, there is a 9 percent chance that an individual has ever experienced a ChronicSevere disability by that age. The corresponding rates for One-Time, Temporary and
Chronic-Not Severe disabling conditions are 6 percent, 7 percent and 13 percent. The rise in
the prevalence of Chronic-Severe disability with age is steep. The chance of ever
experiencing a Chronic-Severe disability approximately triples between age 40 and age 50.
Between age 50 and age 60 the probability nearly doubles again. The rates of chronic-severe
disability tend to be about twice as high as the SSDI receipt rates by age indicated in SSA
data. Despite a broader definition than SSDI eligibility, we will see that the Chronic-Severe
group fares very poorly.
In the Appendix we examine changes in disability prevalence over time. Our most
sophisticated analyses that account for definitional and sample changes, suggest only a
modest decline in disability rates over time.

H. Empirical Methodology
To measure the change in economic outcomes associated with disability, consider the
following fixed effect model for person i in year t:

(1) yit   i   t  X it     kg Akitg   it ,
g

k

where yit is the outcome of interest (such as hours worked) for person i in year t, αi is an
individual fixed effect and γt is an indicator variable for year t. Xit is a set of time-varying
explanatory variables including marital status, state of residence, age and age-squared,
31

Recall that the retrospective question was asked only if an individual was disabled at the time.
These prevalence rates may still be understated because of sample attrition and because the PSID does not
interview the head if he is totally incapacitated. We have examined the reasons for attrition and find that the
main causes are refusal and death, with total incapacitation accounting for less than 5 percent of all attrition.
See the Appendix for further discussion.
32

12

education, and number of children. Additional controls are included, depending on the
dependent variable.33 Akitg is an indicator variable that equals one if in year t, individual i
belongs to disability group g and he is k years from the year of onset, and εit is a potentially
serially correlated error term.
The sample for our analyses consists of the nondisabled and the disabled during all
years prior to disability onset through the ten years after onset. Throughout this study, we
focus on a set of outcomes five years before and ten years after the year of disability onset,
thus k  {-5, 10}. Given the inclusion of individual fixed effects,  kg measures the change in
the dependent variable k years away from the year of onset for those in disability group g
relative to the value of their dependent variable more than five years prior to disability. The
non-disabled are included to improve the precision of the estimated effects of age, education
and the other control variables. This way of modeling the time pattern of economic
outcomes is similar to the approach of Jacobson, LaLonde and Sullivan (1993), Stephens
(2001) and Charles (2003).
Specification (1) is attractive for some dependent variables, but in other cases we may
be interested in percentage changes in the dependent variable and may believe proportional
effects of explanatory variables are more natural that additive effects. Although one can
transform specification (1) into a log-linear form, by replacing the dependent variable yit by
log (yit), this method however is not suitable if a large number of observations on the
dependent variable are zero. As we will show, many disabled men have zero earnings
because they do not work at all. Defining a lower cutoff (that is, log (y) = log (a) for y<a) is
also not ideal, as the estimates may be sensitive to this cutoff. We therefore consider the
Poisson fixed effect regression model:

(2) yit  exp( i   t  X it       k g Akitg )   it
g k

where the coefficients of interest can be estimated by conditional maximum likelihood
methods. Modeling in this way allows us to keep observations with zero outcomes.

33

The number of members in the family is included in the income regressions. For earnings, hours, hourly
earnings and income, we also include interactions of education with age, age-squared and time since 1968. For
the food and housing consumption regressions, variables for the numbers of family members of different
genders and ages are also included. For more details, see the data appendix (Appendix 3).

13

Estimated percentage change in the outcome of a one-unit change in the dependent variable
can be obtained simply as exp(b)-1, where b is the estimated coefficient of interest.34
We estimate model (1) if our interest is how disability affects the level of the outcome
(such as hours of work, receipt of public transfers), whereas we estimate model (2) if we are
interested in knowing how disability affects the percentage change of the outcome (such as
earnings, income, food and food plus housing consumption). Standard errors are clustered by
person.35
In our analysis, all monetary values are reported in 2010 dollars, adjusting for
inflation using the Consumer Price Index Research Series using Current Methods (CPI-URS).36

3. Employment and Earnings Following Disability
We first focus on labor supply and investigate the changes in annual earnings, annual
hours worked, the probability of working and the hourly wage during the five years before
and ten years after disability onset.

A. Earnings
With many disabled having zero earnings and zero hours of work following disability,
using Poisson regression to estimate the effect of disability on earnings is a better choice.37
Table 5 shows the results of estimating equation (2) for the disabled as a whole. The results
for annual earnings are reported in column 1 (estimated coefficient) and column 2 (the
corresponding implied percentage change). These percentage changes are also displayed in
Figure 1. Annual earnings decline rapidly around the year of disability onset, falling about
8.4 percent by the year prior to onset and 13.9 percent by the year of onset, relative to the
years more than five years prior to onset (that is, k < -5, where k = 0 in the year of disability
onset).

This decline continues over the next two years, reaching about 20 percent. The

34

A poisson regression differs from the standard log-linear model in one important way. The former estimates
log E(y|x) while the latter estimates E[log(y|x)].
35
Note that we do not impose the Poisson variance assumption.
36
See the data appendix (Appendix 3).
37
Charles (2003) analyzes outcomes in logarithms, omitting observations with zero values and includes a
selection correction term (inverse Mill’s ratio).

14

earnings drop remains at around this level through the ten years after onset. These results are
very similar to those of Stephens (2001).38
The change in average earnings for all disabled heads hides great heterogeneity across
the Extent of Disability groups. Figure 1 also shows each disability group’s implied
percentage change in annual earnings (the full set of estimates are shown in Appendix Table
4). Not surprisingly, earnings drop the least after disability for the One-Time and Temporary
groups. For the One-Time group, they fall 7.3 percent by the year of onset. By the fifth year
after onset, the decline reaches about 12.3 percent. In the second five year period (six to ten
years after disability onset), annual earnings drop about 10 percent.39 While many of the
single-year differences in earnings from the base period for the One-Time group are
substantial and statistically significant, by years 9 and 10 the effects are much smaller and
not statistical significant. As one might expect, a short-lived disability does not greatly affect
an individual’s earning ability in the long run.
A slightly different pattern emerges for the Temporary group. Earnings have dropped
11 percent by the year of onset and 14.5 percent by the year after onset. By the third year
after onset, the earnings drop has shrunk to about 9 percent. The estimated percentage
decline in later years are about 8 percent but the estimates are statistically indistinguishable
from zero.40
For the Chronic-Not Severe group, earnings drop about 17.3 percent by the year of
disability onset. This decline in earnings continues through the following ten years; by the
tenth year after disability onset, it reaches almost 30 percent.
The decline in the earnings of the Chronic-Severe group is especially large. The
coefficient estimates and the corresponding implied percentage changes are reported in
columns 1 and 2 of Table 6 respectively. By the year of onset, earnings fall 36.5 percent. In
the following year, they fall an additional 23 percentage points, resulting in a cumulative loss
of about 59 percent. This downward trend continues, and by the tenth year after onset,
38

Stephens (2001) finds that disabled individuals experience a decline in annual earnings of about 10 percent
during the year of onset and experience a long-term loss in annual earnings of about 22 percent. Both our
results and those of Stephens’s are not comparable with those of Charles (2003) because the analyses in Charles
exclude those with zero earnings. As we summarize in Mok, Meyer, Charles and Achen (2008), we are unable
to reproduce results in Charles (2003).
39
These estimates are obtained by estimating the model with four time groups instead of the 16 years from
onset indicator variables. The four time groups are k = -5 to k = -2, k = -1 to k = 1, k = 2 to k = 5 and k = 6 to
k = 10, where k is the year from onset.
40
An F-test of the null hypothesis that all estimates after k = 5 are zero has a p-value of 0.72, hence the null
hypothesis cannot be rejected.

15

earnings have dropped by about 76 percent. Such a drop is more than tripled that of the
average disabled. As we will see, this pronounced drop is due to the high fraction of people
who work zero hours after disability.
A closer examination of the two chronic groups suggests that they both experience a
decline in earnings prior to disability onset. By the year before onset, earnings of the
Chronic-Not Severe group and the Chronic-Severe group drop 11.4 percent and 19.4 percent,
respectively. It seems likely that a person experiencing a decline in his earnings ability
would hesitate to call himself disabled initially, but would be more willing to do so after a
condition persisted.

B. Hours of Work and Employment
In this subsection, we examine how annual hours of work and employment change
with disability. We estimate model (1) for hours since the estimated coefficients represent
changes in the level of annual hours which are easily interpreted. Column 3 of Table 5
shows the changes in annual hours of work of the average disabled, and Figure 2 depicts
these changes. Similarly, column 4 reports the percentage of the average disabled working
zero hours; these results are displayed in Figure 3. By the year of onset, annual hours of
work are estimated to decline about 250 hours for the average disabled, with about 6 percent
of this population not working during the year. By the following year, the drop increases to
370 hours with about 13 percent of the disabled not working. From then on, the change in
annual hours of work remains roughly flat, but the percentage of the disabled who work zero
hours continues to rise. In the long term (six to ten years after disability onset), almost onefifth of the average disabled do not work at all during the year.
Figures 2 and 3 also show the hours and employment changes for the Extent of
Disability groups. We see relatively small changes in annual work hours for the One-Time
group; they are estimated to drop by only about 110 hours during disability onset and by an
additional 17 hours the following year. From then on, the fall diminishes. An F-test that all
estimates of the fall in hours are zero after k = 5 fails to reject the null hypothesis (p-value =
0.14) for our One-Time group. We observe a similar pattern for the Temporary group. By
the tenth year after onset, about 7 to 8 percent of people in the One-Time and Temporary
groups work zero hours.
Changes in yearly hours of work are much larger for the Chronic-Not Severe group,
with an estimated decline of more than 200 hours by the year of onset. By the fifth year after
16

onset, this group’s work hours are estimated to decline by about 350 with about 11 percent of
these individuals not working at all. In the long run (six to ten years after disability onset),
yearly work hours are estimated to decline by about 300 with about 10 percent of these
household heads not doing any work during the year. Although these declines are large, they
are much smaller than those of the Chronic-Severe group (columns 3 and 4 of Table 6),
whose annual hours of work are estimated to plummet by almost 690 by the year of onset.
By the following year, annual hours are estimated to decline by about 1,100, and about 40
percent of this group is doing no work during the year. In the long run (six to ten years after
onset), annual hours of work for the Chronic-Severe group are estimated to decline by about
1,400. We also see that only about 35 percent of this group will do any work in a year during
this period. Note, however, that the rise in this zero-work percentage is not instantaneous; it
rises gradually from about 40 percent in the year after onset to about 65 percent by the tenth
year after onset. An explanation might be that these people’s disabilities worsen over time,
and eventually they find themselves incapable of doing any work.

C. Hourly Earnings Following Disability
The above results indicate a rise in non-work following disability onset. We now
examine what happens to hourly earnings conditional on working. It is unlikely that those
who are working are a random sample of the disabled population. Instead, we expect disabled
individuals who are working to be experiencing lower hourly earnings losses. We measure
hourly earnings as annual earnings divided by hours of work, and classify as working those
who work 500 hours or more during the year. We estimate model (1) with log hourly
earnings as the outcome and figure 4 displays the percentage change in hourly earnings
before and after disability onset for all disabled and by extent of disability groups.41 For the
One-time and Temporary groups, there is no evidence that their hourly earnings decline at all
throughout the first ten years of disability, as all estimates are small and imprecisely
measured. The Chronic-Not Severe and Chronic-Severe groups, however, experience sharp
drops in hourly earnings following disability even among those who are working. By the
fifth year after disability onset, hourly earnings drop 15 percent for the Chronic-Not Severe
group and 13 percent for the Chronic-Severe group. In the long-run (six to ten years after
disability onset), hourly earnings decline an estimated 18 percent for the Chronic-Not Severe
group and about 21 percent for the Chronic-Severe group. These findings contrast sharply
41

The estimates for the change in hourly earnings are reported in Appendix Table 9.

17

with those in Charles (2003), who finds very small changes in hourly earnings (no more than
3.2 percent and most of the changes found are statistically insignificant).

4. Changes in Income, Poverty and Transfers with Disability
A. After-Tax Income
Our results in the previous section suggest that earnings decline after disability,
especially for the Chronic-Severe group. It would be premature to conclude, however, that
these large declines translate into large reductions in economic well-being. The effects of
lowered earnings may be cushioned by many factors, including 1) public benefits, 2) intrafamily risk-sharing through earnings of a spouse or children, 3) inter-family transfers such as
support from friends and relatives and 4) reductions in taxes or increases in tax credits from
programs such as the Earned Income Tax Credit that supplement income for the workingpoor. In this section, we examine changes in family income after disability.
Using the summary family income variable provided by the PSID, which is the sum
of labor, asset and transfer income, may be unsatisfactory even after we account for federal
income tax liabilities.42 First, this measure does not include in-kind transfers such as Food
Stamps and subsidized housing. Second, public transfer income is generally under-reported
in household surveys, and transfers to the disabled in the PSID are no exception.43
We formulate two income measures that are useful when examining the material
well-being of the disabled. First, we define “After-Tax Pre-Public Transfer Income” as
family income after federal income taxes but without benefits from the main types of public
benefit programs.44 This income measure may enable us to see how much non-labor
earnings, and intra- and inter-family transfers mitigate the income loss due to the lowered
earnings of the head that result from disability.

42

We use TAXSIM to generate tax liability estimates. See the Data Appendix (Appendix 3) for details. A
technical appendix discussing how we deal with the family issues in estimating federal tax liabilities via
TAXSIM is available upon request.
43
See Meyer, Mok and Sullivan (2009) for evidence of under-reporting of public transfers in several datasets
including the PSID.
44
The public benefit programs are Social Security, Supplemental Security Income, unemployment insurance,
workers’ compensation, Aid to Families with Dependent Children/Temporary Assistance for Needy Families,
Veterans (VA) pensions and other welfare.

18

Second, we define “After-Tax Post-Transfer Income” as the sum of after-tax family income,
Food Stamps and the amount of any housing subsidy received.45 In addition, we account for
under-reporting in the main public benefit programs by scaling the benefits received using
the program-specific reporting rates following Meyer, Mok and Sullivan (2009). These
reporting rates are calculated by comparing the weighted sum of the benefits received by the
entire PSID sample with those reported to have been paid out by government agencies. By
scaling up benefits in this way, we implicitly assume that non-reporting recipients share the
same characteristics as reporting recipients. The difference between our two income
measures will enable us to see how the receipt of benefits from various public programs
affects the drop in income after disability. Column 5 of Table 5 reports the Poisson
regression estimates for after-tax pre-public transfer income received for the disabled as a
whole. The corresponding implied percentage changes are reported in column 6 and are
displayed in Figure 5. For the disabled as a whole, after-tax pre-public transfer income drops
about 9 percent by the year of disability onset. The decline continues and the drop by the
tenth year after onset is about 13 percent.
Before examining the changes for the other disability groups, let us consider how
public transfers mitigate the income drop for the average disabled. Columns 7 and 8 report
the analogous estimates for after-tax post-transfer income, the implied percentage changes
are also displayed in Figure 6. Including public transfers reduces the income drop for the
average disabled by almost a half, to about 5 percent by the year of onset and about 8 percent
by the tenth year after onset.46
Changes in family income vary considerably across the disabled groups as can be
seen in the Appendix Tables 7 and 8. For the Chronic-Not Severe group, pre-public transfer
income drops an estimated 7.8 percent by the year of onset. Public transfers reduce this drop
to under 3 percent. Income continues to fall through the ten years after disability. By the
tenth year after onset, pre-public transfer income has fallen by almost 13 percent. With
public transfers, the income drop is reduced to about 7.6 percent. A similar pattern is
apparent for the Temporary group. For the One-Time group, the pre-transfer income change
by the tenth year after disability onset is small and statistically insignificant and the effect of
moving to post-transfer income is small.

45

See the Data Appendix (Appendix 3) for how we estimate the value of housing subsidies.
Stephens (2001) finds that family income falls about 7.4 percent by the year of onset and 15.5 percent by the
fifth year after onset. He does not, however, account for benefit under-reporting.
46

19

Columns 5-8 in Table 6 report the income changes for the Chronic-Severe group, and
they are also displayed in Figures 5 and 6. There is significant evidence of a pre-onset fall in
both income measures which, as we saw earlier, is primarily due to a fall in earnings prior to
disability. We will later see some evidence that suggests that there is worsening of health
prior to onset. By the year of onset, the drop in after-tax pre-public transfer income is about
23 percent, but only 11 percent when public transfers are included. The role of public
transfers in alleviating the post-onset income drop is evident throughout the Chronic-Severe
group’s disability history. By the tenth year after onset, pre-public transfer income drops 52
percent; when public transfers are included, the income drop is reduced to 28 percent.

B. Poverty
A standard indicator of well-being is the percentage of a group with income below the
poverty line. Figure 7 shows the percentage of the different disabled groups living below
poverty in the years before and after disability onset. Here we deviate from the official
poverty measure and incorporate some of the conceptual improvements that are commonly
suggested. In particular, we account for taxes and in-kind transfers (food stamps and the
value of subsidized housing). We compare this after-tax post-public transfer income to the
official poverty thresholds published by the U.S. Census Bureau which depend on the
number of family members and children.
Not surprisingly, the Chronic-Severe group has the highest poverty rate. Over 17
percent of the Chronic-Severe disabled group lives below poverty during the year of
disability onset; the number reaches 23 percent by the following year. The poverty rate for
this group remains above 20 percent until the tenth year after onset, when about 19 percent of
the Chronic-Severe group has income below the poverty threshold. The rate for the Chronic
Not-Severe group tends to rise over time and is over 10 percent in most later years. In
contrast, there is little change in the poverty rate for the One-Time disabled group over time.
Poverty among the Temporary group rises to a peak of around 15 percent in the second year
after onset, and then declines steadily.

C. Public Transfer Income and Dissaving
Our estimates above reveal that the Chronic-Severe group suffers the largest average
decline in earnings and income. A comparison of the changes in our two income measures
also suggests that the Chronic-Severe group receives substantial public transfers. To see this
20

result, we estimate specification (1) with public transfers received as the dependent variable
(adjusted for benefit under-reporting, including Food Stamps and subsidized housing).
Figure 8 shows these estimates for various disabled groups. The Chronic-Severe group
receives by far the largest amount of public transfers; total benefits increase $7,000 by the
year of onset then rise sharply in the next year. Benefits received then rise slowly reaching
about $14,000 per year ten years after onset. In contrast, members of the Chronic-Not Severe
group receive only about $2,500 ten years out.
Given the importance of public transfer income for the disabled in the long run (sixten years after disability onset), it is useful to disaggregate this broad category into specific
social insurance programs. In Appendix Table 10 we report receipt rates for disabled
individuals who are in their sixth to tenth year after disability onset.47 Not surprisingly, most
of the disabled in the Chronic-Severe group receive benefits – 49 percent receive Social
Security retirement or disability benefits (42 percent receive SSDI), 9 percent receive SSI
(and about 50 percent receive SSDI or SSI), and 24 percent receive food stamps.48 These
rates are considerably higher than those of the Chronic-Not Severe and Temporary groups.
In the case of SSDI, the receipt rate of the Chronic-Severe group is about ten times that of the
Chronic-Not Severe group. But as we will see in our next section, those in the ChronicSevere group still suffer on average from a large drop in living standards despite these
relatively high benefit receipt rates. Appendix Table 10 also reports the share of each
disability group that neither receives benefits nor works in the long run. This fraction is
especially high for the Chronic-Severe group of which 13 percent does not have an obvious
means of nonpublic support besides family member earnings or asset returns. This statistic is
likely overstated (and the earlier program receipt rates overstated) because of the underreporting of transfers mentioned earlier. The last two rows of Appendix Table 10 report preonset and post-onset median net wealth. We see that for the Chronic-Severe group there is a
substantial decline in assets over time from 41 thousand dollars to 26 thousand dollars. On
the other hand, median assets rise sharply for the other less disabled groups. This difference
suggests that a substantial part of the resources that prevent an even larger consumption fall
for the Chronic-Severe disabled come from dissaving.49 We have further explored the extent
47

This is discussed more extensively in Meyer and Mok (2012)
The SSDI receipt rate is based on 1984-1992 surveys, as these are the only years when the type of Social
Security payments received was recorded for the household head.
49
In our companion paper (Meyer and Mok forthcoming), we also study how differences in pre-onset net
wealth affect government benefit receipt. We find that those Chronic-Severe disabled with below median net
wealth are three times more likely to receive food stamps than their richer counterparts.
48

21

of dissaving by calculating the annual change in wealth when possible. We examine true
changes using the five-year apart wealth measures beginning in 1984 and the two-year apart
measures which begin in 1997. These numbers also indicate a sharp difference in the
saving/dissaving of the Chronic-Severe group compared to the other disabled groups and the
nondisabled. While the median annual change in wealth is about two to three thousand
dollars for all other groups, for the Chronic-Severe group it is essentially zero (though the
point estimate is positive). Again, the estimates suggest that the Chronic-Severe group only
maintains consumption by drawing upon wealth, though the estimates are imprecise given
that we have just under 200 observations on wealth changes.
We have also studied the degree of spousal risk sharing by estimating the change in
annual hours of work by wives of disabled heads.50 Appendix Table 6 shows these results.
The general pattern suggests a decline in hours worked by the wife, particularly for those
with a chronically and severely disabled husband; the estimates are not precise, however.51
Although not reported, we have also examined changes in marital status of the disabled over
time. We find that the share of disabled male heads that report their marital status as
“Divorced” or “Separated from Spouse” rises sharply over time relative to the nondisabled,
after accounting for age, education, children and other characteristics. The rise is especially
sharp for the more seriously disabled groups.52 On the surface, these findings suggest that
badly disabled men often lose support from their wives as well.
This part of the paper illustrates the economic hardships of the disabled and their
reliance on public transfer programs. This pattern is particularly true for the Chronic-Severe
group, which suffers large earnings losses and has a high receipt rate of public transfer
income. Despite the various public transfers they receive, about one-fifth of this group has
incomes below the poverty line in the long term.

50

A priori, there is no reason to believe that the wife of a disabled husband will unequivocally work more, as
she may prefer to spend less time working and instead care for her husband. While we find little evidence of
increased spousal work, as we also later indicate, we also find little evidence of increased spousal time caring
for other adults in the family.
51
Although not reported, we have also studied the degree of intra-family risk sharing by examining the changes
in earnings of other family members during the head’s period of disability; we find that they are generally small
and insignificant, consistent with the findings of Nagi and Hadley (1972).
52
A study by Charles and Stephens (2004) finds no change in the divorce hazard after disability. Using the
Survey of Income and Program Participation, Singleton (2012) finds an increase in divorce probability after
disability for a sample of men.

22

5. Consumption Changes Surrounding Disability
In this section, we focus on consumption changes surrounding disability onset
because consumption has advantages over income when measuring well-being. We will also
see below in Section 7 that whether current disability compensation is optimal can be
assessed using the consumption fall with disability as in Chetty (2006). Economic theory
suggests that material well-being is more directly tied to current consumption than to current
income. Conceptually, income is subject to transitory fluctuations caused by events such as
job or family composition changes. Living standard may remain unaffected despite large
income changes, however, if savings can be drawn upon (Poterba 1991, Cutler and Katz
1991). Consumption may also lend itself to more accurate reporting than income for those
who are disadvantaged. There is substantial evidence suggesting that income is underreported. For example, Meyer, Mok and Sullivan (2009) find that major household surveys
sharply under-report many types of government transfer income, and this under-reporting is
rising. Meyer and Sullivan (2003) argue that income is badly measured for those who are at
the bottom of the resource distribution, likely because this group has many small irregular
sources of income. Measuring disposable income entails the further complication of
accounting for taxes. By contrast, analyzing consumption may reduce or even eliminate
many of these problems. Furthermore, consumption is more closely associated with other
measures of well-being for the disadvantaged (Meyer and Sullivan 2003, 2011).
The canonical model for examining the welfare implications of income shocks and
consumption is the life-cycle model. In the life-cycle model, households maximize the
present discounted value of expected utility, subject to an inter-temporal budget constraint.
The life-cycle model has the clear prediction that in the absence of uninsured shocks to
income, the pattern of the marginal utility of consumption should move slowly over time.
Absent other changes, this result implies that consumption has a roughly constant or slowly
trending time pattern (Dynan 1993, Bernheim, Skinner and Weinberg 2001).
A few comments on the assumptions and applicability of the model to the disabled
are in order. First of all, the model only implies small consumption changes if the interest
rate is not too far from the discount rate adjusted for mortality and if precautionary saving
motives are small. In general, we expect these conditions to hold for most households.
Second, the marginal utility of consumption must not fall sharply with disability onset. In
principle, the marginal utility of consumption could rise or fall. Marginal utility might rise if
23

disability sufficiently increases demand for uncovered medical or nursing care, wheelchairs,
scooters, elevator buildings, and ranch houses. It might fall if travel, eating out, and
recreation demand fall.53 Third, and most importantly, the disabled person is embedded in a
household that has in our data on average about 4 members, falling to 3.5 after ten years from
disability onset. Thus, it seems reasonable to assume that the household level marginal
utility of consumption does not change appreciably with the head’s disability.

A. Food and Housing Consumption
We focus on the two components of consumption that can be measured well in the
PSID: food and housing.54 Food consumption is defined as the sum of family food
consumption expenditure at home, family food consumption expenditure outside the home
and the face value of Food Stamps received.55 We define housing consumption as the sum of
owned dwelling service flows calculated as 6 percent of current housing value, rent payments
and the rental subsidy for those with free or subsidized housing.56 Note, that consumption is
measured at the household level, so in most cases a fall in consumption reflects a decline in
living standards for more than the disabled head.
Columns 9 and 11 of Table 5 report the estimated coefficients of the Poisson
regressions for food consumption and food plus housing consumption respectively for the
average disabled. The corresponding percentage changes are displayed in column 10 and
column 12 and they are also shown in Figure 9 (food) and Figure 10 (food plus housing).
For the disabled as a whole, food consumption falls 2.5 percent by the year of onset while
food plus housing drops about 4.1 percent. By the tenth year after onset, food consumption
drops 9 percent on average while food plus housing drops 8.7 percent. These estimates are
very similar to those in Stephens (2001). Overall, our estimates imply that by the tenth year

53

For recent empirical evidence on the effect of bad health on the marginal utility of consumption see
Finkelstein, Luttmer and Notowidigdo (2013) and the discussion and references there.
54
Many authors have used the food and housing variables in the PSID to impute total consumption expenditures
(Skinner 1987; Meyer and Sullivan 2003; Blundell et al. 2005) via the use of the Consumer Expenditure Survey
(CE Survey). A potential problem in predicting consumption for the disabled is that the relationship between
characteristics and consumption differs between the disabled and non-disabled, and the CE Survey question on
disability is very different from the PSID question. In the CE Survey the question is only asked of those who
have not worked in the past 12 months, and includes disability along with other reasons for not working.
55
The PSID food-spending question is “How much do you (family) spend on food in an average week?” We
assume that the question refers to the time of interview rather than the previous year.
56
The PSID does not ask questions about the amount of any rental subsidy received, especially for those whose
dwelling is partially publicly subsidized. We thus construct a rental subsidy for a head by predicting the rent he
would pay if he lived in market housing and then subtracting the actual rent paid from this predicted rent.
Details on how we construct the rental subsidy are included in the data appendix (Appendix 3).

24

after disability onset, the average disabled man faces a decline in earnings of 22 percent, in
after-tax post-transfers income of 8 percent, in food plus housing consumption of 8.7 percent
and in food consumption of 7.6 percent.
Across the Extent of Disability groups, we again see that the decline in consumption
is most dramatic for the Chronic-Severe group (columns 9-12 of Table 6).57 By the year of
onset, food consumption has fallen an estimated 8.9 percent and food plus housing
consumption has fallen by 11.9 percent. Consumption continues to decline through the next
ten years – by the tenth year after disability onset, food consumption has fallen by about 18
percent and food plus housing by about 25 percent. These large declines are about triple
those of the Temporary and Chronic-Not Severe groups, for whom food consumption drops
about 6.7 percent and 6.6 percent, respectively. Compared with our previous estimates for
the Chronic-Severe group, earnings fall 76 percent, after-tax post-transfers income falls 28
percent, food plus housing falls 25 percent and food falls 18 percent. These declines are
close to triple those of the average disabled. The pattern also reflects the incomplete roles
that savings, family support and social insurance play in reducing the consumption drop
following disability for the Chronic-Severe group.58 The smaller decline found for
disposable income than for earnings and the even smaller decline in consumption is plausible
given other sources of income and the drawing down of savings by some households.
We also note that food consumption has fallen by about 12 percent the year before
onset for the Chronic-Severe disabled. As noted in our discussion of earnings changes, a
person may not immediately report he has a disability even when his productivity has fallen.
During this period of decreased productivity, however, he might suspect that his future
income will be lower. Consequently, such a person may adjust his consumption downwards
as suggested by the Permanent Income Hypothesis.

B. Food Eaten at Home and Outside the Home
The above estimates suggest that food consumption falls after disability. It is
important to remember that our food consumption variable primarily consists of food eaten at
home and food eaten outside, and the latter is more expensive. If the observed fall in food

57

Full set of estimates can be found in Appendix Table 8.
We have also examined food security of the disabled using data from the 1999, 2001 and 2003 PSID. While
the sample sizes are small, the Chronic-Severe group in the long run after disability onset is about four times
more likely to report problems of food security in the family than the non-disabled, and two to three times more
likely than the other disability groups.
58

25

consumption were due purely to a switch from meals eaten outside the home to meals eaten
at home, then it would be premature to conclude that a fall in food consumption translates to
a fall in actual material well-being. To clarify this issue, we look at the change in food eaten
at home and outside the home separately. The results are depicted in Figure 11 (food at
home) and Figure 12 (food outside the home).59
We focus on the Chronic-Severe group as its members suffer the greatest drop in
expenditures on food eaten at home and outside the home. Although the estimates suggest a
pre-onset fall in both measures, these changes are mostly imprecisely measured.60 The
decline in consumption of food at home (11 percent) is first apparent in the second year after
disability onset. While the fall is not precisely estimated for individual years, most indicate a
decline of over ten percent. Food outside the home falls more sharply, dropping by over 40
percent by the seventh year after onset and staying low. That both food eaten at home and
food eaten outside fall substantially after disability suggests that the drop in overall food
consumption for the Chronic-Severe disabled is not mostly due to a shift towards more meals
eaten at home.

C. Exploring the Source of Changes in Housing Consumption
We saw in Table 6 that food and housing consumption fall after disability. Exactly
how the fall in housing consumption occurs is unclear because on the surface housing
consumption seems hard to adjust. We examine the importance of post-disability housing
adjustments, such as selling a home and becoming a renter, buying a smaller home or renting
a smaller apartment. To analyze the sources of the decline, we decompose the changes in
housing consumption into changes in housing type and consumption given the housing type.
Let Cit be the housing consumption for person i in year t, defined as the sum over housing
types of the product of an indicator for housing type j, Sit j, and the consumption of housing
type j, Cit j where j  {own, rent, public housing}. In other words

(3 )

C

it





S

j
it

C

j
it

.

j

We let the corresponding variables without the subscript i denote averages over i. By
appropriately adding and subtracting terms, we can then write the change between two
periods, denoted t and τ, as

59
60

Appendix Table 12 reports the underlying estimates.
An F-test that all pre-onset estimates are zero has the p-value 0.42 for food at home.

26

(4)

C  C t 

 ( S

j

 S t j )C j 

j

 (C 

j

 C tj ) S tj

.

j

Equation (4) shows that the change in consumption between two periods depends on
the change in shares (S j) and the changes in consumption, given type (C j). To estimate these
terms, accounting for individual characteristics, we run a series of fixed effect regressions
similar to equation (1) above. We focus on changes specifically after the fifth year of
disability onset. First, we run a series of fixed effect linear probability models of the form

(5)

Sit   i   t  X it     kg Akitg    g Bitg   it
j

g

k

g

j

where Sit is a dichotomous variable that equals one if individual i consumes a particular
housing type j, αi is a fixed effect, γt is a set of time indicator variables, and Xit is a set of
time-varying explanatory variables (including marital status, state of residence, age and agesquared, education, and the number of children). Akitg is a dichotomous variable that equals
one if individual i is in disability group g and is k years after disability onset, where k  {-5,
-4,…,4, 5}. Bitg is a dichotomous variable that equals one if the individual i is in disability
group g and is in year six through ten after disability onset. εit is a potentially serially
correlated error term, as before. We run the fixed effect linear probability model three times,
once for each housing type. We again focus on our four disability groups, so g  {1, 2, 3, 4}.
The coefficients of interest are the  g , which represent the estimated change in the
probability of consuming a housing type j in the long run (six to ten years following
disability).
Panel A of Table 7 shows the results. For the Chronic-Not Severe and the ChronicSevere group, the likelihood of living in public housing increases in the long run by 2 percent
and 4.5 percent, respectively, with the change for the Chronic-Severe group statistically
significant. The likelihood of these groups renting or owning a home, however, does not
change significantly in the long run.
Next, we examine the change in housing consumption within each type of housing.
We estimate models similar to equation (5), but now the amount of consumption of a
particular type of housing becomes the dependent variable. We split the sample into three
parts according to the type of housing chosen and estimate the fixed effect regressions in
each sub-sample.61 Again, the coefficients of interest are the  g , which represent the

61

We do not report expenditures for publicly subsidized housing since the sample sizes are extremely small.

27

estimated long-term change in the amount of housing consumption, conditional on the
individual being in Extent of Disability group g and consuming a particular housing type j.
Panel B of Table 7 shows the results. The Chronic-Severe group again displays some
pronounced patterns. The estimated decline in homeowners’ housing consumption in the
long run is more than $3,000 a year; this corresponds to a drop in home value of more than
$51,450. For those who rent private housing units, estimated annual rent paid declines about
$1,400 ($116 per month) in the long run. Both results suggest that members of the ChronicSevere group who do not receive public housing decrease their housing consumption to
accommodate an overall decline in resources by moving to less costly dwelling units.

D. Consumption after Social Security Eligibility
Up to now, we have investigated how the working age disabled fare after their
disability onset. However, after a disabled person becomes eligible for social security
retirement benefits, his income and consequently consumption may rise. To examine this
issue, we retain observations after age 61 and regress consumption on age indicator variables.
Specifically, we regress consumption (food plus housing) on a set of age indicator variables
(62-64, 65-69, 70-74), year indicator variables, individual fixed effects and a set of non-age
demographic variables (indicator for being married, number of family members, number of
children in the family and years of education of the head). We estimate these regressions
using only members of the Chronic-Severe group. The coefficients of interest are those on
the age indicator variables that measure changes in consumption for the average ChronicSevere disabled as he reaches 62-64, 65-69 and 70-74 relative to his pre-retirement
consumption. We find that food and housing consumption for the average Chronic-Severe
disabled is not significantly different during all periods after social security eligibility than it
was earlier, though the point estimates suggest that consumption falls slightly relative to the
pre-eligibility years.62 The change with age is not significantly different for those who
receive SSDI prior to age 62, and those who do not.

62

When we further control for time after disability onset (by including a set of 13 indicator variables Akit, where
k is the year from onset for individual i in year t for k={0,1,…,10, 11-20, 21 and above}), we obtain very similar
estimates, that are not significantly different from zero, that again suggest a small decline in consumption after
the earliest eligibility age for social security retirement benefits.

28

6.

Robustness Checks, Detailed Consumption, and Time Use
In this section we examine alternative explanations for our results, and the effects of

accounting for unobserved differences between the disabled and the nondisabled through
fixed effects. We examine results for subsamples defined by program receipt and cohort.
We further examine changes in well-being using detailed consumption data. We also
examine the time-use of the disabled both because it is another indicator of well-being and
because time can potentially offset the lower incomes of the disabled. The details of these
analyses are in Appendix 2 Additional Results, but we summarize the main findings here.

A. Differences in Unemployment, Illness and Health Prior to the Onset of Disability
One might wonder if a period of unemployment or other bad employment outcomes
leads a person to say he is disabled. While conceptually it may be difficult to observe what
leads to bad employment outcomes, i.e. whether it is bad health, a declining industry, or a
string of bad luck, we can compare the pattern of unemployment and health prior to disability
onset. As the individual’s decision on when he is disabled is likely a function of his timevarying productivity, disutility of work, and other factors, we present suggestive evidence for
this view by looking at how unemployment, illness and health change prior to when an
individual reports a condition that limits work. We examine the number of working days lost
due to unemployment in each of the five years before disability onset (Appendix Figure 1
shows the results). For the average disabled, there is virtually no change over time. For the
chronic groups, however, there is a dip in days of unemployment during the third and fourth
years before onset, compared to earlier or later years, but no clear evidence of a prolonged
rise in unemployment leading up to onset.
Next, we examine the number of workdays lost due to illness (Appendix Figure 2).
The results suggest that the number of workdays lost due to illness rises as we approach the
year of onset; the changes are similar for all disabled groups. Finally, we examine health
status (Appendix Figure 3 reports estimates of equation (1) with a dependent variable that
equals one if an individual is in fair or poor health). Again, we see suggestive evidence that a
decline in health is an important reason for reporting a disability. This change is particularly
noticeable for our Chronic-Severe group; the fraction of those reporting fair or poor health
increases about 7 percentage points just prior to disability onset. Overall, the results suggest
that declining health, but not unemployment, is a key reason for reporting a disability.
29

Though the optimality framework of the next section explicitly allows for endogeneity of
disability, this result suggests that it may not be a strong influence in any case on selfreported disability as defined in this paper.

B. Underlying Permanent Differences Between the Disabled and Non-Disabled
We compare the estimated effect of disability on various outcomes with and without
fixed effects to examine how the disabled differ in terms of unobservable permanent
characteristics. These estimates indicate whether it is important to estimate fixed effects
models, which account for these unobserved differences, rather than OLS models of
disability outcomes. In both sets of specifications we include the non-disabled. When we
include fixed effects, the estimates for outcomes are relative to those for the disabled more
than five years before onset. When we do not include fixed effects, the estimates for
outcomes are relative to the disabled more than five years before onset and the non-disabled
with similar age, education, etc. Thus, a comparison of the estimates with and without fixed
effects tells us how the unobserved characteristics of the disabled that affect the outcome in
question compare to those of the non-disabled with similar observed characteristics.
In the case of the Chronic-Severe group, we notice a number of patterns. The most
striking pattern is a lack of difference between the estimates with and without fixed effects
after onset. After-onset earnings, hours, after-tax post-transfer income, and food
consumption are all very similar with and without fixed effects. This result suggests that
those in the most disabled group are not different from the non-disabled (after accounting for
observed characteristics) in terms of unobserved attributes that affect these outcomes. There
is a noticeable difference for food plus housing consumption, with the estimates without
fixed effects being about six percentage points higher than those with fixed effects after onset.
This result implies that the Chronic-Severe disabled consumed more pre-onset than their
characteristics imply. In terms of pre-disability estimates, the disabled have unobserved
characteristics that lead to lower hours (about 80 hours per year) and lower earnings in the
five years before disability onset, but these differences disappear after onset. This pattern is
also true for post-tax, post-transfer income, Thus, there appears to be little pronounced
difference between Chronic-Severe and non-disabled groups. What differences exist initially
between the groups appears to be overwhelmed by the changes in sample composition during
the years after onset.

30

For all disabled men combined, the patterns are mostly similar. The differences after
onset tend to be fairly small, with almost no difference for consumption. Before onset, the
estimates with fixed effects are slightly higher for most outcomes, indicating that the disabled
in the sample for those years have worse unobserved characteristics than the non-disabled.
These results suggest that cross-sectional methods often do a fairly good job of
approximating panel data methods.

C. Later Disabilities
We base our disability classification throughout the paper only on the first observed
disability. Here, we examine whether those non-Chronic-Severe disabled individuals whose
disability classification subsequently changes to Chronic-Severe over time (using a rolling
ten-year-ahead window) exhibit outcomes similar to those of the original Chronic-Severe
group. We find that the long-term changes in outcomes during these later Chronic-Severe
disability spells are quantitatively similar to those of the original Chronic-Severe group
presented above.

D. Social Security and Outcomes
Since Social Security disability or SSI payments are the main safety net for the
permanently disabled, it is natural to ask how recipients fare relative to non-recipients. We
split the Chronic-Severe group into those who receive SSDI or SSI benefits more than half of
the time over the ten years after disability onset (SSA recipients) and those who do not (SSA
non-recipients). We find that that those who receive Social Security payments stop working
earlier than those who do not. Nonetheless, the fall in income and consumption is very
similar for the two groups (Appendix Figures 4 through 7). The results indicate that those
with low pre-transfer income are more likely to be recipients, with the benefits raising these
worst off recipients to the level of the other disabled.

E. Cohort Differences
We examine whether the material consequences of disability have changed over time.
To do so, we split the disabled into two samples: those who are first disabled before 1985,
and those disabled later. We estimate the outcome regressions on these two samples
separately and find that the two sets of results for the Chronic-Severe group are very similar.
Results for earnings and income can be found in Meyer and Mok (forthcoming).
31

F. Detailed Consumption and Time-use Data
The results in Section 5 suggest that the disabled suffer from a sizable drop in food
consumption, particularly the Chronic-Severe group. We should interpret these estimates
with care, however, because the PSID records only food and housing expenditures. As
Becker (1965) notes, consumption is the result of home production that uses both expenditure
and time as ingredients. Individuals with a lower relative price of time may substitute time in
home production for expenditures. Thus, the fall in food consumption we observe for the
disabled may be a result of the disabled: 1) spending more time shopping and searching for
lower prices for the goods they purchase and/or 2) spending more time on food preparation,
which may turn cheaper ingredients into better food.
Our findings do not support these effects being important, as we find further evidence
that the drop in consumption reflects a lower living standard. Using data from the 1989-1991
Continuing Survey of Food Intake of Individuals (CSFII) we find that the disabled have
worse nutrition, with about a 10-15 percent lower intake of Vitamin A, Vitamin C and
Vitamin E. To examine time use, we employ the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) and
find that currently disabled male heads spend 0.66 hours per week (5.7 minutes per day)
more on food preparation. Relative to the mean for the non-disabled, this represents a 34
percent increase in the time spent on food preparation, but the amount of time is small. In
fact, this increase takes up only a small fraction of their extra 24.3 hours of leisure hours per
week of the disabled. Major uses of the additional non-work time of the disabled are time
spent watching TV – 10.6 hours per week, obtaining medical care – 7.2 hours per week,
sleeping – 6.8 hours per week, and “relaxing” – 3.2 hours per week. Given that the
household production function employs time inputs of both the husband and the wife, we
also investigate the time use of wives of the disabled. On average, wives of the disabled do
not spend more time working than those whose husbands are not disabled; this is consistent
with the PSID results discussed earlier. Wives of disabled men also do not spend more time
on food preparation. Maybe surprisingly, there is also no conclusive evidence that wives of
disabled husbands spend more time on caring for adult family members. Taken together,
these results do consistently suggest that the disabled suffer from a real decline in material
well-being.

32

G. Life Satisfaction and Adaptation
Our study has examined changes in a variety of economic variables before and after
the onset of disability. One variable that we have not analyzed but has attracted much
attention is “life satisfaction”. Some authors have suggested that the disabled may adapt (or
habituate) to their new state and utility may not fall despite the consumption drop. There are
three important issues here. First, how life satisfaction questions are phrased in the
questionnaire seems to affect individual’s responses. Second, whether life satisfaction is
equal to utility or part of utility remains controversial in the literature.63 If utility is a
function of consumption and life satisfaction, then utility will still decrease as a result of
disability even when life satisfaction remains unchanged, due to the drop in consumption.
Third, there are few empirical studies to date investigating how life satisfaction evolves after
disability onset, especially in the United States.64 Data limitation may prevent us from taking
on this issue here but we believe such question should be seriously addressed in future
research.65

7. Optimal Disability Benefits
While social insurance benefits alleviate material deprivation by smoothing an
individual’s consumption, the optimality of benefits needs to account for their distortion of
labor supply. The classic reference is Baily (1978) who examines the optimality of
unemployment insurance benefits under some simplifying assumption on preferences.
Chetty (2006) generalizes this result by relaxing the assumptions that the third and higher
order terms of the utility function are small and considering adverse events besides

63

See Stevenson and Wolfers (2000).
Lucas (2007), Oswald and Powdthavee (2008), and Daly and Gardiner (2012) examine the existence of
adaptation by studying how life satisfaction changes after disability. The papers come to different conclusions,
though their results differ in part due to differences in methodology and data. In addition, the first two studies
use British and German longitudinal data, and benefits are more generous in these countries than those in the
United States. Daly and Gardiner (2012) use the U.S. Health and Retirement Study and the General Social
Survey and find “little evidence that individuals return to their pre-disability level of subjective wellbeing as
measured by life satisfaction,” though they also note that the length of their panel is short relative to the first
two studies above.
65
The PSID has data on life satisfaction in its 2009 ‘Disability and Use of Time’ supplement but the data are
only available for a small subsample of older survey respondents.
64

33

unemployment. Moreover, he emphasizes that the results are robust to a number of
complications such as a leisure value of nonemployment, private insurance arrangements as
well as saving and costly search.

A. The Framework

Suppose an individual lives for one unit of time and faces disability with probability p. If he
is not disabled, he will receive wage w until the end of time. In the event of disability, the
individual chooses the duration of disability D. Suppose δ(D) is a concave and increasing
function capturing the net benefit of disability duration (such as the pain avoided). Let A0 be
the individual’s asset level at the beginning of time, and u(c) be a strictly concave and stateindependent utility function of the individual, where c={ce, cd} represent the consumption of
the individual in the event of no disability (ce) and disability (cd). Thus, given the disability
probability p, the benefit amount b and tax τ the individual chooses ce, cu and D to maximize
his expected lifetime utility:
max (1-p)u(ce) +p(u(cu) + δ(D))
s.t.

A0 + (w – τ ) - ce ≥ 0
A0 + bD + w (1-D) - cu ≥ 0

Suppose a social planner chooses b and τ to maximize the expected utility of the individual,
subject to a balanced budget constraint. Let V(b,τ) be the indirect utility function of the
individual, then the social planner’s problem is to choose the benefit amount and tax to
maximize the utility of the individual:

Maxb, τ V(b,τ)
s.t. (1-p)τ = pbD

The first order condition for optimality is:

(6)

 b dD 
u ' (ce ) 1 
  u ' (cd )
 D db 

34

This condition simply says that the marginal benefit of providing one extra dollar of benefit
is equal to the marginal cost, which is the sum of the direct cost of raising the tax (u’(ce)) and
a term due to the individual’s behavioral response of extending duration of disability. By
applying a Taylor Series expansion, and assuming the fourth and higher order derivatives of
u(.) are small, the optimal benefit condition can be written as:

(7)



c
 1 c

(b*)1  
(b*)   D ,b
c
 2 c


c *
(b ) is the drop in mean consumption with disability as a function of the benefit
c
level b, γ is –u″ct /u′, the coefficient of relative risk aversion, and ρ is –u′′′ct /u′′, the
where 

coefficient of relative prudence. D is the fraction of a lifetime spent disabled, and εD,b is the
elasticity of D with respect to b. In his calibration exercises, Chetty finds that assuming
u′′′=0, i.e. ignoring the term in ρ, leads to substantial bias.
Chetty (2006) also derived a similar optimality condition under a more general setting.
He considered a continuous-time dynamic setting where a representative agent faces
persistent risk of an adverse event, such as disability. The agent makes a vector of decisions
at time t contingent on a vector of state variables at time t. With some standard assumptions,
proposition 2 in his paper states that the optimal benefit level b* is implicitly defined by the
equation: 66
(8)

 
 c *   c *  
(b )  1 F  1  D ,b
 (b ) 1 
 2 c
 
 1 D
 c

where F = (1+γρsd2)/ (1+γρsn2), sd is the coefficient of variation of consumption in the
disabled state and sn is the coefficient of variation of consumption in the non-disabled state.
Chetty finds in his calibration exercises given his assumed range of F that setting F=1 leads
to little bias, while below we find that our estimate of F leads to an elasticity at the optimum
that is up to 14 percent lower than it would be with F=1, depending on preferences.
The relationship in (8) provides a way of checking whether current benefits are
optimal in this model. If the left hand side is greater than the right hand side then benefits are
too low; if the reverse is true then benefits are too high. This relationship highlights the
importance of knowing the consumption fall with disability when designing disability policy.
66

See p.1889 of Chetty (2006) for the details.

35

Furthermore, this optimality condition is robust to a number of extensions: private insurance
arrangements (spousal supply of labor), the leisure value of unemployment, dynamic search
and saving behavior, and borrowing constraints.67

B. Optimality of Disability Compensation

To implement the optimality rule implied by equation (8), we first take the
proportional drop in consumption to be 0.25, based on the estimate of the change in food plus
housing consumption for the Chronic-Severe group ten years after disability onset, as
reported in Section 5. We assume that this estimate is a reasonable average for the entire
post-onset period, including the period more than ten years after onset. Given our finding
that the consumption drop for the Chronic-Severe group continues until at least age 75, this
approach seems reasonable. To estimate D, the fraction of the working life spent disabled,
we rely on our estimated probability of having had a disability by various ages reported in
Section 2. We average these probabilities from ages 20 through the expected life span for
men conditional on reaching age 20, which is age 76. Since our samples are only large
enough to estimate disability probabilities precisely from age 27 through 61, we take earlier
years to have the rate at age 27 and later years the rate at 61. This calculation gives us an
estimate of D of 0.12. Given that some work disabilities occur after age 61, our estimate of
D may be too low. On the other hand, since mortality among the disabled is higher than
average, our estimate of D may be too high. The optimal level of benefits though is not very
sensitive to the estimate of D as can be seen in equation (8) where the quantity 1-D enters
multiplicatively. To obtain the coefficient of variation of consumption in the disabled state
and the non-disabled state, we split the sample into two groups: 1) The Chronic-Severe
disabled individuals beginning in the year of onset. 2) The Non-disabled, the non-ChronicSevere disabled and the Chronic-Severe disabled observations prior to disability onset.
Using their food plus housing consumption data (adjusted by family size and composition),
we obtain sd = 0.272 and sn = 0.289.68
We report the optimal benefit calculation in Table 8. This table reports the elasticity
of D with respect to benefits that would be consistent with benefits being optimal, for
different values of the coefficients of relative risk aversion (γ) and relative prudence (ρ).
67

Interested readers can refer to pp.1895-96 in Chetty (2006).
To adjust the food and housing consumption data, we use the equivalence scale (A+0.7K)0.7 where A is the
number of adults and K is the number of children in the family.

68

36

Since the literature considers a wide range of values for these parameters, we do as well. We
assume that the marginal utility of consumption (at a given consumption level) is the same
before and after disability, though as discussed earlier, the direction of any change is
uncertain. Particularly since, as mentioned earlier, it is the marginal utility of consumption
for a household of 3 to 4 members on average not just one disabled individual, the
assumption of constancy seems reasonable. As γ ranges from 1 to 5 and ρ ranges from 0 to 5,
the elasticity consistent with optimality ranges from 0.22 to 1.58. If we focus on an estimate
of γ of at least 3 as assumed typically,69 benefits are optimal or higher than optimal if the true
elasticity of time spent disabled is at least 0.66, depending on ρ, but are lower than optimal if
the elasticity is lower.
It is a simplification to summarize policy as a single benefit and a single elasticity,
since compensation for disability comes from many programs: SSDI, workers’ compensation,
SSI and private disability insurance. Thus, the average benefit and elasticity should be
thought of as averages across programs. We focus on SSDI and workers’ compensation, as
they are the largest programs available to the disabled, and because little is known about
benefit elasticities for the other programs. We have also simplified the model by not
considering the choice of waiting times and screening stringency (see Low and Pistafferi
2010 for an analysis that emphasizes the determinants of these other program features).
To determine the elasticity of D with respect to the disability insurance benefit, we
turn to estimates in the literature for SSDI. The literature has tended to focus on the elasticity
of the non-participation probability with respect to the benefit. Bound and Burkhauser (1999)
report estimates that range from 0.21 to 0.93 in their survey, with a median estimate of 0.49.
They argue that most of the estimates are likely to be biased upward. The question still
remains as to how to convert elasticities of non-participation into elasticities of self-reported
disability. To see how the two elasticities compare, note that they can be written as

(9)

 D, j 

D j b
,
b D j

where j equals s or np indicating a self-report or non-participation respectively. To convert
one to the other, we need to compare the levels of non-participation and self-reported
disability, Ds and Dnp respectively, and the derivatives of the two states with respect to
See Chandra and Samwick (2005) who also take γ to be 3, or Cohen and Einav (2007) who suggest that a
widely used estimate is “a low single-digit coefficient”.
69

37

benefits, ∂Ds /∂b and ∂Dnp /∂b, respectively. The former comparison can be directly obtained
from our PSID data. We find that in the prime years for work disability (ages 35 to 55), the
nonparticipation rate is only about ten percent higher than the fraction of men who are
currently severely disabled, and slightly lower than the fraction of those who have
experienced a Chronic-Severe disability by that age. To examine the latter comparison, we
note that an individual induced by higher disability benefits to not participate in the labor
market is extremely likely to indicate that he is disabled. It also seems unlikely that a large
number of individuals would be induced to call themselves disabled because of higher
benefits, but still work. Thus, we take the two derivatives to be equal and conclude that εD,s ≈
εD,np. The combination of these numbers, suggests that current compensation for disability
appears to be below the optimal amount suggested by equation (8), if we believe that the
coefficient of relative risk aversion is three or higher, regardless of the coefficient of relative
prudence (as long as it is zero or positive).
One can also examine the elasticity of non-work with respect to workers’
compensation (WC) benefits. Meyer (2002) reports a wide range of claim incidence and
duration elasticities. The elasticity of time receiving benefits is the sum of these two
elasticities.70 The sum of the median estimates for these two elasticities in the literature is
under 0.6. Given that the WC claim elasticity likely significantly overstates the nonwork
elasticity, the evidence again suggests that our compensation for disability may be lower than
optimal in this framework, if again we hold the same belief on the magnitudes of the
coefficients of relative risk aversion and prudence.
One might also wonder whether one could implement this type of optimal benefit
formula in practice. In particular, how does the screening mechanism for disability insurance
compare to the Chronic-Severe classification of disability emphasized in the paper? We
should emphasize that we do not anticipate program eligibility being determined by the
answers to the PSID questions. Rather, other screening mechanisms could approximate our
disability classification. We have already noted that at each age the share of men who are on
the Social Security disability program is considerably lower than the share that is in the
Chronic-Severe disability group. Thus, we have not focused on a more select and severely
disabled group than those who currently receive SSDI benefits. Our PSID classification does
require examining disability over several years, but in practice SSDI does as well. In general,
70

To see this, consider average benefit duration as the product of claim incidence and disability duration. Then
log differentiate this product.

38

disability screening relies on much more information than is available in the PSID, including
a potential recipient’s medical history and doctors’ examinations, so it could be more
effective. Thus, it does not appear that the screening stringency required is beyond that
which could be implemented.

8. Discussion and Conclusions
This paper studies the prevalence of disability prior to retirement, changes in
household material well-being surrounding disability onset, and the optimality of current
benefits for the disabled in a standard model. Using longitudinal data for the period 19682009 from a sample of male household heads, we determine the prevalence of disability and
examine how it affects a range of outcomes, including earnings, income, and consumption.
This paper has several key findings. First, disability rates are high. We estimate that by age
50, about 9 percent of male household heads have begun an enduring and severe disability.
By age 56, that number rises to 15 percent. An even larger share of men have experienced
some type of disability. A man reaching age 56 has a 41 percent chance of having been
disabled at least once during his working years and about a 28 percent chance of
experiencing a chronic disability that lasted at least four years.
Second, disability is associated with worsened economic outcomes. Ten years after
disability onset, those with a chronic and severe disability condition have on average
experienced a 76 percent decline in earnings, a 28 percent decline in after-tax income, a 25
percent decline in food and housing consumption and a 18 percent decline in consumption of
food alone. In addition, about two-thirds of these most disabled individuals do not return to
work in the long run.
Third, there are sharp outcome differences across disability groups; the outcome
declines for those with chronic and severe disabilities are often more than twice those for the
average disabled. Fourth, our findings indicate the partial but incomplete roles that
individual savings, family support, and government and private insurance play in reducing
the consumption drop that follows disability. Despite the various government programs
available, the incomes of about one-sixth of families with a chronically and severely disabled
head drop below the poverty line in the long term – even after accounting for in-kind
transfers and the under-reporting of benefits.
39

Fifth, we find a noticeable fall in earnings and income prior to the onset of a reported
disability. Consumption also falls somewhat prior to reported onset, indicating that future
disability is partially but incompletely predictable in the short run. Sixth, evidence from
time-use surveys does not suggest that the disabled do more shopping, which might enable
them to enjoy lower prices through greater search effort. We also find that instead of
working more on home and food production, the disabled spend more time watching
television, relaxing, sleeping and using medical services. Together these findings indicate a
real decline in material well-being after the onset of disability, especially for those who are
more disabled. To further substantiate our claim that consumption declines following
disability, we examine food surveys and find that the diet of the disabled is worse than that of
the non-disabled in many dimensions.
Seventh, employing the Chetty (2006) optimal benefit formula, we find that for a
substantial range of plausible parameter values current compensation for the most disabled
appears to be lower than this standard model suggests is optimal. However, stronger
statements require knowing preference parameters that have not been pinned down in the
literature. This calculation accounts for the moral hazard effects of disability, but assumes
that the marginal utility of consumption at the household level does not change with
disability of the head. We believe these findings will be useful for future research on the
disabled as well as policy discussions.
There are many questions raised by our research. We are unable to examine the
prevalence and circumstances of disabled women given the lack of information on disability
for women in the early years of the PSID. Recent evidence from other sources suggests that
disability during the working years is rising for women (Baldwin and Chu 2006).
Furthermore, we only focus on disability during the working years. We find that
consumption does not rebound once a disabled head reaches the Social Security eligibility
age. However, we do not examine disabilities that begin at later ages. Finally, we would like
to supplement the rich economic data we use with detailed health information, which would
allow us to refine our disability definition and potentially focus on specific health conditions.
However, small samples and lack of generality might limit such an approach.

40

References
Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua D. Angrist. 2001. "Consequences of Employment Protection?
The Case of the Americans with Disabilities Act." Journal of Political Economy,
109(5): 915-57.
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2005. "Consumption Versus Expenditure." Journal of
Political Economy, 113(5): 919-48.
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2007. "Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of
Time over Five Decades." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3): 969-1006.
Altug, Sumru and Robert A. Miller. 1990. "Household Choices in Equilibrium."
Econometrica, 58(3): 543-70.
Attanasio, Orazio P. and Guglielmo Weber. 1995. "Is Consumption Growth Consistent
with Intertemporal Optimization? Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure Survey."
Journal of Political Economy, 103(6): 1121-57.
Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. 2006. "The Growth in the Social Security
Disability Rolls: A Fiscal Crisis Unfolding." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(3):
71-96.
Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. 2003. "The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the
Decline in Unemployment." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1): 157-205.
Ball, Steffan and Hamish Low. 2009. “Do Self-Insurance and Disability Insurance Prevent
Consumption Loss on Disability?” Finance and Economics Discussion Series: 2009-31,
Washington DC: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Baldwin, Robert and Sharon Chu. 2006. "A Death and Disability Life Table for Insured
Workers Born in 1985." Actuarial Note. No. 2005.6. Baltimore MD: Office of the Chief
Actuary, Social Security Administration.
Becker, Gary S. 1965. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.” The Economic Journal, 75:
493-517
Benitez-Silva, Hugo; Moshe Buchinsky; Hiu Man Chan; John Rust and Sofia
Sheidvasser. 1999. "An Empirical Analysis of the Social Security Disability
Application, Appeal, and Award Process." Labour Economics, 6(2): 147-78.
Benítez-Silva, Hugo; Moshe Buchinsky; Hiu Man Chan; Sofia Sheidvasser and John
Rust. 2004. "How Large Is the Bias in Self-Reported Disability?" Journal of Applied
Econometrics, 19(6): 649-70.
Benitez-Silva, Hugo; Moshe Buchinsky and John Rust. 2006. "Using a Life-Cycle Model
to Predict Induced Entry Effects of a $1 for $2 Benefit Offset in the SSDI Program."
Unpublished.
Bernheim, B. Douglas; Jonathan Skinner and Steven Weinberg. 2001. "What Accounts
for the Variation in Retirement Wealth among U.S. Households?" The American
Economic Review, 91(4): 832-57.
Black, Dan; Kermit Daniel and Seth Sanders. 2002. "The Impact of Economic Conditions
on Participation in Disability Programs: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust."
American Economic Review, 92(1): 27-50.
Blundell, Richard; Luigi Pistaferri and Ian Preston. 2005. "Imputing Consumption in the
PSID Using Food Demand Estimates from the CEX." Unpublished.
Bound, John. 1989. "The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants."
American Economic Review, 79(3): 482-503.
Bound, John. 1991. "Self-Reported Versus Objective Measures of Health in Retirement
Models." Journal of Human Resources, 26(1): 106-138.

41

Bound, John and Richard V. Burkhauser. 1999. "Economic Analysis of Transfer
Programs Targeted on People with Disabilities." In Handbook of Labor Economics. Vol.
3C, ed. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, 3417-528. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science
North-Holland.
Bound, John; Richard V. Burkhauser and Austin Nichols. 2003. "Tracking the
Household Income of SSDI and SSI Applicants." In Worker Well-Being and Public
Policy. 22, ed. Soloman W. Polachek. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Ltd.
Bound, John; Julie Berry Cullen; Austin Nichols and Lucie Schmidt. 2004. "The Welfare
Implications of Increasing Disability Insurance Benefit Generosity." Journal of Public
Economics, 88(12): 2487-514.
Bound, John; Todd R. Stinebrickner and Timothy Waidmann. 2007. "Health, Economic
Resources and the Work Decisions of Older Men." University of Michigan Working
Paper 07-630.
Bound, John and Timothy Waidmann. 2002. "Accounting for Recent Declines in
Employment Rates among Working-Aged Men and Women with Disabilities." Journal
of Human Resources, 37(2): 231-50.
Bureau of Labor Statistics and U.S. Census Bureau. 2007. “American Time Use Survey
User’s Guide – Understanding ATUS 2003-2007.” Washington DC: Bureau of Labor
Statistics and the U.S. Census Bureau.
Burkhauser, Richard V. and Mary C. Daly. 1996. "Employment and Economic WellBeing Following the Onset of a Disability, the Role of Public Policy." In Disability,
Work and Cash Benefits. ed. Jerry L. Mashaw, Virginia P. Reno, Richard V.
Burkhauser and Monroe Berkowitz, 59-101. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for
Employment Research.
Burkhauser, Richard V.; Mary C. Daly; Andrew J. Houtenville and Nigar Nargis. 2002.
"Self-Reported Work-Limitation Data: What They Can and Cannot Tell Us."
Demography, 39(3): 541-55.
Burkhauser, Richard V. and Andrew. J. Houtenville. 2006. "A Guide to Disability
Statistics from the Current Population Survey – Annual Social and Economic
Supplement (March CPS)." Ithaca NY: Rehabilitation Research and Training Center on
Disability Demographics and Statistics, Cornell University.
Burkhauser, Richard V.; Andrew J. Houtenville and Ludmila Rovba. 2005. "Rising
Poverty in the Midst of Plenty: The Case of Working-Age People with Disabilities."
Unpublished.
Burkhauser, Richard V.; Andrew. J. Houtenville and David C. Wittenburg. 2003. "A
User’s Guide to Current Statistics on the Employment of People with Disabilities." In
The Decline in Employment of People with Disabilities – a Policy Puzzle. ed. David C.
Stapleton and Richard V. Burkhauser, 23-85. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute
for Employment Research.
Burkhauser, Richard V.; Robert R. Weathers II and Mathis Schroeder. 2006. "A Guide
to Disability Statistics from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics." Ithaca, NY:
Rehabilitation Research and Training Center on Disability Demographics and Statistics,
Cornell University.
Chandra, Amitabh and Andrew A. Samwick. 2005. "Disability Risk and the Value of
Disability Insurance." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 11605.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi. 2003. "The Longitudinal Structure of Earnings Losses among WorkLimited Disabled Workers." Journal of Human Resources, 38(3): 618-46.
Charles, Kerwin Kofi and Melvin Stephens Jr. 2004. "Job Displacement, Disability, and
Divorce." Journal of Labor Economics, 22(2): 489-522.

42

Chetty, Raj. 2006. "A General Formula for the Optimal Level of Social Insurance." Journal
of Public Economics, 90(10-11): 1879-901.
Cogley, Timothy. 2002. "Idiosyncratic Risk and the Equity Premium: Evidence from the
Consumer Expenditure Survey." Journal of Monetary Economics, 49(2): 309-34.
Cohen, Alma and Liran Einav. 2007. "Estimating Risk Preferences from Deductible
Choice." American Economic Review, 97(3): 745-788.
Cullen, Julie Berry and Jonathan Gruber. 2000. "Does Unemployment Insurance Crowd
out Spousal Labor Supply?" Journal of Labor Economics, 18(3): 546-72.
Cutler, David and Lawrence Katz. 1991. “Macroeconomic Performance and the
Disadvantaged.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1991(2): 1-74.
Daly, Mary C. and Colin S. and Gardiner. 2012. “Disability and Subjective Well-being.”
In Unexpected Lifecycle Events and Economic Well-Being, ed. by Mary C. Daly,
Kenneth Couch and Julie Zissimopoulus, under review at Stanford University Press.
DeLeire, Thomas. 2001. "Changes in Wage Discrimination against People with Disabilities:
1984-93." Journal of Human Resources, 36(1): 144-58.
DeLeire, Thomas. 2000. "The Wage and Employment Effects of the Americans with
Disabilities Act." Journal of Human Resources, 35(4): 693-715.
Diamond, Peter and Eytan Sheshinski. 1995. "Economic Aspects of Optimal Disability
Benefits." Journal of Public Economics, 57(1): 1-23.
Dynan, Karen E. 1993. "How Prudent Are Consumers?" The Journal of Political Economy,
101(6): 1104-13.
Dynarski, Susan; Jonathan Gruber; Robert A. Moffitt and Gary Burtless. 1997. "Can
Families Smooth Variable Earnings?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1997(1):
229-303.
Finkelstein, Amy; Erzo F. P. Luttmer and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2013. “What Good
Is Wealth Without Health? The Effect of Health on the Marginal Utility of
Consumption.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 11: 221-258.
Gruber, Jonathan. 2000. "Disability Insurance Benefits and Labor Supply." Journal of
Political Economy, 108(6): 1162-83.
Hale, Thomas W. 2001. "The Lack of a Disability Measure in Today's Current Population
Survey." Monthly Labor Review, 124(6): 38-40.
Haveman, Robert H. and Barbara L. Wolfe. 1984a. "The Decline in Male Labor Force
Participation: Comment." Journal of Political Economy, 92(3): 532-41.
Haveman, Robert H. and Barbara L. Wolfe. 1984b. "Disability Transfers and Early
Retirement: A Casual Relationship?" Journal of Public Economics, 24(1): 47-66.
Haveman, Robert H. and Barbara L. Wolfe. 1990. "The Economic Well-Being of the
Disabled: 1962-84." Journal of Human Resources, 25(1): 32-54.
He, Wan; Manisha Sengupta; Victoria A. Velkoff and Kimberley A. DeBarros. 2005.
"65+ in the United States: 2005 " P23-209. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau.
Hotchkiss, Julie L. 2003. "The Labor Market Experience of Workers with Disabilities: The
ADA and Beyond." W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research Working Paper.
Jacobson, Louis S.; Robert J. LaLonde and Daniel G. Sullivan. 1993. "Earnings Losses
of Displaced Workers." American Economic Review, 83(4): 685-709.
Kreider, Brent. 1999. "Latent Work Disability and Reporting Bias." Journal of Human
Resources, 34(4): 734-69.
Kreider, Brent and John Pepper. Forthcoming. "Inferring Disability Status from Corrupt
Data." Journal of Applied Econometrics.

43

Kreider, Brent and John V. Pepper. 2007. "Disability and Employment: Reevaluating the
Evidence in Light of Reporting Errors." Journal of the American Statistical Association,
102: 432-41.
Low, Hamish and Luigi Pistaferri. 2010. "Disability Risk, Disability Insurance and Life
Cycle Behavior." NBER Working Paper No. 15962, May 2010.
Lucas, Robert E. 2007. “Long-term disability is Associated with Lasting Changes in
Subjective Well-being: Evidence from two Nationally Representative Longitudinal
Studies.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92(4): 717-30
Mashaw, Jerry and Virginia P. Reno. 1996. "Balancing Security and Opportunity: The
Challenge of Disability Income Policy." Washington, DC: Report of the Disability
Policy Panel, National Academy of Social Insurance.
McNeil, John M. 2001. "Americans with Disabilities." Household Economic Studies. No. P70(73). Washington, DC: US Department of Commerce and Bureau of Census.
McNeil, John M. . 1993. "Americans with Disabilities: 1991-1992." Household Economic
Studies. No. P-70(33). Washington, DC: US Department of Commerce and Bureau of
Census.
McNeil, John M. 1997. "Americans with Disabilities: 1994-1995." Household Economic
Studies. No. P-70(61). Washington, DC: US Department of Commerce and Bureau of
Census.
McNeil, John M. 1986. "Disability, Functional Limitation and Health Insurance Coverage
1984/85." Household Economic Studies. No. P-70(8). US Department of Commerce
and Bureau of Census.
Meyer, Bruce D. 2002. "Unemployment and Workers' Compensation Programmes:
Rationale, Design, Labour Supply and Income Support." Fiscal Studies, 23(1): 1-49.
Meyer, Bruce D. 1990. "Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells."
Econometrica, 58(4): 757-82.
Meyer, Bruce D. and Wallace K. C. Mok. 2006. "Calculating the Federal Income Tax
Burden after 1993 Using TAXSIM – a Technical Appendix." Unpublished.
Meyer, Bruce D. and Wallace K. C. Mok. 2012. "Disability in America, Evidence

from the PSID" (with Bruce D. Meyer) in Lifecycle Events and Economic
Well-Being, ed. by K. Couch, MC Daly, and J. Zissimopoulus, Stanford
University Press. Forthcoming
Meyer, Bruce D.; Wallace K. C. Mok and James X. Sullivan. 2009. “The UnderReporting of Transfers in Household Surveys: Its Nature and Consequences.” NBER
Working Paper No. 15181, July 2009.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2003. "Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor
Using Income and Consumption." The Journal of Human Resources, 38(Special Issue
on Income Volatility and Implications for Food Assistance Programs): 1180-220.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James- X. Sullivan. 2008.“Changes in the Consumption, Income, and
Well-Being of Single Mother Headed Families,” American Economic Review 98(5)
December 2008, 2221-41.
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2011. “Viewpoint: Further Results on Measuring
the Well-Being of the Poor using Income and Consumption.” Canadian Journal of
Economics 44 (1) February 2011, 52-87.
Mok, Wallace K.C.; Bruce D. Meyer; Kerwin Kofi Charles and Alexandra C. Achen.
2008. "A Note on “the Longitudinal Structure of Earnings Losses among Work-Limited
Disabled Workers." Journal of Human Resources, 43(3): 721-8.

44

Mont, Daniel; John F. Burton Jr and Virginia P. Reno. 2000. "Workers’ Compensation:
Benefits, Coverage and Costs, 1997-98, New Estimates." Washington, DC: National
Academy of Social Insurance.
Nagi, Saad. 1969. Disability and Rehabilitation: Legal, Clinical and Self-Concepts and
Measurement. Columbus, Ohio: Ohio State University Press.
Nagi, Saad. 1965. "Some Conceptual Issues in Disability and Rehabilitation." In Sociology
and Rehabilitation. ed. Marvin B. Sussman, 100-13. Washington, D.C.: American
Sociological Association.
Nagi, Saad Z. and Linda W. Hadley. 1972. "Disability Behavior: Income Change and
Motivation to Work." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 25(2): 223-33.
Oswald, Andrew J. and Nattavudh Powdthavee. 2008. "Does happiness adapt? A
longitudinal study of disability with implications for economists and judges." Journal
of Public Economics, 92(5-6): 1061-77
Parsons, Donald O. 1980. "The Decline in Male Labor Force Participation." Journal of
Political Economy, 88(1): 117-34.
Parsons, Donald O. 1984. "Disability Insurance and Male Labor Force Participation: A
Response to Haveman and Wolfe." Journal of Political Economy, 92(3): 542-49.
Parsons, Donald O. 1991. "The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance
Applicants: Comment." American Economic Review, 81(5): 1419-26.
Poterba, James M. 1991. “Is the Gasoline Tax Regressive?" in Tax Policy and the
Economy 5, David Bradford, ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 145-164.
Rosen, Harvey S. 2001. Public Finance 6th Edition. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Irwin.
Rupp, Kalman and Paul S. Davies. 2004. "A Long-Term View of Health Status,
Disabilities, Mortality, and Participation in the DI and SSI Disability Programs." In
Accounting for Worker Well-Being. ed. Soloman W. Polachek, 119-83. Amsterdam:
Elsevier Science North Holland.
Scheffler, Richard M. and George Iden. 1974. "The Effect of Disability on Labor Supply."
Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 28(1): 122-32.
Sengupta, Ishita; Virginia Reno and Jr. John .F. Burton. 2007. "Workers’ Compensation:
Benefits, Coverage, and Costs." Washington, DC: National Academy of Social
Insurance.
Singleton, Perry. 2012. “"Insult to Injury: Disability, Earnings, and Divorce." Journal of
Human Resources, 47(4): 972-990
Skinner, Jonathan. 1987. "A Superior Measure of Consumption from the Panel Study of
Income Dynamics." Economics Letters, 23(2): 213-16.
Stephens, Melvin, Jr. 2001. "The Long-Run Consumption Effects of Earnings Shocks."
Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(1): 28-36.
Stern, Steven. 1989. "Measuring the Effect of Disability on Labor Force Participation."
Journal of Human Resources, 24(3): 361-95.
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers. 2008. “Economic Growth and Happiness:
Reassessing the Easterlin Paradox,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring
2008: 1-87.
Treitel, Ralph. 1976. "Appeal by Denial Disability Claimants." Washington, DC: Office of
Research and Statistics, US Department of Health, Education and Human Services and
Social Security Administration
U.S. Social Security Administration. 2005. "Annual Statistical Supplements to the Social
Security Bulletin." Washington, DC: US Social Security Administration.
U.S. Social Security Administration. 2006. "Disability Benefits." Washington, DC: US
Social Security Administration.

45

U.S. Social Security Administration. 2007. "Understanding SSI." Washington, DC: US
Social Security Administration.
U.S. Social Security Administration, SSI Monthly Statistics. 2007. US Social Security
Administration. http://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/ssi_monthly/200512/index.html. (accessed October 15, 2007).
Waldrop, Judith and Sharon M. Stern. 2003. "Disability Status: 2000." Census 2000 Brief.
No. C2KBR-27. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and
Statistics Administration, U.S. Census Bureau.
Zeldes, Stephen P. 1989. "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical
Investigation." Journal of Political Economy, 97(2): 305-46.

46

Figure 1
Percent Change in Annual Earnings Before and After Disability Onset,
Extent of Disability Groups and All Disabled

Figure 2
Change in Annual Hours of Work Before and After Disability Onset,
Extent of Disability Groups and All Disabled

47

Figure 3
Percentage of Disabled with Zero Hours of Work
Before and After Disability Onset,
Extent of Disability Groups and All Disabled

Figure 4
Percentage Change in Hourly Earnings Before and After Disability Onset,
Extent of Disability Groups and All Disabled

48

Figure 5
Percentage Change in After-Tax Pre-Public Transfer Income
Before and After Disability Onset,
Extent of Disability Groups and All Disabled

Figure 6
Percentage Change in After-Tax Post-Transfer Income
Before and After Disability Onset,
Extent of Disability Groups and All Disabled

49

Figure 7
Percentage of Families with After-Tax Post-Transfer Income
Below the Poverty Line,
Extent of Disability Groups and All Disabled

Figure 8
Change in Under-reporting Adjusted Public Transfer Income
Before and After Disability Onset,
Extent of Disability Groups and All Disabled

50

Figure 9
Percentage Change in Food Consumption Before and After Disability Onset,
Extent of Disability Groups and All Disabled

Figure 10
Percentage Change in Food plus Housing Consumption
Before and After Disability Onset,
Extent of Disability Groups and All Disabled

51

Figure 11
Percentage Change in Food Eaten at Home Before and After Disability Onset,
Extent of Disability Groups and All Disabled

Figure 12
Percentage Change in Food Eaten Outside the Home Before and After Disability Onset,
Extent of Disability Groups and All Disabled

52

Table 1
Working Age Male Household Head Disability Rates, and Shares Severely Disabled
1968-2009

Year

1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1999
2001
2003
2005
2007
2009

N
(1)
2,865
2,659
2,730
2,809
2,901
3,039
3,164
3,307
3,418
3,542
3,663
3,799
3,905
3,931
3,970
4,046
4,093
4,177
4,193
4,221
4,262
4,266
5,485
5,451
5,716
5,712
6,224
5,966
4,946
4,028
4,175
4,475
4,718
4,746
4,858
5,034

Disability Rate
(Unweighted)
(2)
15.17
17.84
16.40
16.87
14.03
12.62
11.79
10.81
10.89
11.86
12.17
13.26
14.09
12.46
11.74
11.46
12.38
11.95
10.55
12.62
12.86
12.90
13.65
13.48
13.50
13.24
13.46
13.03
12.78
11.34
12.11
12.45
12.13
11.60
12.13
11.45

Disability Rate
(Weighted)
(3)
13.74
16.25
14.76
16.01
13.16
12.24
11.41
10.60
10.43
10.95
11.39
12.79
13.60
12.38
11.99
11.25
12.86
12.14
11.25
13.64
13.71
13.49
14.42
14.09
13.99
13.46
12.80
12.98
13.19
12.02
12.29
13.02
12.35
12.07
13.20
12.03

Share of Disabled that
are Severely Disabled
(Weighted)
(4)
0.30

0.33
0.28
0.27
0.27
0.35
0.48
0.44
0.44
0.42
0.48
0.45
0.48
0.37
0.41
0.26
0.31
0.28
0.31
0.33
0.31
0.28
0.29
0.30
0.34
0.34
0.28
0.34
0.29
0.32
0.38
0.36
0.39

Notes: The sample is male household heads ages 22-61 years in the PSID full sample. The disabled in a survey year are
those who answer yes to the question: “Do you have a physical or nervous limitation that limits the amount or type of
work you can do?” Severely disabled family heads are those who report “Can do nothing,” “Completely,” “A Lot” or
“Severely” in response to the follow-up severity question.

53

Table 2
Disability Transition Matrix

t-1

Non-disabled
Non-disabled
Non-disabled
Not Severe
Not Severe
Not Severe
Severe
Severe
Severe

t

Non-disabled
Not Severe
Severe
Non-disabled
Not Severe
Severe
Non-disabled
Not Severe
Severe

Nondisabled
0.967
0.586
0.309
0.752
0.252
0.124
0.647
0.194
0.066

t+1
Not
Severe
0.023
0.336
0.255
0.203
0.647
0.314
0.196
0.464
0.129

Severe
0.007
0.075
0.431
0.041
0.094
0.552
0.145
0.342
0.796

Nondisabled
0.954
0.619
0.345
0.726
0.323
0.173
0.609
0.212
0.099

t+2
Not
Severe
0.029
0.300
0.253
0.202
0.546
0.309
0.211
0.397
0.160

Notes: The sample is male household heads ages 22-61. See the text for further details.

54

Severe
0.011
0.074
0.388
0.067
0.118
0.514
0.165
0.386
0.728

Table 3
Sample Means and Standard Deviations,
Non-disabled and the Extent of Disability Groups
Extent of Disability Groups
Chronic
NonAll
Not
Chronic
Disabled
Disabled One-Time Temporary
Severe
Severe
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Age at Disability Onset
37.0
35.7
35.6
37.0
41.7
(10.3)
(9.0)
(10.5)
(10.3)
(10.2)

Age

35.9
(7.9)

40.5
(8.7)

37.0
(6.7)

39.5
(8.4)

42.1
(8.6)

44.9
(9.2)

White

0.667
(0.471)

0.670
(0.470)

0.716
(0.451)

0.657
(0.475)

0.752
(0.432)

0.489
(0.501)

Married

0.802
(0.317)

0.799
(0.312)

0.786
(0.319)

0.797
(0.307)

0.816
(0.299)

0.792
(0.331)

Number of Years In
Survey

13.7
(8.0)

19.3
(8.1)

19.4
(8.0)

19.2
(8.3)

20.6
(7.9)

17.5
(8.0)

Highest Level of EducHigh School

0.347
(0.476)

0.315
(0.465)

0.347
(0.476)

0.331
(0.471)

0.336
(0.473)

0.264
(0.442)

Highest Level of EducCollege

0.461
(0.499)

0.355
(0.479)

0.462
(0.499)

0.360
(0.480)

0.358
(0.480)

0.191
(0.394)

Years in Survey after
Onset

13.7
(8.6)

10.2
(6.7)

13.8
(9.3)

16.5
(8.5)

13.9
(8.2)

Number of Consecutive
Positive Limitation
Reports

1.919
(4.225)

0.444
(0.631)

3.339
(5.193)

4.933
(6.167)

Number of Non-missing
Reports of Disability
Status from Onset to the
10th Year after Onset

7.471
(2.495)

7.218
(2.542)

8.210
(2.196)

7.653
(2.392)

Number of Positive
Limitation Reports from
Onset to the 10th Year
after Onset

2.993
(2.912)

1.402
(0.491)

5.363
(2.113)

6.155
(2.339)

Severity Ratio

0.277
(0.371)

0.207
(0.307)

0.121
(0.164)

0.837
(0.168)

Age in the Last Interview

45.2
(11.7)

54.8
(13.4)

6.794
(2.599)

0.129
(0.336)
50.2
(11.8)

53.6
(13.7)

57.6
(13.1)

58.5
(13.4)

Number of Observations
4,804
1,937
465
595
548
329
Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. The variables Age and Married are averages over the sample
years during which the individual is the head and ages 22-61. Individuals are classified by their first
observed disability. See data appendix or text for sample restrictions and the text for group definitions.
55

Table 4
Prevalence of Disability by Age

Age

Number
of Male
Heads

30

607

32

1009

34

1214

36

1272

38

1112

40

1009

42

902

44

743

46

583

48

554

50

542

52

555

54

538

56

545

58

383

60

352

Any
disability
(1)

0.2171
(0.0201)
0.2160
(0.0156)
0.2443
(0.0150)
0.2448
(0.0143)
0.2683
(0.0161)
0.2658
(0.0167)
0.2827
(0.0178)
0.3001
(0.0199)
0.3298
(0.0231)
0.3411
(0.0237)
0.3595
(0.0245)
0.3544
(0.0239)
0.3824
(0.0242)
0.4140
(0.0243)
0.6047
(0.0298)
0.6142
(0.0309)

Currently
Chronic
Disabled One-Time Temporary Not Severe
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

0.0862
(0.0147)
0.0769
(0.0102)
0.0899
(0.0102)
0.0989
(0.0098)
0.0824
(0.0098)
0.0882
(0.0105)
0.1079
(0.0126)
0.1205
(0.0141)
0.1317
(0.0169)
0.1275
(0.0165)
0.1628
(0.0191)
0.1687
(0.0190)
0.1909
(0.0198)
0.2152
(0.0205)
0.3033
(0.0281)
0.3039
(0.0290)

0.0428
(0.0089)
0.0422
(0.0077)
0.0570
(0.0079)
0.0584
(0.0075)
0.0635
(0.0084)
0.0536
(0.0081)
0.0611
(0.0091)
0.0484
(0.0088)
0.0507
(0.0108)
0.0470
(0.0101)
0.0558
(0.0117)
0.0606
(0.0119)
0.0607
(0.0122)
0.0639
(0.0127)
0.0841
(0.0171)
0.0808
(0.0180)

0.0650
(0.0120)
0.0645
(0.0090)
0.0590
(0.0079)
0.0572
(0.0074)
0.0693
(0.0092)
0.0712
(0.0096)
0.0710
(0.0099)
0.0995
(0.0132)
0.1061
(0.0152)
0.0910
(0.0144)
0.0790
(0.0134)
0.0720
(0.0121)
0.0758
(0.0126)
0.0734
(0.0125)
0.1041
(0.0179)
0.1007
(0.0181)

0.0736
(0.0124)
0.0772
(0.0101)
0.0902
(0.0098)
0.0964
(0.0102)
0.1069
(0.0118)
0.1118
(0.0121)
0.1204
(0.0132)
0.1201
(0.0143)
0.1130
(0.0155)
0.1394
(0.0175)
0.1332
(0.0170)
0.1200
(0.0164)
0.1281
(0.0164)
0.1312
(0.0165)
0.2104
(0.0250)
0.1878
(0.0251)

Chronic
Severe
(6)

0.0357
(0.0102)
0.0321
(0.0071)
0.0382
(0.0078)
0.0329
(0.0057)
0.0286
(0.0057)
0.0292
(0.0062)
0.0302
(0.0067)
0.0321
(0.0070)
0.0599
(0.0116)
0.0637
(0.0116)
0.0916
(0.0151)
0.1018
(0.0152)
0.1178
(0.0160)
0.1456
(0.0172)
0.2060
(0.0244)
0.2451
(0.0268)

Notes: This table reports for each age the fraction of the sample members who have had a disability by
the specified age, the fraction of individuals who are currently disabled, and the fraction for whom a
given disability type is their most severe disability to date. For this table we only use data from 19801992. The fractions are weighted. Standard errors are in parentheses. We restrict the sample to
individuals with at least 10 years of data prior to the specified age. See text for details.

56

Table 5
Changes in Economic Outcomes Before and After Disability Onset, All Disabled
Year
from
onset
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Earnings
(1)
-0.038
(0.024)
-0.028
(0.022)
-0.043
(0.027)
-0.080**
(0.027)
-0.087**
(0.021)
-0.150**
(0.025)
-0.231**
(0.030)
-0.230**
(0.030)
-0.203**
(0.036)
-0.237**
(0.032)
-0.247**
(0.039)
-0.226**
(0.036)
-0.248**
(0.041)
-0.255**
(0.037)
-0.226**
(0.042)
-0.252**
(0.043)

Implied %
Change
(2)

Hours of
Work
(3)

-3.68

22
(20)
-15
(23)
-18
(23)
-70**
(25)
-112**
(25)
-246**
(27)
-368**
(29)
-346**
(30)
-328**
(30)
-368**
(30)
-343**
(32)
-329**
(33)
-334**
(33)
-300**
(34)
-320**
(36)
-378**
(38)

-2.80
-4.21
-7.73
-8.36
-13.93
-20.63
-20.55
-18.37
-21.10
-21.89
-20.23
-21.96
-22.51
-20.23
-22.28

%
working
zero
hours
(4)
1.84
2.63
2.78
2.81
4.59
6.21
13.30
13.52
15.50
15.23
17.50
16.17
18.55
16.33
18.72
18.41

PrePublic
Transfer
Income
(5)
-0.019
(0.013)
-0.012
(0.015)
-0.019
(0.018)
-0.045**
(0.015)
-0.046**
(0.017)
-0.095**
(0.017)
-0.147**
(0.019)
-0.138**
(0.019)
-0.125**
(0.024)
-0.124**
(0.026)
-0.157**
(0.023)
-0.138**
(0.024)
-0.119**
(0.034)
-0.157**
(0.025)
-0.140**
(0.027)
-0.144**
(0.028)

Implied %
Change
(6)
-1.91
-1.20
-1.90
-4.40
-4.50
-9.02
-13.67
-12.89
-11.75
-11.66
-14.53
-12.89
-11.22
-14.53
-13.06
-13.41

PostPublic
Transfer
Income
(7)
-0.021
(0.013)
-0.012
(0.015)
-0.020
(0.018)
-0.045**
(0.015)
-0.032
(0.016)
-0.051**
(0.017)
-0.078**
(0.018)
-0.084**
(0.019)
-0.086**
(0.024)
-0.070**
(0.025)
-0.101**
(0.022)
-0.094**
(0.023)
-0.071*
(0.033)
-0.117**
(0.024)
-0.096**
(0.026)
-0.083**
(0.028)

Implied %
Change
(8)
-2.04
-1.18
-1.95
-4.43
-3.11
-4.97
-7.48
-8.06
-8.23
-6.75
-9.61
-8.97
-6.90
-11.04
-9.14
-7.97

Food
(9)
0.006
(0.014)
-0.019
(0.013)
-0.023
(0.013)
-0.002
(0.014)
-0.030*
(0.014)
-0.025
(0.013)
-0.027
(0.016)
-0.062**
(0.014)
-0.058**
(0.015)
-0.066**
(0.015)
-0.072**
(0.015)
-0.056**
(0.016)
-0.086**
(0.016)
-0.054**
(0.017)
-0.074**
(0.017)
-0.079**
(0.018)

Implied %
Change
(10)
0.59
-1.87
-2.31
-0.17
-2.95
-2.48
-2.63
-6.02
-5.61
-6.35
-6.95
-5.46
-8.23
-5.26
-7.18
-7.56

Food
plus
Housing
(11)
-0.017
(0.011)
-0.034**
(0.012)
-0.034**
(0.013)
-0.028*
(0.014)
-0.030*
(0.014)
-0.042**
(0.014)
-0.040*
(0.016)
-0.065**
(0.016)
-0.063**
(0.017)
-0.071**
(0.018)
-0.072**
(0.019)
-0.065**
(0.023)
-0.103**
(0.019)
-0.079**
(0.022)
-0.092**
(0.022)
-0.091**
(0.023)

Implied %
Change
(12)
-1.72
-3.32
-3.38
-2.74
-2.99
-4.10
-3.88
-6.26
-6.12
-6.82
-6.99
-6.29
-9.79
-7.62
-8.83
-8.69

Notes: The numbers reported are, for each variable of interest, the coefficient estimates of the time from onset indicator variables in fixed effect regressions. The omitted period is more than 5 years before onset.
Standard errors clustered by person are in parentheses. Statistical significance of each estimate is denoted as follows: **Significant at 1 percent level, *Significant at 5 percent level. See the data appendix for
variable definitions and the text for further details.

57

Table 6
Changes in Economic Outcomes Before and After Disability Onset, Chronic-Severe Group
Year
from
onset
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Earnings
(1)
-0.101*
(0.060)
-0.109**
(0.054)
-0.129**
(0.045)
-0.147**
(0.041)
-0.216**
(0.043)
-0.454**
(0.079)
-0.900**
(0.103)
-0.981**
(0.112)
-1.075**
(0.126)
-1.111**
(0.129)
-1.314**
(0.136)
-1.331**
(0.145)
-1.525**
(0.156)
-1.594**
(0.184)
-1.474**
(0.180)
-1.431**
(0.196)

Implied %
Change
(2)

Hours of
Work
(3)

-9.61

-36
(58)
-120*
(51)
-75
(53)
-87
(63)
-249**
(59)
-686**
(71)
-1,121**
(69)
-1,195**
(73)
-1,283**
(68)
-1,327**
(70)
-1,397**
(66)
-1,434**
(72)
-1,417**
(74)
-1,499**
(75)
-1,444**
(86)
-1,445**
(85)

-10.33
-12.10
-13.67
-19.43
-36.49
-59.34
-62.51
-65.87
-67.08
-73.13
-73.58
-78.24
-79.69
-77.10
-76.09

%
working
zero
hours
(4)

PrePublic
Transfer
Income
(5)

3.20

-0.091**
(0.034)
-0.059
(0.035)
-0.07
(0.038)
-0.092*
(0.040)
-0.114**
(0.042)
-0.255**
(0.052)
-0.475**
(0.060)
-0.512**
(0.060)
-0.574**
(0.069)
-0.553**
(0.095)
-0.643**
(0.069)
-0.653**
(0.072)
-0.676**
(0.078)
-0.817**
(0.078)
-0.800**
(0.082)
-0.739**
(0.095)

2.82
2.90
3.90
4.67
16.18
39.85
47.49
56.36
55.26
62.28
59.75
66.67
65.35
69.73
65.82

Implied %
Change
(6)
-8.70
-5.78
-6.78
-8.77
-10.77
-22.51
-37.81
-40.07
-43.67
-42.48
-47.43
-47.95
-49.14
-55.82
-55.07
-52.24

PostPublic
Transfer
Income
(7)
-0.076*
(0.031)
-0.081*
(0.033)
-0.073*
(0.035)
-0.098**
(0.035)
-0.091*
(0.037)
-0.115**
(0.041)
-0.176**
(0.049)
-0.256**
(0.044)
-0.271**
(0.048)
-0.203**
(0.066)
-0.265**
(0.048)
-0.279**
(0.053)
-0.306**
(0.054)
-0.412**
(0.053)
-0.360**
(0.054)
-0.325**
(0.064)

Implied %
Change
(8)
-7.27
-7.80
-7.08
-9.33
-8.73
-10.86
-16.14
-22.59
-23.74
-18.37
-23.28
-24.35
-26.36
-33.77
-30.23
-27.75

Food
(9)
-0.003
(0.027)
-0.06
(0.031)
-0.064*
(0.033)
-0.081*
(0.034)
-0.106**
(0.036)
-0.093**
(0.033)
-0.09
(0.049)
-0.194**
(0.034)
-0.174**
(0.039)
-0.212**
(0.033)
-0.214**
(0.036)
-0.162**
(0.039)
-0.221**
(0.040)
-0.226**
(0.034)
-0.237**
(0.036)
-0.201**
(0.044)

Implied %
Change
(10)
-0.33
-5.85
-6.20
-7.78
-10.06
-8.93
-8.58
-17.63
-15.97
-19.10
-19.27
-14.96
-19.83
-20.23
-21.10
-18.21

Food
plus
Housing
(11)
-0.054*
(0.022)
-0.084**
(0.027)
-0.083**
(0.028)
-0.123**
(0.032)
-0.136**
(0.032)
-0.127**
(0.032)
-0.153**
(0.039)
-0.229**
(0.032)
-0.207**
(0.033)
-0.232**
(0.034)
-0.239**
(0.034)
-0.242**
(0.037)
-0.289**
(0.039)
-0.326**
(0.036)
-0.285**
(0.045)
-0.287**
(0.040)

Implied %
Change
(12)
-5.25
-8.07
-7.98
-11.57
-12.72
-11.93
-14.19
-20.47
-18.70
-20.71
-21.26
-21.49
-25.10
-27.82
-24.80
-24.95

Notes: The numbers reported are, for each variable of interest, the coefficient estimates of the time from onset indicator variables in fixed effect regressions, for the Chronic-Severe disability group. The omitted
period is more than 5 years before onset. Standard errors clustered by person are in parentheses. Statistical significance of each estimate is denoted as follows: **Significant at 1 percent level, *Significant at 5
percent level. See the data appendix for variable definitions and the text for further details.

58

Table 7
Decomposition of Change in Housing Consumption

One-Time
(1)

Temporary
(2)

Chronic
Not Severe
(3)

Chronic
Severe
(4)

Homeowner

-0.028
(0.026)

-0.073**
(0.026)

-0.006
(0.026)

-0.059
(0.037)

Publicly Subsidized

0.018
(0.010)

0.011
(0.009)

0.02
(0.011)

0.045*
(0.022)

Rental

0.01
(0.025)

0.062*
(0.026)

-0.014
(0.027)

0.013
(0.040)

-233.37
(890.58)

-924.01
(723.18)

-3,086.54**
(607.09)

-1,081.96**
(398.77)

-564.83
(468.94)

-1,396.83**
(391.41)

A. Housing Type

B. Housing Consumption Given Type

Homeowner
Rental

-1003.76
(599.61)
-942.77*
(405.11)

Notes: The table reports the coefficient estimates on the interaction of each disability group with
being after the 6th year after onset (t  {6,10}). Standard errors clustered by person are in
parentheses. Statistical significance of each estimate is denoted as follows: **Significant at 1
percent level, *Significant at 5 percent level. For the upper panel, the dependent variable is a
dichotomous variable that equals one if the specified housing type is chosen. For the bottom panel,
the dependent variable is the amount of housing consumption, conditional on the housing type
chosen. See the text for details.

59

Table 8
Estimates of εD,b for Current Disability Compensation Programs to be Optimal

Coefficient of Relative Risk Aversion, γ
1
2
3
4
5

Coefficient of
Relative
Prudence, ρ

0
1
2

0.2200
0.2373
0.2557

0.4400
0.4720
0.5082

0.6600
0.7045
0.7585

0.8800
0.9353
1.0074

1.1000
1.1646
1.2551

3
4
5

0.2748
0.2946
0.3149

0.5471
0.5879
0.6302

0.8179
0.8807
0.9457

1.0878
1.1731
1.2613

1.3571
1.4652
1.5769

Notes: This table shows, for a given value of γ (coefficient of relative risk aversion) and ρ
(coefficient of relative prudence), what εD,b (elasticity of the fraction of a lifetime spent disabled
with respect to the disability benefit level) would be if the current compensation programs for the
chronic-severe disabled are optimal.

60

