                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ANTICIPATED TAX CHANGES AND
                    THE TIMING OF. INVESTMENT




                        Alan J. Auerbach


                       James R. Hines, Jr.




                     Working Paper No. 1886




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 1986




This paper was prepared for the NBER Conference on the Effects of
Taxation on Capital Formation, Palm Beach, February 13-16, 1986.
We are grateful to Andrew Abel for helpful comments and to the
Sloan Foundation for financial support. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation and projects in
Government Budgets and Taxation and Capital Formation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #1886
                                               April 1986




            Anticipated Tax Changes and the Timing of Investment




                                 ABSTRACT



     This paper analyzes the short-run and long-run effects of corporate tax
changes over the last three decades and the likely consequences of proposed
future tax changes. Consideration of short-run effects of tax reform on invest-
ment and market value requires a careful analysis of three elements of behavior
that are normally omitted from long run analyses: the state of investor expec-
tations, the time lags involved in putting new capital in place, and the tax
law's distinctions between new and old capital. The model described in this
paper considers investment in equipment and investment in plant separately, and
does so under different specifications of investor expectations.

     Our results for the period 1954—1985 suggest that investors did take
account of fluctuations in profitability, real interest rates, and the tax code
in making their investment plans. We examine the consequences of the
nonindexation of depreciation benefits as well as the introduction of the
investment tax credit and the Accelerated Cost Recovery System by simulating the
corporate sector's performance in the absence of these features. In addition,
we analyze the effects of changing the tax code in 1986 along the lines proposed
in the Bradley-Gephardt "Fair Tax" plan, the Treasury II plan, and the
Rostenkowski plan, H.R. 3838. The simulation results suggest that all three
plans would reduce fixed investment in the short run, with the reduction coming
primarily in equipment. At the same time, the simulations predict large wind-
falls for existing capital assets under all three reform proposals.



Alan J. Auerbach                                  James R. Hines Jr.
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania                        Harvard University
3718 Locust Walk/CR                               200 Littauer Center
Philadelphia, PA 19104                            Cambridge, MA 02138

(215) 898—1503                                    (617) 495-2144
    Introduction


     Since 1981, important changes in the Federal tax provisions affecting

investment in business plant and equipment have occurred in every year except

1983. There is every reason to believe that 1986 will not be another

exception. Yet the methods economists commonly use to measure the impacts of

tax law changes generally assume that such changes will be permanent and

ignore problems of transition. Such analysis can be valuable for

understanding the underlying differences among alternative tax systems, but

may be unhelpful, even misleading, if one is attempting to understand the

short-run impact on investment of a tax change that may have been anticipated

and may be foreseen as temporary.

     The purpose of this paper is to present and use a framework for tax

analysis that is closely related to previous approaches but capable of

assessing the short-run impact on investment of very complicated combinations

of tax policies undertaken at specified dates with different degrees of

anticipation on the part of investors. At the same time, the model generates

predictions about the impact of these changes on the market value of

corporate securities that are consistent with the predicted path of

investment.

     Because the model's parameters are based on empirical evidence for the

U.S., its predictions are not simply illustrative, but should convey an

impression of the actual quantitative effects of tax policy changes. Being an

historical model, based on data beginning in 1953, it also allows us to

perform counterfactual experiments to estimate the effects of historical

policies. Thus, we can (and do) evaluate the performance of the activist tax
                                    —2-


policy of the last three decades in altering the level and stability of

investment over that period.

     Another primary objective, however, concerns the future. In the past

couple of years, numerous tax reform plans have surfaced that would make

important changes in the incentives for business fixed investment. Most would

rationalize the treatment of depreciation for different types of assets,

remove the investment tax credit, and compensate, at least in part, for the

reduction -in these investment incentives through reductions in the statuary

corporate tax rate. Among the most influential such plans have been the

Bradley-Gephardt "Fair Tax" (originally formulated in 1983), the first and

second Treasury plans (introduced in November 1984 and May 1985), and the

"Rostenkowski" plan formulated by the House Ways and Means Committee and

passed by the full House in January, 1986.

     Each of these plans has been greeted with mixed but predominantly

negative responses from the business community, with the primary criticism

being that they would reduce investment. The analysis below evaluates these

criticisms by estimating the marginal effects of several of the proposals on

the level and distribution of investment and the value of the stock market.

An interesting point that surfaces in this analysis is that even to the extent

that such plans may harm investment, they should be very beneficial for the

value of corporate equity. It is thus somewhat ironic that they should be so

vehemently opposed by many of those who would appear to benefit.

     Before turning to these results we describe the model used in this

paper, based on that developed in Auerbach and Hines (1986), and the choice of

parameter values used for the simulations.
                                          -3-



Modelling Investment Behavior


      The model of investment used in this paper assumes that there are two types

of fixed investment (structures and equipment) and costs to adjusting the

capital stock that may be separate or mutual and may differ between structures

and equipment. It is, in other words, a q investment model with two types of

capital. We choose this level of aggregation to allow comparability with

previous work, and because the greatest variation in tax treatment has

historically been between these two broad classes of assets.

      Consistent with the data, ours is a discrete time model with one year

intervals. Each capital good is assumed to decay exponentially, and the

representative, competitive firm produces its output using labor and the two

types of capital subject to a constant returns to scale, Cobb—Douglas production

function, with a1 and a2 representing the gross shares (including depreciation)

of the equipment and structures, respectively, in production. The adjustment

cost function is assumed to have the following form1:


                                      +
(1)     A(It) =   J(o(It/Kt_i)2Kt_i       i(Iit/K1t_i)2K1_1   +



where 'it and K1t are net investment and capital of type -i       -in year t,    and

Kt are sums over both types of investment and capital, and 13,,           and 132 are

adjustment cost terms reflecting joint costs and costs specific to the two

types of capital, respectively.

      Given the homogeneity of the production function and adjustment cost

function with respect to the scale of the firm, the value of the firm will be

proportional to the size of its capital stock and the behavior of all firms can
                                    -4-.




be represented by a single, aggregate representative firm.

     The quadratic adjustment cost function in (1) is a two—capital-good version

of the one used by Summers (1981) in his empirical analysis. It also differs in

two other respects. First, it is based on net, rather than gross investment.

Second, there is no constant subtracted from the ratio I/K in each quadratic

term. However, one may equivalently view the current model as being based on

gross investment, with a constant equal to the rate, o, of economic depreciation

being subtracted. Either way, the notion is that minimum average adjustment

costs (in this case, zero) occur when net investment is zero. This makes sense

-if one views the costs as general ones involving changing the scale of

operations rather than bolting down the new machines. Summers's preferred

estimate of the constant term (.088) is quite consistent with this

interpretation.

     We ignore changes in relative prices between capital goods and output and

between different types of capital, and assume that all new investment goods

have a real price of unity in every year. The adjustment costs are assumed to

be "internal", in that they relate not to an upward sloping supply schedule for

capital goods but the costs of absorption at the firm level. This is consistent

with the observation that historical fluctuations in capital goods prices are

relatively minor compared to estimated costs of adjustment.

     The firm's optimization problem consists of choosing equipment, structures

and labor at each time t, taking account of current and (to the extent of the

assumed planning horizon) future economic conditions. There is no risk from the

firm's point of view; whatever it expects about the future (right or wrong) is

expected with certainty.   If we let the production function -in the three factor
 inputs be F(.), then the firm seeks to maximize its value at time t, equal to

 the discounted value of its real, after—tax cash flows:



 (2)        Vt =                                                       wN)   -
                   5t(1+_+lt         (1_T÷i)           is,K2s,N) -


                                                  2
                   (1+r)(1—TS)A(I S) +   (li-r)
                                                            is )G.
                                                      [—(1—k.   is +




where      is the labor input in period s, r is the real, after—tax required

return, w is the real wage rate paid at the end of year s, D(s,x) is the

depreciation allowance at the beginning of year s for assets of type i

purchased at the beginning of year x, kt -is the investment tax credit

received on investment of type I at the beginning of year t, it is the rate of

inflation, 6 is the rate at which capital of type I depreciates, G1 is gross

investment of type 'I at the beginning of year t, and Tt is the tax rate at the

beginning of year t.2 Depreciation allowances decay at the inflation rate

because they are not indexed.

       We use the convention that year t investment occurs at the beginning of the

period, while quasirents occur at the end, with period t investment yielding its

first return at the end of the same period. We also assume that adjustment

costs are immediately expensed, as would be the case for internal adjustment

costs that require extra factors or reduce productivity. Gross and net

investment of type i are related by the identity:
                                               —6-


                 =
(3)                  1it    +
                                 óKt_1
        For labor, the optimal condition derived by differentiating (2) with

respect to N calls for the firm to set the marginal product of labor equal to

the real wage. As usual in models of this sort with constant returns to scale,

the labor demand equation is omitted from explicit analysis. For each type of

capital good i, it is most convenient to derive the first order condition with

respect to gross investment at each date t,                    Assuming, for the moment, an

infinite horizon and perfect foresight, this yields:



(4)          pit =   [(1)/(1_Tt+i)]

                     -
                         s=t+1
                                (l_o)t)(1+r)_(5t+1)(1_T1)p15]

where (using 1 and 3):



(5)
             pit dFt/dK1 - dA+1/dK.t

                 =                 +
                     dF/dK.            io[(It+1/K)2   +
                                                          26.(It+1/K)]
                                   +
                                       i0[(I. 1t2         +

is    the "total" marginal product of capital at the end of period t, taking

account of reduced concurrent costs of adjustment, and q is the marginal

cost of a unit of capital, less tax savings associated with costs of

adjustment:
                                         -.7—



                 = 1 +                          +
(6)
                          (1—Tt)[o(It/Kt1)

        Equation (5) reminds the reader that there are two components to the firm's
marginal value of an additional piece of capital this year: the marginal product

of capital (dFt+1/dK1t) and the reduction in next year's adjustment costs

(dAti/dKt). Expression (4) says that firms should invest in capital of type I

at date t until its marginal product, after tax, equals its after tax cost

(multiplied by (1+r) because costs are borne at the beginning of the period)

less the present value of investment credits, depreciation allowances and future

quasirents. Thus, the expression is the result of the optimal backward solution

for firm behavior. When expectations are static, as is commonly assumed, (4)

reduces to the standard user cost of capital formula:


(7)          pit =


where z equals the present value of depreciation allowances D1(s,t) and


(8)          q' =

is    a tax-adjusted price of new capital goods that we will interpret below.

        Because of the assumption that production is governed by a Cobb—Douglas

production function, the direct marginal product of capital of type I in period

t is:



                         (1—a1—a2)
                                     —(1—a.)
                                         1
                                                    a.
                 =
(9)                  aN                         K.t3     j=3—i



where a is the production function constant. Thus, given the optimal choice

of labor input, expressions (4) and (5) for I and j give us two equations in
                                           -8-



the capital stocks Kit and K2t. Without adjustment costs, this would permit a

closed form, backward solution for these capital stocks in each period.3

However, since        depends on lagged capital stocks, this solution method is no

longer possible, and we must resort to simulation analysis.


Parameter I zat ion



       Three types of parameters appear in the model just described, relating to

production (a, a1, a2,         ö2,     1, and          taxation (T, k1, k2,       and

D2(•)) and financial markets (r and it).         For it, we use the realized values of

the GNP deflator (year on year), while r is set equal to the statutory corporate

tax rate that prevailed for the majority of the year.4 Firms' required rate of

return, r, -is set equal to after-tax real rate on 4- to 6-month commercial paper

which prevailed in the year of investment, plus a risk premium that is taken to

be constant. This series on adjusted interest rates was calcualted by (10):


(10)        ra =   0.06 + (1—T)PR - INFL

where ra is the adjusted rate, PR -is the nominal (annualized) return on 4— to

6-month paper, and INFL is the contemporaneous inflation rate. The after-tax

risk premium -in (10) is 696, which roughly corresponds to the historical

difference between after-tax risk-free interest rates and after-tax profit

rates.

       In order to calculate the production paramaters a and 6 and the tax terms k

and D(.), it is necessary to aggregate data on thirty—four classes of assets

for which we have data (twenty equipment and fourteen structures) into

corresponding values for aggregate equipment and structures. This turns out to
                                                        -9-


be a very complex problem. The method used is described in the appendix.

       Once values of          and 2 are known, it 'is possible to estimate the capital

share parameters a1 and a2 from production and capital stock data. We begin by

calculating the net—of-depreciation, before-tax return to capital in the

corporate sector in 1977 by dividing the difference between value added and

labor compensation in the corporate sector, taken from the 1977 Census of

Manufactures, by the total corporate capital stock, equal to equipment and

structures plus inventories and land. We then assume that all forms of capital

earned this before—tax rate of return, Rg5 Next, we assume that the

Cobb-Douglas production function specified above refers to gross output net of

returns to inventories and land,6 calculated as follows:


(11)         G = V +               +           -
                       o1K1             62K2       R9(K3-4-K4)


where V is value added and K3 and K4 are stocks of inventories and land.

       Once we have obtained this value of G, we note that, since output is

observed net of adjustment costs, the production function F(.) must satisfy:


(12)        F(K11K2,N) =       G    +   A(1)

Finally, we define the net return to capital of type i (i=1,2) in the current

period as being the derivative of 6 with respect to K1, holding constant the

capital stock growth rates (11/K1), (12/K2) and (I/K), less depreciation a1.7

This   yields (using 1. and 9):


(13)        Rg = a1F/K1
                           -
                                   JJ0(I/K)2
                                                    —   i(I/K)2   -
                                                                      i=112

which can immediately be solved for a1.8

       The resulting parameter values are:
          a1 =      .166

          a2 =      .181
                =   .137

          ô2
                = .033

with the estimated value of Rg equal to 10.4. This estimate of the marginal

product of capital (which is used only in the calculation of a1 and a2) is

consistent with previous findings. In interpreting the sizes of the two share

coefficients, it should be remembered that these are shares in gross output,

less estimated returns to land and inventories. Relative to usual

calculations of the capital share of net output, the first of these factors

(the use of gross output) would lead to a larger total share (since

depreciation is included in both numerator and denominator) while the second

(excluding part of the capital stock) would lead to a smaller total share

(since returns to excluded capital are subtracted from both numerator and

denominator.)

     The production function constant a -is obtained for 1977 by dividing

F(.) by the product of its component factors raised to the power of their

respective factor shares. We then assume that the labor input, in efficiency

units, grows at a constant rate of 3 over the entire sample period.9    This

imparts a trend rate of growth to the steady state of the model. That it is

slightly below the historical capital stock growth rate of about 4 may be

because part of that growth is attributable to the historical decline in

effective tax rates on investment.

     In order to obtain an historical series for a that would be consistent
                                               —11—


with observed fluctuations in the profitability of capital, we use data on

after-tax corporate rates of return from Feldstein, et. al. (1983), updated to

include 1984. We took the 1984 value to prevail for all subsequent years.

Assuming capital market equilibrium and constant returns technology, this rate

of return will be equal to the marginal gross return to capital, Rg in (13).

Note that this methodology implicitly assumes that yearly variation in the

return to capital is attributable to shocks to the production function and not

to changes in the capital/labor ratio. Then, using (9) and (13), the

technical and labor-related component of the production function can be

computed:



                    (C +   Rt)   K (1—a1—a2)
(14)         a =



where the left side of (14) is the value to be calculated, and C and D are

constants, with C equal to:


(15)         C =                               +          +
                   J(O.O3)2(0+1s1+2s2)             61s1       82s2

where s1 is the share of capital of type I in the capital stock (s1 +        1).
                                                                        s2
        Since (14) is a relationship which holds for all years, it must hold for

1977, the year from which values are calibrated. Marginal products of capital

for all other years were calculated where is using a1 and a2 and the

assumption that Kt/Nt is constant: to solve for a relative to its value in

1977,
                                    —12—


                          t
          a           C+R
           t         ____
           77        C+Rg

     The only parameters that remain to be chosen are the adjustment costs terms

       and 2' which are quite crucial to our analysis. Previous studies have

inferred these parameters from regressions of investment on "tax—adjusted q".

The authors of these studies have derived "tax-adjusted q" by correcting the

ratio of the market value of the firm to its capital stock (presumed to be

average q) for tax factors such as the investment tax credit, accelerated

depreciation and the deductibility of adjustment costs that would cause marginal

and average q to differ. In one case (Abel and Blanchard (1986)), average q is

explicity estimated from projected future profits and interest rates. A

regression of I on adjusted q can then be interpreted as estimating the inverted

marginal cost function.

     In a model with one capital stock, the coefficient on adjusted q would be

an estimate of 1/a, the inverted marginal adjustment cost. Although such

regressions cannot be done if there is more than one capital stock, one can

still interpret the coefficient as the inverse of the sum of marginal adjustment

costs associated with investment of type i, or            in the current model.

     Empirical investigations have found this coefficient to be quite small.

However, for many reasons usually pointed out by authors of the previous studies

themselves, these coefficients (which are not always even statistically

significant) may be prone to serious downward bias because of an inexact measure

of q being used.1°

     Given the uncertainty of what the "true" values of        and     should be,
                                      —13—


we choose values that, given the other parameters of the model, make the

variances of the growth rates of investment in equipment, structures and the two

categories together that are generated by an historical simulation with perfect

foresight roughly equal to their historical values for the period 1954-1984.

While this methodology is somewhat arbitrary, it derives from the observation

that, in the simulations, fluctuations in investment are particularly sensitive

to the configuration of adjustment costs.

      Postwar investment history suggests that adjustment costs are substantial

and not symmetric between equipment and structures. The net stock of equipment

grew at a mean annual rate of 5.O between 1954 and 1984, while structures grew

3.19 annually and total capital grew at a 3.9 rate. The historical variances

of equipment, structures, and total net investment rates were .O41, .OO7O, and

.O12 respectively. Adjustment cost parameters for the simulations were cho-

sen to approximate as closely as possible these variances with those generated

by the perfect foresight simulation when investors expect the 1985 tax law to

stay unchanged forever. Choosing .       I3,   and     to equal the common value of

six, as in Auerbach and Hines (1986), produces investment variability that does

not conform well with the historical evidence: structures investment is too

variable in these runs and equipment investment not variable enough. On the

basis of experiments with several parameterizat-lons, we found that the values

13o15,   =O,        produced results which most closely mirrored actual
investment.     This specification of adjustment costs yields equipment, struc-

tures, and total investment variances equal to .O35, .OO67, and .O12

respect ively. 11

     To compare these chosen values of               and   to those found in the pre-
                                      —14—




vious   literature on aggregate investment, note that the value of 13

corresponding to a dollar increase in net investment proportional to the

weights of equipment and structures in the capital stock is: 13 =

where k is the fraction of the capital stock represented by capital of type 1.

Given typical values of k1 and k2, this yields a value of 13   approximately
equal to 28, which is quite reasonable given previous research.12


Solution of the Model


     In the presence of adjustment costs, the model as specified can only be

solved numerically. There exist different techniques to obtain such solutions.

The one used here is described in great detail in Auerbach and Hines (1986).

     All simulations begin with the assumption that, prior to 1954, the economy

was in a steady state: that economic conditions had been stable for sufficiently

long that the stocks of both kinds of capital had completely adjusted, and no

change in these conditions was anticipated. Though this is undoubtedly

inaccurate, some such assumption is required to fix the irrital values of capital

stocks in a way that is consistent with the assumed production technology.

     This solution for the steady state in 1953 does not depend on any future

variables. Indeed, when expectations are assumed to be completely myopic

throughout, the model can then be solved forward without iteration, with each

year's solution beginning with        and solving for Kt. At the other extreme is

the assumption of perfect foresight. By this, we mean that all tax and

inflation rates are correctly anticipated until the present. It is hard to

implement this assumption for future dates, so we make assumptions about the

values of these variables and suppose that firms' expectations match them. We
                                    —15—


then solve the model into the 21st century to guarantee convergence to a new

steady state.


Measuring the Effects of Policies


     In addition to the two capital stocks, we calculate three variables of

interest. One is the average q of the representative firm, its value relative

to the replacement cost of its capital stock. This starts with the marginal q

obtained directly from the adjustment cost function, and then takes account of

the variety of tax provisions that make old and new capital differ in value.

The second is the effective tax rate, which summarizes the incentive to invest

in a particular asset in a given year. The third is the net investment flows of

equipment and structures which the simulation generates.


Estimating Average q


     It is this variable that tells us what the overall impact of a tax change

will be on market value. Generally, there will be two effects. To the extent

that the incentive to invest increases, marginal q, defined to be the basic

price of a unit of capital capital plus the derivative of the adjustment cost

function with respect to investment, will rise. In the absence of taxes, the

homogeneity of production and adjustment cost functions would imply that this

would also be the firm's value per unit of capital.

     But to the extent that the new incentive magnifies the distinction between

new and old capital, the difference between marginal q and average q will also

rise. The net effect on average q can be either positive or negative for

expansionary or contractionary policies. Holding marginal q constant, an
                                           -16-


increase in average q may be viewed as a lump sum transfer to the owners of

corporate capital.

       The formula for average q is based on an arbitrage condition between old

and new capital. Since new capital goods must generate after-tax cash flows

equal to marginal q, it follows that:



(17)            =
                    Tt[o(It/Kt1)       +
                                           (I.t/ti)I   +
                                                           PV   +   + TD.(S,t)

where       is marginal q and PV is the present value of the after—tax

quasirents accruing to an new asset purchased for one dollar at date t. Since

capital purchased at t'<t has a present value of quasirents of (l_oi)ttPVjt,

it follows that its value at date t, per efficiency unit of capital, is:



(18)                       +




Solution   of (17) for PV and substitution of this expression into (18) gives

a solution for the value of capital of type i and cohort t' at time t, in

terms of         From (1) and the definition of marginal q, we also have:


                = 1 +
(19)                    o(It/Kt)   +



Combining (18) and (19) to get each cohort's value, we then aggregate these
values of average q over all vintages and both types of capital to obtain an

overall value for the firm at date t.

       Note that this expression for average q is consistent with the assumption

of perfect foresight. When myopic expectations are assumed, we change (17) and

(18) correspondingly.
                                                    —17—


Calculating Effective Tax Rates


       In models based on myopic expectations, it is common to define the

effective tax rate to be the percentage difference between the net (of

depreciation) marginal products of capital before and after taxes. Given a

fixed after-tax return, this calculation also tells us what the before tax, or

social return to capital must be for the firm to earn zero profits. Unless the

economy actually is in a steady state, however, this will be correct only in the

year the calculation is made. Hence, the effective tax rate as commonly used

measures the required before-tax return to capital in the same year, assuming

myopia.

       When firms are not myopic, the formula for the user cost of capital is

different, but we can still answer the same question, viz., what rate of return

on capital must the firm earn in the current year, taking account of future

changes in taxes, inflation and the firm's marginal product of capital? As

before, this will tell us what the firm's rate of return on investment must be,

before taxes, in the current year. Dropping subsrcripts, the effective tax rate

is defined to be:


(20)       9 =   [(p/q   -
                             6)   -
                                      r]/(p/q   -
                                                    6)

where p is the marginal product of capital defined in (5)

       It is not clear which value of q should be used in (20). The most obvious

candidate is marginal q, as defined in expression (19). However, use of this

value has the effect of incorporating the tax deduction for adjustment costs in

the effective tax rate. This is perfectly acceptable; -it reflects the fact that
                                   -18-


part of the cost of investment is expensed. However, it makes more difficult a

comparison with previous results, since even when there is economic depreciation

of direct capital costs, the effective tax rate will be less than T. By using

the tax adjusted value, q', defined in (8),13 one "undoes" the differential tax

treatment of adjustment costs, and obtains the usual results for expensing,

economic depreciation, and other special cases. Hence, for the sake of

comparability with other studies in which adjustment costs were ignored, we take

this latter approach.
                                     -19-


Simulation Results


          This section presents the results of simulations, chosen to provide

answers to some of the questions raised in the introduction.    We begin by

contrasting the historical patterns of net investment in equipment and

structures with net investment series produced by simulation runs using myopic

and perfect foresight assumptions about investor expectations of future tax

laws and macroeconomic conditions.

     Table 1. presents net corporate investment, expressed as a fraction of the

capital stock, in equipment and structures for the period 1953-1984. These

investment rates are not derived from the published BEA net investment series;

they are calculated by applying the BEA gross investment data and

Hulten-Wykoff depreciation rates to form a perpetual inventory of corporate

capital assuming the published 1925 net capital stock to be accurate. The

investment series produced by thi.s method are then measured consistently with

net investment calculations from the simulation runs.

     Table 1 illustrates several sharp features of the postwar investment

experience. Equipment investment strongly accelerates in the mid-1960's,

possibly -in part in response to the introduction of the investment tax credit

and repeal of the Long amendment. Both equipment and structures appear to be

affected by business cycle downturns in 1970-1971 and 1975-1976. Structures

never recover from the latter shock. Investment in every year of the post-1975

period fails to equal any of its previous values.

     Tables 2 and 3 present results from simulations in which investors have

myopic expectations and perfect expectations respectively. The main point is
                                     -20-


 to illustrate the effects of expectations on the smoothing of investment and

 the impact that movements in marginal q have on average q when adjustment

costs are present. Both simulations are performed for the period 1953—1990,

 under the assumption that Congress passes no post-1985 tax reform proposals and

 investors (in the perfect foresight simulation) correctly anticipate that there

will be no changes.

          Table 2a and 3a present effective tax rates for these two simula-

tions. For each year, there are two numbers: the effective tax rates for

equipment and structures, respectively. These results are quite consistent

with those of the previous literature.
                                         Since effective tax rates depend not

only on the tax treatment of new investment, but also on macroeconomic

conditions and investment adjustment Costs, a casual examination of effective

tax rates does not reveal all the incentives built into the tax code.

Effective tax rates may be useful for purposes of comparison, however.

          Beginning from effective tax rates in 1953 well above the statutory

rate of 52 for equipment, and somewhat lower for structures, effective tax

rates for the myopic simulation in Table 2a move lower with the tax changes

introduced in 1954, and again in 1962 with the introduction of the investment

tax credit. Tax rates on equipment go down again in 1972 with the reintroduc-

tion of the investment tax credit and the introduction of the Asset Depreciation

Range (ADR) System. Effective tax rates for equipment and structures move

strongly -in 1975 for reasons to be discussed shortly. By 1980, higher rates of

inflation have pushed effective tax rates back up to earlier levels, par-

ticularly on equipment. The introduction of ACRS in 1981 brought effective tax

rates on equipment essentially to zero, also lowering tax rates on structures to
                                    —21—


a postwar low. Reduced inflation in 1982 brought tax rates down still further.

Rates went up in 1983 on equipment and 1984 on structures because of the 1982

and 1984 tax acts, which introduced a fifty percent basis adjustment for the

investment tax credit and an eighteen year (instead of fifteen year) tax life

for structures, respectively.

     The net investment rates for equipment, structures, and aggregate capital

are displayed in Table 2b, expressed as a percentage of the respective capital

stocks. The substantial adjustment costs built into the model have the effect

of raising marginal q when investment tax incentives are strong, thereby

encouraging firms to smooth their investment. Despite this effect, the

investment series in Table 2b is highly erratic. The variance of structures

investment is almost ten times its historical value, and episodes such as the

introduction of the investment tax credit in 1962 and its removal at the end

of the 1960's produce unrealitsically sharp investment changes.

     Years such as 1975 illustrate some of the hazards of modelling investment

behavior under myopic expectations. Net structures investment in the model is

15 that year, and equipment investment is -3. These incongruous results are

produced by the economy's deep recession that year and the accompanying low

real interest rates and marginal products of capital. The enormous decline in

real interest rates leads to a desired shift to longer-lived investment.

Since myopic investors expect the cost of capital never to change in the future,

they find themselves desperately short of structures when costs fall in 1975.

Their one-period time horizon prevents them from delaying enough of their

investment to minimize adjustment costs efficiently, and leads to unrealisti-

cally sensitive investment demands. That is, they are assumed not to anticipate
                                    —22-


a decline in marginal q from its current high level.

     Values of average q, as reported in Table 2c, reflect the pattern of

investment as well as tax law changes. Average q has generally declined over

the years as the distinction made by the tax system between old and new

capital has widened. Under a system of economic depreciation, average q would

equal marginal q net of the tax deduction of adjustment costs, as defined in

(6) (averaged over the two types of capital). At a steady state growth rate

of 3, a corporate tax rate of about 5O, and with structures comprising about

6O of total capital, the steady state value of average q will be 1.14 In

the short run, average q is determined both by the distinction between new and

old capital (the difference between average q and marginal q) and the value of

marginal q itself. A change in the incentive to invest will typically affect

both of these terms, sometimes in different directions.

     Though the estimated time series given in Table 2c suggest that average q

for total capital was above one throughout the postwar period, it exceeded 1.14

only for the period before 1982. After the acceleration of depreciation

allowances in 1954, and throughout the 1950s and until 1981, average q remained

quite high. The mid-1960's investment boom -in particular contributed to marginal

q and therefore average q. Adverse macroeconomic conditions discourage invest-

ment in the 1980's, thereby lowering marginal q. Combined with the increased

gap between new and old capital brought about by ERTA, this moves average q

closer to one.

     Table 3a presents effective tax rates for the perfect foresight

simulation. The results are qualitatively similar to those in Table 2a, with

the exception that investment is steadier and so effective tax rates are
                                     —23-


 jostled less by movements in marginal q.

      Table 3b contains the perfect foresight investment series. Structures

 investment is very smooth over the whole time period, generally declining from

 1954 until the late 1960's, rising then and declining thereafter. The

presence of substantial joint adjustment costs raises the cost of structures

 investment when firms are investing heavily in equipment, and this effect is

reflected in downward movements in structures investment rates for 1962 and

1972, years in which the investment tax credit was introduced. Similarly,

structures investment recovers in 1967, when the investment tax credit was

removed. Equipment investment follows the opposite pattern over these years,

and is subject to much wider investment swings generally. The persistence of

very high historical equipment investment over the period 1965-1969 as

reported in Table 1 is not reproduced in the equipment investment series in

Table 3b; simulated investment responds quickly to incentives in 1962 and

1964, but dies out much more quickly 'in subsequent years.

     Table 3c reports average qs for this perfect foresight simulation. As in

the simulation with myopic expectations, average q follows a strong secular

drift downward over the whole time period. Other than for the effects of

strong investment and consequent high marginal qs in the mid-1960's, changes

in the tax system have over time progressively increased the distinction between

old and new capital in these runs.

     The salient features of the historical investment pattern seem to be best

captured by the perfect foresight simulation. Besides the generally less

variable investment behavior it produces, its results for equipment -in the

mid—1970's and structures at the end of the 1970's are much closer to the actual
                                   —24-


investment pattern than is the case for the myopic simulation. Historical

equipment and structures investment remained strong through 1974, and then

declined in response to the recession. Investment in the myopic simulation

responds too quickly to the macroeconomic and tax law changes, while the perfect

foresight investors can see ahead to the next tax reform or phase in the

business cycle and so their investments show the same kind of smooth transitions

one finds in the historical series. Of course, the perfect foresight investment

series do not always match historical investment: at the end of the 1970's, for

example, perfect foresight investors know that ACRS is coming and would have

reduced equipment investment much more than was the case in reality. And

neither simulation run can explain the recent boom in equipment investment.14
                                    —25—


     Effects of Historical Investment Policies


     One of the most important investment incentives of the period under

consideration was the investment tax credit. While the investment tax credit

reduces the partial-equilibrium user cost of equipment, some authors have

suggested that the destabilizing effects of the credit over the business cycle

mitigated its investment incentive for equipment and reduced incentives for

structures investment.15

     Table 4 presents investment series from a simulation in which it is

assumed that the government never instituted an investment tax credit. The

tax law is otherwise unchanged, and this run assumes that investors have

perfect foresight. Some of the results are predictable: equipment investment

rises much less quickly in 1962 and 1972 than it does in Table 3b. In

addition, equipment investment dies at the end of the 1970's when the

investment tax credit is not present to mitigate the effects of adverse

macroeconomic conditions.

     The variance of equipment investment in this simulation is O.O24, which

is less than the O.O35 variance of investment reported in the perfect

foresight run (Table 3b) when the investment tax credit is present. While one

might be tempted to conclude that the investment tax credit was destabilizing,

such an interpretation depends on the sense in which stability is understood.

Mean equipment growth for the simulation reported in Table 4 is 2.86, which

is substantially less than the 3.4 growth rate reported in Table 3b. The

coefficient of variation for investment in the simulation with the tax credit

removed is 0.54, which is very close to the 0.55 coefficient of variation for
                                      -26--



investment in the historical law perfect foresight (Table 3b) simulation. It

appears, then, that in raising both the mean and variance of investment the

investment tax credit has not substantially changed -its relative stability. Of

course, it -is   hard to know in a model like this one whether absolute or relative

stability is more appropriate in making welfare comparisons.

     Table 5 presents investment series from simulations in which the

investment tax credit was never introduced and firms have myopic expectations

about future conditions. The mean growth rate of equipment is 3.54%, which is

higher than in the perfect foresight simulation but still smaller than

the 4.0% growth rate when investors receive the investment tax credit. The

variance of equipment investment is 0.047%, and the coefficient of variation

is 0.61. Thus, the relative stability of equipment investment in the absence of

an investment tax credit seems to be affected little by the nature of expec—

tations of future tax policies.

     The introduction of ACRS in 1981 made new investment significantly more

attractive than it would have been under the prevailing AOR system. Table 6

presents simulation results which illustrate the effects of this legislative

change while holding the rest of the economic environment constant. In this

simulation investors have perfect foresight and ACRS is never introduced.

     Equipment investment in Table 6 is significantly lower than corresponding

perfect-foresight equipment investment in Table 38 for the ACRS years, in par-

ticular 1981. and 1982. Because perfect-foresight investors correctly anticipate

and wish to smooth future adjustment costs, equipment investment in this run

falls off slightly from investment in Table 36 as early as 1966. In the absence

of ACRS, average annual equipment investment is somewhat lower and its variance
                                       —27—


marginally higher (since ACRS was -introduced at a time when macroeconomic con-

ditions were unfavorable to investment). The coefficient of variation for

equipment investment in this run is 0.59. Structures investment is less sharply

affected by the absence of ACRS. Structures investment in Table 6 is slightly

lower than that in Table 38 starting in 1959, and experiences a small drop in

1981.

        High rates of -inflation may discourage investment by lowering the present

value of nominal depreciation allowances.16 Table 7 illustrates the effects of

rising inflation in the late 1960's and 1970's, by presenting results from a

perfect-foresight simulation in which depreciation allowances are indexed to

inflation starting in 1954. Equipment investment in Table 7 is substantially

higher over the period 1965-1974 than -it is in the perfect-foresight simulation

without indexing (Table 3B). Despite more generous depreciation allowances

under indexing, equipment investment in Table 7 is lower in the 1980's than is

the investment series in Table 38. This feature of Table 7 reflects the process

of adjustment from a higher capital stock, and is a further reminder of how

misleading static cost-of—capital calculations can be in explaining investment.

Equipment investment and its variance in Table 7 are somewhat higher than those

in Table 38, and have acoeff-icient of variation of 0.58. Structures investment

in Table 7 -is slightly higher than investment in Table 3B, but does not diverge

from the other series very much over any ranges.
                                    -28-


    The Economic Effects of Tax Reform


     In this section, we consider the impact on investment and firm value of

three tax reform proposals that have been seriously considered by the Congress

during the past year. The proposals share certain attributes but also have

their differences.

    All three plans would repeal the investment tax credit. The first plan, the

Bradley-Gephardt "Fair Tax", would reduce the corporate tax rate to 30 percent

and provide assets with 250 percent declining balance depreciation over life-

times similar to those of the the asset depreciation range of the 1970s. The

second plan, proposed by President Reagan in May 1985 and generally referred to

as "Treasury II", would provide specified write-off patterns with comparable

lifetimes, fully indexed for inflation, and reduce the corporate tax rate to 33

percent.17 The third plan, passed by the House of Representatives and often

called the Rostenkowski plan after the Chairman of the House Ways and Means

Committee, would reduce the corporate tax rate to 36 percent and provide 200

percent declining balance depreciation with a switchover to straight-line,

indexed for half of all price level changes in excess of 5 percent per year.

    Because all plans would remove the investment tax credit, one would expect

a shift in the mix of investment toward structures. The statutory rate reduc-

tions should contribute to increases in the value of corporate equity, though

the total impact on value of these plans will also depend on the as yet undeter-

mined effects on the overall incentive to invest.

    In order to compare the effects of the plans, we simulate each starting

from the same initial conditions, and assuming that 1985 economic conditions
                                    -29--



(e.g., profitability and -inflation) will prevail in each subsequent year. The

particular assumptions made about previous behavior affect only the equipment

and structures capital stocks with which we begin. We assume that investors

behaved from 1954 through 1985 with perfect foresight, but expected the tax law

and economic conditions of 1985 to last forever.

     In considering the effects of the plans, we must also make an assumption

about the behavior of interest rates. Since both corporate and personal tax

rates would fall under each plan, it is reasonable to expect that some decline

in before-tax interest rates would occur; how much is difficult to know wfthout

a more complete model of interest rate determination. Thus, we consider two

polar assumptions: that the real interest rate after-tax remains constant, and

that the real interest rate before-tax remains constant.

     Table 8 shows the effects on investment of the plans. For comparison, we

present in the first column the -investment figures predicted for the case in

which no change -in policy occurs. Table 9 presents the corresponding values for

average q.

     Table 8A, which presents results for the constant after-tax real interest

rate assumption, shows that, without any change in the tax law, investment would

be predicted to grow slowly over the next five years as a fraction of the capi-

tal stock but remain low. This is a continuation of the investment pattern that

should have occurred in recent years in response to the very high prevailing

real interest rates and low returns to capital. The growth simply reflects the

gradual approach back to the steady state investment level of 3 percent. The

corresponding values of marginal q in Table 9A mirror this slow growth in the

rate of investment.
                                    —30-


     A switch to Bradley-Gephardt would increase the tax burden on equipment and

decrease that on structures. In the long run, the effective tax rate on equip-

ment would be 23 percent, that on strucures 26 percent, compared to 4 percent

and 31 percent, respectively, under present law. This results in a predicted

drop in equipment investment of 1.6 percent of the equipment capital stock, and

an increase of .5 percent in structures investment.   By 1990, the aggregate

capital stock is predicted to be about 1.5 percent lower because of the change.

At the same time, the proposal is predicted to cause a jump in the stock market.

The average q for both equipment and structures rises substantially, with an

aggregate increase in market value of 26 percent! Over time, it continues to

increase as the level of aggregate investment recovers.

     Under Treasury II, investment in both equipment and structures would fare

better than under the Bradley—Gephardt plan. Overall, investment would fall

very little, with long run effective tax rates of 18 percent on equipment and 23

percent on structures. Because of the higher corporate tax rate imposed,

Treasury II would also result in lower windfalls than under Bradley-Gephardt,

despite its more favorable impact on investment and marginal q.

     The Rostenkowski plan would be less favorable for investment than either of

the other two proposals, imposing, in the long run, an effective tax rate of 31

percent on both equipment and structures. The larger rise in the equipment tax

burden, combined with the much lower adjustment costs associated with equipment,

leads to a sharp decline in equipment investment in 1986, with structures

investment behaving much as it did in the previous two simulations. Aggregate

fixed investment is predicted to drop by .9 percentage points in 1986 due to the

adoption of the plan. Given the size of the fixed corporate capital stock rela-
                                    —31-


tive to GNP, this translates into a drop in -investment of just under six—tenths

of a percent of GNP and about 5 percent of gross nonresidential fixed invest-

ment. By 1990, the capital stock would be about 3.3 percent lower than under

current law.

     Because it would lower the statutory tax rate the least, to 36 percent, and

because it decreases marginal q the most through reduced investment, this plan

would provide the smallest windfall to existing capital of the three plans. The

aggregate value of average q would rise by 16 percent, compared to 26 percent

under Bradley-Gephardt and 23 percent under Treasury II. Thus, the Rostenkowski

plan would raise more revenue from both new and old assets than would either of

the other plans.

     The simulations presented in Tables 8B and 9B correspond to the assumption

of a fixed before-tax interest rate. The associated increase in after-tax

interest rates under the reform plans leads to further reductions in investment

and windfalls to old capital. Nevertheless, in no simulation does the windfall

fall below 7 percent of the market value of the capital stock, despite the quite

large declines in investment and marginal q that are predicted.
                                    —32-


     Conclusion

     The analysis in this paper illustrates the importance of anticipated

changes in taxes and other economic variables on investment behavior and firm

valuation. Simulation results suggest that postwar U.S. corporate investment

behavior can be understood as the outcome of a process in which investors

anticipate the general direction of future tax changes. To be sure, our

simple model of perfect foresight corporate investment does not explain all

the major movements in investment over this period. Yet the simulation runs

which explore the consequences of myopic investor expectations reveal how

poorly this modelling approach, which is standard in static models, performs

in a dynamic context.

     The simulation experiments presented in this paper describe the likely

consequences of several alternatives to the historical pattern of corporate

taxation. We examine the effects of the investment tax credit by simulating

the last 25 years of firm behavior in its absence, and find that although the

tax credit increased the variance of equipment investment, it increased mean

equipment investment by even more. Of more pertinence to current policy

discussions, we also simulate the effects of two of the proposed tax reform

proposals. We find that both the Bradley-Gephardt and Rostenkowski corporate

tax plans would discourage investment and reduce the size of the corporate

capital stock relative to the effects of the current law. One of the advan-

tages of the model described in this paper is that we can use it to measure

the extent of the windfall gains enjoyed by old capital upon introduction of

these plans.
                                    —33-


      Several important aspects of the determinants of corporate investment and

firm valuation remain poorly understood. The results in this paper make us

suspect that more attention needs to be devoted to the process by which

investors form expectations about future tax policy and macroeconomic con-

dit-ions.
                                             -34-


                                           Appendix:

                Aggregation of Depreciation Rates and Tax Parameters


       What we seek are parameters for aggregate capital goods that, by some

measure, accurately reflect those of their components. One criterion that seems

reasonable is to require that, for a particular tax system, both net and gross

rates of return to capital before tax be the same for the aggregate assets as

for the sums of their components. A particular motivation for using this

approach is that it results in the effective tax rate, as usually measured,

being invariant to the aggregation procedure.

       To see what weights this criterion dictates, consider first the special

case in which adjustment costs are zero and expectations are myopic. Let         be

the fraction of capital stock j of the total in its class i (equipment or struc-

tures) at a particular date. (We suppress the time subscript but emphasize that

these capital stock weights are not time invariant.) The gross before tax

return to capital of type i is then:


(Al)            =            =     Q.(r+ô.) (1-k.--Tz.)/(1-T)



where o, k3 and z correspond to asset j. The net return is:


(42)        r =       -


Thus, the criterion would be satisfied by weighting the indvidual values of 6

by capital stock weights Q and the tax parameters k and z by f2(r+6); the tax

parameters of short-lived assets should be more heavily weighted. This is an

important choice, since the values of k÷Tz generally increase monotonically
                                       —35--



with 18

       Since capital stock weights change over time, this formula would require

recomputation every year. However, this presents an index number problem, and

-it   -is unclear that we should prefer a measure with varying weights. Even after

this issue is resolved, one must deal with the problem of adjustment costs and

varying values of asset—specific q's, about which there is little information.

Finally, there is the problem of expectations. When the marginal product of

capital is dictated by expression (4), there are no simple weights (that we can

think of!) that satisfy the criterion. One would generally have to determine

the weights simultaneously with the solution for the marginal product itself,

which would make the problem intractable.

       In light of the situation, we choose to weight 6 by   and tax parameters by

Q(r+6), using fixed values for r and the capital stock weights ci   over time. The
capital stock weights used are for the year 1977, as described in Auerbach

(1983). The rates of economic depreciation come from calculations by Hulten and

Wykoff (1981). The fixed value used for r is .04.
                                                           -36-


                                                            Notes



     1.  For ease of notation, we write A(.) as a function of                              alone rather
than all its arguments.

     2. The constancy of it is not assumed in our analysis, and is used here
only for the sake of simplicity. Some of the later simulations examine the
effect of allowing r to vary.

     3. Note that net investment is simply the first difference of the capi-
tal stock.

       4. This and other tax data used is described in Appendix A of Auerbach
(1983).

     5. This would be true only if, among other things, the effective tax
rates on all forms of capital were equal, which they were not.

     6. This assumption -is required if we are to consider the investment
decisions separately for structures and equipment.

     7. This marginal product definition is required for 6 to be homogeneous
of degree one with respect to its inputs.

     8. The internal consistency of this procedure can be verified by noting
that, given this solution for a1 and a2, RQ(K1 +
                                                 K2) equals
       +
           a2)F
                      —
                          A(I)      -
                                        61K1
                                               -
                                                   82K2] which, by (11) and (12), equals
[v -              +             -
                          K4)       (1-a1-a2)F}.       Thus, the net returns to capital equal value
       Rg(K3
added less the competitive return to labor.

     9. Denison (1979, p. 92) finds all factors and productivity changes
other than capital growth to contribute exactly 3.00% annually to the growth
of U.S. nonresidential business output over the period 1948—1973. While this
figure includes noncorporate businesses and would presumably be lower over the
period of the 1970's, it suggests that 396 is the most reasonable choice for
the exogenous growth rate of noncap-ital inputs.

     10. These include the presence of returns to other factors in the firm's
market value, heterogeneity of the capital stock and the standard use of a tax
adjustment based on myopia of expectations about future changes in the tax
law. Some evidence -in support of this comes from the finding by Abel and
Blanchard that the coefficient of investment on adjusted q rises substantially
when the variable is purged of that part of its variation estimated to have come
from fluctuations in the cost of capital (as opposed to profitability). In
addition, there has been very little work done which estimates separate adjust-
ment cost parameters for different types of capital; for an exploratory effort,
see Chirinko (1984).
                                    -37-


     11. As Andrew Abel has pointed out, if actual investment series are
measured with noise then our calibration method will in general lead to adjust-
ment cost parameters which are smaller than the true parameters. However, our
resulting estimates are similar to those obtained from q investment equations,
which we believe to yield estimates that are biased upwards.

     12. See the discussion in Auerbach and Hines (1986).

     13. When expectations are nonmyopic, q' is defined consistently, with
future changes in ir taken into account.

     14. Nor is it easily explained by the assumption that investors know that
one of the favorable tax reform proposals is imminent. In a perfect foresight
run (not reported here) in which it was known all along that the House Ways and
Means Committee proposal was to be adopted in 1986, equipment investment in 1985
-is only 1.3. This conclusion could be reversed, however, if investors only
recently learned of a forthcoming tax law change.

     15. See, for example, Auerbach and Summers (1979).

     16. Of course, inflation affects the incentive to invest through other
channels as well. See, for example, the discussions in Auerbach (1979),
Bradford (1981), and Hall (1981).

     17. Also proposed as part of Treasury II was a recapture of "excess depre-
ciation" attributable to investors being able to take into the tax base at a 33
percent rate income deferred through accelerated depreciation under the current
46 percent tax rate. The provision would have raised an estimated 56.1 billion
dollars between fiscal years 1986 and 1989, equal to about 2 percent of the
value of the fixed corporate capital stock in present value. This provision is
not included in our calculations. If truly unanticipated, however, its inclu-
sion in our model would simply lead to a reduction in the 1986 value of average
q under Treasury II of about 2 percent, with no other impact. As the results
below suggest, this lump sum tax is quite small compared to the windfall gains
that Treasury II would produce overall for owners of existing assets.

     18. We note in passing that if the rate of growth of the capital stock,
say g, equals the interest rate, then this latter set of weights corresponds
to using investment flow weights rather than capital stock weights.
                                       -38-

                                      References


Abel,    A. and 0. Blanchard (1986), "The Present Value of Profits and Cyclical
        Movements in Investment", Econometrica, 54:2 (March), 249-273.

Auerbach, A. (1979), "Inflation and the Choice of Asset Life", Journal of
     Political Economy, 87:3 (June), 621—638.

Auerbach, A. (1983), "Corporate Taxation in the United States", Brookings Papers
     on Economic Activity, 14:2, 451-505.

Auerbach, A. and J. Hines (1986), "Tax Reform, Investment, and the Value of the
     Firm", NBER Working Paper No. 1803, January.

Auerbach, A. and L. Summers (1979), "The Investment Tax Credit: An Evaluation",
     NBER Working Paper No. 404, November.

Bradford, 0. (1981), "Issues in the Design of Savings and Investment
     Incentives", in C. Hulten, ed., Depreciation, Inflation, and the Taxation
     of Income from          (Washington: The Urban Institute Press), 13-47.

Chirinko, R. (1984), "Investment, Tobin's Q, and Multiple Capital Inputs",
     mimeo, Cornell University, September.

Denison, E. (1979), Accounting for Slower Economic Growth: The United States
     in the 1970's, (Washington: Brookings).

Feldstein, M., J. Poterba, and L. Dicks--Mireaux (1983), "The Effective Tax
     Rate and the Pretax Rate of Return", Journal of Public Economics, 21,
     129—158.

Hall,    R. (1981), "Tax Treatment of Depreciation, Capital Gains, and Interest in
        an Inflationary Economy", -in C. Hulten, ed., Depreciation, Inflation, and
        the Taxation of Income from Capital, (Washington: The Urban Institute
        Press), 149—166.

Hulten, C. and F. Wykoff (1981), "The Measurement of Economic Depreciation",
     in C. Hulten, ed., Depreciation, Inflation, and the Taxation of Income
     from          (Washington: The Urban Institute Press), 81—125.

Summers, L. (1981), "Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q Theory Approach",
     Brook-ings Papers on Economic Activity, 12:1, 67-127.
                                   TABLE 1

                   U.S. CORPORATE NET INVESTMENT, 1954-1984



      Year           Equipment               Structures       Total


     1953              5.1                      3.7            4.2
     1954              3.6                      3.5            3.5
     1955              4.7                      4.1            4.3
     1956              5.0                      4.3            4.5
     1957              4.9                      3.9            4.3
     1958              0.5                      3.1            2.1
     1959              2.3                      2.8            2.6
     1960              3.0                      3.2            3.1
     1961              2.0                      3.2            2.8
     1962              3.5                      3.3            3.4
     1963              4.1                      3.1            3.4
     1964              6.0                      3.4            4.3
     1965              8.1                      4.4            5.7
     1966              9.6                      4.5            6.4
     1967              7.0                      4.1            5.2
     1968              7.0                      4.1            5.2
     1969              7.3                      4.1            5.4
     1970              5.2                      3.6            4.2
     1971              3.6                      3.0            3.2
     1972              5.3                      3.1            4.0
     1973              7.6                      3.3            5.1
     1974              6.6                      3.0            4.5
     1975              2.8                      2.1            2.4
     1976              3.4                      2.0            2.6
     1977              5.4                      1.8            3.4
     1978              6.2                      2.2            4.0
     1979              6.2                      2.7            4.3
     1980              5.4                      2.4            3.8
     1981              5.2                     2.3            3.6
     1982              2.9                      2.1            2.4
     1983              3.6                      1.4            2.4
     1984              6.7                     2.7             4.6


mean growth rate       5.                      3. 1           3.


 variance of
 investment            0.041%                  0.0070%        0.012%
                 TABLE 2A

        EFFECTIVE TAX RATES: MYOPIC




Year          Equipment           Structures



 1953            59                    48
 1954            53                    46
 1955            56                    48
 1956            59                    50
 1957            60                    50
 1958            54                    47
 1959            56                    48
 1960            54                    47
 1961            52                    46
 1962            38                    43
 1963            37                    43
1964             28                    40
 1965            28                    39
1966             31                    41
1967             45                    42
1968             41                    48
1969             43                    49
1970             53                    48
1971             53                    48
1972             10                   42
1973             19                   44
1974             33                   53
1975            104                   101
1976             11                   42
1977             13                   44
1978            22                    47
1979            25                    45
1980            27                    44
1981             4                    35
1982            —2                    30
1983             2                    28
1984             4                    30
1985             4                    31
                               TABLE 2B

                    INVESTMENT: MYOPIC EXPECTATIONS



      Year         Equipment           Structures     Total


      1953           3.0                   3.O         3.O
      1954           3.6                   3.2         3.3
      1955           5.4                   4.4         4.8
      1956           3.3                   4.6         4.1
      1957           2.6                   4.2         3.6
      1958           1.9                   2.7         2.4
      1959           3.7                   3.0         3.3
      1960           2.7                   2.3         2.4
      1961           2.9                   2.1         2.4
      1962           6.8                   2.9         4.4
      1963           6.3                   2.8         4.2
      1964           6.9                   3.0         4.5
      1965           6.8                   3.9         5.0
      1966           5.8                   4.4         5.0
      1967           2.7                   4.4         3.7
      1968           4.4                   5.3         4.9
      1969           3.3                   4.5         4.0
      1970          0.4                    4.2         2.7
      1971           1.6                   5.4         3.9
      1972           6.5                   4.0         4.9
      1973           5.3                   3.7         4.4
      1974           1.7                   6.7         4.7
      1975         —3.3                   15.3         8.2
      1976          8.4                    3.4         5.1
      1977          7.1                    4.5         5.4
      1978          5.5                    5.0         5.2
      1979          4.4                    3.9         4.1
      1980          3.2                    3.3         3.3
      1981          4.6                    2.6         3.3
      1982          3.4                    1.0         1.8
      1983          3.6                    1.1         2.0
      1984          3.2                    0.7         1.6
      1985          3.0                    0.7         1.6


mean growth rate    4.0                    3.9         4.0%


 variance of
 investment         0.055                  0.0062%     0.018%
                     TABLE 2C

        AVERAGE q:   MYOPIC EXPECTATIONS



Year   Equipment             Structures    Total


1954     1.37                   1.50       1.45
1955     1.48                   1.73       1.65
1956     1.43                   1.70       1.61
1957     1.38                   1 . 63     1.55
1958     1.29                   1.40       1.36
1959     1.35                   1 . 49     1.44
1950     1.28                   1.36       1.34
1961     1.27                   1.34       1.32
1962     1.32                   1 . 52     1.45
1963     1.29                   1.49       1.42
1964     1.31                   1.56       1.47
1965     1.35                   1.72       1.58
1966     1.34                   1 .   77   1.61
1957     1.30                   1 . 68     1.53
1968     1.29                   1.76       1.58
1959     1. .22                 1 . 63     1.47
1970     1.19                   1.58       1.44
1971     1 .29                  1.81       1 . 62
1972    1.25                    1.71       1.55
1973    1.21                    1.65       1.49
1974    1.24                    1.98       1.71
1975    1.49                    3.15       2.56
1976    1.23                    1.64       1.51
1977    1.25                    1.77       1 .   60
1978    1.24                    1.82       1.63
1979    1.17                    1.65       1.49
1980    1.10                    1.52       1.38
1981    1.07                    1.39       1.28
1982    0.94                    1.08       1.04
1983    0.96                    1.11       1.06
1984    0.93                    1.05       1.01
1985    0.92                    1.06       1.01
                   TABLE 3A

    EFFECTIVE TAX RATES: PERFECT FORESIGHT




Year            Equipment           Structures



 1953              58%                  49%
 1954              54                   48
 1955              65                   58
 1956              65                   59
 1957              62                   57
 1958              49                   44
 1959              56                   49
 1960              48                   40
 1961              54                   40
 1962              47                   46
 1963              44                   43
 1964              38                   42
 1965              45                   48
1966               41                   51
1967               57                   52
1968               57                   61
1969               40                   55
1970               45                   52
1971               67                   63
1972               42                   57
1973               39                   55
1974               54                   74
1975              100                  100
1976              42                    63
1977              54                    70
1978              59                    73
1979              48                    67
1980              46                    64
1981              25                    52
1982             —38                    25
1983             -1                     27
1984             -8                     22
1985             -7                     23
                                   TABLE 38

                     INVESTMENT:     PERFECT FORESIGHT



      Year         Equipment               Structures    Total


       1953          3.096                    3.096       3.096
       1954          4.2                      3.9         4.0
       1955          4.2                      3.9         4.0
       1956          3.5                      3.9         3.8
       1957         3.2                       3.9         3.6
       1958         3.0                       3.8         3.5
       1959         3.6                       3.8         3.7
       1960         3.5                       3.7         3.7
       1961         3.9                       3.8         3.8
       1962         7.6                       3.5         5.0
       1963         6.9                       3.6         4.9
       1964         6.7                       3.4         4.7
      1965          5.7                       3.4        4.3
       1966         4.9                       3.4        4.0
      1967          2.0                       3.8        3.1
      1968          4.7                       3.7        4.1
      1969          4.0                       3.7        3.8
      1970          1.3                       3.6        2.7
      1971          1.5                       3.4        2.6
      1972          5.3                       2.6        3.7
      1973          4.6                       2.6        3.4
      1974          4.3                       2.6        3.3
      1975          3.9                       2.4        3.0
      1976          2.7                       2.4        2.5
      1977          2.2                       2.2        2.2
      1978          1.6                       2.1        1.9
      1979          0.9                       1.9        1.5
      1980          0.7                       1.7        1.3
      1981          1.5                       1.8        1.7
      1982          1.4                       1.8        1.6
      1983          1.0                       1.8        1.5
      1984          1.3                       1.7        1.5
      1985          1.6                       1.6        1.6


mean growth rate    3.496                     3.096      3.296



 variance of
 Investment         0.03596                   0.006796   0.01296
                       TABLE 3C

          AVERAGE q:    PERFECT FORESIGHT



Year    Equipment             Structures    Total


1954     1.42                     1.63       1.56
1955     1.42                     1.63       1.56
1956     1.40                     1.62       1.54
1957     1.39                     1.60       1.53
 1958    1.37                     1.59       1.51
 1959    1.38                     1.60       1.52
 1960    1.37                     1 .60      1.52
 1961    1.37                     1.61       1.53
         I
 1962    i .,Q I                  1.62       1.53
 1963    1.35                     1.62       1.52
 1964    1.32                     1.62       1.51
 1965    1.30                     1.61       1.49
 1966    1.27                     1.60       1.47
 1967    1.25                     1.57       1.45
 1968    1.23                     1.57      1.44
 1969    1.21                     1 .54     1.42
1970     1.19                     1.52      1.40
1971     1.19                     1.51      1.39
1972     1.16                     1.48      1.36
1973     1.14                     1.46      1.34
1974     1.12                     1.44      1.32
1975     1.10                     1.40      1.28
1976     1.05                     1.33      1.22
1977     1.02                     1.30      1.19
1978     0.99                     1.26      1.16
1979     0.96                     1.22      1.12
1980     0.94                     1.18      1.09
1981     0.92                     1.16      1.07
1982     0.91.                    1.14      1.05
1983     0.93                     1.14      1.06
1984     0.92                     1.15      1.06
1985     0.85                     1.11      1.01
                                  TABLE 4

         INVESTMENT: PERFECT FORESIGHT AND NO INVESTMENT TAX CREDIT



      Year           Equipment              Structures         Total


     1953              3.                     3.0°              3. 09
     1954              4.2                    3.8               4.0
     1955              4.2                    3.8               4.0
     1956              3.5                    3.8               3.7
     1957              3.2                    3.7               3.5
     1958              3.0                    3.7               3.4
     1959              3.6                    3.6               3.6
     1960              3.6                    3.6               3.6
     1961              4.0                    3.6               3.7
     1962              6.2                    3.5               4.5
     1963              5.8                    3.6               4.4
     1964              5.1                    3.5               4.1
     1965              4.4                    3.4               3.8
     1966              3.8                    3.4               3.6
     1967              3.2                    3.4               3.3
     1968              3.5                    3.7               3.6
     1969              3.0                    3.6               3.4
     1970              2.6                    3.2               3.0
     1971              2.6                    3.0               2.9
     1972              3,1                    2.8               2.9
     1973              2.8                    2.7               2.8
     1974              2.8                    2.6               2.7
     1975              2.7                    2.5               2.6
     1976              1.8                    2.5               2.0
     1977              1.5                    2.0               1.8
     1978              0.9                    1.9               1.5
     1979              0.2                    1.7               1.1
     1980              0.1                    1.5               1.0
     1981              0.7                    1.7               1.3
     1982              0.6                    1.6               1.2
     1983              1.0                    1.6               1.3
     1984              1.3                    1.4               1.4
     1985              1.6                    1.4               1.5

mean growth rate       2.9                    2. 9              2. 9


 variance of
 investment            0.024%                 0.0072%           0.012%
                                  TABLE 5

        INVESTMENT: MYOPIC EXPECTATIONS AND NO INVESTMENT TAX CREDIT



      Year           Equipment              Structures         Total


      1953             3.0%                    3.0%             3.0%
      1954             3.6                     3.2              3.3
      1955             5.4                     4.4              4.8
      1956             3.3                     4.6              4.1
      1957             2.6                     4.2              3.6
      1958             1.9                     2.7              2.4
      1959             3.7                     3.0              3.3
      1960             2.7                     2.1              2.4
      1961             2.8                     2.1              2.4
      1962             5.5                     3.1              4.0
      1963             5.4                     2.9              3.9
      1964             5.5                     3.1              4.0
      1965             5.9                     3.9              4.7
      1966             5.1                     4.4              4.7
      1967             3.9                     4.1              4.0
      1968             3.3                     5.3              4.5
      1969             2.4                     4.5              3.7
      1970             1.6                     3.9              3.0
      1971             2.7                     5.2              4.2
      1972             4.3                     4.2              4.3
      1973             3.7                    3.9               3.8
      1974             0.4                     6.6              4.3
      1975            -4.2                    15.0              8.1
      1976             8.0                    3.1               4.7
      1977             6.8                    4.2               5.0
      1978             5.1                    4.7               4.9
      1979             3.9                    3.5               3.7
      1980             2.5                    3.1               2.9
      1981             3.8                    2.5               2.9
      1982             2.3                    0.9               1.4
      1983             3.6                    0.9               1.8
      1984             3.1                    0.4               1.4
      1985             2.8                    0.5               1.3

mean growth rate       3.5%                   3.8%              3.7%


 variance of
 investment            0.047%                 0.0061%           0.017%
                                    TABLE 6

             INVESTMENT: PERFECT FORESIGHT AND ACRS NEVER INTRODUCED



      Year             Equipment              Structures         Total


      1953               3.0%                    3.0%             3.0%
      1954               4.2                     3.9              4.0
      1955               4.2                     3.9              4.0
      1956               3.5                     3.9              3.7
      1957               3.2                     3.9              3.6
      1958               3.0                     3.8              3.5
      1959               3.6                     3.7              3.7
      1960               3.5                     3.7              3.7
      1961               3.9                     3.7              3.8
      1962               7.6                     3.5              5.0
      1963               6.9                     3.5              4.8
      1964               6.7                     3.4              4.7
      1965               5.7                     3.3              4.3
      1966               4.8                     3.4              4.0
      1967               2.0                    3.8               3.0
      1968               4.6                    3-7               4.1
      1969               3.9                    3.7               3.8
      1970               1.2                    3.6               2.6
      1971               1.4                    3.4               2.6
      1972               5.3                    2.6               3.7
      1973               4.6                    2.6               3.4
      1974               4.2                    2.6               3.2
      1975               3.8                    2.4               3.0
      1976               2.6                    2.3               2.5
      1977               2.1                    2.2               2.2
      1978               1.5                    2.1               1.8
      1979               0.8                    1.9               1.4
      1980               0.5                    1.7               1.2
      1981               0.7                    1.6               1.2
      1982               0.6                    1.5               1.1
      1983               1.0                    1.4               1.2
      1984               1.1                    1.4               1.3
      1985               1.3                    1.4               1.4

mean growth rate         3.3%                   3.0%              3.1%


 variance of
 investment              0.038%                 0.0082%           0.014%
                                  TABLE 7

        INVESTMENT: PERFECT FORESIGHT AND INDEXING INTRODUCED IN 1954



      Year           Equipment              Structures         Total


      1953             3.096                   3.0%             3.0%
      1954             4.3                     4.0              4.1
      1955             4.3                     3.9              4.1
      1956             3.5                     4.0              3.8
      1957             3.1                     3.9              3.6
      1958             3.0                     3.9              3.5
      1959             3.6                     3.8              3.7
      1960             3.6                     3.8              3.7
      1961             4.2                     3.8              4.0
      1962             7.5                     3.6              5.1
      1963             7.0                    3.7               5.0
      1964             7.1                    3.5               4.9
      1965             6.1                    3.5               4.5
      1966             5.4                    3.5               4.3
      1967             2.7                    3.9               3.4
      1968             5.4                    3.8               4.5
      1969             4.6                    3.8               4.1
      1970             1.9                    3.7               3.0
      1971             2.1                    3.5               2.9
      1972             5.7                    2.8               4.0
      1973             5.2                    2.7               3.7
      1974             4.6                    2.7               3.5
      1975             3.8                    2.6               3.1
      1976             2.9                    2.4               2.6
      1977             2.4                    2.3               2.4
      1978             1.8                    2.2               2.0
      1979             1.0                    1.9               1.5
      1980             0.6                    1.8               1.3
      1981             0.9                    2.0               1.5
      1982             0.7                    1.8               1.4
      1983             0.3                    1.9               1.2
      1984             0.8                    1.7               1.3
      1985             1.1                    1.6               1.4

mean growth rate       3.5%                   3.196             3.3%


 variance of
 investment            0.041%                 0.0068%           0.014%
                                       TABLE 8A

                         TAX REFORM AND INVESTMENT
                  (Constant After-Tax Real Interest Rate)

       Percentage Growth Rates of Capital Under Different Plans



                                         Tax R egime

                  Current Law                                   Rostenkowski

        Equip.      Struc.      Total                  Equip.      Struc.      Total




1985     1.6          1.6        1.6                    1.6         1.6         1.6

1986      1.7         1.7        1.7                   -0.8         2.0         0.8

1987      1.9         1.7        1.8                   -0.3         1.9         1.0

1988      2.0         1.7        1.8                    0.2         1.9         1.2

1989      2.1         1.8        1.9                    0.6         1.8         1.4

1990      2.1         1.8        2.0                    0.9         1.8         1.5




                Bradley-Gephardt                                Treasury II

         Equip.      Struc.     Total                  Equip.      Struc.      Total




1985      1.6         1.6        1.6                    1.6         1.6         1.6

1986      0.0         2.1        1.3                    0.3         2.2         1.5

1987      0.4         2.1        1.4                    0.7         2.2         1.6

1988      0.8         2.1        1.5                    1.1         2.2         1.7

1989      1.1         2.0        1.7                    1.3         2.2         1.8

1990      1.3         2.0        1.8                    1.6         2.2         1.9
                                      TABLE 86

                        TAX REFORM AND INVESTMENT
                 (Variable After-Tax Real Interest Rate)

       Percentage Growth Rates of Capital Under Different Plans



                                        Tax Regime

                 Current Law                                  Rostenkowski

        Equip.      Struc.     Total                 Equip.      Struc.      Total



1985     1.6         1.6        1.5                   1.6         1.6         1.6

1986     1.7         1.7        1.7                  —1.7         1.5         0.2

1987     1.9         1.7        1.8                  —1.1         1.4         0.4

1988     2.0         1.7        1.8                  —0.5         1.4         0.6

1989     2.1         1.8        1.9                   0.0         1.3         0.8

1990     2.1         1.8        2.0                   0.4         1.3         1.0




               Bradley-Gephardt                               Treasury II

        Equip.      Struc.     Total                 Equip.      Struc.     Total



1985     1.6         1.6        1.6                   1.6         1.6         1.6

1986    -1.3         1.4        0.3                  —0.7         1.6        0.6

1987    -0.8         1.3        0.5                  —0.2         1.5        0.8

1988    -0.3        1.3         0.7                   0.2         1.5        1.0

1989     0.2        1.3         0.8                   0.6         1.5         1.1

1990     0.5        1.3         1.0                   0.9         1.5        1.3
                                   TABLE 9A

                  TAX REFORM AND MARKET REPLACEMENT COST
                 (Constant After-Tax Real Interest Rates)

       Percentage of Market Value of Capital to Replacement Cost



                                       Tax Regime

                 Current Law                                 Rostenkowski

        Equip.     Struc.      Total                Equip.      Struc.      Total



1985     0.85        1.11       1.01                 0.85        1.11        1.01

1986     0.85        1.12       1.02                 1 .00       1.28        1.17

1987     0.85        1.12       1.02                 0.97        1.28        1.17

1988     0.85        1.13       1.02                 0.96        1.28        1.16

1989     0.85        1.14       1.03                 0.95        1.28        1.16

1990     0.86        1.14       1.03                 0.95        1.29        1.17




            Bradley—Gephardt                                 Treasury II

        Equip.     Struc.      Total                Equip.      Struc.      Total




1985     0.85        1.11       1.01                 0.85        1.11        1.01

1986     1.07        1.39       1.27                 1.05        1.36        1.24

1987      1.08       1.40       1.28                 1.06        1.36        1.25

1988     1.08        1.41       1.29                 1.06        1.36        1.25

1989      1.09       1.41       1.29                 1.07        1.37        1.26

1990     1.10        1.42       1.30                 1.08        1.38        1.27
                                    TABLE 9B

                  TAX REFORM AND MARKET REPLACEMENT COST
                 (Variable After-Tax Real Interest Rates)

       Percentage of Market Value of Capital to Replacement Cost



                                        Tax Regime

                 Current Law                                  Rostenkowski

        Equip.     Struc.      Total                 Equip.      Struc.      Total



1985     0.85       1.11        1.01                  0.85        1.11        1.01

1986     0.85        1.12       1.02                  0.94        1.16        1.08

1987     0.85       1.12        1.02                  0.92        1.16       1.07

1988     0.85       1.13        1.02                  0.91        1.17       1.07

1989     0.85       1.14        1.03                  0.91        1.17       1.08

1990     0.86       1.14        1 .03                 0.91        1.18       1 .08




            Bradley—Gephardt                                  Treasury II

        Equip.     Struc.      Total                 Equip.     Struc.      Total



1985     0.85       1.11        1.01                  0.85        1.11       1.01

1986     0.98       1.19        1.11                  1.00       1.18        1.11

1987     0.98       1.20       1.12                  0.98        1 .   18    1.11

1988     0.99       1.21       1.13                  0.97        1.19        1.11

1989     1 .00      1.23       1.14                  0.96        1.20        1.11

1990     1.02       1.24       1.16                  0.96        1.20        1.11
