                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  WHAT DO WE REALLY KNOW ABOUT FOOD SECURITY?

                                               Carlo Cafiero

                                          Working Paper 18861
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w18861


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       March 2013




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further information
is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18861.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Carlo Cafiero. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
What do we Really Know about Food Security?
Carlo Cafiero
NBER Working Paper No. 18861
March 2013
JEL No. C19,O11,O12

                                              ABSTRACT

Many discussions following the 2007/08 food price crisis have revolved around the magnitude of the
negative impacts that it may have had on food security worldwide. Analysts have been asked to provide
timely assessments, often based on partial data and information. The variety of opinions and the ranges
of reported estimated impacts that have followed have revealed how shaky the informational ground
on which they move is.

This paper deals with two issues related to the way in which the state of food insecurity in the world
can be assessed from the perspectives of the availability of and the access to food, dimensions for
which the economic lenses conceivably are the most adequate. The two issues are: the quality and
coverage of available data and the methods through which the relevant information is filtered from
the data to draw inference on food security.

The conclusion we reach is that, for policies to be informed by solid evidence and to be sure that monitoring
and evaluation is based on firm empirical grounds, much remains to be achieved, both in terms of
data quality and coverage and regarding methods, standards and tools for assessment. However, we
do not have to start from zero. A wealth of data has accumulated in the past that, if properly analyzed,
may allow shading light on the way in which food markets work and how households behave with
respect to food consumption. The combination of the two should allow better understanding the determinants
and impacts of food price volatility on food security.

Once key data conveying information on those determinants have been identified, a comprehensive
food security information system can be devised based on a key set of core indicators. Such a system
would require the use of common standards in the collection, validation and dissemination of data
on agricultural prices, production, trade and uses, and on food consumption patterns.


Carlo Cafiero
Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations
carlo.cafiero@fao.org
                        “It is well known that there is much starvation and malnutrition in the world.
                        Millions of people never get enough to eat, and much large numbers, not actually
                        hungry, do not obtain the kind of diet necessary for health. Vague knowledge that
                        this situation exists is not enough; facts and figures are needed if the nations are to
                        attempt do to away with famine and malnutrition …”
                        FAO - The World Food Survey, 1945




1. Introduction. Putting the paper in context

    This paper is concerned with measuring food security. Since early 2008, when the FAO
Food Price Index reached the 200 mark – its highest level in thirty years – huge amounts of
intellectual energy have been spent in trying and assess the causes, the likely impacts, and the
possible remedies to what has by now come to be known as the 2007/08 “food crisis,”
paralleling, in many respects, a similar effort that had been produced following the previous
great food crisis of the early 1970s. The tone of the debate within academic and international
organizations circles has been at times heated, due to differences in opinions about many
aspects, including: the role of financial speculation in conditioning agricultural commodity
markets; the impacts of the growing demand for agricultural commodities to be used for
biofuel production; the consequences of trade policies and other forms of market
interventions, etc.

    As a contribution to this overall effort and to possibly resolve some of the outstanding
issues, the focus of this conference is on the economics of food price volatility. Attention to
prices in relation to food security stems from the almost obvious consideration that prices
must carry an important signal of relative food scarcity and therefore of the risk of food
insecurity, at least when and where the predominant way of accessing food is through market
transactions.

    Based on the visibility it is given in the press and in much of the academic work
concerned with food security assessment, the FAO Food Price Index seems to have been
adopted by the international community as the major indicator of relative food scarcity. The
problem is that, as more evidence is gathered on actual food availability and food
consumption worldwide, there appears to be very limited – if any – relationship between the
time evolution of the FAO Food Price Index and the dynamics of supply and demand, what
should be considered the fundamentals of price formation and of food security. This is a



                                                       2
disturbing finding, which calls for careful scrutiny both of the evidence and of the conceptual
frameworks that have been used so far to inform the debate.

     The thesis we offer here is that the type of data that has been used to search for evidence
in support of one argument or the other and the way in which it has been used have both
played a major role in widening the gap between opinions, rather than in closing it, as it
should have been the case.1

     We think we can offer a contribution by exploring the possibility that different
understanding and interpretation of what the available data and indicators truly are may have
been, at least in part, responsible for differences in the assessments. If we are correct in
suspecting that the available evidence has been sometimes not fully recognized for what it
actually is, and therefore not correctly interpreted as providing the evidence it is believed it
does, then we can hope to have offered a valuable contribution to the debate.

     To demonstrate that our thesis has value we start by taking stock of some of the data that
is more directly related to food security. To keep the task to a manageable size, we limit the
presentation to data related to two particular dimensions of the broad concept of food
security: availability of food and people’s access to it. Also, we limit our considerations to
the need to inform aggregate level indicators, at global, regional, and national levels.2

     After a brief description of the typical information available on food prices, food supply,
food consumption, we will touch on methods, by taking as a specific reference the debate that
has surrounded the way in which the FAO has, since 1974, monitored hunger through the so
called “prevalence of undernourishment” (PoU) indicator.3 The debate on the FAO estimates
is an interesting one not only for the direct relevance it has for the topic of this conference,



1
  By type of data we mean the combination of several aspects, including the timeliness with which data are
  collected and made available, the statistical concept associated with the data collected, and the precision with
  which the typical data point reflects the associated statistical concept. When referring to the way in which data
  is used, we mostly refer to the relative roles of the data and of the identifying assumptions (drawn from
  theoretical considerations), on which analytical models are unavoidably based, in the conclusions drawn from
  applied models.
2
  This is not to be meant to imply that we believe that differences in the state of food insecurity among
  households are not relevant, quite the contrary. We only want to recognize the difference that exists between
  population level and individual level measures, a point that has sometime been overlooked in the discussions
  on food security. This point will emerge clearly in the discussion below on the use of survey data.
3
  See in particular: Osmani (1992), Svedberg, (1999 and 2000); Smith, 1999; FAO, 2003; Smith et al. (2006);
  Naiken, 2007.


                                                           3
but also because it raises important questions regarding problems such as the proper
definition of a statistical concept that is relevant for the identified political objective, the use
of data collected on individuals or households to inform population level indicators, and the
inevitable combination of data and theories that are needed to come up with assessments. All
these questions arise in many fields of social and economic analysis, including for example
on the analysis of poverty incidence, and some of the considerations we make may apply to
other fields of applied economic analysis.

    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. First, section 2 discusses the
definition of food security, to underline one of the major problems related to its monitoring.
Lack of clarity on what is meant by the generic expression “food insecurity” may in fact have
led users into error when interpreting proposed data and indicators. The section ends
highlighting the need for synthesis and to reach agreement on a set of key operational
concepts that can be used as a basis to inform data collection and analysis.

    Next, section 3 deals with data, cataloguing and describing few of the major sources of
data on food prices, food supply and food consumption. Merits and drawbacks of the various
sources are highlighted to suggest possible ways to improve and/or integrate them.

    By making explicit reference to the debate that has surrounded the PoU indicator, section
4 will then touch on the problem of how the relevant information “signal” can be filtered
from the “noise” that is unavoidably contained in the data, in drawing inference on a complex
phenomenon when there are no means to collect the ideal information. One key problem that
is touched upon in this section is the relative role of models and data defined and collected at
the micro and macro level, and the possibility of integrating the two scales of analysis in a
coherent way.

    A final section closes the papers by proposing a concrete research agenda including a
possible division of labor between international organizations, academia, non-governmental
organizations and food security practitioners.

2. The importance of careful definitions: the concepts of food security and related
    indicators

    Defining food security in a way that is operationally useful is a daunting task. The
prevailing definition describes food security as the condition that “exists when all people, at




                                                    4
all times, have physical, social and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to
meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life.”4

     If taken literally, the most important message this definition sends is that food security is
a condition that… will never be achieved in practice! Even if the definition is properly
recognized as being an aspirational statement, qualifications such as “all people at all the
times” or “to meet their dietary preferences” clearly determine the virtual impossibility of a
complete monitoring.5

     The definition is nevertheless useful in that it hints at several potential manifestation of
what we may be term food insecurity, which would exist:

    a) When people cannot access food, simply because food is not physically available
         where and when it is needed;
    b) When people do not have economic access to food, meaning that they lack the means
         to acquire the food even if the food would be at their physical reach;
    c) When people can only afford to procure and eat combinations of foods that do not
         meet their preferences, are not safe, or are nutritionally unbalanced;
    d) When any one of the above conditions holds even occasionally.

     Four dimensions or pillars of food security – commonly referred to as availability,
access, utilization and stability – have thus been conceptualized (see footnote 4) as a way to
provide better guidance to policy aimed at addressing the problem. The complexity that
emerges from even the bare attempts at describing food insecurity has a clear reflection in the
difficulties encountered in the attempts at measuring it. It thus must play a central role in the
debate that discusses the merits of various indicators. It is evident for example that, no matter
how desirable it may be, no single indicator can ever be imagined to be able to capture all the
identified dimensions that comprise the problem.



4
  The working concept of food security as adopted by the Committee of World Food Security goes even further,
  by clarifying that : “The four pillars of food security are availability, access, utilization and stability. The
  nutritional dimension is integral to the concept of food security and to the work of CFS.” See Document CFS
  2009/2 Rev.2 entitled “Reform of the Committee on World Food Security”, available at:
  ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/meeting/018/k7197e.pdf and incorporated in volume I of the Basic Texts of FAO.
5
  We wish to note how this is in striking contrast with declarations made in the same forum a few years earlier,
  according to which “we have a measurable and monitorable goal.” See: “The World Food Summit Goal and
  the Millennium Development Goals”. Committee on World Food Security, 27th session, Rome, 28 May - 1
  June 2001 (emphasis added). Available at: http://www.fao.org/DOCREP/MEETING/003/Y0688E.HTM


                                                           5
     For an empirical measure to be meaningful, in fact, the statistical concept associated with
it must be clearly defined, and therefore it must be much narrower than the broad “food
security” construct that comes out of the running definition reported above. In the history of
food security assessment this has had two major consequences. First, there has been a
proliferation of proposals for “food security indicators,”6 most of which have never come to
be applied to such a broad scale to make them truly relevant for the global debate and to
guide policies, but have nevertheless contributed to add confusion to the attempts at
understanding and monitoring the phenomenon across countries and over time. Second, as
only few indicators have been applied to broad scale (essentially because of data availability)
being the only ones available they have been exposed to criticisms for not being able to
capture all the dimensions that a supposedly ideal indicator should. When superficially read
by the vast audience of non-experts in the details of statistical analysis, these criticisms have
contributed to create an aura of suspicion on the validity of the indicators, thus potentially
reducing their relevance and impact.

     A lesson we draw from the discussion so far is that efforts must be exerted in being sure
that the statistical concept informing any indicator’s definition is fully understood before
searching for the data needed to estimate it, and to clarify the dimension on which the
proposed indicator is meant to contribute. With reference to food insecurity indicators for
example, the scope of the indicator should be preliminarily defined, by considering several
aspects, including:

1) A distinction between causes of the food insecurity (limited availability or access) and
    consequences (nutritional status, economic and social cost, welfare reduction).7
2) Clarifying whether the analysis refers to individuals or to populations. It should be
    evident that indicators may be defined differently depending upon whether they aim at
    capturing the food security status of individuals or that of populations (i.e., groups of
    people at different levels: households, villages, towns, provinces, up to entire countries or
    regions in the world.)




6
  According to Hoddinott (1999), “there exist approximately 200 definitions and 450 indicators of food
  security.” If anything, the numbers have only increased since.
7
  These may be also referred to respectively as inputs to and outputs of food security.


                                                         6
3) Defining the time length over which the food insecurity condition spans, ranging from
   acute situations lasting from few days up to few weeks, to chronic situations spanning
   over several months or years.
4) Determining whether it refers to the actual or potential nature of the situation that is,
   distinguishing whether the analysis is of current and past situations or of the prospects
   toward future conditions.
5) Weather the phenomenon is measured in strict quantitative terms (i.e., food production
   deficits, energy intake deficits, etc.) or involves qualitative aspects, (e.g. whether it refers
   to a “diversified” diet, or to the need to acquire food in “socially acceptable” ways, etc.)

    In principle, it is only once the scope is defined that the search for appropriate data and
theories could start. In reality, monitoring efforts may have started instead from a
consideration on which data were available. Even if this has been the case, it would still
prove useful to try and classify existing indicators in one or more of the categories that would
emerge from the points above.

    Failing to do so may have led to the following two consequences: (a) exposing the
available indicators to unfair criticisms, for not being able to capture something they were
never meant to do, and, (b) making serious mistakes in the inference derived simply because
the data used to inform an indicator does not contain information on the dimension that is
intended to be captured.

    While the case of the FAO prevalence of undernourishment is a clear example of the first
problem (see section 4.1 below), the growing attention that, over time, has been devoted to
specific additional dimensions of food security, without seriously reconsidering the base of
data, has greatly increased the possibility of making mistakes in drawing inferences,
following the temptation to try and squeeze, from existing data and indicators, information
that simply is not there.

    The remainder of the paper is intended to shed light on the limits inherent in some of the
available and widely used data and on the risks of mistaken inference when either implicit or
explicit ad hoc assumptions are included in empirical models to fill the data gap.




                                                   7
3. Food security data

      3.1. Food Price data

       In analyzing the role of food price in relation to food security we should ask: what do we
mean by food price? Is there such a thing as the “price of food” or should we rather speak of
food prices? And, of the many prices we can read about on bulletins, which ones are more
relevant for food security consideration? Prices are quoted on different points in time and
space, and for a myriad of items. In spite of what seems to be a general perception by the
wider community of food security analysts and policy makers, it is not at all clear to what
extent and how they relate to food security.

       Considerable effort has been devoted to the collection and publication of prices for major
traded agricultural commodities, as formed on a number of reference markets, so that we
have consistent price series of, say, “export price for no. 1, hard red winter wheat, ordinary
protein, delivered at the US Gulf port for prompt or 30 days shipment” or of “5% broken,
white rice (WR), milled, indicative price based on weekly surveys of export transactions,
government standard, f.o.b. Bangkok”8 . These are very well defined concepts indeed, and the
associated measures can be considered quite reliable, in the sense that there are immediate
and valid records, but how are these particular prices related to the actual price people pay for
their food every day?

       As already mentioned in the introduction, the FAO Food Price Index has become the de
facto indicator of “global” food prices, even though close scrutiny of its definition would
make it clear that the extent to which it is representative, at any moment in time, of the price
paid by consumer for their food is, at a minimum, questionable.

       The FAO Food Price Index is an average of averages. It in fact consists of the average of
5 commodity group price indices (cereals, meat, dairy, sugar and oils), weighted with the
average export shares of each of the groups for 2002-2004. The extent to which it reflects the
relevant price of food in any given country at a given moment in time depends on the
following assumptions:




8
    These are the definitions of two of the series compiled by the Prospects Group at the World Bank and
    published monthly in the “Pinksheet” bulletins, one of the most widely used sources of commodity price data.


                                                           8
-     That the share of each food price in the index mirrors the corresponding share of the food
      item in the country’s “food consumption basket”,
-     That the movement of the price of each food in the country closely follows the movement
      of the corresponding price on the international market (that is, “price transmission” on the
      food commodity markets is close to complete),
-     That food processing and trade within the country is such to exclude non-competitive
      pricing mechanisms , and
-     There are no public policies interfering with food prices.

       There are many good reasons to expect that, in any real world situation, one or more of
the assumptions do not hold, thus breaking the conceptual link between international
commodity prices and domestic food prices. Just a couple of examples may suffice to make
the point. First, because of comparative advantages in the production of certain commodities
in certain areas of the world, food commodity trade does not, and it should not be expected
to, mirror food consumption in any country. Second, if there are “tensions” on the
international market, as for example because of the enacting of trade restricting policies by
major countries, the international market for some commodity may become extremely thin,
the corresponding international price become very volatile, and the relation to domestic price
in both traditional exporting and importing country break down. Arguably, this is what
happened in 2007/08 or in other periods of market “turmoil”, the moments when the demand
for a reliable index of food price is higher.

       More relevant to food security would be the monitoring of the prices of consumer food
items on retail markets. National Statistical Offices, central banks and labor organizations
worldwide do have an interest in monitoring consumer price levels and traditionally produce
various forms of consumer price indexes (CPI) based on data from household expenditure
surveys. Such indexes are obtained as a weighted average of the domestic prices of a set of
items included in representative consumption baskets for various aggregates (“total
consumption”, “food and beverages”, “housing”, etc.), maintained and updated over time.9

       Arguably, the CPI of the “food” (or similar) aggregate, normalized to the general
consumption CPI, is the most appropriate index to convey information on food security.



9
    The International Labor Organization (ILO) maintains series of monthly Consumer Price Index – Food for a
    large number of countries, with incomplete coverage, starting sometime from 1975.


                                                          9
However, as the typical food consumption basket may differ in the population, reference to a
national average basket may hide important information on the changes in prices that are
more relevant to food insecurity such as those of the items which are predominant in the
consumption of the most food insecure people in the country. Unfortunately, this information
is not available for most countries as price indexes are usually reported only at the national
level. Some additional information could be obtained if the detailed prices and quantities that
form the index were separately published, but it is easy to imagine that problems of
heterogeneity of the items entering in the “food” aggregate and problems with the
comparability of data collection methods and reliability of the various components have
prevented that so far.

     A commendable effort has been exerted by the International Comparison Program (ICP),
a worldwide statistical partnership established to collect comparative price data to compile
detailed expenditure values of countries’ gross domestic products (GDP) and to estimate
purchasing power parities (PPPs) of the world’s economies.10 Unfortunately, the frequency of
the data collection rounds and of publication of the results does not make the data the
program releases useful for a timely monitoring of food prices for food security.11

     Other initiatives have been started by various organizations to fill the gap on relevant
food price data. The Global Information and Early Warning System (GIEWS) program at
FAO collects and publishes retail level prices of a selected number of food items in major
cities through their Food Price and Analysis Tool,12 with coverage that has increased over the
years since the tool was initially developed. Similarly, USAid’s Famine Early Warning
Systems Network (FEWS NET) publishes a series of price bulletins containing retail food
price information collected in a number of monitored countries. While very useful initiatives,
in both cases issues remain in terms of standardization of the data collected, completeness
and representativeness of the chosen price series, and country coverage before they may
become the basis for comprehensive and regular food price monitoring.




10
   See http://siteresources.worldbank.org/ICPEXT/Resources/ICP_2011.html.
11
   The latest ICP rounds refer to 2011, 2005 and 1996.
12
   See http://www.fao.org/giews/pricetool/.


                                                      10
     3.2. Food supply data

     The two main sources of food availability that are global in scope are FAO’s Food
Balance Sheets (FBS)13, and the Production, Supply and Demand (PSD) Online system14
maintained by the Foreign Agricultural Service of the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA). Both databases provide estimates of yearly production, trade and
utilization of agricultural commodities, at the level of single countries and territories. By
compiling complete accounts of supply and utilization of food commodities, both systems
provide an assessment of food available for human consumption in the country as a whole, in
a specific year.15

        3.2.1. FAO Food Balance Sheets

     According to the description provided in the latest edition of the FAO Food Balance
Sheets Handbook16, FAO’s FBS aim at presenting a comprehensive picture of the pattern of a
country’s food supply during a specified reference period.

     Conceptually, the food balance sheet shows for each food item – i.e. each primary
commodity and a number of processed commodities potentially available for human
consumption – the sources of supply and its utilization. The total quantity of foodstuffs
produced in a country added to the total quantity imported and adjusted to any change in
stocks that may have occurred since the beginning of the reference period gives the supply
available during that period. On the utilization side a distinction is made between the
quantities exported, fed to livestock, used for seed, processed for food use and non-food uses,
lost during storage and transportation.

     The food supplies potentially available for human consumption at the retail level are thus
obtained as a balance. The per capita supply of each food item available for human
consumption is finally obtained by dividing the respective quantity by the related data on the
population actually partaking of it. Data on per caput food supplies are expressed in terms of




13
   http://faostat.fao.org/site/368/default.aspx
14
   http://www.fas.usda.gov/psdonline/psdQuery.aspx
15
   The discussion below is conducted on the FAO’s Food Balance Sheets, on which I am more familiar,
   although many of the reflections would apply also to the USDA commodity balances.
16
   http://www.fao.org/docrep/003/X9892E/X9892E00.HTM


                                                      11
quantity and - by applying appropriate food composition factors for all primary and processed
products - also in terms of energy, protein and fat content.

    The FAO currently compiles balance sheets for about 180 countries throughout the world
and on a large number of primary food commodity and food items. Of course, the amount of
data needed to complete them is huge, and not all of it is available through official sources.
For that reason, both official and unofficial data available in the Statistics Division and other
Units concerned in FAO are used. In addition, a large number of missing data points are
estimated by FAO on the basis of agricultural and household surveys and other information,
as well as on technical expertise available in house.

    [BOX 1 HERE]

    Ideally, the basic data required for the preparation of food balance sheets should be
obtained from the same source. In principle each country should have a comprehensive
agricultural and food statistical system, recording all current information relating to each
component of the food balance sheet. Definitions of the data series should correspond to
those of the food balance sheet concepts and the information available should be consistent,
at least with respect to measurement unit and time reference period. In practice, however, and
despite considerable technical assistance efforts made by the FAO and other organizations, an
ideal statistical system does not exist, and problems of harmonization of standards and
definitions still condition the possibility of full cross country comparison. Even in the few,
mainly developed, countries which possess uncommonly sophisticated reporting procedures,
the available data do not always meet either the criteria just listed.

    In practice, the basic data used come from a variety of sources, with the result that the
quality and their coverage vary considerably among countries and commodities. Production
and trade data are part of the ongoing national official statistics. They are based either on
direct enquiries or records, or are estimated by Government agencies and reported upon
request. Where available, information on stock changes comes from marketing authorities
and the processing industry, or from farmer stock surveys. Information on industrial uses is
obtained from industrial/manufacturing censuses/surveys. Feed and seeding rates are obtained
from cost of production surveys or are estimated by the Government agencies concerned.
Losses occurring in industrial processing are also obtained from manufacturing surveys.




                                                  12
    Since they are obtained from different sources, the basic data may reveal inconsistencies
that need to be resolved to compile a coherent balance. Inconsistencies may be due to
different definitions of the basic concepts or to different time reference and estimation, or to
missing data. Adjustments and imputations are thus necessary in order to maintain a
sufficient degree of consistency, completeness and reliability of the resulting food balances.

    How reliable are Food Balance Sheets data?
    Assessing the reliability of the FBS data is not easy, as there are many considerations to
be made, and no generally valid conclusion can be drawn on for all countries and
commodities.

    Conceptual problems frequently arise with respect to coverage/representativeness of the
basic data. Production statistics are mostly confined only to commercialized major food
crops. Non-commercial or subsistence production (i.e. home produce and food obtained from
hunting, fishing and gathering by households for their own consumption) are usually not
included in official statistics and are very difficult to estimate. This might be an appreciable
part of total production in some countries, but not in others.

    Manufacturing surveys may cover only a certain size of industrial establishment.
Information on commercial stocks may be available from official or marketing authorities,
factories, wholesalers and retailers, but inventories of catering establishments, institutions
and households may not be available. Information on waste in industrial processing may be
available, but waste/losses during storage, transportation or on quantities intentionally
discarded for the purpose of price control or epidemic disease control may not be available.
In these cases, even though the basic data are reliable, some adjustments are required to adapt
the basic data to food balance sheets concepts/coverage.

    The incompleteness and inaccuracy of the basic data, even when gathered from official
sources, tend to be major problems. Production statistics may not be available for all
commodities needed. Even where the statistics are available, they are not always reliable.
This may be due to the fact that crop patterns and utilization of some crops in developing
countries are sometimes rather complicated, making it difficult to estimate the production.
The estimation of production of some crops is further complicated because they are
continuously harvested at regular or irregular intervals over a long period of time (e.g.
cassava and certain fruits and vegetables). Certain kinds of food may not be covered by food
balance sheets because they are not included in national production statistics. For example


                                                  13
meat, such as that of game, wild animals and insects may be excluded for this reason. Under
conditions such as those prevailing in many developing countries, this meat may form a
substantial part of the consumption of animal protein. Also, major food crops may not be
grown in pure stands but mix-planted in fields of bewildering complexity, thus eluding the
possibility of accurate production assessments by governmental officers.

    The reliability of official production data may also be questionable. When they are based
on farmers reporting, they may be underestimated, as farmers may equate production with tax
collection. On the other hand, reliable information on pre-harvest food grain losses caused by
pests and diseases are not usually available, making assessments based on surveys of planted
areas rather imprecise, as the estimates of yield are likely to be inaccurate.

    Import and export data may be accurate in the majority of countries, but in some
countries there may be significant amounts of trade across national boundaries that go
unrecorded. Moreover, import and export transactions may not receive equal attention from
the custom's administration as taxes or quantitative controls are generally concentrated more
on import items than export. As a consequence, the reliability of export data may also be
questionable.

    One common problem is that the availability of basic data on the feed, seed and
industrial/manufacture use components of food crops are rather limited. Seeding rates for
crops are fairly well established in most countries, but when the quantities fed to animals
have to be estimated, many aspects must be considered. Feeding practices vary from country
to country according to the quantity and quality of pastures, the degree to which rearing is
intensive, the prices of feedstuffs, etc. In addition, the quality of grain and other feedstuffs
fed to livestock may vary from one year to the next. Cost of production surveys and
manufacturing surveys, which are the appropriate sources of such data, have not been
conducted regularly in most developing countries. Even where surveys are conducted, their
coverage is usually limited (e.g. cost of production surveys cover only a few major crops or
do not cover livestock commodities, etc.).

    Another crucial aspect for the relevance of FBS data for food security analysis is that
information on stock changes and losses/waste during storage and transportation are often
nearly non-existent or, at best, only fractional in its coverage, e.g. commercial stocks of some
commodities may occasionally be available from official sources or marketing authorities.
And even if reliable figures on the total amount of storage held by governments and large


                                                   14
private enterprises would be available, stocks held by small farmers and households during
the reference period will not be covered.

    All this considerations can be made for each item on which balances are constructed. In
principle, to give a complete account of the food supply, all potentially edible commodities
should be taken into account, regardless of whether they are actually eaten or used for non-
food purposes. The definition of a complete list of potentially edible commodities however
presents virtually insurmountable difficulties - both conceptual and statistical. For practical
purposes, therefore, a pragmatic list of commodities has been typically adopted, with the
result that reliability of the balances may be very different across items for the same country.

    The estimate of the total population is also a part of the set of ongoing official statistics.
The per caput figure of each food commodity is obtained by dividing the figure for food
available for human consumption by the total population partaking of it during the reference
period, i.e. it should refer to de facto population living in the country. However, for many
countries, the total population estimates may refer to the de jure population, i.e., the official
legally resident population only. Thus, non-resident population, such as illegal immigrants,
tourists, refugees, foreign diplomatic personnel and their dependents, foreign armed forces,
etc., are not included. This omission may constitute a considerable part in some countries.
This, therefore, would understate the total partaker population and overestimate the per capita
availabilities.

    There are also problems related to the time-reference period to be used in preparing food
balance sheets. Several twelve-month periods, such as July/June, October/September,
April/March, have been proposed and were indeed also applied. However, none of these
periods satisfactorily and uniformly covered the production of all agricultural commodities,
their trade and domestic utilization. It can be assumed that there is no single twelve-month
period which is fully suitable for recording supply and utilization for all products. The
decision of taking the calendar year time-reference period (January-December) has been
made for accounting purposes, but may have consequences, for example, in the determination
of the levels of stock variations.

    All these problems raise some concern on the reliability of the detailed information that
is provided through a typical food balance sheet, some of which seem not to have been
clearly recognized if the data is to be used to inform sophisticated analysis, for example of
the nutritional value of the diet.


                                                  15
    Uses of the Food Balance Sheets
    Probably the main use of the annual food balance sheets, tabulated regularly over a
period of years, is to show the trends in the overall national food supply, to reveal changes
that may have taken place in the types of food available for consumption, to reveal the extent
to which the food supply of the country as a whole is adequate in relation to nutritional
requirement and compare these trends across countries. Observed trends are also useful in
developing projections of future food supply, in setting targets for agricultural production and
trade and for establishing relationships between national food supplies and various other
dimensions of food security and development, as well as evaluating national food policies.

    Arguably, FAO food balance sheets provide the best assessment of food supply
worldwide, which is one dimension of the food problem that still forms a fundamental basis
for the policy analysis and decision-making needed to ensure food security. For this reason,
international organizations, governments, planners and researchers have found them as a very
important tool in determining whether a nation as a whole is moving towards adequate food
supply. The FAO, in particular, has been traditionally using the average per capita caloric
availability derived from FBS as an estimate of the mean food consumption for the
assessment of undernourishment, a use that has not been exempt from criticisms (see section
4.1 below.) One other useful indicator that can be derived from FBS data is the comparison of
the quantities of food available for human consumption with those imported (the food import
dependency ratio), indicating the extent to which a country depends upon imports to feed
itself. Similarly, the amount of food crops that is used for feeding livestock, in relation to
total crop production indicates the degree to which primary food resources are used to
produce animal feed which is useful information for analyzing livestock policies or patterns
of agriculture.

    These are all very important uses, which justifies the maintenance and continued
improvement of the Food Balance Sheet System by FAO. It is important however to point
also to what FBS data is not, and the information they do not contain. They do not give any
indication, for example, of the differences that may exist in the diet consumed by different
individuals or population groups, e.g. people of different socio-economic groups, ecological
zones or geographical areas within a country. Neither do they provide information on
seasonal variations in the total food supply. To obtain a complete picture of the distribution of
the national food supply at various times of the year, across regions, and among different



                                                  16
groups of the population, different kinds of data would be needed, and the best source is
certainly food consumption surveys of the population.

    In fact, the two sets of data – those from aggregate supply and those from consumption
surveys – are complementary in many respects. There are in fact commodities for which a
production estimate could best be based on estimated consumption as obtained from food
consumption surveys rather than from official production statistics. On the other hand, there
are commodities for which production, trade and utilization statistics could give a better
nationwide consumption estimate than the data derived from food consumption surveys. Data
obtained through household and food consumption surveys are often the preferred source of
food consumption estimates to conduct analyses of covariates of the food consumption, as
they provide also information on the people who are purchasing and eating the food, a type of
information that is not available from food balance sheets.

    Another warning should be raised on the use of FBS to provide information on specific
components of the food supply. Even though the list of items covered is long, the information
provided at the level of each individual item is likely to be less reliable than the one provided
on aggregates such as the total calories, and there are reasons to believe that the latter is much
more reliable than other aggregates, such as the supply of micronutrients such as minerals
and vitamins. Generally, food balance sheets are constructed for primary crops, livestock and
fish commodities up to the first stage of processing in the case of crops and to the second
(and sometimes the third) stage of processing in the case of livestock and fish products. The
reason for the restriction on the higher stages of processing is the difficulty in obtaining data
for all the varied forms of processed products, and even more difficult, in tracing the
components of the processed composite products. Reliable quantities of food availability can
thus be estimated only at the level of primary commodities (say “wheat” or “bananas”) with
no possibility of knowing whether, say, wheat is made available to consumers as refined flour
or whole grains or if it is enriched or not. While these may make little difference in
estimating the average caloric content (to the extent that the proper nutrient conversion factor
is use) things become much more problematic in estimating contents of micronutrients such
as minerals and vitamins.

   3.3. Food Access Data

    Even if the aggregate supply of food may be sufficient to cover the total food need of a
population, food insecurity may exist because the available food is distributed unequally in


                                                  17
the population. FAO assessment of the world food problem, as presented up to the fourth
World Food Survey of 1974 has been criticized precisely because the estimate of the likely
proportion of people suffering from food inadequacy in the world did not considered the
distribution of food access. The situation has changed considerably since, and significant
efforts have been made to include considerations related to the inequality of food
consumption within population in assessing the actual prevalence of food deprivation.
Nationally representative Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (HIES) have been, for
a long time, the only source of available information to assess other parameters regarding in
the distribution of food intake.17

     As the approach FAO has taken in addressing food insecurity has focused on the
nutritive value of food rather than on the economic aspects, the proper denominator for food
consumption has been taken to be the caloric contribution of the various sources. As most of
these surveys are not designed to specifically address food consumption from a nutritional
perspective, but rather from an economic point of view, the data they provide on monetary
values of food expenditure must be treated in order to infer the required information on the
households’ level of normal food consumption over the year.18 There are two major common
problems that need to be tackled.

     First, the actual quantities of food consumed need to be estimated by converting first the
monetary values of expenditures into quantities, and then, in turn quantities are converted
into calorie equivalents. Problems arise both in converting expenditures into quantities (as not
always the needed unit values are available) and in converting them into calories when either
the composition of the food basket to which the expenditure refers is not known (as it is often
the case for food consumed at restaurants) or when the description of the food item is too
generic to allow for proper nutrient conversion.




17
   For countries for which no household surveys were available, FAO had to devise indirect means to estimate
   the parameters of the distribution, by referring, for example, to tabulations of the income distribution and to
   other indicative data on food insecurity, such as child mortality rates. These indirect methods are obviously
   fated to generate more unreliable estimates of the distribution of food intake and are being gradually
   discontinued, as soon as data form survey is made available.
18
   Sometime the quality of the household level information pertaining to food consumption in household
   expenditure surveys is so low that they are of no use for food security assessments. In their analysis of Sub-
   Saharan countries Smith et al. (2006) were able to use in the end only 13 out of more than 100 household
   surveys, having to disregard the others for various problems related with data quality.


                                                           18
        Second, to increase reliability of the reported data, which is normally collected through
recall questionnaires, the expenditures or the quantities of food are collected with reference to
a short period (usually a week or a fortnight) and the issue arises on how representative these
values are of the household average level of food consumption over the year. This is
especially true when the quantities or expenditures being reported refer to food acquired
during the reference period, but not necessarily consumed. Even if the overall mean calorie
consumption in the sample may still be a good estimate of the average, because “households
in a large population group are equally likely to be drawing down on food stocks as they are
to be accumulating them” (Smith et al., 2006, p.), the values calculated for each individual
household would likely be biased whenever household level storage of food is relevant. This
shall have consequences on the estimated distribution of food consumption across
households, as the variability within households will be confounded with the variability
between households. Second, and perhaps more worrying, if the individual household status
of being undernourished is going to be used to conduct disaggregated analysis by
subpopulation groups (the possibility of which constitutes one of the major attractiveness of
household survey data), the risk exists that the analysis would yield inconsistent results if the
difference between acquisition and consumption happens to be correlated to the grouping
variable.19

        For all these reasons, the data on household level food consumption from surveys is used
by FAO in an indirect way, to estimate the parameters of the distribution of habitual food
consumption in the population (essentially by controlling for the intra household variability)
and to conduct inference at the population level only.

        It is hoped that in the near future more nationally representative household surveys
explicitly collecting average quantities of food consumed over the year will be available to
improve the precision of the estimates at the population level, and also to allow for analysis
of individual households food consumption, in relation to other socio economic
characteristics. A minimal set of requirements for such a survey should include features that
would allow:



19
     As an example, consider the case in which most households build up food stocks in the period after the
     harvest. If that is not being taken into account when defining the sampling plan, it may happen that one area of
     the country is surveyed in that period, with the result that there will be a bias in the data correlated with the
     geographic location of the household.


                                                             19
     a) To have a complete assessment of the type of food consumed by all household
        members, including that consumed away from home;
     b) To discern actual food consumption of the surveyed household from food acquisition
        over the surveyed period, recognizing that the latter may include food that is acquired
        for other uses (storage, food given to guests, etc.);
     c) To control for possible seasonal variation in food consumption (ideally by conducting
        repeated observation on the same household in different points in time)

4. From macro-data to micro-inference and from micro-model to macro-inference

     The cursory survey of food price, availability and consumption data conducted in the
previous sections has revealed that there is wide heterogeneity in the quality of the available
data which often refer to concepts that do not correspond to the ideal ones. This has
invariably forced analysts to try and “fill the data gap” with assumptions, and the debate on
the evidence has thus been transferred from the data domain to that of the modeling approach.

     The debate that has accompanied the FAO method for estimating the prevalence of
undernourishment is an interesting one, as it touches on many issues related to the problems
of conducting analysis at the aggregate level when the fundamental concept is defined at the
individual level (that is how to conduct macro-inference with micro-modeling, which calls on
the question of proper aggregation) and on the specular one to try and derive micro inference
from aggregate level data.

     4.1. The debate on the FAO prevalence of undernourishment indicator, or: how to
         draw population level inference from imprecisely observed individual level
         data.20

     Within its broader objective of contributing to the fight against food insecurity, FAO has
received a mandate from the international community to monitor progress towards
achievement of the objectives set by the World Food Summit and the UN Millennium
Development Goal,21 to which it has responded with production and publication of figures on



20
   This section draws on Cafiero (forthcoming) “Advances in hunger measurement. Traditional FAO methods
   and recent innovations”. Global Food Security. 2012
21
   The 1996 World Food Summit pledged “... to eradicate hunger in all countries, with an immediate view to
   reducing the number of undernourished people to half their present level no later than 2015” (FAO, 1996)
   while the MDG Target 1.C is defined as to “halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people who
   suffer from hunger.” (UN, 2000)


                                                        20
the prevalence and number of undernourished people in the developing world, at global and
regional level for the first time with the 1985 Fifth World Food Survey and since 1999 with
the annual “State of Food Insecurity”(SOFI) publication.

    The first issue to be resolved has been that of trying to define the concept of “hunger”
narrowly enough that it could be meaningfully monitored. The terms “undernourished” and
“hunger”, as used in describing the two targets, have thus been interpreted as referring to a
situation of continued inability to obtain enough food, i.e., a quantity of food sufficient to
conduct a healthy and active life. While much more specific than a generic expression such as
“food insecurity”, this definition is still too vague to lead to practical monitoring. First,
considering the complexity of the process of human nutrition and the fact that there are both
quantity and quality dimensions associated with food, the expression ‘enough food’ needed to
be qualified. From that The FAO method has been traditionally based on dietary energy
intake (i.e., calories) as the metric of ‘food’, and that ‘enough’ ought to be addressed against
normative benchmarks established by nutritionists related to human energy requirements. The
FAO operational definition is thus based on the assumption that a human being is
undernourished if the level of his or her dietary energy intake is below the minimum level
that nutritionists would deem appropriate for normal life. But even this further narrowing
down of the concept was still not sufficient to reach the dimension needed for practical
measurement. Though temporary dietary energy shortage may in fact exist, the FAO
definition of the indicator has been associated with the level of habitual food consumption
over one year, that is, a period long enough for the consequences of low food intake to be
truly detrimental to health. As such, the operational definition of food insecurity that is
embedded in the FAO indicator could be better described as of “chronic undernourishment”

    Formally, the Prevalence of Undernourishment (PoU) is defined as:

                                                                                                (1)

where       represents the distribution of yearly habitual dietary energy consumption across
individuals, or, equivalently, the probability distribution of the habitual food intake levels for
the population’s “representative” individual.

    In evaluating the merits of this estimator, one of the most common sources of
misinterpretation is the fact that the probability distribution in (1) has tended to be interpreted
as the empirical distribution of the actual food consumption in the population, that is, the



                                                   21
distribution that could be obtained, for example, through a food consumption census of the
population, but such an interpretation is largely misleading.

     Under such an interpretation, in fact, it would be very difficult for example to make
sense of a unique threshold level to be applied to all individuals, as it is obvious that energy
requirements vary among individuals. If reference were to be made to the empirical
distribution of food consumption in the population, than the proper measure of the prevalence
of undernourishment ought to be:

                                                                                                          (2)

where the possibility of a joint distribution of dietary energy consumption ( ) and
requirements ( ) is explicitly recognized.22 The attractiveness of an approach as in (2) is that
it gives the impression that it may be possible to classify individuals in the population as
being undernourished or not, based on the comparison between the individual intake                        and
the individual requirement           Estimating the prevalence of undernourishment in the
population would then amount to simply head-count those who are classified as
undernourished.

     The major obstacle to the proper application of a joint distribution framework as in (2) is
that individual dietary energy requirement is practically unobservable. It is in fact widely
recognized that individual dietary energy requirement proper depends not only on observable
individual characteristics, such as body mass and level of physical activity, but also on a
rather elusive individual degree of efficiency in the metabolism of food.23 As an important
practical consequence of this fact, normative food requirement standards can only be given as
ranges valid for groups of individuals (usually defined by age, sex, and physical activity) in
recognition of the many unobservable factors affecting the individual requirement.24 When


22
   In the past, the FAO approach has been described with reference to a joint distribution, most notably by
   Svedberg (2000), who claimed that under such an approach, the choice of a single threshold level would
   necessarily lead to estimation errors. As pointed out by Naiken (2007) and Cafiero and Gennari (2011),
   Svedberg criticism is vitiated by a fundamental misrepresentation of the FAO methodology (see also below.)
23
   The actual metabolic efficiency in food processing could be measured through clinical trials at very high costs
   per single measure, which makes it infeasible for the practical purpose of monitoring undernourishment.
24
   “Estimates of energy requirements are derived from measurements of individuals. Measurements of a
   collection of individuals of the same gender and similar age, body size and physical activity are grouped
   together to give the average energy requirement - or recommended level of dietary intake - for a class of
   people or a population group. These requirements are then used to predict the requirements and recommended
   levels of energy intake for other individuals with similar characteristics, but on whom measurements have not


                                                          22
the only information available on an individual is the combination of sex, age and level of
physical activity, therefore, only a range of energy requirement levels that are compatible
with good health can be given.25

     Contrary to what seems to have been implied by some critics of the FAO methodology,
the difficulty to precisely assess individual energy requirement thresholds (which led to the
suggestion of monitoring anthropometrics as an indirect way to assess undernutrition) does
not exclude the possibility of conducting a valid inference at the population level, based on a
probabilistic statement and a proper understanding of the concepts involved. To facilitate
such an understanding, the distribution in (1) is best interpreted as the probability distribution
of the possible levels of habitual dietary energy consumptions for the population’s
“representative individual” (that is, the “average” individual in terms of all the observed and
unobserved characteristics that may affect energy requirements). The threshold level can thus
be interpreted with reference to that ‘special’ individual, and the question arises on how to set
the caloric threshold level to obtain the best estimate of the status of undernourishment, an
issue that has raised lots of controversies in the past.26

     There should be no controversy on the fact that the starting point must be found in the
normative standards set by nutritionists, such as those produced by the joint
FAO/WHO/UNU group of experts in various occasions.27 At a superficial consideration, one
may be tempted to refer to the average requirement given as “recommended level” of dietary
intake for a group of individuals of a certain age and sex as the most suited threshold to


   been made. Although individuals in a given class have been matched for characteristics that may affect
   requirements, such as gender, age, body size, body composition and lifestyle, there remain unknown factors
   that produce variations among individuals. Consequently, there is a distribution of requirements within the
   class or population group.” (FAO/WHO/UNU, 2002, p. 5, emphasis added).
25
   A joint FAO/WHO/UNU group of experts convened with the task to assess human energy requirements have
   repeatedly make a point that the norm corresponding to the average of the range provided should not be used
   at the individual level, lacking a more comprehensive assessment of other individual characteristics.
26
   Osmani (1992) provides an excellent collection of articles contributing to the debate in the 1980’s. Most of
   the discussion at that time was concerned with the roles of intra- and inter-individual variation in energy
   requirements, with unresolved issues among nutritionists and others on whether or not human beings can
   effectively adapt their dietary energy requirements to the environment. Notice however that, in view of the
   interpretation of the model in equation (1) as referring to the representative individual in the population, the
   question is of no relevance here. Irrespective of whether it is due to individual adaptation to changing
   conditions, or to differences in the metabolism among different individuals, the relevant concept is that there
   will be not a single value, but rather a whole range of requirement, associated with the variability in the
   efficiency of food processing that is compatible with good health and nutrition even for the representative
   individual in the population.
27
   The latest expert consultation was held in 2001. Results are published in UNU/WHO/FAO (2004)


                                                           23
determine whether an individual belonging to that group is likely to be undernourished or not.
After all, lacking any other information, why not considering any individual as the “average”
of the group of same sex and age in terms of caloric requirements?

        Unfortunately, such a simplistic reasoning is faulty and would lead to grossly mistaken
inference.28 The reason is that, even if a group of individuals were composed only of well-
nourished people, it would be expected that roughly 50% of them have intakes below the
average requirement. Using the average requirement as a threshold in any situation where less
than half of the population is undernourishment would produce an overestimate (a point
effectively made as early as 1960 by P.V. Sukhatme, and subsequently recognized, among
others, by Srinivasan (1983)).

        The obvious corollary of recognizing that there is variability of intakes also among well-
nourished, similar people is that the proper threshold should be set at a level below the
average, so that the probability of overestimating the prevalence of undernourishment in the
group is reduced.29 By choosing as a threshold the level that corresponds to the minimum of
the range of dietary energy requirement indicated by nutritionists as compatible with good
health and normal physical activity for that group (as FAO does in setting the MDER as the
threshold), the probability of overestimating the prevalence of undernourishment in a group is
minimized.

        Of course, as lucidly pointed out, among others, by Osmani (1999), there is still the
possibility that the measure thus obtained is an under estimate of the actual prevalence of
undernourishment, as there would be individuals who, despite consuming at a level higher
than the MDER, are undernourished. In choosing the threshold level, a trade-off thus arises
between the risk of overestimation and the risk of underestimation. By choosing a threshold
that is higher than the MDER, the probability of underestimation of the prevalence of
undernourishment is reduced, but at the cost of increasing that of overestimation.




28
     Several researchers in the past have fallen in such a mistake, including Smith et al. (2006),
29
     The use of a single threshold value in estimating the prevalence of undernourishment has been criticized by
     many others (e.g., Anand and Harris, 1992)on the account that it may never lead to correct identification of all
     the undernourished in a population. It is worth to remind the reader that the objective of the FAO
     methodology discussed here is not, and has never been, that of identifying individuals as being
     undernourished, but only to estimate the likely prevalence in the population.


                                                             24
    How to choose the most appropriate threshold depends therefore on the cost that is
associated with the two estimation errors, which is likely to be a function of the expected size
of the estimation errors. It is conceivable that over- or underestimating by a “little” is less
costly than doing it by a “lot”. In judging what the proper threshold should be, therefore, not
only the mere possibility of underestimating or of overestimating should be considered, but
also by how much. Seen from a statistical inferential perspective, this is the aspect that has
probably been lying underneath the debate that, over the years, has surrounded the FAO
estimator.

    One aspect that has emerged clearly in the debate is that the extent of possible errors in
setting a given threshold crucially depends on the supposed relationship between the
(observable) level of intake and the (unobservable) level of requirements. The conclusion
Osmani draws from the review of the elements in the debate is that: “a value-neutral way of
tackling [the problem of estimating the prevalence of undernourishment] would be to shun
the ‘cut-off approach’ altogether and use instead a joint distribution of intake and
requirement” (Osmani, 1999, p. 142).

    There are two main issues that can be raised with such a conclusion and that, if properly
recognized, could contribute to move forward in the debate and in making proper use of the
evidence provided by an indicator such as the PoU. The first one is to realize that the
existence of a pure “value-neutral” way of tackling any estimation problem as suggested by
Osmani is essentially an illusion created by what could be termed an “idealistic” view of
statistical inference. As best put by the late Arnold Zellner in his pioneering and valuable
contribution to the theory and practice of statistical inference, no estimator can ever be
deemed void of value judgment. Whatever estimator can be conceived, the most that can be
hoped is that it is proven optimal under a specific loss function. The value judgment that is
supposedly avoided by claiming the “optimality” of the estimator reemerges, implicitly, in
the choice of the loss function.

    With reference to the problems related to the use of a single cut-off point in estimating
undernourishment, the use of the minimum dietary energy requirement as the threshold level
can then be justified if the cost of overestimating undernourishment dominates that of
underestimating it, something that is in line with the definition of “undernourishment” as the
extreme form of food insecurity. This is not to deny the possibility of underestimation, but
only to clarify that the possible extent of such underestimation has been deemed small by the



                                                  25
proponents of the FAO methods, based on the presumption that the probability of
undernourishment, conditional on intakes being larger than MDER, should become very
small as intakes increase (see FAO, 1996, Appendix 3, Figure 1). If that assumption is true, a
threshold at, or very close to, the MDER is the appropriate one, unless one associates a
disproportionately higher cost to the risk of underestimating compared with that of
overestimating it. Nothing would prevent that, other considerations deemed relevant or other
perspectives on the food deprivation problem being considered, a different (higher) threshold
may be used, resulting in an estimator that would implicitly give more weight to the cost of
underestimating it.

        The second problem with the conclusion drawn by Osmani is the idea that use of an
approach based on the joint distribution of intake and requirement might have paved the way
towards a better estimator. As elaborated by Naiken (2007), and hinted to in Cafiero and
Gennari (2011), the possibility of defining a joint probability distribution for dietary energy
intake and requirement is highly problematic, to say the least. It has to confront the very
definition of the concept of “adequate nourishment” from a statistical point of view. If we
define the condition                as “undernourishment” and, by symmetry,                   as
“overnourishment”, it is clear that the event                    should correspond to adequate
nourishment. Any continuous joint density function would assign zero probability to such an
event, and therefore could not be used as a legitimate representation. One possibility is to
define adequate nourishment as an approximation,                       by recognizing that small
differences between           and    may exist due to measurement errors and therefore, even though
          gets assigned zero probability, a joint distribution could be defined that assigns the
proper mass to the event “adequate nourishment.” However, it should be self-evident that,
even if such a distribution could be conceived, it is very unlikely that it may have elliptical
iso-density contours and therefore it would be fundamentally different from joint normal or
similar distributions.30

        Ruling out the possibility of using a joint distribution framework the question seems to
revolve around the problem of whether or not it is possible at all to conduct meaningful
inference based only on the (observed) variability in intakes when this in part reflects



30
     A double normal distribution, with various degrees of correlations, has been used by Svedberg (2000, ch. 9) in
     his criticism of the FAO methodology. In light of the discussion being conducted here, the whole argument
     raised by Svedberg appears virtually irrelevant.


                                                            26
(unobservable) variability in requirements. The FAO method provides one such possibility,
which is fully consistent with the principles of statistical inferences, even though the
“optimality” of the proposed estimation method stands on an unproven – though quite
reasonable – assumption on the probability of being undernourished conditional on various
levels of observed food intake.

     There is however another argument that can be made to demonstrate that inference on
undernourishment can properly be drawn on observing only the distribution of food
consumption, and that appears to have eluded the attention of researchers so far. The
argument is the following: any population for which measuring undernourishment is
meaningful should be properly viewed as composed of three different groups: that of the
undernourished individuals, that of the adequately nourished, and that made of people with
excess food consumption. Sampling from such a population, therefore, would correspond to
what has been termed in the statistics literature as a problem of conducting inference on a
finite mixture of distributions (Everitt, 1985), and there is ample literature on how to conduct
such inference.31 An interesting avenue for further research on how to improve the practice of
estimating the extent of undernourishment (which would bring the important addition of
being able to estimate at once also the extent of over-nourishment) resides in the application
of statistical procedures developed to deal with mixture distributions on datasets of
individuals’ or households’ food consumption obtained from representative samples of the
population. The aim would be that of classifying each observed case in one of the three
underlying sub-populations, thus effectively providing an estimate of the relative size of the
groups in the overall population.

     4.2. Nutritional analysis based on aggregate food supply data: or the impossibility of
          deducing individual level outcomes from aggregate data

     Use of aggregate food supply data to derive information on the quality of the diet has
been recently proposed by Reedy, Krebs-Smith and Bosire (2010) in an attempt to assess the
“quality of the food environment. The proposal is to apply the Healthy Eating Index,32 an
index of dietary quality developed to assess the conformity of individual diets to the



31
   Principles of how to conduct inference from finite mixture distributions are given in detail by Titterington,
   Smith and Makov (1985), using maximum likelihood principles and the E-M algorithm, and by Diebolt and
   Robert (1994), using Bayesian procedures based on Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods.
32
   http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/healthyeatingindex.htm


                                                          27
recommendations of the US Dietary Guidelines for Americans,33 to a diet composed by the
average availability of foods in the country.

        This proposal is questionable to the extent that the objective is to assess the quality of the
average American diet. Even a cursory reading of nutritional principles in fact would suggest
that the nutritional value of a certain diet depends on the combination in which nutrients are
ingested.34 It should be clear, however, that the combination of average quantities of nutrients
as derived from the aggregate supply of food in a country would provide information on the
quality of the diets actually consumed by the individuals only under the very unlikely
assumption that all individuals consume exactly the same diet. As it is obvious that
unbalances in different components of the diet do not compensate each other (you cannot
compensate a deficit in, say, fibers, by eating more proteins, the very essence of the concept
of the value of a balanced diet), any meaningful index of dietary quality is going to be a
highly non-linear combination of its components (usually based on minimum or maximum
thresholds of individual nutrients). Therefore, the quality of a hypothetical diet made of
average nutrient supplies may bear little resemblance of average quality of the diets in the
country; a simple manifestation of Jensen’s inequality. In simpler terms, the hypothetical diet
formed by the averages of the aggregate supply of foods available in the countries is going to
be per force more “balanced” that any of the individual diets in the population (unless, as
said, all individual diets are identical).

       4.3. Gender and nutrition issues in food security assessments based on household
             level data: or the risk of using assumptions to substitute for missing information

        As another example of the methodological problems that can be encountered in food
security assessment, consider the recent evolution of the debate on food insecurity, in which
attention to gender issues and to nutrition is taking center stage. For both aspects to be
properly evaluated, it seems quite obvious that one cannot really do without individual level
data. Unfortunately, as reported in section 3.3 above, nationally representative food
consumption data are still only collected at the household level, under the influence of the




33
     http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/DietaryGuidelines.htm
34
     “By assessing multiple dietary components simultaneously, […] the HEI-2005 captures the balance among
     different types of food and, therefore, measures the quality rather than the quantity of the diet” (Reedy et al.
     2010, cit., p.466). Emphasis added.


                                                              28
economic literature that has tended to consider the household as a single decision making
unit.

        With reference to food security, it has long been recognized that it is important to
ascertain whether there is discrimination in accessing food among members of a household.
Assuming that there is none, as it is often implicitly done under the “unitary model” of the
household as a guideline for policy prescriptions may lead to serious policy failures.35 On the
other hand, whether or not discrimination within households exists in practice is an empirical
question which should be resolved in order to be able to evaluate the potential effectiveness
of different types of programs or targeting mechanisms in specific contexts. In turn, the
possibility of resolving the issue cannot dispense of the availability of individual data, which
is still too scarce at the global level and on nationally representative samples. As the same
consideration can be made, even more strongly, for discriminations that lead to different
quality of the food eaten by different members of the household, we must conclude that the
vision of the household as a unitary decision making unit, a die-hard feature of data collection
efforts in the development field, still hinders the possibility of properly assessing the gender
and nutritional dimensions of food insecurity.

5.      Conclusions: what’s ahead

        One of the major concerns associated with food price volatility, and conceivably one of
the motivations for the attention devoted to the economics of food markets, is that it may be
harmful for food security worldwide. The capacity to assess the extent to which this is true
and, most importantly, to identify the most effective remedies that could be put in place to
protect the welfare of citizens confronted with food price volatility, stands on the assumption
that we are indeed capable of “measuring” food security.

        This article has presented a review of some of the conceptual and practical issues
associated with the use of available data and information for food security monitoring and
analysis, revealing that there are still many gaps in the collective ability of the international
community of food security analysts to reliably identify when and where conditions of food
insecurity prevail, so to effectively direct economic and social policies.




35
     . Haddad, Hoddinott and Alderman (eds.) (1997)


                                                      29
    The review has proceeded in two directions, starting from considerations related to the
base of data analyst can currently rely upon when making food security assessments, and then
touching upon the interaction between data and theories embedded in the analytic models
used in the applied analysis.

    To illustrate the kind of methodological questions that need to be carefully addressed, we
have considered the example of one of the most widely used worldwide indicators of food
insecurity, the FAO “Prevalence of Undernourishment” that gives an estimate of the
proportion of people in a country that has access to insufficient amounts of food. It is an
interesting and relevant example, as criticisms have been raised on it in the past by many
authoritative pulpits, who have, however, thus far failed to deliver viable alternatives.

    One of the major criticisms that have been raised against the FAO indicator is that it
appeared to be not sufficiently “microfounded” in justifying the way in which available
information on food availability and on population characteristics is used in drawing
inferences. The criticisms parallels a more general evolution that have characterized the field
of development economics in the latest three decades, and that has led to increased attention
towards micro-level data and theories.

    Especially from the perspective of monitoring social and economic phenomena, often –
if not exclusively – the role of the theory is that of making up for the missing information
(Varian, 1992). One of the lessons that can be derived from the review of the debate on the
PoU indicator is that, unless careful attention is devoted to matching the theory with the
proper data, use of microeconomic theory to fill the data gap bears the risk to draw inference
that has only the appearance of precision.

    This is particularly true, for example, with microeconomic models of consumption that
assume consumers facing a set of exogenous prices make a series of rational decisions
constrained by their resource endowments. As it is well known within the economics
profession, use of such theories in empirical assessments of the situation of countries has to
confront the problem of how the collective decisions of individual consumers lead to market
wide equilibriums, level at which prices must be seen as endogenously determined. The
problem of proper aggregation has been, in my very humble opinion, greatly neglected in
microeconomic and welfare economic theory.




                                                 30
    A related problem is that reliance on micro theories imposes a series of requirements in
terms of coverage and quality on the type of data needed that are rarely satisfied. The
example of food price data is striking: even assuming a fully economistic view of food
access, every person may base her or his decisions on the effective set of prices she/he faces.
Yet, such prices may be highly diversified across villages or seasons, so that reliance on
average prices may make the potential contribution of the microeconomic theory virtually nil.

    While it is clear that the combined use of data and theory is unavoidable, it is important
that no confusion is made between them, and the question of how to properly reconcile
macro-level information with micro-level modeling is faced upfront.

    The presentation in the previous pages has likely raised more questions that it has
answered, and therefore may have been of little comfort to those seeking for solutions to the
important question of how to assess the impact of economic shocks, of which price volatility
may be a symptom, on food security.

    Two main conclusions can be drawn at this point. The first is that data availability, in
terms of both quality and coverage, is still an important limitation for our collective ability to
conduct meaningful and timely analysis of relevant socio-economic phenomena such as food
security. If not properly recognized, and if insufficient scrutiny is applied to the
understanding of the real information content of published data, mistaken inference can be
drawn. The second one is that, as it is very likely that analysts will never enjoy the luxury of
being able to wait for the right data to be collected before being asked to conduct analyses of
current events, the role of theory as a guiding principle is of fundamental importance. By
making extended reference to the debate on the practice of food insecurity assessment, we
hope to have demonstrated how the risk of slipping away from proper inference is always
around the corner.

References

Anand, Sudhir and Christopher J. Harris (1992) “Issues in the Measurement of
        Undernutrition”. Chapter 7 in Osmani (1992, ed.) cit.
Cafiero (forthcoming) “Advances in hunger measurement. Traditional FAO methods and
         recent innovations”. Global Food Security. 2012
Cafiero, Carlo and Pietro Gennari (2011) “The FAO indicator of the prevalence of
         undernourishment”. Presented at the Workshop “Measuring Food Insecurity and
         Assessing the Sustainability of Global Food Systems”, The National Academies of
         Science, Washington, DC, February 16-17, 2011. Available at:


                                                  31
        http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/ess/ess_test_folder/Workshops_Events/Food
        _Security_for_All_FEB2011/Background_paper.pdf
        http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/ess/ess_test_folder/Workshops_Events/Food
        _Security_for_All_FEB2011/Presentation_SFA_2.pdf
Diebolt, J. and Robert, C. P. (1994). “Estimation of finite mixture distributions through
         Bayesian sampling.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B 56, 363–375.
Everitt, B. S. (1985). “Mixture distributions.” In Encyclopedia of Statistical Sciences, S.
          Kotz, N. L. Johnson, and C. B. Read, eds. Wiley, New York, Vol. 5, pp. 559–569.
FAO (1996) The Sixth World Food Survey. Rome, FAO
FAO (2001) “The World Food Summit Goal and the Millennium Development Goals”.
       Committee on World Food Security, 27th session, Rome, 28 May - 1 June 2001.
       (Full text available at: http://www.fao.org/DOCREP/MEETING/003/Y0688E.HTM)
FAO, (2003) Measurement and Assessment of Food Deprivation and Undernutrition.
       Proceedings of the International Scientific Symposium convened by the Agriculture
       and Economic Development Analysis Division in Rome, 26-28 June 2002.
Gustavsson, Jenny, Christel Cederberg, Ulf Sonesson, Robert van Otterdijk and Alexandre
        Meybeck (2011) “Global food losses and food waste. Extent, causes and
        prevention.” Study conducted for the International Congress SAVE FOOD! at
        Interpack 2011,Düsseldorf, Germany. Rome:FAO
Haddad, Hoddinott and Alderman (eds.) (1997) Intrahousehold Resource Allocation in
        Developing Countries. Models, Methods, and Policy. The Hohns Hopkins
        University Press for the International Food Policy Research Institute. Baltimore and
        London.
Hoddinott (1999), Operationalizing Household Food Security in Development Projects: An
       Introduction. IFPRI Technigal Guide No 1. March 1999
Naiken, Loganaden (2003) “FAO methodology for estimating the prevalence of
        undernourishment”. In Measurement and Assessment of Food Deprivation and
        Undernutrition. Proceedings of the International Scientific Symposium convened by
        the Agriculture and Economic Development Analysis Division in Rome, 26-28 June
        2002. (HTML version available at:
        http://www.fao.org/docrep/005/Y4249E/y4249e00.htm)
Naiken, Loganaden (2007) “The Probability Distribution Framework for Estimating the
        Prevalence of Undernourishment: Exploding the Myth of the Bivariate Distribution.”
        FAO Statistics Division Working Paper Series No ESS/ESSG/009e FAO Rome,
        August. (Full text available at:
        http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/ess/documents/food_security_statistics/work
        ing_paper_series/WP009e.pdf )
Osmani, Siddiqur R. (1992) Nutrition and Poverty. UNU-WIDER Studies in Development
        Economics. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Ravaillon, Martin (2011) “On Multidimensional Indices of Poverty.” Policy Research
        Working Paper N° 5580, The World Bank, Washington, DC, February 2011. (Full



                                               32
        text available at: http://www-
        wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2011/02/28/0001
        58349_20110228142416/Rendered/PDF/WPS5580.pdf
Reedy, Krebs-Smith, Bosire (2010) “Evaluating the Food Environment: Application of the
        Healthy Eating Index-2005”. American Journal of Preventive Medicine (38) 5:465-
        471
Sibrian, Ricardo , Loganaden Naiken and Jorge Mernies (2007) “The FAO Parametric Versus
         the IFPRI Non-Parametric Approach in Estimating the Prevalence of
         Undernourishment: Issues Relating to the Use of Household Level Data from
         National Household Surveys.” FAO Statistics Division Working Paper Series No
         ESS/ESSG/12e FAO Rome, August. (Full text available at:
         http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/ess/documents/food_security_statistics/work
         ing_paper_series/WP012e.pdf )
Smith, (1999) “Can FAO's measure of chronic undernourishment be strengthened? Food
         Policy, Vol. 23, No. 5, pp. 425–445, 1998
Smith, Lisa C. (2011) “The great Indian calorie debate: An investigation of divergent trends
        in poverty and undernourishment during India’s rapid economic growth.”
        Unpublished Report presented to the Food and Agricultural Organization of the
        United Nations.
Smith, Lisa C. and Ali Subandoro (2005) “Measuring food security using household
        expenditure surveys. Food Security in Practice series. International Food Policy
        Research Institute, Washington, D.C.
Smith, Lisa C., Harold Alderman and Dede Aduayom (2006) “Food Insecurity in Sub-
        Saharan Africa. New Estimates from Household Expenditure Surveys.” Research
        report 146. International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, D.C.
Svedberg, Peter (1999) “841 Million Undernourished?” World Development Vol. 27, No. 12,
        pp. 2081-2098,
Svedberg, Peter (2000) Poverty and Undernutrition. Theory, Measurement and Policy. UNU-
        WIDER Studies in Development Economics. Oxford University Press.
Svedberg, Peter (2002) “Undernutrition Overestimated.” Economic Development and
        Cultural Change, 51 (1), 5-36.
Titterington, D.M., A.F.M. Smith and U.E. Makov (1985) Statistical analysis of finite
         mixture distributions. Wiley, 243 pp.
UNU/WHO/FAO (2004) Human energy requirements. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO/UNU
     Expert Consultation. Rome, 17-24 October 2001. (Full text vailable at
     ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/007/y5686e/y5686e00.pdf)
Varian, (1992) “What use is Economic Theory?” Available at
         http://people.ischool.berkeley.edu/~hal/Papers/theory.pdf
WHO (1995) “Physical status: the use and interpretation of anthropometry”. WHO Technical
      Report Series No. 854. Geneva.



                                               33
      Box. Historical Background of Food Balance Sheets
      FAO Food Balance Sheets have a long history that parallels the entire history of the FAO. The first
attempts at preparing food balance sheets date back to World War I. Food balance sheets were the major
source of data when, in 1936, at the request of the League of Nations Mixed Committee on the Problem of
Nutrition and its Sub-Committee on Nutritional Statistics, a systematic international comparison of food
consumption data was prepared. During World War II, the interest in food balance sheets increased
considerably. The Inter-Allied Committee on Post-war Requirements used them in 1942/43 in their studies of
post-war requirements in European countries and an even more detailed technique was developed and
employed by a joint committee of experts from Canada, the United States of America and the United
Kingdom in the report “Food Consumption Levels in the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom”.
During these years, food balance sheets were also constructed in Germany for the country itself as well as for
the occupied countries. In the work of the International Emergency Food Council, which dealt with problems
of food allocation and distribution in the period of worldwide food shortages after the war, food balance
sheets played an important role.
      At its Fourth Session in Washington in 1948, the FAO Conference recommended that governments be
encouraged to develop their own food balance sheets and that FAO assist those governments that find it
difficult to do so. It was also proposed that in future food balance sheets be published regularly for as many
countries as possible. In 1949, food balance sheets were published for 41 countries covering the period 1934-
38 and 1947/48, with a supplement in 1950 giving 1948/49 data for 36 countries. In 1955, food balance
sheets giving 1950/51 and 1951/52 data were published for 33 countries, together with revised data for the
1934-38 period. Supplements were issued in 1956 giving 1952/53 data for 30 countries, and in l957 giving
1953/54 and 1954/55 data for 29 countries. For methodological reasons, it was decided in 1957 to
discontinue the publication of annual food balance sheets and to publish instead three-year average food
balance sheets, the first set of which, for 30 countries, was issued in 1958, covering the period 1954-56; the
second for 43 countries in 1963, covering the period 1957-59; the third for 63 countries in 1966, covering the
period 1960-62 and the fourth in 1971 for 132 countries, covering the period 1964-66. In 1960, time series
covering the periods 1935-39, 1948-50, 1951-53 and 1954-56 were published showing data for 32 countries
on production, available supply, feed and manufacture, as well as per caput food supplies available for
human consumption in quantity, caloric value and protein and fat content.
      In 1977, it was possible to publish provisional 1972-74 average food balance sheets for 162 developed
and developing countries. For the first time, tables were included showing for all countries, continents,
economic classes and regions and the world, long-term series of per caput food supplies in terms of calories,
protein and fat by major food groups for the average period 1961-63 and individual years 1964 to 1974. The
following issue included 1975-77 average food balance sheets for 164 countries, together with long-term
series of per caput food supplies and tables showing the conversion ratios applied and the various
assumptions made in arriving at the published figures. For the first time in this series, the table of per caput
food supplies also showed, in addition to calories, protein and fat, the supply by food groups of selected
minerals (iron, calcium) and vitamins (retinol, thiamine, riboflavine, niacine, ascorbic acid).
      Starting with the 1979-81 issue, three-year average food balance sheets were published in a
standardized format; 146 countries were covered. The publication showing standardized food balance sheets
for the average 1984-86 included, in addition to the food balance sheets for individual countries, tables
showing long-term series of per caput supplies, by major food groups, in terms of product weight, calories,
protein and fat. These tables were shown also for the world, developed and developing countries. The tables
were based on information for more countries than those included in the publication, and covered almost 100
percent of the population in both developed and developing countries. The 1992-94 issue covered 175
countries and the 1994-96 issue about 180 countries.
      Food balance sheets were the main source of data used in the assessment and appraisal of the world
food situation which FAO made for the pre-war period in its First World Food Survey (1946), for the early
post-war period in the Second World Food Survey (1952), for the late 1950s in its Third World Food Survey
(1963), for the early 1970s in its Fourth World Food Survey (1977), for the 1970s and 1980s in the Fifth
World Food Survey (1985) and, covering the two decades from 1969-71 to 1990-92, in the Sixth World Food
Survey (1996) . Food balance sheets also provided a major source of information for establishing the
statistical base of FAO's Indicative World Plan for Agricultural Development, for which purpose 1961-63
average food balance sheets were prepared for all the 64 developing countries included in the study.

Source: FAO (2001) FOOD BALANCE SHEETS. A handbook.
Available on line at: http://www.fao.org/docrep/003/X9892E/X9892E00.htm




                                                        34
