                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT AND THE CHOICE OF TRADE PARTNERS

                                            Man Lung Chan
                                            Kalina Manova

                                         Working Paper 18867
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18867


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2013




I declare that I have no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research described in
this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Man Lung Chan and Kalina Manova. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Financial Development and the Choice of Trade Partners
Man Lung Chan and Kalina Manova
NBER Working Paper No. 18867
March 2013, Revised March 2015
JEL No. F10,F14,F36,G20

                                               ABSTRACT

What determines the choice of countries' trade partners? We show theoretically and empirically that
financial market imperfections affect the number and identity of exporters' destinations. Bigger economies
with lower trade costs are more attractive markets because they offer higher export profits. This generates
a pecking order of destinations such that firms serve all countries above a cut-off level of market potential.
Credit constraints, however, raise this cut-off above the first best. Financially advanced nations thus
have more trade partners and go further down the pecking order, especially in sectors that rely heavily
on the financial system. Our results provide new, systematic evidence that countries follow a hierarchy
of export destinations, that market size and trade costs determine this hierarchy, and that financial
frictions interact importantly with it. This has policy implications for the effects of cross-border linkages
that depend on the number and identity of countries' trade partners.


Man Lung Chan
Ph.D. Candidate
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
jmlchan@stanford.edu

Kalina Manova
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
manova@stanford.edu
1    Introduction
    For many developing countries, international trade contributes significantly to aggregate output and
economic growth. Exporting provides access to a bigger consumer market, enabling firms to expand
production, increase domestic employment and reap higher profits. This can in turn boost firms’ pro-
ductivity by allowing them to benefit from scale economies under existing manufacturing practices, as
well as to invest in innovation and technology upgrading. The very exposure to international know-how
and the frequent use of imported inputs in production for foreign countries can mediate productivity
spillovers across borders. Aside from raising income levels and growth rates, exporting can also reduce
volatility over time. By diversifying across multiple consumer markets, exporters may be able to hedge
fluctuations in country-specific demand and insure against downturns at home.
    These arguments suggest that being able to not only export more, but also to sell to more destinations
matters for aggregate welfare. In practice, successful economies indeed boast high exports to many
destinations. For example, countries with more trade partners in 1985 exported substantially more over
the next 10 years (Figure 1). They attained faster average annual growth in both exports and GDP per
capita (Figures 2a and 2b). They also experienced less volatility, as reflected in lower standard deviations
of these growth rates over time (Figures 3a and 3b). As the regressions in Appendix Table 1 show, these
correlations are not driven by cross-country differences in initial export volumes in 1985. While faster
growth in the number of export destinations is not associated with faster income or export growth in the
raw data (Figures 4a and 4b), it is when catch-up effects are taken into account in regressions controlling
for initial trade activity (Appendix Table 1).
    These patterns indicate that it is important to understand what determines countries’ ability to estab-
lish more trade links. Among other things, financial development appears strongly positively correlated
with exporters’ destination count (Figure 5).
    This paper examines the effect of financial market imperfections on the number and characteristics of
exporters’ trade partners. Because market size and trade costs vary across countries, bigger economies
with lower trade costs are relatively more profitable export targets. This generates a pecking order of
destinations based on their market potential. In the absence of credit constraints, firms export to all
destinations above a cut-off level of market potential. Financial frictions, however, raise this cut-off
and prevent firms from serving some markets that they would otherwise have entered in the first best.
Financially developed nations thus have more trade partners and go further down the pecking order of
destinations, especially in sectors that rely more heavily on the financial system.
    We study these questions formally by extending the theory developed in Manova (2013). In the
model, heterogeneous firms incur trade costs in each market they enter. They face liquidity problems
and require outside funding for a fraction of these costs, which they can raise by pledging collateral.
Financial contracts are imperfectly enforced and creditors face default risks. Producers are thus unable to
pursue all profitable export opportunities because they have limited access to capital. Instead, companies
optimally add destinations in decreasing order of profitability until they exhaust their financial resources.
Aggregating across firms, this implies that credit constraints restrict countries’ number of trade partners
to suboptimal levels and change the composition of these trade partners.
    The theory illustrates how these distortions vary systematically across exporting countries and sectors.
The strength of financial contractibility depends on how developed the exporter’s financial institutions
are. Firms’ need for external finance and availability of collateralizable assets differ across industries for
technological reasons, exogenous from the perspective of individual producers. Hence while all countries
can export to the most attractive destinations in the world, financially advanced countries also sell to


                                                      2
                                                                                          20
                                                                    (log) Total exports
                                                                     (1986−95 mean)
                                                                                          15
                                                                                          10
                                                                                               0           50         100                                              150      200
                                                                                                         # export destinations (1985)


                 Fig. 1: Export partners and total exports. Slope (t-stat) of the fitted line: 0.047 (23.1). N = 90.
                                           30




                                                                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                       Average growth rate (%) of real
           Average growth rate (%) of




                                                                                                                         GDP per capita (1986−95)
            total exports (1986−95)
                                           20




                                                                                                                                                            5
                                           10




                                                                                                                                                            0
                                           0
                                           −10




                                                                                                                                                            −5


                                                 0     50          100                             150      200                                                    0           50           100     150     200
                                                     # export destinations (1985)                                                                                            # export destinations (1985)

                                                             (a)                                                                                                                      (b)

Fig. 2: (a) Export partners and growth rate of total exports; (b) Export partners and growth rate of GDP per capita.
Slope (t-stat) of the fitted line: (a) 0.054 (4.2); (b) 0.018 (3.8). N = 90.
                                                                                                                                                            1.25
                                           2.5




                                                                                                                       Std dev of growth rate (%) of real
           Std dev of growth rate (%) of




                                                                                                                          GDP per capita (1986−95)
             total exports (1986−95)




                                                                                                                                                            1.2
                                           2




                                                                                                                                                            1.15
                                                                                                                                                            1.1
                                           1.5




                                                                                                                                                            1.05
                                           1




                                                                                                                                                            1




                                                 0     50          100                             150      200                                                    0           50           100     150     200
                                                     # export destinations (1985)                                                                                            # export destinations (1985)

                                                             (a)                                                                                                                      (b)

Fig. 3: (a) Export partners and std. dev. of growth rate of total exports; (b) Export partners and std. dev. of growth
rate of GDP per capita. Slope (t-stat) of the fitted line: (a) -0.003 (-6.2); (b) -0.0003 (-4.6). N = 90.



economies with less market potential. Importantly, these effects are more pronounced in sectors that
require more external capital and in sectors that are endowed with fewer tangible assets.
   We provide strong empirical support for these predictions using panel data on bilateral trade for 78
export countries and 27 industries in 1985-1995. We first derive model-consistent estimating equations
that relate characteristics of an exporter’s destination countries to its number of destinations and credit
conditions at home. We then develop a model-consistent ranking of destinations by market potential,
and record the highest and lowest destination market potential among an exporter’s trade partners.
In line with the theory, we document no systematic variation in the maximum value across export



                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                          Average growth rate (%) of real
                                    30




                                                                                                                                                            10
       Average growth rate (%) of




                                                                                                                            GDP per capita (1986−95)
        total exports (1986−95)
                                    20




                                                                                                                                                            5
                                    10




                                                                                                                                                            0
                                    0
                                    −10




                                                                                                                                                            −5
                                          −5          0                                         5               10                                               −5             0         5             10
                                                 Average growth rate (%) of                                                                                             Average growth rate (%) of
                                               # export destinations (1986−95)                                                                                        # export destinations (1986−95)

                                                          (a)                                                                                                                       (b)

Fig. 4: (a) Growth rate of number of export partners and growth rate of total exports; (b) Growth rate of number of export
partners and growth rate of real GDP per capita. Slope (t-stat) of the fitted line: (a) 0.097 (0.37); (b) -0.128 (-1.37).
N = 90.
                                                                                               200
                                                                # export destinations (1985)
                                                                                               150
                                                                                               100
                                                                                               50
                                                                                               0




                                                                                                     0           .5                                              1        1.5
                                                                                                         Private credit−to−GDP ratio (1985)


                                     Fig. 5: Private credit and export partners. Slope (t-stat) of the fitted line: 118.4 (8.5). N = 90.



countries and industries. By contrast, the minimum value falls with the exporter’s level of financial
development disproportionately faster in financially more vulnerable sectors. In other words, financially
advanced exporters go further down the pecking order in such sectors and are able to service lower-ranked
destinations. Indeed, once we control for the number of destinations, we find that it fully explains the
minimum destination market potential, and there is no residual direct effect of financial conditions. As
further evidence that financial frictions do not reposition economies in the pecking order and that export
countries follow this pecking order without gaps, we present consistent results for destinations at every
5th percentile in the distribution of countries’ export markets.
    These results have two key implications. First, they indicate that there exists a hierarchy of des-
tinations that exporters observe which is stable across exporting countries, and that this hierarchy is
governed by market size and trade costs in specific ways. Second, they show how credit constraints
interact with this pecking order, intensify its relevance to export decisions, and ultimately affect the
choice (both number and identity) of countries’ trade partners. While the latter is the main focus of our
study, the former is a side product of the analysis.
    Our empirical strategy relies on exploiting the variation in financial development across export
economies and in financial vulnerability across sectors. Following common practice, we measure the
former with countries’ private credit, and the latter with sectors’ external finance dependence and sec-
tors’ asset tangibility.1 Since financial development is correlated with other country characteristics that
   1 “Private                         credit” is the amount of credit extended to the private sector as a share of GDP. “External finance dependence”


                                                                                                                      4
could influence export activity, interpreting its direct effect as causal is problematic. It can also become
theoretically ambiguous in general equilibrium. On the other hand, the differential effect of financial
development across industries survives in general equilibrium and cannot easily be attributed to alter-
native explanations. For this reason, this difference-in-difference approach has been widely used in the
literature as a means of establishing a causal effect of credit constraints on various economic outcomes.
It permits the inclusion of a rigorous set of control variables such as Heckscher-Ohlin sources of compar-
ative advantage, country and sector fixed effects. We further ensure that our results do not capture the
role of overall development or other institutions by controlling for the interactions of GDP per capita,
rule of law and corruption with the sector measures of financial vulnerability.
    We propose two methodologies to gauge destinations’ relative position in the pecking order. We
first examine different proxies for market size and trade costs as the sole determinants of destinations’
desirability. We then pursue an alternative approach, which remains agnostic about the exact drivers
of market potential and is based on the principle of revealed preferences: If a market is particularly
attractive and profitable, more exporters will enter it. The number of nations selling to a given country
thus implicitly signals its market potential. By the same logic, we also adopt a semi-structural two-
stage estimation technique. In the first stage, we run a probit regression of an indicator for positive
bilateral exports on exporter, importer and sector fixed effects. We use the coefficients on the importer
dummies from this regression as an index of market desirability in the second stage. We find robust
results consistent with the model’s predictions both with the direct and with the agnostic measures of
market potential.
    Our findings extend three lines of research in the prior literature. We advance a large literature that
seeks to understand why the incidence and magnitude of cross-border transactions varies substantially
across countries, sectors and firms. At the aggregate level, about half of all country pairs conduct no
bilateral trade, and another 15% initiate only one-way flows (Helpman et al. 2008). At the micro level,
export sales are highly concentrated in a few large and productive firms that ship to many countries
(Bernard et al. 2007). These patterns can be explained if economies differ in their market potential and
exporters observe a pecking order of destinations. While recent work-horse models of international trade
incorporate this feature, however, they can have opposing implications as to which country characteristics
determine market potential and how. For example, bigger destinations rank higher in the pecking order
in Melitz (2003), but lower in Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) and Eaton and Kortum (2002). Separately,
Armenter and Koren (2014) present a random-assignment model of “balls” (i.e. export transactions) to
“bins” (i.e. export markets), in which a pecking order arises atheoretically, rather than because firms
purposefully add destinations in decreasing order of profitability.
    Despite this theoretical interest, the pecking order hypothesis has received little attention in the
empirical literature to date, with mixed results. Eaton et al. (2011a) show that French companies with
more export destinations tend to enter less popular markets, i.e. countries served by fewer manufacturers.
However, there are significant deviations from a uniform pecking order across firms, which Eaton et al.
(2011a) rationalize with idiosyncratic firm-destination specific export cost and demand draws. In cross-
country data, Helpman et al. (2008) find that bigger market sizes and lower trade costs increase the
probability of bilateral trade on average, but do not examine whether exporting countries observe a
hierarchy of destinations without gaps. It has thus remained an open empirical question whether there is
a stable pecking order of exporting at the aggregate level and what factors govern it. Our analysis is one
of the first to provide systematic evidence that countries do follow a (common) hierarchy of destinations,
is the share of capital expenditures not financed from internal cash flows from operations. “Asset tangibility” is the share
of plant, property and equipment in total assets. See Section 4 for more details.



                                                             5
that bigger market size and lower trade costs raise destinations in this hierarchy, and that financial
frictions interact nontrivially with it.2 In the process, we develop a methodology for obtaining agnostic,
comprehensive measures of market potential from observable data that can be applied to other contexts,
such as testing models with and without a pecking order of products within multi-product firms (e.g.
Bernard et al. 2011, Dhingra 2013, Mayer et al. 2014).
    Most directly, this paper adds to the growing body of work at the intersection of international trade
and corporate finance (c.f. Foley and Manova forthcoming). A number of theoretical models have
examined the mechanisms through which credit constraints disrupt trade activity (e.g. Manova 2013,
Feenstra et al. forthcoming). These frameworks have illustrated that financially developed countries have
a comparative advantage in financially vulnerable sectors. They have also emphasized the heterogeneous
impact of imperfect capital markets across firms. On the empirical side, evidence indicates that credit
constraints impede firms’ export operations and distort aggregate trade flows, both in normal times and
during crisis episodes (e.g. Berman and Héricourt 2010, Amiti and Weinstein 2011, Minetti and Zhu
2011, Chor and Manova 2012, Bricongne et al. 2012, Manova 2013, Feenstra et al. forthcoming).
    Our contribution to this literature is in identifying a novel dimension of global commerce that is
affected by credit market imperfections: the choice of countries’ trade partners. Of note, Manova (2013)
establishes theoretically and empirically that (i) financially developed countries export to more desti-
nations in financially more vulnerable sectors. We complement this result by showing theoretically and
empirically that (ii) financial development operates by allowing exporting nations to go further down
the pecking order of destinations. Importantly, while our theoretical predictions follow directly from the
Manova (2013) framework which we extend, our empirical findings are not automatically implied by hers
because pattern (i) can obtain in alternative trade models with financial frictions that do not generate
pattern (ii). What guarantees (ii) is that credit constraints do not change the ranking of destinations in
the pecking order and do not cause gaps in the order in which destinations are added. These features
are, however, sensitive to modeling assumptions about the economic environment and the nature of fi-
nancial frictions (see Section 2.4). Hence our analysis implicitly provides validation for the theoretical
mechanisms we propose in favor of alternative models. This may shed light on the potential welfare
losses from imperfect capital markets if greater deviations from the first-best choice of trade partners is
associated with lower gains from trade.
    More broadly, our work is motivated by and informs studies that relate international trade linkages
to economic growth, cross-country technology spillovers, and contagion. Trade openness is typically
associated with faster income growth, although results are somewhat mixed (Rodrik 2005). Countries’
number of trade partners too appears positively correlated with growth after controlling for other co-
variates (Kali et al. 2007, Figure 2). Evidence also suggests that access to imported inputs allows firms
in developing countries to improve product quality and to manufacture more products (Verhoogen 2008,
Goldberg et al. 2010, Manova and Zhang 2012). In addition, firms in developing economies appear to
learn from exporting and experience productivity gains when selling to developed nations (de Loecker
2007). Separately, business cycles are more synchronized between countries that trade with each other
(Frankel and Rose 1998, Clark and van Wincoop 2001, Baxter and Kouparitsas 2005). Moreover, cost
or demand shocks originating in one economy tend to propagate to its trade partners (Burstein et al.
2008, Eaton et al. 2011b).
    The effects of these cross-country interdependencies clearly hinge on the identity of the economies in
    2 In work subsequent to ours, Muûls (2008) has confirmed that our results for the maximum and minimum GDP across

an exporter’s destinations hold not only in aggregate, but also at the firm level: Financially healthier firms in Belgium are
able to export to smaller destinations than credit constrained firms.



                                                             6
question in terms of their size, average income, overall development, TFP, and role in global financial
and goods markets. Understanding these interdependencies can thus be enhanced by better understand-
ing how countries’ trade partners are determined. Our results highlight the importance of financial
development and credit constraints as one such determinant.
   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section outlines the theoretical frame-
work, while Section 3 derives model-consistent estimating equations. We introduce the data in Section
4 and present the empirical results in Section 5. The last section concludes.


2     Theoretical framework
    We extend the Manova (2013) theoretical model to study how financial market imperfections affect
the choice of countries’ trade partners. We provide a variant of that model here, focusing specifically
on the predictions for the pecking order of export destinations. The underlying production and market
structure follows Melitz (2003) in a static, partial-equilibrium set-up. Correspondingly, the exposition
moves quickly and refers the reader to Manova (2013) for further details.


2.1     Set up
     The world consists of I countries and S sectors. Within each country and sector, a continuum of
heterogeneous firms produce differentiated goods. The representative consumer in country i has utility
      Q θs                     hR                 i α1
Ui = s Cis     , where Cis = ω∈Ωis qis (ω)α dω , Ωis spans the set of available varieties, and θs gives the
share of expenditure on industry s. The constant elasticity of substitution across products is given by
                                                                                                   −ε
ε = 1/(1 − α) > 1 with 0 < α < 1. Demand for variety ω in sector s is thus qis (ω) = pis (ω)      1−ε
                                                                                                Pis
                                                                                                      θs Yi
                                                                                                            , where
                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                       1−ε
                                                                                        R
pis (ω) is the price of that variety, Yi equals total spending in country i, and Pis = [ ω∈Ωis pis (ω) dω] 1−ε
reflects an ideal price index.


2.2     Firms’ export behavior
    Firms in country j pay a sunk cost cjs ej in order to enter industry s. At that point, they draw
their productivity level 1/a from a cumulative distribution function G(a) with support [aL , aH ], aH >
aL > 0. This productivity draw uniquely determines manufacturers’ production and trade behavior.
The marginal cost of making one unit of output is cjs a, where cjs is the country-sector specific cost
of a cost-minimizing bundle of inputs. Exporting to market i entails fixed (cjs fij > 0) and variable
trade costs of the iceberg variety (τij > 1) in each period of trading.3 These costs could, for example,
relate to researching consumer demand, building and maintaining foreign distribution networks, product
customization, and transportation. Setting τjj = 1 would correspond to operations in the domestic
market. Given our interest, we concentrate on companies’ export decisions. In other words, we study
the selection of domestic producers into exporting, and leave the selection of entrants into domestic
production in the background.
    3 We allow the fixed costs of firm entry and exporting to depend on factor costs in the exporting country to add richness

and flexibility to the model. Intuitively, the fixed investment required to establish a new firm is bigger when local factor
inputs are more expensive, for example because that raises the cost of building a plant, hiring managers, buying equipment,
conducting research and product development etc. Likewise, fixed trade costs may be higher when the workers employed
in marketing research, product customization or advertising are more expensive. This formulation is not consequential for
the model’s predictions since fixed costs enter all relevant expressions linearly and are additively separable.




                                                             7
     Firms face liquidity needs because a portion ds ∈ (0, 1) of the fixed trade cost is incurred up-front and
cannot be financed with retained earnings or internal cash flows from operations.4 In order to raise these
funds in the external capital market, companies must pledge collateral. Their available collateralizable
assets constitute a fraction ts ∈ (0, 1) of the initial entry cost, which can be interpreted as tangible
investments in plant, property, and equipment. Financially more vulnerable sectors have relatively
higher ds and lower ts .
     Entrepreneurs obtain outside financing by making a take-it-or-leave-it offer to potential (risk-neutral)
investors. However, agents operate in an environment with imperfect contractibility. With an exogenous
probability λj ∈ (0, 1), financial agreements are enforced and lenders are repaid a pre-specified amount
Fjs (a). Otherwise, with probability (1 − λj ), the firm defaults, and the creditor claims the collateral
ts cjs ej . Manufacturers then have to replace this collateral to continue operations in the future. The
parameter λj can thus be thought of as an indicator of the strength of financial institutions or the level
of financial development in exporting country j.
     Profit-maximizing exporters choose which destination markets i to enter, the optimal price pijs and
quantity qijs in each destination, and the terms of the financial contract they propose to investors (total
loan size, repayment Fjs (a), and collateral posted ts cjs ej ).5 If T P (a) is the set of trade partners that
                                                                                            P
a firm with productivity 1/a sells to, the firm’s total liquidity needs will amount to i∈T P (a) ds cjs fij .
The company’s maximization problem can therefore be expressed as follows:
                        X
   max πjs (a) =                  {pijs (a)qijs (a) − qijs (a)τij cjs a − (1 − ds )cjs fij } − λj Fjs (a) − (1 − λj )ts cjs ej
 T P,p,q,F
                      i∈T P (a)

                                                                                                                          (2.1)
                                             −ε
                                pijs (a) θs Yi
             s.t. (1) qijs (a) =       1−ε      ,
                                     Pis
                                  X
                  (2) Ajs (a) ≡          {pijs (a)qijs (a) − qijs (a)τij cjs a − (1 − ds )cjs fij } ≥ Fjs (a), and
                                     i∈T P (a)
                                          X
                  (3) Bjs (a) ≡ −                  ds cjs fij + λj Fjs (a) + (1 − λj )ts cjs ej ≥ 0.
                                       i∈T P (a)


    The expression for profits reflects the fact that the firm finances all of its variable costs qijs (a)τij cjs a
and a fraction (1 − ds ) of its fixed costs internally, pays the investor Fjs (a) when the contract is enforced
(with probability λj ), and replaces the collateral in case of default (with probability (1 − λj )). In the
absence of financial frictions, exporters maximize profits subject to demand (1). With liquidity needs,
two additional conditions bind manufacturers’ decisions. In case of repayment, entrepreneurs can offer
at most their net revenues to the creditor, i.e. Ajs (a) ≥ Fjs (a). Also, investors only fund the company
if their net return Bjs (a) exceeds their outside option, here normalized to 0.
    With competitive credit markets, lenders always break even in expectation. This implies that pro-
ducers adjust their payment Fjs (a) so as to bring the financier to his participation constraint in (3), i.e.
Bjs (a) = 0. The optimization problem therefore reduces to a familiar Melitz-type formulation with the
    4 While requiring firms to use external finance for part of their variable costs would not qualitatively affect our predic-

tions, securing funding for fixed trade costs is plausibly more difficult than raising funds for their working capital needs
associated with variable trade costs. For example, banks often provide letters of credit to cover the latter since these are
tied to specific trade transactions and the goods shipped can serve as collateral themselves.
    5 To maximize their chance of obtaining the loan, it is in firms’ interest to pledge all of their collateralizable assets.




                                                                  8
additional credit constraint (2):
                                         X                                                                            X
                max πjs (a) =                      {pijs (a)qijs (a) − qijs (a)τij cjs a − cjs fij } =                          πijs (a)   (2.2)
                T P,p,q
                                       i∈T P (a)                                                                    i∈T P (a)

                                                 pijs (a)−ε θs Yi
                          s.t. (1) qijs (a) =           1−ε       , and
                                                      Pis
                                                                                              
                                                  1  X                                        
                                   (2) Ajs (a) ≥                ds cjs fij − (1 − λj )ts cjs ej .
                                                 λj                                           
                                                               i∈T P (a)


    The profits πijs (a) from any market are unaffected by financial considerations (conditional on ex-
porting there). This occurs because firms require external capital only for their fixed costs. They thus
optimally set the same price and quantity in every destination they choose to serve as in the absence of
financial frictions. Incorporating the demand condition (1), the maximization problem finally becomes:
                                   (                              1−ε                     )
                          X                            τij cjs a                                      X
   max πjs (a) =                     (1 − α)                              θs Yi − cjs fij       =               πijs (a)                   (2.3)
    TP                                                  αPis
                      i∈T P (a)                                                                     i∈T P (a)
                               (                                                       )                                      
                                                           1−ε
                     X                          τij cjs a                                     1 − λj  X                       
         s.t.                  (1 − α)                               θs Yi − cjs fij        ≥            ds cjs fij − ts cjs ej .
                                                 αPis                                           λj                            
                   i∈T P (a)                                                                                i∈T P (a)


    We build intuition for the solution to this problem in steps. Note first that profitability will vary
across export markets. From the perspective of firms in country j and sector s, destinations i can be
uniquely ranked in terms of their relative profitability: While profits πijs (a) increase with productivity
1/a, one can verify that πxjs (a0 ) > πyjs (a0 ) whenever πxjs (a) > πyjs (a). In other words, if destination
x is more profitable than destination y for firm a, it is also more desirable for firm a0 , if both firms are
based in the same country j and sector s.
    Observe also that importing countries with a larger market size Yi and lower trade costs, τij and fij ,
are more attractive because they guarantee higher profits. We jointly refer to these characteristics as
market potential (MP), and to the ranking of destinations in decreasing order of market potential as the
pecking order. A summary statistic for the market potential of destination i relevant for firms exporting
from country j is M Pijs = Yi /(τij fij ). What matters for our purposes is not the exact functional form
for M Pijs , but rather that it is increasing in Yi and decreasing in τij and fij .
    In this set-up, all firms in a given country j will observe the same pecking order regardless of their
sector affiliation, since the pertinent sector characteristics (cjs , θs , ds and ts ) enter separably. We capture
these characteristics with sector fixed effects in our empirical analysis. To the extent that the hierarchy of
destinations in fact varies across industries within j, the theoretical predictions below would be weakened
and we would be less likely to find support for them in the data.
    On the other hand, our framework does not guarantee that manufacturers in different export countries
will follow the same pecking order. While all firms exporting to i face the same destination market size
Yi regardless of their country of origin j, they incur different bilateral trade costs τij and fij that depend
on the country pair. If these trade costs are separable into exporter- and importer-specific components,
then the pecking order will be stable across exporting nations. For example, if τij = τi τj and fij = fi fj ,
then the summary statistic for market potential can be expressed as M Pijs = M Pi = Yi /(τi fi ) for all j.
We return to this point later on.
    With perfect financial contractibility (λj = 1), each firm would export to all countries that promise



                                                                             9
non-negative profits. For a firm with productivity 1/a, there will be a minimum level of market potential
such that the firm serves all destinations more attractive than it. This threshold is pinned down by
πijs (a) = 0. We denote this first-best group of trade partners T P F B (a), and the number of countries in
it #T P F B (a).
    With financial frictions (λj < 1), entrepreneurs might have to forgo exporting to some countries in
their ideal set T P F B (a). This arises because each destination not only brings extra profits, but also
imposes additional liquidity needs. The limited collateral a firm possesses, however, constrains the total
loan it can access. This implies that the marginal country the producer ships to will have to generate
strictly positive profits to warrant the extra burden it places on the overall financial contract. We restrict
our attention to the interesting case when the total loan size needed to access all destinations in T P F B (a)
                                                    P
exceeds the value of the available collateral, i.e., i∈T P F B (a) ds cjs fij > ts cjs ej .
    Formally, the exporter’s constrained optimal choice of trade partners T P ∗ (a) satisfies:
                                                                                         
                           X                    1 − λj  X                                
                                     πijs (a) ≥                     ds cjs fij − ts cjs ej and
                                                  λj                                     
                         i∈T P ∗ (a)                    i∈T P ∗ (a)
                                                                                            
                          X                     1 − λj     X                                
                                     πijs (a) <                        ds cjs fij − ts cjs ej ,              (2.4)
                           ∗
                                                  λj         ∗
                                                                                             
                      i∈T P (a)+1                        i∈T P (a)+1


where the set T P ∗ (a) + 1 includes all countries in T P ∗ (a) plus the destination ranked next in the pecking
order according to its market potential.
     By construction, #T P ∗ (a) ≤ #T P F B (a) necessarily holds.                 ∗
                                                                   nP #T P (a) will be strictly        o below the
                                                             1−λ
first-best #T P F B (a) whenever i∈T P F B (a) πijs (a) < λj
                                   P                             j
                                                                                     d c f
                                                                       i∈T P F B (a) s js ij − t  c  e
                                                                                                 s js j , i.e. when
                                                                         P
the profits from exporting to all destinations in the first-best set i∈T P F B (a) πijs (a) are insufficient to
                                                             P
incentivize investors to provide the necessary funding i∈T P F B (a) ds cjs fij given the available collateral
ts cjs ej and probability of repayment λj . Note that the left-hand side of this inequality (i.e. global firm
profits) rises monotonically with productivity, while the right-hand side is invariant across firms. This
implies that more productive firms will be able to go further down the pecking order and export to more
destinations. Moreover, only companies below a certain productivity level will be affected by financial
concerns and forced to reduce their number of trade partners below the first best.


2.3    Countries’ trade partners
    We next consider the implications of imperfect financial markets for countries’ aggregate export
behavior. All producers target destinations in decreasing order of market potential and follow the same
pecking order (for given exporter-sector characteristics). In the aggregate, country j will therefore export
to country i in sector s as long as at least one firm in j can afford to do so. This will in turn depend
on importer i’s position in j’s hierarchy of destinations. For example, if i is the fifth most attractive
market, at least one firm in j should sell to five or more nations in order to ship to i; if i is ranked tenth,
at least one firm should serve ten or more markets; etc. This implies a one-to-one mapping between the
number of country j’s trade partners #T Pjs and the identity of these trade partners.
    For any given set (number) of export destinations T Pjs (#T Pjs ), there is a minimum productivity
level 1/aT Pjs above which firms can sustain this many trade links. This cut-off is determined by the




                                                         10
liquidity constraint in equation (2.3):
                (                                                       )                                     
                                              1−ε
        X                     τij cjs aT Pjs                                  1 − λj  X                       
                (1 − α)                               θs Yi − cjs fij       =            ds cjs fij − ts cjs ej .   (2.5)
                                   αPis                                         λj                            
      i∈T Pjs                                                                          i∈T Pjs


   The left-hand side of this equality is increasing in the productivity cut-off. Taking derivatives, simple
comparative statics describe the effect of financial market imperfections on the right-hand side RHS:
                                                                       
                                    ∂RHS    1  X                       
                                         =− 2     ds cjs fij − ts cjs ej < 0,
                                     ∂λj   λj                          
                                                             i∈T Pjs

                       ∂RHS   1 − λj X              ∂RHS    1 − λj
                            =          cjs fij > 0,      =−        cjs ej < 0,                                      (2.6)
                        ∂ds     λj                   ∂ts      λj
                                                 i∈T Pjs

                           ∂ 2 RHS    1 X              ∂ 2 RHS   1
                                   =− 2   cjs fij < 0,         = 2 cjs ej > 0.
                           ∂λj ∂ds   λj                ∂λj ∂ts  λj
                                                   i∈T Pjs


This immediately implies that the productivity cut-off for exporting from j to #T Pjs destinations is
                                                                                            ∂ (1/aT Pjs )
higher in sectors that require more external finance or have fewer tangible assets,             ∂ds       > 0 and
∂ (1/aT Pjs )                                                                                    ∂ (1/aT Pjs )
     ∂ts      < 0. The threshold also falls with the strength of financial contractibility,          ∂λj       < 0.
Importantly, financial development reduces the export cut-off relatively more in financially vulnerable
              ∂ 2 (1/aT Pjs )         ∂ 2 (1/aT Pjs )
industries,       ∂λj ∂ds     < 0 and     ∂λj ∂ts     > 0.6 If no firm in country j has productivity above this
cut-off (i.e., if 1/aT Pjs > 1/aL ), then j will sell to fewer than #T Pjs markets and will certainly not
export to the destination country in position #T Pjs of j’s pecking order.
    Recall that the ranking of destinations by market potential will generally vary across exporting
nations because it depends on bilateral trade costs. Ceteris paribus, these comparative statics therefore
describe the impact of financial development on trade patterns within an exporting country over time
and across sectors. To the extent that the pecking order is universal, they would also apply to the
cross-sectional variation across exporting nations and sectors. Our empirical exercise takes this into
account by including export country, sector and time fixed effects. We also consider different proxies for
market potential, some of which are specific to each importer (market size, import costs), while others
are bilateral in nature (distance). This allows us to shed light on the stability of the pecking order in
practice.
    The following propositions summarize the key implications of the model that we take to the data.
For brevity, we state them without reference to the above caveat about the uniformity of the pecking
order across countries.

Proposition 1. (Trade partners) The number of export destinations increases with the exporter’s level
of financial development. This effect is stronger in financially more vulnerable sectors, i.e.

                                  ∂ (#T Pjs )      ∂ 2 (#T Pjs )      ∂ 2 (#T Pjs )
                                              > 0,               > 0,               < 0.
                                     ∂λj              ∂λj ∂ds            ∂λj ∂ts

Proposition 2. (Pecking order) Exporters follow a pecking order of destinations, determined by market
potential. All exporters sell to the destination with the greatest market potential. Financially developed
countries go further down the pecking order and also export to destinations with lower market potential.
    6 While the level effect of financial development can become ambiguous in general equilibrium, its differential impact

across sectors would persist. See Manova (2013) for more details.


                                                                   11
This latter effect is stronger in financially more vulnerable sectors, i.e.

               ∂ maxi∈T Pjs M Pijs   ∂ 2 maxi∈T Pjs M Pijs   ∂ 2 maxi∈T Pjs M Pijs
                                   =                       =                       = 0, and
                      ∂λj                  ∂λj ∂ds                  ∂λj ∂ts
               ∂ mini∈T Pjs M Pijs      ∂ 2 mini∈T Pjs M Pijs      ∂ 2 mini∈T Pjs M Pijs
                                   < 0,                       < 0,                       > 0.
                      ∂λj                      ∂λj ∂ds                    ∂λj ∂ts

    The first proposition restates theoretical and empirical results from Manova (2013), which we have
re-derived in the present version of the model. The second proposition is novel, and it is the one we
focus on in our empirical analysis.


2.4    Discussion
    In our model, credit constraints disrupt trade activity but do not change the ranking of destinations
in the pecking order and do not cause gaps in the order in which destinations are added. This feature
is important in allowing us to derive Proposition 2. While it would also be present in other models of
international trade with imperfect capital markets, it is not insensitive to certain assumptions about the
economic environment and the nature of financial frictions. In particular, financing considerations may
reshuffle the hierarchy of destinations to one that is not based solely on market profitability as in the first
best, or they may lead different exporters to follow different pecking orders. Credit market imperfections
may also lead to gaps in the pecking order such that more profitable markets are not served first. To
illustrate this, we now briefly describe some alternative frameworks that would deliver Proposition 1 but
not necessarily Proposition 2. In light of this discussion, our empirical analysis below implicitly provides
validation for the theoretical mechanisms we propose in favor of alternative models.
    Departures from the Melitz (2003) market demand structure may negate the prediction for a pecking
order of exporting even in the absence of financial frictions. Adding financial frictions would then trivially
imply no pecking order either. For example, firm-destination specific cost or demand draws would
generate a hierarchy of destinations that varies across firms from the same exporting country (Eaton et
al. 2011a). Whether a stable pecking order obtains across exporting countries at the aggregate level
would then become theoretically ambiguous and dependent on the joint distribution of firm productivity
and firm-destination specific draws.
    When a pecking order does hold in the absence of financial frictions, it matters how different market
characteristics govern it and whether it interacts with credit constraints. While bigger markets are more
attractive export destinations with CES demand for instance (Melitz 2003), with linear demand they are
more competitive, require a higher productivity cut-off for exporting and place lower in the hierarchy
of destinations (Melitz and Ottaviano 2008). If a pecking order arises atheoretically due to the random
falling of “balls” into “bins” (Armenter and Koren 2014), financial frictions could restrict all trade flows
proportionately, rather than systematically shift trade activity towards more profitable markets.
    Finally, alternative forms of credit market imperfections may affect how financial frictions interact
with the pecking order. First, if exporters face the risk of non-payment by the importer, and if this risk
varies across destinations but is not correlated with market size and trade costs, investors may be more
willing to fund exports to less risky countries. This would result in deviations from the first-best pecking
order based on market size and trade costs. Second, firms might require external finance for both their
fixed and variable costs. Under certain demand or production functions, it may be optimal for firms to
serve more, smaller markets with first-best export quantities than fewer, bigger destinations with reduced,
second-best export quantities. Third, violations of the pecking order could occur if financial frictions lead


                                                      12
to strategic interactions whereby financially more developed exporters choose to fully saturate demand
in destinations with less market potential, while financially less developed exporters use their limited
resources to sell in the top markets.
    Fourth, our model features credit underprovision but no credit misallocation since there is no in-
formational asymmetry between borrowers and lenders: More productive firms receive more financing
than less productive firms, even if not enough to implement their first-best export strategy. Credit
misallocation may however arise if lenders do not observe firms’ productivity or firm-destination specific
profitability. Financiers might then extend the ”wrong” amount of funding to the “wrong” firms for the
“wrong” export markets. The pecking order of destinations would be violated at the firm level, with
ambiguous implications for its observance at the country level.


3       Empirical specification
   Our model delivers clear predictions for exporters’ choice of destination countries in the presence of
imperfect capital markets. We test Proposition 2 with the following reduced-form equations:


     max M Pijst = α + α0 F inDevjt + α1 F inDevjt × ExtF ins + α2 F inDevjt × T angs + ΛX Xjst
    i∈T Pjst
                                                                                                                        (3.1)
                      + ϕj + ϕs + ϕt + jst ,

     min M Pijst = β + β0 F inDevjt + β1 F inDevjt × ExtF ins + β2 F inDevjt × T angs + BX Xjst
    i∈T Pjst
                                                                                                                        (3.2)
                       + φj + φs + φt + νjst ,

     min M Pijst = γ + γ0 F inDevjt + γ1 F inDevjt × ExtF ins + γ2 F inDevjt × T angs + γ3 #T Pjst
 i∈T Pjst
                                                                                                                        (3.3)
                      + ΓX Xjst + ψj + ψs + ψt + ηjst .
    Here T Pjst represents the set of trade partners that country j exports to in sector s and year t. If the
relative attractiveness of importer i is measured by its market potential M Pijst , and if exporters observe
a pecking order governed by M Pijst , then much can be learned from examining the maximum and
minimum values of M Pijst among j’s chosen destinations. The unit of observation in these regressions is
thus the exporter-sector-year, and the outcomes precisely these extreme values. The main explanatory
variables of interest are exporter j’s level of financial development F inDevjt , sector s’s external finance
dependence ExtF ins , and sector s’s asset tangibility T angs . These are the empirical counterparts to
the parameters λj , ds and ts in the model.
    Consider the case of a stable pecking order across exporting countries. According to Proposition 2,
all exporters should be able to enter the most profitable market in the world. Thus, maxi∈T Pjst M Pijst
should not vary systematically across countries and sectors, and we would hypothesize that α1 = α2 = 0.7
On the other hand, financially developed economies should be able to go further down the hierarchy of
export destinations and penetrate less attractive markets as well, especially in financially vulnerable
industries. This implication would be validated if β1 < 0 and β2 > 0. Finally, the model generates
a direct mapping between the number of trade partners #T Pjst and the market potential of the least
appealing one among them. In other words, #T Pjst should exactly pin down mini∈T Pjst M Pijst . Once
we control for #T Pjst , we would expect that γ1 = γ2 = 0 and γ3 < 0 in the third regression.
     7 WhileProposition 2 also makes predictions regarding the coefficients on F inDevjt , i.e. α0 , β0 , and γ0 , we focus on
the interaction terms since only they hold unambiguously in general equilibrium.


                                                             13
    We adopt two strategies to address the possibility that the pecking order of destinations might vary
across exporters. First, we use panel data on bilateral trade by sector which allows us to include various
fixed effects. Exporter fixed effects (ϕj , φj and ψj ) control for intransient country characteristics that
affect export outcomes in all sectors, such as local infrastructure or regulatory obstacles to production
and trade. Similarly, sector fixed effects (ϕs , φs and ψs ) capture industry features that shape trade
activity in all countries, such as the composition of consumer demand, need for product customization,
marketing costs, and the main effects of ExtF ins and T angs . Finally, year fixed effects (ϕt , φt and ψt )
reflect cost or demand shocks common to all suppliers, such as changes in energy prices, shipping and
logistics technologies, or global crises. We cluster errors by country, to allow for correlated trade patterns
across sectors and over time within an exporter. Our results are very similar if we instead cluster by
exporter-sector pair. For a meaningful spread in market potential across export destinations, we focus
on observations with more than 5 trade partners, but our findings are not sensitive to this restriction.
    Our second strategy is to consider different dimensions of market potential as dictated by the model.
Ceteris paribus, the comparative statics derived for overall market potential hold for its individual com-
ponents as well. We thus examine some proxies for M Pijst that are invariant across exporting countries
(e.g. destinations’ market size and bureaucratic import costs). All exporters should order destinations
uniformly along these dimensions. We also study proxies that are bilateral in nature (e.g. distance).
While these would tend to generate varying pecking orders across exporting countries, they would still
imply a stable pecking order across sectors within a country. Since these different M Pijst measures are
imperfectly correlated, no one factor alone will determine j’s overall hierarchy of destinations. Our re-
sults could thus deviate from our strict predictions when we focus on only one aspect of market potential.
For this reason, we also analyze more encompassing measures, which we expect to perform better.
    Implicitly, these specifications test the base premise that a pecking order of exporting exists, as well
as the hypothesis that it interacts systematically with financial conditions. To the extent that countries
follow different pecking orders that we fail to capture, this would work against us finding support for
Proposition 2.
    Separately, we want to rule out alternative explanations of the pecking order unrelated to credit
constraints. To this end, we include a series of controls Xjst to account for other determinants of
trade activity. Their corresponding coefficients form the vectors ΛX , BX and ΓX . We condition on the
exporter’s size with its annual log GDP. This accommodates the possibility that bigger economies have
more or different trade links, for example because they support a larger mass of firms. We also take
into account Heckscher-Ohlin sources of comparative advantage. We allow exporters’ log endowments
of physical capital K/Ljt , human capital H/Ljt and natural resources per capita N/Ljt to enter the
regression, as well as their interactions with sectors’ respective factor intensities ks , hs and ns . The main
effects of these sector characteristics are subsumed by the sector dummies. Finally, we ensure that our
estimates capture the role of financial development as opposed to overall economic development. We do
so by controlling for exporters’ log GDP per capita and its interactions with both ExtF ins and T angs .
All country-level variables in Xjst are time-variant.


4    Data
   Our empirical analysis requires five pieces of information. First, we obtain bilateral trade flows for
164 exporting and 175 importing countries over the 1985-1995 period from Feenstra’s World Trade Flows.
These data are available at the 4-digit SITC Rev. 2 industry level, which we aggregate up to the 3-digit



                                                      14
ISIC level to merge with various industry characteristics of interest.8
    Second, we capture exporters’ level of financial development with a standard measure in the literature:
the amount of credit extended by deposit-money banks and other financial institutions to the private
sector, as a share of GDP. This outcome-based variable reflects the actual availability of financial resources
in an economy, and is commonly believed to gauge the depth and breadth of the financial system. It is
available for over 150 nations from Beck et al. (2000) and varies substantially both in the cross-section
and over time. In our sample, it has an average of 0.414 and standard deviation of 0.364. In robustness
checks, we also consider indicators of the underlying institutional environment and its ability to sustain
financial contracts. We discuss these alternative measures in Section 5.4.
    Third, we employ two widely used measures of sectors’ financial vulnerability that correspond to the
concepts of ds and ts in the model. External finance dependence is the share of capital expenditures
not financed by internal cash flows from operations. It signals producers’ need for outside funding so
that they can meet up-front expenditures that have to be incurred before revenues are realized. Asset
tangibility is computed as net property, plant and equipment, as a share of total book-value assets. It
identifies producers’ ability to raise external finance by pledging hard, collateralizable assets.
    These two variables are meant to capture inherent characteristics of the manufacturing process that
are largely exogenous from the perspective of individual firms. Consistent with this, they vary signifi-
cantly more across industries than across companies within an industry. Following best practice in the
literature, we adopt measures based on data for all publicly listed US companies in Compustat from
Braun (2003). These are available for 27 3-digit ISIC manufacturing industries.9 The mean (standard
deviation) of external finance dependence and asset tangibility are 0.242 (0.330) and 0.298 (0.139), re-
spectively. Both of their effects can be analyzed as they are only weakly correlated at 0.010. This low
correlation corroborates the notion that the variables capture two distinct aspects of financial vulnera-
bility. Manova (2013) and Manova et al. (forthcoming) provide further justification for the use of these
proxies.
    Fourth, we examine a series of importer characteristics that determine countries’ attractiveness to
potential exporters. We measure market size using data on PPP-adjusted GDP from the Penn World
Tables 6.1 (PWT). Alternatively, we gauge aggregate consumer demand with the sum of net imports
and domestic output by sector from UNIDO (in international dollars in 1996 constant prices).
    Since trade costs are not readily observed directly, we examine a variety of proxies proposed in the
prior literature.10 We use bilateral distance from CEPII as a correlate of transportation costs. We also
employ estimates of the regulation costs of exporting and importing from the World Bank Doing Business
Report (DB). These include the number of days, number of documents, and nominal cost (per shipping
container) required for a cross-border transaction. Separately, the World Bank collects survey data on
trade facilitation and calculates a Logistics Performance Index (LPI), based on 6 different indicators.11,12
    8 We use SITC-ISIC concordance tables provided by Haveman at http://www.macalester.edu/research/economics/

PAGE/HAVEMAN/Trade.Resources/tradeconcordances.html .
    9 The measures are calculated as the median values across all firms in a given industry, after first averaging these firm

values over the 1986-1995 period. The measures are available for manufacturing, i.e. industries with first digit equal to
3 in the ISIC Rev. 2 classification system. The industries excluded from our analysis are agriculture, mining, utilities
(electricity/gas/water) and services (e.g. construction, retail, financial, transportation).
   10 See Novy (2013) for a short summary.
   11 Specifically, these 6 components are: (1) the efficiency of customs and border management clearance; (2) the quality

of trade and transport infrastructure; (3) the ease of arranging competitively priced shipments; (4) the competence and
quality of logistics services; (5) the ability to track and trace consignments; and (6) the frequency with which shipments
reach consignees within scheduled or expected delivery times.
   12 The year closest to our panel for which DB and LPI data are available is 2007. While these costs may change over

time, they arguably reflect the underlying institutional environment which is slow-moving. The cross-sectional variation
and ranking across nations is thus relatively stable. For example, the correlation between the values in 2007 and 2012 is in



                                                             15
Finally, the ESCAP-World Bank Trade Cost Database provides an index of comprehensive trade costs
and decomposes it into its tariff and non-tariff components.13 All of these trade cost measures are
country characteristics that do not vary over time.
    Lastly, we require a number of control variables. GDP per capita is accessible from PWT. Economies’
endowments of physical and human capital per capita come from Caselli (2005). The World Bank’s
Expanding the Measure of Wealth gives estimates of natural resource endowments, which we translate
into per-capita terms by dividing by population size from PWT. Sectors’ physical capital, human capital,
and natural resource intensities are from Braun (2003).
    The core sample for our empirical analysis comprises 78 export countries with available data on
financial development and the above control variables. The set of importing countries we use to construct
the dependent variables of interest in each regression (maxi∈T Pjst M Pijst and mini∈T Pjst M Pijst ) varies
across specifications because different indicators of market potential M Pijst are available for different
subsamples of countries. For example, GDP (a measure of market size) is observed for more destinations
than regulatory and logistical barriers to trade (a measure of trade costs). We are, however, able to
develop a comprehensive measure of market potential for all 175 destinations in the raw trade data by
estimating country fixed effects in an auxiliary probit regression that circumvents such data limitations.


4.1     A first glance at the data
     As a prelude to the econometric analysis, we first present some suggestive descriptive patterns broadly
in line with the theory’s predictions. In particular, we tabulate summary statistics for the top and bottom
exporters and importers in the sample. For each nation, we record its total exports and imports. We
also count the number of destinations it exports to and the number of origin countries it imports from
(averaged across sectors). Tables 1 and 2 show averages for the 1985-1995 period, but qualitatively similar
patterns hold in any one year. Given our focus on the role of financial development, we concentrate on
a common set of 107 economies with data both on GDP and private credit.14
     The five biggest importers in the sample are the US, Germany, France, the United Kingdom, and
Japan, in that order. The five destinations with the lowest import flows are Equatorial Guinea, Chad,
the Central African Republic, Burundi, and Sierra Leone. The contrasts between these two sets of
countries are striking: The largest importers receive shipments worth 3-4 orders of magnitude more
than the smallest ones. While the top importers purchase goods from 65-95 countries, the bottom five
source products from 6-16 suppliers only. Moreover, these outcomes appear strongly correlated with key
determinants of the pecking order of destinations in our model (Appendix Table A.2). Leading importers
are significantly larger and richer economies, as evidenced by their GDP and per capita income. They
also tend to have markedly lower trade costs. For the purposes of this table, we proxy the latter with an
overall index of the DB regulation cost variables. We construct it by first normalizing each of the three
components to a number between 0 and 100, and then taking the unweighted average.
     We next turn to the most and least active exporters in the data (Table 2). The top five importers
are also the top five exporters in the world during this period, with a slightly reordered ranking. Their
cross-border sales dramatically exceed those of the bottom five exporters (Burundi, Rwanda, Equatorial
Guinea, the Central African Republic, and Guinea-Bissau) by 4 orders of magnitude. While the largest
exporters service 121-146 economies, the smallest enter only 2-4 foreign markets. Consistent with our
the range of 0.77 to 0.90 for the various DB and LPI measures.
   13 See Arvis et al. (2013) for more details on these data.
   14 We first count the number of trade partners in the full sample of 164 exporting and 175 importing countries in the

raw trade data. We then report the top and bottom trading countries among the 107 nations in our sample.



                                                          16
                                       Table 1: Top and Bottom Importers

                                    Total imports    Average number     GDP (in     GDP per capita     DB trade
    Country                          (in billions)     of partners      billions)   (in thousands)     cost index
    1. USA                               459               94.6          6,530            26.1             9.2
    2. Germany                           268               81.9          1,540            19.4             7.4
    3. France                            177               80.9          1,110            19.1            11.5
    4. Great Britain                     171               89.3          1,030            17.9             8.9
    5. Japan                             136               65.0          2,620            21.2             9.9
    ...
    103. Sierra Leone                   0.156              15.7           4.57            1.14            23.3
    104. Burundi                        0.137              11.9           4.34            0.80            60.9
    105. Central African Republic       0.122              10.8           3.91            1.34            74.1
    106. Chad                           0.114              7.8            5.73            0.99            79.7
    107. Equatorial Guinea              0.063               6.6           0.50            1.43            28.3
     Notes: Total imports, GDP, and GDP per capita are measured in 1996 international dollars. Average number
    of partners refers to the mean number of partners across sectors where imports are positive. Mean values over
    the period 1985-1995 given for the first four columns, values in 2007 for the last.


theory, exporters’ level of financial development is highly correlated with their choice of trade partners
(Appendix Table A.2). Private credit is about 10 times more accessible in the leading exporters, indi-
cating deeper and more effective capital markets. Looking across exporters’ destination countries, the
biggest markets served are quite comparable and vary between 1.4 and 6.5 trillion USD in size. By
contrast, the smallest markets penetrated differ tremendously: Their GDP is on average some 100 times
lower for the top exporters (roughly 4 vs 700 billion USD).
    Note also that the largest buyer Germany, France, the United Kingdom, and Japan trade with is
the same country (the US), as implied by a strictly size-driven pecking order in our model. Although
the bottom exporters do not exhibit this consistency, they generally still tap into some of the biggest
economies in the world. In fact, they sell only to relatively large destinations, while top exporters are
also able to access smaller markets. This can be gauged from the gap between the values in the last two
columns.
    When we look across an exporter’s destination countries, we focus on the importer at the 10th
percentile of the distribution instead of at the absolute minimum to guard against idiosyncrasies in the
data. Our model examines firms as monopolistic competitors in a static environment. In reality, there
could be temporary fluctuations in conditions that may influence suppliers’ choice of locations to sell in.
For instance, price and demand shocks could alter the relative attractiveness of different markets. In
addition, firms might face uncertainty about their products’ consumer appeal, and first experiment in
some markets with limited sales before deciding whether to scale up or pull out from a market. These
factors are more likely to affect export entry into marginal destinations around the cut-off minimum
market potential; they are by contrast less likely to influence export entry into large and established
markets with known high potential. To address these concerns, we use the 10th percentile and the
maximum values of market potential across an exporter’s trade partners. Our results are however not
sensitive to this choice.
    Overall, these descriptive statistics provide preliminary evidence consistent with market size and trade
costs shaping the relative attractiveness of different destinations. In addition, countries’ level of financial
development appears closely related to their total exports, number of export markets, and ability to go
further down the pecking order of destinations.




                                                         17
                                          Table 2: Top and Bottom Exporters

                                                         Average                    Maximum            10th percentile
                                       Total exports    number of     Private    destination GDP      destination GDP
      Country                           (in billions)    partners     credit       (in billions)        (in billions)
      1. USA                                351           130.0        0.91            2,690                4.93
      2. Germany                            349           141.3        0.93            6,534                4.68
      3. Japan                              302           121.0        1.63            6,534                7.50
      4. France                             178           139.5        0.86            6,534                4.22
      5. Great Britain                      160           146.1        0.95            6,534                4.23
      ...
      103. Guinea-Bissau                   0.025            4.3         0.03           2,544                 657
      104. Central Africa Republic         0.020            3.4         0.07           2,044                 477
      105. Equatorial Guinea               0.015            2.4         0.18           1,362                 682
      106. Rwanda                          0.008            3.3         0.09           3,027                 719
      107. Burundi                         0.007            3.0         0.09           1,641                 524
      Notes: Total exports and GDP are measured in 1996 international dollars. Average # of partners refers to the
      mean number of partners across sectors where exports are positive. Private credit is the ratio of the amount
      of private credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions to GDP. Mean values over the period
      1985-1995 given.


5     Results
    We next evaluate econometrically the impact of financial development on countries’ choice of trade
partners. We organize the analysis into three steps that correspond to different ways of ranking the
desirability of export destinations. We first consider a pecking order of importers based exclusively
on market size, and ignore cross-country differences in trade costs. We then study the opposite and
complementary case, in which only trade costs matter, while market size plays no role. Finally, we take
an integrated approach and develop summary statistics of market potential that incorporate information
on both size and costs.15
    Implicit in our study is that credit conditions affect the level of countries’ exports and their number
of trade partners. For completeness, in Appendix Table A.3 we reproduce results from Manova (2013)
confirming that this is indeed the case.16 Financially advanced economies export relatively more in
sectors more reliant on external capital and in sectors more intensive in intangible assets than in less
financially vulnerable sectors. Countries with stronger financial systems also ship to more destinations in
such industries. These patterns hold in a baseline regression controlling for the exporter’s GDP, country,
year and sector fixed effects, as well as when we condition on the full set of control variables from the
specifications below.
    Appendix Figure A.1 provides some canonical examples of the impact of financial development on
trade activity. We consider 6 nations that experienced some of the biggest improvements in financial
conditions in our panel: Bolivia, China, Indonesia, Mexico, Poland, and Thailand. The left-hand side
graphs illustrate how private credit and the aggregate number of export destinations generally moved
closely together within countries over the 1985-1995 period. The right-hand side graphs plot the rise
in the destination count by sector between 1985 and 1995 against sectors’ external finance dependence.
Financial development indeed tended to differentially affect market entry across sectors.17
   15 In our partial-equilibrium model, the aggregate price index in a destination country also affects its position along the

pecking order. In general equilibrium, however, it too would be a function of market size and trade costs.
   16 Table 5, Panel B, Column 1 in Manova (2013) is identical to Table A.3, Panel A, Column 2 here. The other regression

results we report are not exactly the same as those in Manova (2013) because of slight differences in the sample and the
control variables included.
   17 These figures are of course only suggestive since many other developments take place in these countries over the

1985-1995 period aside from financial development. Our regression analysis will take this into account with a combination
of country, sector and year fixed effects, as well as various controls.




                                                             18
5.1       A pecking order of market sizes
    We first evaluate how market size influences the pecking order of export destinations and if financial
development affects how far down this pecking order exporting countries reach. We use GDP as our main
measure of market size, since it is the conceptual counterpart to aggregate spending Yi in the model.
For each exporter j, we rank its trade partners in sector s (T Pjst ) by size, and record the log GDP of
its largest importer, maxi∈T Pjst GDPit . We do this separately for each year in the panel to allow for
changes in economic conditions that affect destinations’ attractiveness. Similarly, we note the log GDP
of the destination at the 10th percentile of the distribution, our proxy for mini∈T Pjst GDPit for reasons
outlined above. Using these two variables, we estimate specifications (3.1), (3.2), and (3.3).
    The results in Panel A of Table 3 lend strong support to our model’s predictions. We find no
systematic variation in the market size of exporters’ largest trade partners across exporters at different
levels of financial development and across sectors at different levels of financial vulnerability (Column
1). By contrast, credit conditions are an important driver of the size of the smallest market that
exporters choose to service (Column 2). Financially advanced economies are able to penetrate smaller
destinations than financially less developed exporters, and this difference is bigger in financially more
vulnerable industries. The coefficients on the two interaction terms of interest (F inDevjt × ExtF ins
and F inDevjt × T angs ) are highly statistically significant, both individually and jointly. The last row
in the panel reports the p-value from an F-test of β1 = β2 = 0, and decisively rejects this null hypothesis
at the 0.1% level of confidence.18
    These effects are also of sizable economic magnitude. Consider a country such as Mexico that under-
goes financial reforms. Let these reforms increase the amount of private credit available in the economy
(as a share of GDP) by 0.364, which corresponds to one standard deviation in our data. As a result,
Mexico would be able to begin exporting to more destinations by going further down the pecking order
and entering progressively smaller markets. The extent of this expansion into additional export markets
would vary across industries and depend on their reliance on the financial system. Since sectors differ
along two dimensions that are not perfectly correlated with each other (external finance dependence
and asset tangibility), we characterize their differential response with three comparative statics. Take
first two sectors that have the same level of asset tangibility but one requires as much external capital
as the Electrical Machinery industry (ISIC 383, ExtF ins = 0.768), the sector at the 90th percentile
of the distribution, while the other uses as little outside finance as the Leather industry (ISIC 323,
ExtF ins = −0.140), the sector at the 10th percentile. Following financial reforms, the size of Mexico’s
smallest export destination would fall by 16.6 percentage points more in Electrical Machinery than in
Leather. Conversely, two sectors might exhibit the same reliance on external finance but have endow-
ments of tangible assets corresponding to the 10th and 90th percentiles of the distribution, Footwear
(ISIC 324, T angs = 0.117) and Iron and Steel (ISIC 371, T angs = 0.458). The size of Mexico’s smallest
trade partner would fall by 10.1 percentage points more in Footwear than in Iron and Steel. Finally,
we account for the actual variation across sectors in the data along both dimensions of financial vulner-
ability, and calculate the total implied impact of financial reforms for each sector. The industry that
experiences the biggest expansion into new export markets would see the size of its smallest destination
fall by 32.0 percentage points more than the industry that benefits the least.
    Appendix Table A.4 reports these comparative statics, as well as similar calculations for other mea-
sures of market potential discussed below such as aggregate consumption or bilateral distance. For each
  18 In unreported results available on request, we have considered a decomposition of GDP into population and GDP per
capita, and found consistent results for both components. While the maximum values of log population and log income do
not vary systematically across exporters and sectors, the minimum values do much like aggregate GDP.



                                                         19
                                                 Table 3: Market Size

                                                    PANEL A                                   PANEL B
     Dependent variable:                            (log) GDP                              Ranking of GDP
                                        Maximum           10th percentile        Minimum            90th percentile
                                           (1)           (2)            (3)          (1)           (2)           (3)
     F inDevjt                           0.250*        -0.150        -0.206       -1.534*         0.235        1.474
                                         (1.81)        (-0.70)       (-1.16)      (-1.88)        (0.06)        (0.47)
     F inDevjt × ExtF ins                 0.044      -0.498***       -0.047        -0.287     10.740***        0.802
                                         (0.56)        (-3.71)       (-0.37)      (-0.70)        (4.27)        (0.41)
     F inDevjt × T angs                  -0.210       0.809**        0.536*         1.602      -15.985**      -9.973*
                                         (-0.93)       (2.01)        (1.77)        (1.18)        (-2.13)      (-1.93)
     #P artnersjst                                                 -0.015***                                 0.333***
                                                                    (-11.93)                                  (15.68)
     R2                                   0.28           0.52          0.56         0.12          0.54          0.61
     F -test on interaction terms (p)     0.64         <0.01           0.21         0.50         <0.01          0.15
                                                    PANEL C                                   PANEL D
     Dependent variable:                   (log) Aggregate consumption               (log) Consumption by sector
                                                 across all sectors
                                        Maximum           10th percentile       Maximum            10th percentile
                                           (1)           (2)            (3)         (1)           (2)            (3)
     F inDevjt                           0.256*        -0.149        -0.214      0.349**        -0.056        -0.108
                                         (1.70)        (-0.47)       (-0.66)      (2.00)        (-0.22)       (-0.42)
     F inDevjt × ExtF ins                 0.053      -0.465***        0.054        0.025      -0.338***        0.023
                                         (0.65)        (-3.35)       (0.44)       (0.34)        (-3.27)       (0.24)
     F inDevjt × T angs                  -0.238        0.930*         0.616       -0.426         0.481         0.263
                                         (-0.95)       (1.97)        (1.58)      (-1.52)        (1.22)        (0.77)
     #P artnersjst                                                 -0.017***                                -0.012***
                                                                    (-11.73)                                  (-8.15)
     R2                                   0.23           0.45          0.49        0.79          0.59           0.61
     F -test on interaction terms (p)     0.64         <0.01           0.24        0.24         <0.01           0.74
     Notes: This table shows the effect of an export country’s financial development on the maximum and mini-
     mum destination market size among its export destinations. Estimates from equations (3.1), (3.2) and (3.3)
     are reported in Columns 1, 2, and 3 of each panel respectively. Financial development is measured by private
     credit as a share of GDP. Market size is measured by log GDP, a rank order based on GDP, log aggregate con-
     sumption, or log consumption by sector. The sample is restricted to exporter-sector-year observations with
     more than 5 trade partners. The number of observations (number of exporters) is 16,332 (78) in Panels A
     to C and 15,688 (78) in Panel D. All regressions include a constant and controls as listed in the text. Stan-
     dard errors are clustered at the exporter level. T-statistics in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
     significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.


of these measures, Column 1 reports the differential effect of a one-standard-deviation improvement in
financial conditions on the market potential of the marginal export destination in a sector at the 90th vs
at the 10th percentile of ExtF ins (holding T angs fixed) or of T angs (holding ExtF ins fixed). Column 3
compares instead the implied impact on the most vs. least affected industry, based on the actual variation
in both ExtF ins and T angs across industries. Column 2 replicates Column 1 but compares sectors that
are one standard deviation apart in financial vulnerability rather than spanning the 90th-10th percentile
range.
    Column 3 confirms that there is an intimate link between the number of countries’ export destinations
#T Pjst and the size of their smallest trade partner. When we include #T Pjst in the regression for
mini∈T Pjst GDPit , the point estimates are substantially reduced in size and significance. We can no longer
reject the null hypothesis that the interaction term coefficients are jointly zero. (However, F inDevjt ×
T angs still enters weakly significantly at 10%, albeit with a much smaller coefficient.) As expected,
#T Pjst receives a negative and very significant coefficient.
    There are two ways to view these results through the lens of the theory. Strictly interpreted, our model
implies that each exporter observes the same pecking order in every sector with respect to destinations’
aggregate expenditure. Our findings are broadly consistent with this implication. To the extent that
sector-level consumer preferences vary across importing countries (for example because of non-homothetic


                                                            20
preferences or home bias), the ranking of destinations might not be exactly the same across sectors. This
could contribute to the residual effect of F inDevjt × T angs even after controlling for trade partner
intensity in Column 3. Separately, the pecking order is a function of both market size and trade costs
in the model. Since we consider only the former here, potential differences in trade costs across country
pairs and sectors remain unaccounted for.
     To shed more light on the stability of the size-based pecking order across exporters and sectors, we
next pursue a slightly different exercise. We now rank all countries in the world based on their GDP,
year by year. Since there are 119 importing nations in our sample, the biggest one receives rank 1, and
the smallest – rank 119. For each exporter, we note the GDP rank of its trade partners, by sector. If all
countries follow the same pecking order, they will all be able to export to the single largest market in the
world. The minimum destination rank observed for each exporter-sector pair, mini∈T Pjst GDP rankit ,
will thus be 1. Moreover, an exporter selling to #T Pjst countries in sector s will record a maximum
destination rank exactly equal to maxi∈T Pjst GDP rankit = #T Pjst , and will export to all countries with
rank lower than #T Pjst . Conversely, when the pecking order is not stable across exporting countries
and industries, there will be gaps in this rank sequence and maxi∈T Pjst GDP rankit > #T Pjst will
mechanically hold.
     In line with these predictions, in Panel B we find that mini∈T Pjst GDP rankit is independent of
exporters’ financial conditions and sectors’ financial vulnerability. By contrast, maxi∈T Pjst GDP rankit
varies systematically in the data such that financially advanced economies go further down the global
hierarchy of destinations in financially dependent industries.19 (The signs of the coefficients are opposite
to those in Panel A since large economies receive a lower rank.) Once again, controlling for the number
of trade partners substantially reduces the point estimates on the interaction terms: They are no longer
jointly significant and the coefficient on F inDevjt × ExtF ins cannot be distinguished from 0, but that
on F inDevjt × T angs remains marginally significant at 10%. As anticipated, the number of partners
now enters positively, with a p-value below 0.1%. These results suggest that the size-based pecking order
of export markets is relatively stable if imperfect across exporters and sectors.
     Recall that in the model, market size affects firms’ cross-border sales via aggregate consumer demand
Yi . With balanced trade, a nation’s GDP exactly equals total expenditure as an accounting identity. In
practice, however, the two often differ since countries run trade deficits or surpluses. In the rest of Table
3 we confirm that our results hold, and in fact become sharper, when we proxy market size with a direct
measure of consumption instead of GDP. The associated economic effects are of comparable magnitudes
too (Appendix Table A.4). We impute total consumption as the sum of domestic production (available
from UNIDO) and net imports (from the trade data).
     In Panel C, we repeat the analysis from Panel A using the log highest and lowest levels of aggregate
consumption observed across a countries’ trade partners as outcome variables. As earlier, we find that
the maximum value does not vary systematically across exporters and sectors. By contrast, the smallest
consumer market that financially advanced exporters serve is significantly smaller in industries that
require more external capital or feature fewer tangible assets. Moreover, this pattern is now completely
driven by the number of destinations and both interaction terms lose significance when we control for
the latter. Similar results obtain in Panel D when we instead consider consumption by destination and
sector, constructed from sector-level production and trade data. This suggests that a consumption-based
hierarchy of importers is broadly stable across exporters, and more so than a GDP ranking.
   19 Consistently with our use of the 10th percentile of market size instead of the minimum, we use the 90th percentile of

the size rank instead of the maximum.




                                                            21
5.2    A pecking order of trade costs
    The results in the previous subsection lend strong support to our prediction that financial development
importantly affects countries’ choice of trade partners in terms of market size. We next study the extent
to which this is also true of export costs, the second determinant of the pecking order of destinations in
our model.
    Since trade costs are not directly observable, we employ a few standard proxies in the literature. We
first consider bilateral distance Distji , which is arguably associated with the expense of shipping goods
across borders. In this sense it provides an empirical counterpart to the iceberg costs in the model, τij .
To the extent that transportation entails both fixed and variable costs, distance may also partly capture
the fixed cost of exporting, fij . The same would apply if countries that are geographically closer are
more likely to be similar along various economic dimensions that reduce the cost of setting up a trade
partnership. For example, proximate nations might share similar business practices, legal frameworks,
and consumer preferences. Such factors could facilitate the establishment of new commercial links, ease
the maintenance of distribution networks, make researching market potential cheaper, and reduce the
need for customizing products and advertising to local tastes. We therefore do not take a stand as to
whether distance picks up the role of τij or fij in the model. While the measures of market size above
vary by importer and year, distance is a time-invariant characteristic of each exporter-importer pair.
Hence, it is not associated with a uniform pecking order across exporters (e.g. Mexico is closer to US
exporters than Germany, but the converse is true for French exporters).
    In Panel A of Table 4, we assess whether financial development allows countries to go further down
the pecking order of export destinations in terms of bilateral distance. According to our model, exporters
will access all markets closer than a maximum distance, but this cut-off will vary across exporters and
sectors. To test this prediction, we record the shortest log distance at which countries export in each year
and industry, mini∈T Pjst Distji . As expected, we find that this value does not vary systematically with
credit conditions. Instead, the longest distance at which countries ship their goods, maxi∈T Pjst Distji ,
rises with F inDevjt × ExtF ins . This implies that stronger financial markets enable firms to fund higher
trade costs, particularly in sectors that demand more external capital. As anticipated, this effect becomes
insignificant when we control for #T Pjst , and so it can be attributed to an expansion into more markets:
The expected positive sign on #T Pjst indicates that having more export partners is associated with
reaching farther destinations. The insignificant coefficient on F inDevjt × T angs in Column 2, however,
suggests that financial development does not affect the choice of trade partners differentially across
sectors at different levels of asset tangibility.
    We next examine a series of destination-specific proxies for trade costs that reflect the regulatory and
logistical barriers for exporting to country i, Costi . In Panel A of Table 5, we consider the log nominal
cost (per shipping container) required for cross-border sales. The lowest shipping cost observed across
country j’s destinations does not appear to vary systematically with j’s credit conditions (Column 1). By
contrast, the highest shipping cost rises with j’s private credit in sectors with high reliance on external
capital and few collateralizable assets (Column 2). In other words, financially developed exporters are
able to penetrate foreign markets that are more expensive to access. As expected, this pattern can be
explained with the fact that j has more trade partners in such sectors (Column 3).
    We find similar results when we instead consider the log number of days it takes for customs trans-
actions to clear (Panel B). On the other hand, the log number of import documents needed does not
appear to generate a pecking order of destinations (Panel C). This suggests that shipping and customs
delays increase exporters’ working capital needs because they force suppliers to stretch their cash flow


                                                    22
                                                 Table 4: Trade Costs

                                                      PANEL A                              PANEL B
       Dependent variable:                     (log) Bilateral distance                DB trade cost index
                                          Minimum           90th percentile     Minimum         90th percentile
                                             (1)           (2)          (3)        (1)          (2)          (3)
       F inDevjt                           -0.055       -0.089*      -0.079       0.379       1.371         1.882
                                           (-0.60)      (-1.84)      (-1.59)     (1.29)       (0.71)       (1.11)
       F inDevjt × ExtF ins                -0.011        0.082*      -0.003       0.149      3.514**       -0.583
                                           (-0.33)       (1.85)      (-0.07)     (0.47)       (2.54)      (-0.46)
       F inDevjt × T angs                  -0.119         0.059       0.111      -0.294       -1.115        1.363
                                           (-1.50)       (0.63)      (1.18)      (-0.50)     (-0.48)       (0.75)
       #P artnersjst                                                0.003***                             0.137***
                                                                     (5.92)                               (13.04)
       R2                                   0.79           0.48        0.50        0.46        0.52         0.56
       F -test on interaction terms (p)     0.32          0.15         0.50        0.76        0.04         0.74
                                                      PANEL C                              PANEL D
       Dependent variable:                  Logistics Performance Index              ESCAP-WB trade costs
                                          Maximum           10th percentile     Minimum         90th percentile
                                             (1)           (2)          (3)        (1)          (2)          (3)
       F inDevjt                           -0.009        -0.044      -0.056      -1.784       -8.325       -3.640
                                           (-0.43)      (-0.85)      (-1.20)     (-0.55)     (-0.87)      (-0.43)
       F inDevjt × ExtF ins                 0.001        -0.047       0.052       0.645     30.099**      -10.902
                                           (0.04)       (-1.23)      (1.44)      (1.08)       (2.44)      (-1.33)
       F inDevjt × T angs                   0.023        0.138*       0.079      -2.562      -24.775       0.410
                                           (0.55)        (1.71)      (1.12)      (-1.30)     (-1.22)       (0.03)
       #P artnersjst                                               -0.003***                             1.382***
                                                                     (-8.34)                              (18.13)
       R2                                   0.27           0.46        0.48        0.80        0.49         0.59
       F -test on interaction terms (p)     0.86          0.15         0.15        0.26        0.03         0.40
       Notes: This table shows the effect of an export country’s financial development on the minimum and
       maximum trade costs among its export destinations. Estimates from equations (3.1), (3.2) and (3.3) are
       reported in Columns 1, 2, and 3 of each panel respectively. Financial development is measured by private
       credit as a share of GDP. Trade costs are measured by log bilateral distance, a trade cost index from the
       World Bank Doing Business Report, the Logistics Performance Index, or a comprehensive ESCAP-World
       Bank index of trade costs. The sample is restricted to exporter-sector-year observations with more than
       5 trade partners. The number of observations (number of exporters) is 16,334 (78) in Panels A to C and
       16,070 (75) in Panel D. All regressions include a constant and controls as listed in the text. Standard
       errors are clustered at the exporter level. T-statistics in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical
       significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.


cycle and maintain bigger inventories. By contrast, filling out forms does not have such implications
for companies’ balance sheets. Moreover, the cross-sectional dispersion in the time and monetary cost
of exporting significantly exceeds that in paperwork (coefficients of variation of 0.67 and 0.61 vs. 0.35).
For completeness, in Panel B of Table 4 we also report results for the aggregate index that we construct
as the average of the three regulatory barriers. This behaves in much the same way as the cost and
duration of shipping.
    We next exploit another measure of trade facilitation: destination countries’ Logistics Performance
Index (LPI). Higher values for this index imply more reliable, efficient and expedient customs, shipment
and overall logistics. This variable captures other dimensions of trade costs not present in the previous
indicators. For example, its correlation with the trade cost index from Panel B is -0.64. Consistent with
our hypothesis, in Panel C of Table 4 we find that all exporters service attractive locations with high LPI.
However, exporters with stronger financial systems also enter markets with more challenging logistics:
The lowest LPI they tolerate falls with financial development faster in financially more vulnerable indus-
tries. This time, however, only F inDevtjt × T angs but not F inDevtjt × ExtF ins is precisely estimated.
Once we control for the number of destinations, both interactions become predictably insignificant.
    The various regulatory costs of trade we have employed characterize the environment in the import-
ing country only. In robustness checks available on request, we have alternatively taken the average


                                                           23
                               Table 5: World Bank Doing Business Costs to Import

                                                        PANEL A                                    PANEL B
     Dependent variable:                (log) Nominal cost (USD per container)                  (log) # of days
                                        Minimum               90th percentile         Minimum           90th percentile
                                            (1)           (2)              (3)            (1)           (2)         (3)
     F inDevjt                            0.047*        0.057           0.072*          -0.018         0.082     0.101*
                                          (1.90)       (1.19)            (1.95)         (-0.59)       (1.19)      (1.69)
     F inDevjt × ExtF ins                  0.019      0.111***           -0.010          0.006       0.117**      -0.034
                                          (0.74)       (2.96)           (-0.32)         (0.25)        (2.07)     (-0.69)
     F inDevjt × T angs                   -0.046       -0.112            -0.038      -7.9×10−5        -0.127      -0.036
                                          (-1.23)      (-1.49)          (-0.76)        (-0.002)       (-1.48)    (-0.49)
     #P artnersjst                                                     0.004***                                 0.005***
                                                                        (13.63)                                  (11.19)
     R2                                     0.60         0.51             0.57            0.43         0.48        0.52
     F -test on interaction terms (p)      0.28          0.01             0.72            0.97         0.09        0.65
                                                        PANEL C
     Dependent variable:                          (log) # of documents
                                        Minimum               90th percentile
                                            (1)           (2)              (3)
     F inDevjt                             0.017        0.012             0.017
                                          (0.81)       (0.45)            (0.66)
     F inDevjt × ExtF ins                  0.007       -0.001          -0.041**
                                          (0.36)       (-0.06)          (-2.42)
     F inDevjt × T angs                    0.006       -0.048            -0.024
                                          (0.14)       (-1.22)          (-0.61)
     #P artnersjst                                                     0.001***
                                                                         (9.25)
     R2                                     0.44         0.37              0.39
     F -test on interaction terms (p)      0.91          0.47              0.04
     Notes: This table shows the effect of an export country’s financial development on the minimum and maxi-
     mum trade costs among its export destinations. Estimates from equations (3.1), (3.2) and (3.3) are reported
     in Columns 1, 2, and 3 of each panel respectively. Financial development is measured by private credit as a
     share of GDP. Trade costs are measured by the log nominal cost per shipping container, the log number of
     days per export transaction, or the log number of documents per export transaction. The sample is restricted
     to exporter-sector-year observations with more than 5 trade partners. The number of observations (number of
     exporters) is 16,334 (78) exporters in all panels. All regressions include a constant and controls as listed in the
     text. Standard errors are clustered at the exporter level. T-statistics in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate
     statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.


of regulatory barriers in both trade partners. Encouragingly, these specifications deliver very similar
conclusions and lend further support to our interpretation.
    Lastly, we make use of the ESCAP-World Bank data on comprehensive trade costs. It provides
annual ad-valorem equivalent values for the cost of cross-border sales relative to the cost of domestic
transactions.20 The main advantage of these cost measures is that they are bilateral and broken down
into tariff and non-tariff components. On the other hand, they may not be ideally suited to our analysis
to the extent that domestic trade costs differ across countries. This caveat notwithstanding, results in
Panel D of Table 4 once again indicate that exporting in sectors more reliant on external funds benefits
more from deeper capital markets.
    Our estimates suggest that financial conditions matter less for the set of countries’ export destinations
with respect to trade costs than with respect to market size (Appendix Table A.4). For example, a one-
standard-deviation increase in private credit would raise the longest distance at which countries export
by 1-3 percentage points more in a sector at the 90th percentile by financial vulnerability, compared
to a sector at the 10th percentile. Taking both external finance dependence and asset tangibility into
account, the difference between the most and least affected industry would be 5 percentage points. These
  20 The  data are available separately for manufacturing and agriculture, and so we use the former. Since data are missing
for various years and countries, we compute an average for each country based on an interpolated series of trade costs. We
obtain qualitatively similar results if we simply take country-specific averages without interpolation.




                                                             24
economic magnitudes are approximately a sixth of those for GDP.
    In summary, it appears that no single measure of trade barriers uniquely characterizes the pecking
order of exporting. Taken collectively, however, the evidence points to financial frictions and trade costs
jointly affecting the location of foreign sales as predicted by theory.


5.3     A pecking order of market potential
    Through the lens of our model, the above results suggest that multiple factors govern firms’ choice
of export markets. We next propose that these determinants can be jointly captured with summary
measures of market potential, which indicate the relative desirability of different destinations. In this
section, we develop three such summary measures, and show that financial development affects exporters’
set of trade partners in line with the pecking order implied by these measures.
    We first consider a proxy for market potential that combines information about both consumer
demand and trade costs: the log ratio of GDP to distance. This measure is meant to concisely reflect
the basic idea that bigger and more proximate destinations are more attractive. Although it imposes
a specific functional form, we have confirmed that similar results obtain when we adopt alternative
formulations.21 Note that market size is common across all sellers to a given economy, while distance
is country-pair specific. The GDP-to-distance ratio thus allows the relative appeal of an importer to
depend on the identity of the exporter. For example, Canada may be a profitable and proximate market
for the US, but not for other exporters such as Korea, for whom Japan might be preferable.
    Using this measure of market potential, we once again record its maximum and minimum (10th
percentile) value across all destinations that exporter j services in sector s. In Panel A of Table 6, we
re-estimate our baseline specifications with these values as outcome variables. We find strong support for
the predictions of the model. As expected, all countries are able to access the markets with the greatest
export potential, but financially advanced economies go further down their hierarchy of destinations in
financially more vulnerable industries. Moreover, both interaction terms are now highly statistically
significant in Column 2, but become insignificant when we control for the number of trade partners in
Column 3. Given the patterns in Panel A of Tables 3 and 4, this suggests that taking both market size
and trade costs into account indeed provides a tighter fit between theory and data. This is not surprising,
since the correlation between GDP and bilateral distance is only 0.06 for the average exporter, and it is
the combination of both country characteristics that determines the pecking order of exporting.
    For completeness, in Panel B we perform the same analysis using the log ratio of GDP to the Doing
Business trade cost index as a summary statistic for market potential. In Panel C, we expand this to
the log ratio of GDP to the product of bilateral distance and the trade cost index. We obtain similar
results for these alternative measures as well.
    Of note, the implied economic significance of financial development for countries’ choice of trade
partners is considerably larger when we use these summary measures of market potential, than when we
separately consider market size or trade costs (Appendix Table A.4). If a country improves its financial
system by 1 standard deviation, the lowest market potential (=GDP/DB trade costs) among its export
destinations would fall by 22 percentage points more in a financially dependent sector (90th percentile)
relative to a financially less dependent sector (10th percentile). Taking both sectors’ external finance
dependence and asset tangibility into account, the spread between the most and least affected sector
would be 45 percentage points.
   21 For example, the residuals from regressing (log) importers’ GDP on (log) bilateral distance as the only regressor can

be obtained and used to proxy market potential.




                                                            25
                                         Table 6: Market Potential

                                                PANEL A                                 PANEL B
Dependent variable:                    (log) GDP/Bilateral distance          (log) GDP/DB trade cost index
                                   Maximum             10th percentile      Maximum           10th percentile
                                        (1)           (2)            (3)       (1)           (2)            (3)
F inDevjt                            0.282*         -0.072        -0.150     0.269*        -0.305       -0.386*
                                     (1.71)         (-0.36)       (-1.10)    (1.81)        (-1.09)       (-1.68)
F inDevjt × ExtF ins                  0.013       -0.540***        0.091      0.055      -0.677***       -0.032
                                     (0.33)         (-3.01)       (0.66)     (0.62)        (-3.72)       (-0.20)
F inDevjt × T angs                   -0.060         0.815*         0.433     -0.220       1.157**       0.767**
                                    (-0.49)         (1.89)        (1.47)     (-0.87)       (2.34)        (2.13)
#P artnersjst                                                   -0.021***                              -0.022***
                                                                 (-16.14)                               (-12.31)
R2                                    0.83            0.60          0.68       0.26          0.53         0.81
F -test on interaction terms (p)      0.89          <0.01           0.18       0.69        <0.01           0.11
                                                 PANEL C                                PANEL D
Dependent variable:                 (log) GDP/(Bilateral distance ×           (log) # of exporters by sector
                                            DB trade cost index)
                                   Maximum             10th percentile      Maximum           10th percentile
                                        (1)           (2)            (3)       (1)            (2)           (3)
F inDevjt                            0.310*         -0.212       -0.315*      0.032         0.008        -0.012
                                     (1.80)         (-0.82)       (-1.75)    (1.49)         (0.09)       (-0.15)
F inDevjt × ExtF ins                  0.013       -0.700***        0.126      0.008       -0.150**        0.003
                                     (0.27)         (-3.11)       (0.76)     (0.54)        (-2.46)       (0.06)
F inDevjt × T angs                   -0.077        1.211**       0.712**     -0.051         0.128         0.035
                                    (-0.48)         (2.27)        (2.07)     (-1.61)        (0.93)       (0.29)
#P artnersjst                                                   -0.028***                              -0.005***
                                                                 (-16.88)                               (-10.49)
R2                                    0.81            0.62          0.69      0.87           0.71          0.73
F -test on interaction terms (p)      0.89          <0.01           0.07      0.28           0.05          0.96
                                                 PANEL E                                PANEL F
Dependent variable:                    (log) Average # of exporters            Fixed effect coefficient from
                                               across sectors                   auxiliary probit regression
                                   Maximum             10th percentile      Maximum           10th percentile
                                        (1)           (2)            (3)       (1)            (2)           (3)
F inDevjt                             0.035         -0.026        -0.044      0.059         -0.038       -0.059
                                     (1.46)         (-0.39)       (-0.72)    (1.48)        (-0.49)       (-0.85)
F inDevjt × ExtF ins                  0.007       -0.191***       -0.045      0.011      -0.201***       -0.033
                                     (0.52)         (-4.07)       (-1.07)    (0.48)        (-3.84)       (-0.69)
F inDevjt × T angs                   -0.028        0.218**        0.130*     -0.050        0.241**       0.140*
                                    (-0.77)         (2.41)        (1.94)     (-0.79)        (2.34)       (1.85)
#P artnersjst                                                   -0.005***                              -0.006***
                                                                 (-12.33)                               (-12.69)
R2                                    0.17            0.54          0.59      0.88           0.82          0.84
F -test on interaction terms (p)      0.74          <0.01           0.12      0.73          <0.01          0.17
Notes: This table shows the effect of an export country’s financial development on the maximum and min-
imum market potential among its export destinations. Estimates from equations (3.1), (3.2) and (3.3) are
reported in Columns 1, 2, and 3 of each panel respectively. Financial development is measured by private
credit as a share of GDP. Market potential is measured by the log of GDP / bilateral distance, the log of
GDP / World Bank Doing Business Report trade cost index, the log GDP / (bilateral distance × World Bank
Doing Business Report trade cost index), the log number of countries selling to a given destination-sector,
the log average number of countries selling to a given destination across sectors, or a destination fixed effect
from equation (5.1). The sample is restricted to exporter-sector-year observations with more than 5 trade
partners. The number of observations (number of exporters) is 16,332 (78) in Panels A to C and 16,334 (78)
in Panels D to F. All regressions include a constant and controls as listed in the text. Standard errors are
clustered at the exporter level. T-statistics in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at
the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.




                                                       26
    We next take an agnostic approach to what exact factors affect the relative attractiveness of different
foreign markets. To do so, we rely on the principle of revealed preferences: The more popular a given
destination is, the more profitable it must be. We thus count the number of countries exporting to
importer i, #T Pist . We obtain this count separately for each sector s since trade conditions (such as
demand and cost structure) could vary not only across destinations, but also across sectors. On the
other hand, by construction #T Pist imposes a hierarchy of markets that is shared by all exporters.
    This indicator of market potential delivers more evidence in support of our model. In Panel D, we
replace the outcome variable with the log maximum and minimum (10th percentile) values of #T Pist
across the countries to which j exports to in sector s. In Panel E, we instead use the log number
of importer i’s trade partners averaged across sectors s. In both cases, we find patterns consistent
with financial development allowing exporters to go further down the pecking order of destinations in
financially vulnerable industries.
    Recall from the model that whether bilateral trade occurs depends on both characteristics of the
seller (productivity distribution, wages, trade costs, financial development) and of the buyer (aggregate
demand, trade costs, price index). The number of countries j that sell to i thus reflects how the
combination of exporter and importer factors affect the probability of a trade link between each j and
i. To isolate the contribution of importer-specific determinants without specifying their precise nature,
we finally estimate an auxiliary probit regression with importer fixed effects and examine the relative
magnitude of their coefficients.
    Formally, let Tijst be a binary variable equal to 1 if j exports to i in sector s in year t, and zero
otherwise. Assuming a normally distributed error term, the conditional probability of this trade link is:

                                           Pr(Tijst = 1) = Φ(δjt + δit + δst )                                           (5.1)

where Φ is the c.d.f. of the standard normal distribution, and δjt , δit and δst indicate exporter-year,
importer-year and sector-year fixed effects.22 The coefficients δit give a summary measure of the ease and
attractiveness of entering market i in year t. Larger positive coefficients on δit are associated with more
popular destinations. We perform the estimation separately for each year since economic conditions may
vary over time.
    Using our estimates of δit in Panel F of Table 6, we record highly statistically and economically
significant results in line with the model’s predictions. We estimate that a one-standard-deviation im-
provement in financial conditions would allow exporters to add 5 more countries down the pecking order
of destinations in an industry highly reliant on external finance (90th percentile) relative to a less de-
pendent industry (10th percentile). Accounting for the variation in both sector measures of financial
vulnerability implies a differential impact of 9 countries between the most and least affected sectors
(Appendix Table A.4).23 Since these fixed effects δit constitute our most agnostic ranking of export
destinations by relative market potential, they are our preferred summary statistic in the remainder of
the empirical analysis.
   22 We estimate this regression on the full sample of 164 exporting and 175 importing nations in the trade dataset, since

no control variables are required. This arguably provides the most complete picture of global trade patterns and their
underlying determinants. Very similar results hold if we instead restrict our attention to the 78 export countries with
sufficient data to enter our baseline regressions above.
   23 Since it is difficult to directly interpret the point estimates in regressions with δ as the measure of market potential,
                                                                                           it
we calculate these comparative statics using the δit -based ranking of countries in Panel D of Table 8 below. This ranking
of destinations lends itself to a more natural interpretation.




                                                              27
                        Table 7: Alternative Measures of Financial Development

                                               PANEL A                                 PANEL B
F inDevjt measure:                     Stock market turnover ratio        Stock market value traded-to-GDP
                                   Maximum           10th percentile      Maximum            10th percentile
                                      (1)           (2)            (3)        (1)            (2)           (3)
F inDevjt                           -0.004       -0.041*        -0.018     -0.0003         -0.030        0.011
                                    (-0.32)       (-1.78)       (-0.76)     (-0.02)       (-0.59)       (0.28)
F inDevjt × ExtF ins               -0.021**     -0.125***       -0.027      -0.010        -0.094*        0.017
                                    (-2.31)       (-5.36)       (-1.23)     (-0.92)       (-1.88)       (0.40)
F inDevjt × T angs                   0.034       0.182**         0.054      -0.010         0.206*        0.010
                                    (0.81)        (2.65)        (0.78)      (-0.25)        (1.70)       (0.10)
#P artnersjst                                                 -0.005***                               -0.005***
                                                               (-13.08)                                (-13.31)
R2                                    0.92          0.85          0.87       0.92           0.85          0.87
F -test on interaction terms (p)     0.08         <0.01           0.34       0.50           0.12          0.86
                                               PANEL C                                 PANEL D
F inDevj measure:                     Risk of contract repudiation                Risk of expropriation
                                   Maximum           10th percentile      Maximum            10th percentile
                                      (1)           (2)            (3)        (1)            (2)           (3)
F inDevj × ExtF ins                 -0.002      -0.065***       -0.010      -0.005      -0.052***        0.011
                                    (-0.19)       (-3.91)       (-0.73)     (-0.58)       (-2.82)       (0.71)
F inDevj × T angs                   -0.033        0.078*         0.016      -0.001        0.111**        0.055
                                    (-0.95)       (1.74)        (0.47)      (-0.03)        (2.03)       (1.23)
#P artnersjst                                                 -0.006***                               -0.006***
                                                               (-12.74)                                (-12.78)
R2                                    0.92          0.84          0.87       0.92           0.84          0.87
F -test on interaction terms (p)     0.37         <0.01           0.70       0.70           0.02          0.30
                                               PANEL E                                 PANEL F
F inDevjt measure:                        Accounting standards             Private credit (extended controls)
                                   Maximum           10th percentile      Maximum            10th percentile
                                      (1)           (2)            (3)        (1)            (2)           (3)
F inDevjt                                                                    0.029         -0.069       -0.073
                                                                            (1.37)        (-0.84)       (-1.05)
F inDevjt × ExtF ins                -0.106*      -0.393**      -0.039        0.019       -0.170**       -0.032
                                    (-1.73)       (-2.13)      (-0.25)      (0.66)        (-2.62)       (-0.61)
F inDevjt × T angs                   0.026         0.517        0.150       -0.072        0.322**      0.180**
                                     (0.11)       (1.52)       (0.40)       (-1.11)        (2.52)       (2.16)
#P artnersjst                                                -0.006***                                -0.006***
                                                              (-11.66)                                 (-12.71)
R2                                    0.97         0.88          0.91        0.92           0.85          0.87
F -test on interaction terms (p)      0.22         0.09         0.90         0.50           0.01          0.10
Notes: This table shows that the effect of export countries’ financial development on their choice of export
destinations is robust to alternative measures of financial development. Estimates from equations (3.1), (3.2)
and (3.3) are reported in Columns 1, 2, and 3 of each panel respectively. Financial development is measured
by the stock market turnover ratio, stock market value traded as a share of GDP, the risk of contract repu-
diation, the risk of expropriation, or accounting standards. Market potential is measured by a destination
fixed effect from equation (5.1). The sample is restricted to exporter-sector-year observations with more than
5 trade partners. The number of observations (number of exporters) from Panels A to F are: 12,687 (55),
13,224 (56), 12,091 (42), 12,091 (42), 9,962 (34), and 11,821 (42). All regressions include a constant and con-
trols as listed in the text. Standard errors are clustered at the exporter level. T-statistics in parentheses.
***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.




                                                      28
                                           Table 8: Specification Checks

                                                    PANEL A                                     PANEL B
Dependent variable:                       Fixed effect coefficient from               Fixed effect coefficient from
                                           auxiliary probit regression                 auxiliary probit regression
F inV uls measure:                        External finance dependence                       Asset tangibility
                                     Maximum                10th percentile      Maximum             10th percentile
                                          (1)              (2)           (3)         (1)            (2)             (3)
F inDevjt                               0.044             0.037        -0.016       0.062         -0.094         -0.068
                                        (1.26)           (0.52)        (-0.26)     (1.51)         (-1.24)       (-1.00)
F inDevjt × F inV uls                    0.011         -0.204***       -0.034      -0.051        0.258**        0.142*
                                        (0.50)           (-3.86)       (-0.72)    (-0.79)         (2.46)         (1.87)
#P artnersjst                                                        -0.006***                                -0.006***
                                                                      (-12.68)                                 (-13.08)
R2                                       0.88              0.82          0.84       0.88           0.82            0.84
                                                    PANEL C                                     PANEL D
Dependent variable:                       Fixed effect coefficient from            Ranking of fixed effect coefficient
                                           auxiliary probit regression              from auxiliary probit regression
                                   90th percentile             Minimum           Minimum             90th percentile
                                          (1)              (2)           (3)         (1)            (2)             (3)
F inDevjt                             0.117**             0.143         0.102      -1.126          2.620          4.216
                                        (2.04)           (1.19)        (1.07)     (-1.58)         (0.48)         (0.85)
F inDevjt × ExtF ins                   -0.085*         -0.354***       -0.025      -0.283       14.958***         2.182
                                       (-1.67)           (-5.27)       (-0.36)    (-0.75)         (3.87)         (0.62)
F inDevjt × T angs                      0.010           0.356**         0.157       0.770       -19.607**      -11.878*
                                        (0.09)           (2.41)        (1.45)      (0.63)         (-2.36)       (-1.95)
#P artnersjst                                                        -0.011***                                 0.428***
                                                                      (-15.93)                                  (12.44)
R2                                       0.84              0.76          0.80       0.09           0.54            0.59
F -test on interaction terms (p)         0.19            <0.01           0.35       0.71          <0.01            0.15
                                                    PANEL E                                     PANEL F
Dependent variable:                       Fixed effect coefficient from               Fixed effect coefficient from
                                            auxiliary logit regression                  auxiliary LPM regression
                                     Maximum                10th percentile      Maximum             10th percentile
                                          (1)              (2)           (3)         (1)            (2)             (3)
F inDevjt                               0.085            -0.054        -0.092       0.014         -0.012         -0.016
                                        (1.21)           (-0.40)       (-0.74)     (1.48)         (-0.71)       (-1.03)
F inDevjt × ExtF ins                     0.020         -0.369***       -0.066       0.002       -0.045***        -0.012
                                        (0.50)           (-3.81)       (-0.75)     (0.45)         (-4.25)       (-1.22)
F inDevjt × T angs                      -0.081          0.466**       0.282**      -0.012        0.048**        0.028*
                                       (-0.69)           (2.43)        (2.02)     (-0.81)         (2.19)         (1.72)
#P artnersjst                                                        -0.010***                                -0.001***
                                                                       (-2.41)                                 (-12.59)
R2                                       0.84              0.79          0.81       0.92           0.88            0.89
F -test on interaction terms (p)         0.78            <0.01           0.12       0.72          <0.01            0.15
                                                   PANEL G                                      PANEL H
Dependent variable:                       Fixed effect coefficient from          Fixed effect coefficient from auxiliary
                                     auxiliary probit regression (pooled)          probit regression (by sector-year)
                                     Maximum                10th percentile      Maximum             10th percentile
                                          (1)              (2)           (3)         (1)            (2)             (3)
F inDevjt                              0.068*            -0.066        -0.086       0.039         -0.016         -0.042
                                        (1.79)           (-0.95)       (-1.32)     (0.95)         (-0.17)       (-0.49)
F inDevjt × ExtF ins                     0.009         -0.185***       -0.031       0.046       -0.280***        -0.075
                                        (0.40)           (-3.86)       (-0.70)     (1.41)         (-4.51)       (-1.45)
F inDevjt × T angs                      -0.047          0.224**        0.131*      -0.086        0.265**          0.140
                                       (-0.74)           (2.32)        (1.80)     (-1.49)         (2.11)         (1.34)
#P artnersjst                                                        -0.005***                                -0.007***
                                                                      (-11.79)                                 (-13.78)
R2                                       0.15              0.52          0.57       0.90           0.76            0.79
F -test on interaction terms (p)         0.76            <0.01           0.18       0.25          <0.01            0.14
Notes: This table shows that the effect of export countries’ financial development on their choice of export desti-
nations is robust to alternative estimation methods. Estimates from equations (3.1), (3.2) and (3.3) are reported
in Columns 1, 2, and 3 of each panel respectively. Financial development is measured by private credit as a share
of GDP. Market potential is measured by a destination fixed effect from equation (5.1). The sample is restricted
to exporter-sector-year observations with more than 5 trade partners. The number of observations (number of ex-
porters) is 16,334 (78) in all panels. All regressions include a constant and controls as listed in the text. Standard
errors are clustered at the exporter level. T-statistics in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.



                                                           29
5.4     Robustness
    We conclude by showing that our empirical findings survive a series of specification checks that
reinforce our conclusions. We report these robustness tests using the fixed effects from the auxiliary
probit regression, but qualitatively similar patterns hold for the other measures we have employed as
well.
    Our analysis has relied on the amount of private credit in an economy as a signal of financial market
development. In Table 7, we first confirm that other indicators of financial sector activity (also from
Beck et al. 2000) deliver comparable findings. In Panel A, we consider the stock market turnover
ratio, constructed as the value of total shares traded divided by stock market capitalization. While
private credit reflects firms’ use of debt financing, value traded captures the availability and liquidity of
equity capital. In Column 2, we find that active stock markets help exporters in reaching less attractive
destinations, and this is especially true in financially vulnerable sectors. (Although there is a statistically
significant effect present for the largest market as well in Column 1, it is much weaker in comparison.)
Similar patterns emerge in Panel B, where we study stock market value traded as a share of GDP. This
suggests that loan access and stock issuance are both relevant to trade activity, presumably because they
provide alternative sources of funding.24
    Private credit and stock market activity are outcome-based measures that reflect the actual availabil-
ity and use of financial capital in a country. The health of the financial system in turn depends on the
underlying institutions that support financial contracts. For this reason, the prior literature has exploited
different institutional measures to gauge the variation in financial development across nations. As Panels
C, D, and E demonstrate, our results are qualitatively the same when we follow this strategy: Using the
risk of contract repudiation, the risk of expropriation, or accounting standards instead of private credit
delivers similar patterns for exporters’ choice of trade partners.25
    We further verify that our measure of financial development does not simply pick up the strength of
the broader institutional environment. To do so, we expand the set of control variables to include the
interactions of rule of law and corruption with each of the two sector indicators of financial vulnerability.26
Panel F shows that this does not affect the coefficients of interest.
    We next ensure that our findings are not driven by specific functional form assumptions. In Panels
A and B of Table 8, we include only one interaction term at a time. The magnitude and statistical
significance of the point estimates are barely affected, consistent with the low correlation between the
two sector measures. This supports the idea that ExtF ins and T angs reflect separate dimensions of
financial vulnerability that are both important in practice.
    In the rest of Table 8, we consider a series of other perturbations to the baseline functional form that
leave our results unchanged or stronger. In Panel C, we set the outcome variables equal to the 90th
percentile and the minimum value of market potential across a country’s export destinations, instead of
   24 In unreported results available on request, we have found that the size of the stock market itself (measured by stock

market capitalization divided by GDP) does not affect exporters’ trade partners systematically. This is consistent with
prior evidence in the literature that stock market activity can sometimes be a more informative measure of financial sector
development than stock market size (c.f. Manova 2008). We have also studied total liquid liabilities (the sum of currency
in circulation, demand- and interest-bearing liabilities of all banks and non-bank financial intermediaries), divided by GDP.
This ratio provides an alternative index of financial depth and of the overall size of the financial intermediary sector. The
results are in line with our other findings, though the coefficients are less precisely estimated.
   25 The indices for the risk of contract repudiation or expropriation range from 0 to 10, while the rating of accounting

standards varies in the unit interval. All three measures come from La Porta et al. (1998), and are available for a smaller
sample of 34-42 export countries. Since they are time-invariant, the main effect of financial development in these regressions
is subsumed by the exporter country fixed effects.
   26 These two measures also come from La Porta et al. (1998), do not vary over time, and are available for 42 of the

export countries in the sample.




                                                             30
                                  .2
 Coefficient on FinDev x ExtFin




                                                                                                   Coefficient on FinDev x Tang
                                                                                                                                  .6
                                  0




                                                                                                                                  .4
                                  −.2




                                                                                                                                  .2
                                  −.4




                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                  −.2
                                  −.6




                                        100     80        60        40       20           0                                             100     80        60        40       20           0
                                          Distribution of Market Potential (Percentile)                                                   Distribution of Market Potential (Percentile)

                                                            (a)                                                                                            (b)

Fig. 6: This figure shows the effect of an export country’s financial development on market potential at the 100th, 95th,
90th, ..., 10th, 5th, and 0th percentile of the distribution of market potential among its export destinations. Plots (a) and
(b) present coefficient estimates for F inDevjt × ExtF ins and F inDevjt × T angs , respectively, from estimating equation
(3.1) for each of these 21 percentiles as the outcome variable. The dashed lines correspond to the 95% confidence interval
around these coefficient estimates. Financial development is measured by private credit as a share of GDP. Market potential
is measured by a destination fixed effect from equation (5.1). Coefficients at the 100th percentile (maximum) correspond
to coefficients in Table 6 Panel F Column 1, and at the 10th percentile to Column 2.



the maximum and the 10th percentile as we have done so far. In Panel D, we study importers’ rank
based on their fixed effects from the auxiliary probit regression, instead of the value of those fixed effects.
In Panels E and F, we estimate the first-stage equation (5.1) either with logit or with a linear probability
model, instead of with probit. In Panel G, we run the first-stage probit in the pooled panel for 1985-1995
with year dummies, instead of year-by-year. This imposes time-invariant importer fixed effects, such
that the hierarchy of destinations is stable over this period. Conversely, in Panel H we allow the pecking
order to vary flexibly both across time and across sectors, by estimating the first stage separately for
each sector-year pair.
    We next conduct a more stringent test of our model’s predictions. If countries follow a strict pecking
order of exporting, we should observe nestedness: no country should enter the Nth most popular market
unless it also serves the (N-1)th most popular market. We have so far provided indirect evidence for
nestedness by finding significant coefficients in equation (3.2) but not in (3.1) and (3.3). In particular,
these results imply a one-to-one mapping between an exporter’s number of destinations and the minimum
market potential among them, such that all destinations with higher market potential must also be served
with no gaps in the pecking order. As a more direct test of nestedness, we now estimate specification
(3.1) for 21 values from the distribution of market potential across an exporter’s trade partners: 100th
percentile (=maximum), 95th percentile, 90th percentile, ... , 10th percentile, 5th percentile, and 0th
percentile (=minimum). For each of these 21 regressions, we record the coefficients on the two interactions
of interest, and plot them against the percentile corresponding to the outcome variable.27
    Figure 6 displays patterns strongly indicative of nestedness. With perfect nestedness, financial devel-
opment should not affect the maximum market potential among a country’s destinations differentially
across sectors with different levels of financial vulnerability. As we have already seen, the estimated
coefficients are indeed 0 for both sector measures when the outcome is the 100th percentile of market
potential. As we move right along the horizontal axis from the 100th to the 0th percentile, the line
   27 Bustos et al. (2012) employ other econometric tests of nestedness that are not readily applicable to difference-in-

differences estimation. We leave the application of their methodology to the study of export-market nestedness with
financial frictions to future work.




                                                                                              31
generally slopes down for external finance dependence and generally slopes up for asset tangibility. In
other words, financial development allows countries to smoothly go further down their pecking order of
destinations in financially more vulnerable sectors, relative to financially less vulnerable sectors. More-
over, any non-monotonicities in the precise point estimates disappear when we take into account the
95-percent confidence interval around these estimates.
    Figure 6 indicates that the effects of financial development become statistically significant around and
below the 70th percentile of the distribution of export destinations by market potential. How important
are these destinations to countries’ aggregate exports? Our difference-in-differences identification strat-
egy prevents us from calculating implied magnitudes for effects at the country level. Summary statistics
nevertheless suggest that although the distribution of trade flows across destinations is very skewed, the
contribution of destinations outside the top deciles is not trivial. Appendix Figure A.2 plots the share of
exports (summed across sectors) going to each of ten deciles of destinations grouped by market potential,
averaged across exporting countries in 1995. The top, second and third deciles capture respectively about
65%, 18% and 7% of the average country’s exports. Very similar patterns obtain whether we rank all
potential destinations based on our preferred measure of market potential or order actual destinations
served separately for each exporter. Expansion into new markets abroad can also add substantially to
export growth within countries over time. We identify the new destinations that each exporter in our
data entered between 1985 and 1995. For the average country, sales to new markets contribute 10.9%
to total exports in 1995 (standard deviation 16.7%) and 14.5% to total export growth between 1985 and
1995 (standard deviation 80.3%).
    Finally, we have performed sensitivity checks to address potential concerns with reporting errors in
trade values (available on request). While classical measurement error would introduce noise and bias our
results downwards, a particular form of non-classical measurement error might bias our results upwards:
If very low trade flows are systematically under-reported, the pecking order of countries would not be
affected, but the coefficients in regressions for the minimum market potential might be overestimated.
This might arise for two reasons. First, the raw data report only positive bilateral trade flows, in
thousands of dollars. Hence the lowest observed value is $1,000, and any unobserved exporter-importer-
sector triplet is assumed to conduct zero trade. Our results, however, remain robust when we set to 0
all observed positive trade flows below the 1st percentile ($5,000) or below $100,000.
    Second, less developed nations may be more likely to misreport trade flows. Note that all of our
specifications already control for the exporter’s level of overall development (GDP per capita), and
Panel F of Table 7 shows that our findings also hold conditioning on the exporter’s corruption level. We
have additionally checked that our results survive when, in the first-stage auxiliary probit regression,
we drop origin and destination countries with GDP per capita below the 5th percentile, or exporter-
importer-sector triplets with annual export growth above 100% that might signal misreporting. We have
also estimated a weighted first-stage probit regression, where we weighted observations by the exporter’s
GDP per capita or anti-corruption index.
    The stability of the results across these robustness checks bolsters our conclusion that countries’ level
of financial development is an important determinant of their export behavior, and the range of markets
they choose to service in particular.




                                                     32
6    Conclusion
    This paper establishes that exporters follow a pecking order of destinations, but financial frictions
disrupt their decision to enter foreign markets. We develop a theoretical model to illustrate how firms
add destinations in decreasing order of profitability, determined by market size and trade costs. Credit
constraints limit firms’ access to financial resources and prevent them from entering all markets they could
serve in the first best. This distortion is alleviated in exporting countries with better-functioning capital
markets. As a result, financially advanced economies export to more destinations by going further down
the pecking order. This effect is especially pronounced in financially vulnerable sectors characterized by
high external finance dependence and low asset tangibility.
    We confirm these theoretical predictions empirically by estimating model-consistent relationships
between characteristics of exporters’ destination countries and credit conditions at home. Using aggregate
bilateral trade data, we analyze how the maximum and minimum values of market potential amongst an
exporter’s trade partners vary with exporters’ financial development and sectors’ financial vulnerability.
In the process, we develop a model-consistent hierarchy of destinations based on observed market size
and trade costs, as well as on unobserved market potential inferred from actual trade links. Our findings
are robust to a series of specification checks and variable measurement.
    Our results imply that financial institutions importantly affect the number and identity of countries’
trade partners. This adds to prior evidence in the literature that international trade linkages have a wide
range of economic repercussions that crucially depend on countries’ characteristics, such as overall level
of development and role in global goods and capital markets. A promising direction for future work lies
at the intersection of these two lines of research. By improving domestic financial conditions, countries
can expand their set of export destinations and foster entry into new locations. A key question for
policy makers in developing economies is how this would shape economic growth, volatility, cross-border
productivity spillovers, and the transmission of shocks across nations.


References
Amiti, M. and D. E. Weinstein (2011). Exports and financial shocks. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics 126 (4), 1841–1877.
Armenter, R. and M. Koren (2014). A balls-and-bins model of trade. American Economic Review 104 (7),
  2127–2151.
Arvis, J.-F., Y. Duval, B. Shepherd, and C. Utoktham (2013). Trade costs in the developing world: 1995
  - 2010. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6309 .
Baxter, M. and M. A. Kouparitsas (2005). Determinants of business cycle comovement: a robust analysis.
  Journal of Monetary Economics 52, 113–157.
Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, and R. Levine (2000). A new database on the structure and development
  of the financial sector. World Bank Economic Review 14 (3), 597–605.
Berman, N. and J. Héricourt (2010). Financial factors and the margins of trade: Evidence from cross-
  country firm-level data. Journal of Development Economics 93 (2), 206–217.
Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2007). Firms in international trade.
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 21 (3), 105–130.

Bernard, A. B., S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2011). Multiproduct firms and trade liberalization.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (3), 1271–1318.



                                                     33
Braun, M. (2003). Financial contractibtility and asset hardness. University of California- Los Angeles
  mimeo.
Bricongne, J.-C., L. Fontagné, G. Gaulier, D. Taglioni, and V. Vicard (2012). Firms and the global
  crisis: French exports in the turmoil. Journal of International Economics 87 (1), 134–146.

Burstein, A., C. Kurz, and L. Tesar (2008). Trade, production sharing, and the international transmission
  of business cycles. Journal of Monetary Economics 55, 775–795.
Bustos, S., C. Gomez, R. Hausmann, and C. A. Hidalgo (2012). The dynamics of nestedness predicts
  the evolution of industrial ecosystems. PLoS One 7 (11), e49393.

Caselli, F. (2005). Accounting for cross-country income differences. In P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (Eds.),
  Handbook of Economic Growth, pp. 679–741. Elsevier.
Chor, D. and K. Manova (2012). Off the cliff and back? Credit conditions and international trade during
  the global financial crisis. Journal of International Economics 87, 117–133.

Clark, T. E. and E. van Wincoop (2001). Borders and business cycles. Journal of International Eco-
  nomics 55, 59–85.
de Loecker, J. (2007). Do exports generate higher productivity? Evidence from Slovenia. Journal of
  International Economics 73 (1), 69–98.
Dhingra, S. (2013). Trading away wide brands for cheap brands. American Economic Review 103 (6),
 2554–2584.
Eaton, J. and S. Kortum (2002). Technology, geography, and trade. Econometrica 70 (5), 1741–1779.
Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and F. Kramarz (2011a). An anatomy of international trade: Evidence from
  French firms. Econometrica 79 (5), 1453–1498.
Eaton, J., S. Kortum, B. Neiman, and J. Romalis (2011b). Trade and the global recession. NBER
  Working Paper No. 16666 .
Feenstra, R. C. (2000). World trade flows, 1980-1997. Center for International Data, University of
  California Davis.
Feenstra, R. C., Z. Li, and M. Yu (forthcoming). Exports and credit constraints under incomplete
  information: Theory and evidence from China. Review of Economics and Statistics.
Foley, F. C. and K. Manova (forthcoming). International trade, multinational activity, and corporate
  finance. Annual Review of Economics.
Frankel, J. A. and A. K. Rose (1998). The endogeneity of the optimum currency area criteria. The
  Economic Journal 108 (449), 1009–1025.
Goldberg, P. K., A. K. Khandelwal, N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova (2010). Imported intermediate inputs
 and domestic product growth: Evidence from India. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (4), 1727–
 1767.

Haveman, J.   Jon Haveman’s industry concordances. http://www.macalester.edu/research/
  economics/PAGE/HAVEMAN/Trade.Resources/tradeconcordances.html. Accessed: 05/09/2014.
Helpman, E., M. J. Melitz, and Y. Rubinstein (2008). Estimating trade flows: Trading partners and
  trading volumes. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2), 441–487.
Kali, R., F. Méndez, and J. Reyes (2007). Trade structure and economic growth. The Journal of
 International Trade and Economic Development 16 (2), 245–269.
La Porta, R., F. López-de Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1998). Law and finance. Journal of
  Political Economy 106 (6), 1113–1155.


                                                   34
Manova, K. (2008). Credit constraints, equity market liberalizations and international trade. Journal of
 International Economics 76, 33–47.
Manova, K. (2013). Credit constraints, heterogeneous firms, and international trade. Review of Economic
 Studies 80, 711–744.

Manova, K., S.-J. Wei, and Z. Zhang (forthcoming). Firm exports and multinational activity under
 credit constraints. Review of Economics and Statistics.
Manova, K. and Z. Zhang (2012). Export prices across firms and destinations. Quarterly Journal of
 Economics 127 (1), 379–436.

Mayer, T., M. J. Melitz, and G. I. P. Ottaviano (2014). Market size, competition, and the product mix
 of exporters. American Economic Review 104 (2), 495–536.
Melitz, M. J. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry pro-
 ductivity. Econometrica 71 (6), 1695–1725.

Melitz, M. J. and G. I. P. Ottaviano (2008). Market size, trade, and productivity. Review of Economic
 Studies 75, 295–316.
Minetti, R. and S. C. Zhu (2011). Credit constraints and firm export: Microeconomic evidence from
 Italy. Journal of International Economics 83 (2), 109–125.
Muûls, M. (2008). Exporters and credit constraints: a firm-level approach. London School of Economics
 mimeo.
Novy, D. (2013). Gravity redux: measuring international trade costs with panel data. Economic In-
  quiry 51 (1), 101–121.
Rodrik, D. (2005). Growth strategies. In P. Aghion and S. Durlauf (Eds.), Handbook of Economic
 Growth, pp. 967–1014. Elsevier.
Verhoogen, E. (2008). Trade, quality upgrading, and wage inequality in the Mexican manufacturing
  sector. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (2), 489–530.




                                                  35
Appendix

                                   Table A.1: Export Destinations, Growth, and Volatility

Dependent variable:                    ∆(Exports)       σ(∆(Exports))         ∆(Exports)       ∆(GDPpc)         σ(∆(GDPpc))   ∆(GDPpc)
                                           (1)                (2)                   (3)            (4)                (5)         (6)
(log) # of export destinations1985      5.985**            -0.149**           11.851***          1.231*            -0.019*     2.113**
                                         (2.60)             (-2.34)              (6.21)          (1.74)            (-1.72)      (2.45)
(log) total exports1985                  -0.747             -0.010             -1.208***         0.027              -0.001      -0.042
                                         (-1.15)            (-0.53)              (-2.67)         (0.13)            (-0.33)     (-0.22)
∆(# of export destinations)                                                     1.772***                                        0.266*
                                                                                 (6.34)                                         (1.81)
R2                                        0.19               0.29                  0.44              0.17           0.24         0.21
Notes: ∆(x) and σ(∆(x)) refer to the mean and standard deviation of the growth rate of x between 1986-1995. N = 90 ex-
porters in all regressions. All regressions include a constant term. Heteroskedastic robust standard errors used. T-statistics in
parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.



                               Table A.2: Correlations for Variables in Tables 1 and 2

                          PANEL A- Importers
                          Variable                                1           2         3        4          5
                          1. Total imports                        —
                          2. Average # of partners               0.79         —
                          3. GDP                                0.86         0.60      —
                          4. GDP per capita                     0.63         0.80     0.40      —
                          5. Trade cost index                   -0.34        -0.61    -0.22    -0.63        —
                          PANEL B- Exporters
                          Variable                                1           2         3        4          5
                          1. Total exports                        —
                          2. Average # of partners               0.77          —
                          3. Private credit                      0.63         0.78      —
                          4. Max. of export partners’ GDP       0.24         0.61      0.49     —
                          5. 10th percentile of distr. of       -0.29        -0.56    -0.47    -0.63        —
                             export partners’ GDP
                          Notes: 104 countries in Panel A, 107 in Panel B.



                               Table A.3: Financial Development and Trade Activity

                                                       PANEL A                               PANEL B
                                                  At least 1 partner                   More than 5 partners
                 Dependent variable:        (log) Exports           # TP          (log) Exports           # TP
                                                   (1)                (2)               (1)                 (2)
                 F inDevjt                       0.150              -2.227             0.229              -3.732
                                                 (0.57)            (-0.46)            (0.70)             (-0.58)
                 F inDevjt × ExtF ins          1.564***          41.942***           1.356***           29.872***
                                                 (8.31)            (13.44)            (4.38)              (5.08)
                 F inDevjt × T angs             -1.171*          -17.045**           -1.680**            -18.074
                                                (-1.89)            (-2.12)            (-2.06)            (-1.53)
                 Controls                          log(GDPjt ) and                log(GDPjt ), K/L, H/L, N/L,
                                                  j, s, t fixed effects            log(GDP P Cjt ), interactions
                                                                                       and j, s, t fixed effects
                 R2                              0.82               0.90                0.80               0.88
                 Notes: # T P refers to the number of trade partners of the exporter in each sector.
                 The measure of financial development is private credit. The unit of observation is at
                 the exporter-sector-year level. The sample is restricted to observations with at least
                 1 trade partner in Panel A and more than 5 trade partners in B. The number of ob-
                 servations (number of exporters) is 26,900 (107) in Panel A and 16,334 (78) in Panel
                 B. Panel B controls are the same as those listed in the text. Standard errors are
                 clustered at the exporter level. T-statistics in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate
                 statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.




                                                              36
                                                                        Bolivia                                                                                                                                    Bolivia
                                  60




                                                                                                                                                                           30
                                                                                                       .5
       # of export destinations




                                                                                                                                                     export destinations
                                                                                                       .4




                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                  50




                                                                                                                                                       Change in # of
                                                                                                             Private Credit
                                                                                                       .3




                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                  40




                                                                                                       .2




                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                  30




                                                                                      # export dest.   .1




                                                                                                                                                                           −10
                                  20




                                                                                      Private credit
                                                                                                                                                                                   −.5                     0                 .5        1
                                                                                                       0



                                      1985                              1990                      1995                                                                                                External Finance Dependence

                                                                         (a)                                                                                                                                   (b)

                                                                        China                                                                                                                                      China
                                                                                                                                                                           150
                                                                                                       .85
                                  160
       # of export destinations




                                                                                                                                                     export destinations
                                  140




                                                                                                                                                       Change in # of
                                                                                                                                                                           100
                                                                                                             Private Credit
                                                                                                       .8
                                  120




                                                                                                                                                                           50
                                                                                                       .75
                                  100




                                                                                      # export dest.
                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                      Private credit
                                  80




                                                                                                       .7




                                                                                                                                                                                   −.5                     0                 .5        1
                                      1985                              1990                      1995                                                                                                External Finance Dependence

                                                                         (c)                                                                                                                                   (d)

                                                                          Indonesia                                                                                                                                   Indonesia
                                                               140




                                                                                                                              .5




                                                                                                                                                                                           80
                                    # of export destinations




                                                                                                                                                                     export destinations
                                                               130




                                                                                                                                                                       Change in # of
                                                                                                                              .4




                                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                   Private Credit
                                                               120




                                                                                                                                                                                           40
                                                                                                                              .3




                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                               110




                                                                                                                              .2




                                                                                          # export dest.
                                                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                                                          Private credit
                                                               100




                                                                                                                              .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                −.5            0                  .5       1
                                                                 1985          1990                    1995                                                                                              External Finance Dependence

                                                                               (e)                                                                                                                                   (f)

Fig. A.1: For each country (Bolivia, China, and Indonesia), we plot the number of export destinations and financial
development (private credit) from 1985 to 1995 (left side), and the change in the number of export destinations from 1985
to 1995 by industry against industries’ external finance dependence (right side).




                                                                                                                                                    37
                                                                         Mexico                                                                                                                                     Mexico
                                   130




                                                                                                        .35




                                                                                                                                                                            40
        # of export destinations




                                                                                                                                                      export destinations
                                                                                                        .3




                                                                                                                                                        Change in # of
                                                                                                              Private Credit
                                   120




                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                        .25
                                                                                                        .2




                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                   110




                                                                                       # export dest.   .15




                                                                                                                                                                            −20
                                                                                                        .1
                                                                                       Private credit
                                   100




                                                                                                                                                                                    −.5                     0                .5        1
                                       1985                              1990                      1995                                                                                                External Finance Dependence

                                                                          (g)                                                                                                                                   (h)

                                                                         Poland                                                                                                                                     Poland
                                   150




                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                                                                                        .2
        # of export destinations
                                   140




                                                                                                                                                      export destinations
                                                                                                                                                                            60
                                                                                                                                                        Change in # of
                                                                                                        .15
                                                                                                              Private Credit
                                   130




                                                                                                                                                                            40
                                                                                                        .1
                                   120




                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                        .05
                                   110




                                                                                       # export dest.
                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                       Private credit
                                   100




                                                                                                                                                                                    −.5                     0                .5        1
                                                                                                        0




                                       1985                              1990                      1995                                                                                                External Finance Dependence

                                                                          (i)                                                                                                                                   (j)

                                                                           Thailand                                                                                                                                    Thailand
                                                                160




                                                                                                                               1




                                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                     # of export destinations




                                                                                                                                                                      export destinations
                                                                                                                                                                        Change in # of
                                                                                                                                                                                            60
                                                                                                                                    Private Credit
                                                                150




                                                                                                                               .8




                                                                                                                                                                                            40
                                                                140




                                                                                                                               .6




                                                                                                                                                                                            20




                                                                                           # export dest.
                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                           Private credit
                                                                130




                                                                                                                               .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                 −.5            0                 .5       1
                                                                  1985          1990                    1995                                                                                              External Finance Dependence

                                                                                (k)                                                                                                                                   (l)

Fig. A.1 (cont.): For each country (Mexico, Poland, and Thailand), we plot the number of export destinations and financial
development (private credit) from 1985 to 1995 (left side), and the change in the number of export destinations from 1985
to 1995 by industry against industries’ external finance dependence (right side).




                                                                                                                                                     38
                                                             Table A.4: Economic Magnitudes

                                                                                       (1)                 (2)         (3)
             Dependent variable                                   F inV uls    10th and 90th pctl.    1 std. dev.   Maximum
             (log) GDP                                            ExtFin             -0.165              -0.060      -0.320
                                                                  Tang               -0.101              -0.041
             (log) Aggregate consumption                          ExtFin             -0.154              -0.056      -0.331
                                                                  Tang               -0.116              -0.047
             (log) Bilateral distance                             ExtFin              0.027               0.010      0.050
                                                                  Tang               -0.007              -0.003
             DB trade cost index                                  ExtFin              1.161               0.422      1.985
                                                                  Tang                0.139               0.056
             (log) GDP/Bilateral distance                         ExtFin             -0.178              -0.065      -0.335
                                                                  Tang               -0.101              -0.041
             (log) GDP/DB trade cost index                        ExtFin             -0.224              -0.081      -0.445
                                                                  Tang               -0.144              -0.059
             Fixed effect coefficient                             ExtFin             -0.013              -0.005      -0.021
                                                                  Tang               -0.006              -0.002
             Rank of fixed effect coefficient                     ExtFin              4.941               1.796      8.713
                                                                  Tang                2.437               0.993
             Notes: This table reports comparative statics based on Tables 3, 4, 6, and 8 to illustrate the
             implied economic effect of financial development on countries’ ability to add destinations down
             the pecking order. For each measure of export market potential, Column 1 reports the differ-
             ential effect of a one-standard-deviation increase in private credit (0.364) on the market poten-
             tial of the marginal export destination in a sector at the 90th versus at the 10th percentile of
             external finance dependence (holding asset tangibility fixed) or of asset tangibility (holding ex-
             ternal finance dependence fixed). Column 3 compares instead the implied impact on the most
             versus least affected industry, based on the variation in both external finance dependence and
             asset tangibility across industries. Column 2 replicates Column 1 but compares sectors that
             are one standard deviation apart in financial vulnerability rather than spanning the 90th-10th
             percentile range.
                                                 100
                          Average Trade Share
                          Across Exporters (%)
                                                 80
                                                 60
                                                 40
                                                 20
                                                 0




                                                       100        80          60        40           20         0
                                                                 Distribution of Destination
                                                                Market Potential (Percentile)

Fig. A.2: This figure plots the share of exports to each decile of destinations grouped by their market potential (measure
by the destination fixed effect from equation (5.1)), averaged across exporting countries in 1995.




                                                                              39
