                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      SPECULATIVE RUNS ON INTEREST RATE PEGS

                                          Marco Bassetto
                                         Christopher Phelan

                                        Working Paper 18864
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18864


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2013




For valuable suggestions, we thank Fernando Alvarez, Gadi Barlevy, Robert Barsky, Mariacristina
De Nardi, Robert E. Lucas, Jr., and Thomas J. Sargent. Marco Bassetto acknowledges financial support
from the ESRC through the Centre for Macroeconomics. This is a draft of a paper prepared for the
Carnegie-Rochester-NYU Conference Series. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Banks
of Chicago, or Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve˛System.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Marco Bassetto and Christopher Phelan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Speculative Runs on Interest Rate Pegs
Marco Bassetto and Christopher Phelan
NBER Working Paper No. 18864
March 2013, Revised August 2014
JEL No. E42,E43,E52,E61

                                              ABSTRACT

We analyze a new class of equilibria that emerges when a central bank conducts monetary policy by
setting an interest rate (as an arbitrary function of its available information) and letting the private
sector set the quantity traded. These equilibria involve a run on the central bank's interest target, whereby
money grows fast, private agents borrow as much as possible against the central bank, and the shadow
interest rate is different from the policy target. We argue that these equilibria represent a particular
danger when banks hold large excess reserves, such as is the case following periods of quantitative
easing. Our analysis suggests that successfully managing the exit strategy requires additional tools
beyond setting interest-rate targets and paying interest on reserves; in particular, freezing excess reserves
or fiscal-policy intervention may be needed to fend off adverse expectations.


Marco Bassetto
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 S. LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604
and University College London
m.bassetto@ucl.ac.uk

Christopher Phelan
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
1925 4th Avenue South, 4-101 Hanson Hall
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0462
and NBER
cphelan@umn.edu
1     Introduction
Until the last few years, most central banks (CBs) around the world conducted monetary policy
by setting targets for short-term interest rates. Maneuvering interest rates as a way to achieve
low and stable inflation is now regarded as a success story, and it is widely expected that it will
return to be the dominant tool of monetary policy as soon as the economy and inflation recover
enough to warrant moving away from the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates.
    The aftermath of quantitative easing implies subtle differences for interest-rate management
that have however potentially dramatic implications for the control of the price level. Taking
the Federal Reserve System as an example, before 2008, day-to-day implementation of a given
interest-rate target was entrusted to open-market operations undertaken by the trading desk of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; the trading desk retained full control of the quantity of
monetary base available for transactions. In the aftermath of quantitative easing, the monetary
base is much larger than what is demanded purely for transaction reasons, and, during the period
of exit, control of interest rates is expected to be achieved by setting a price, the interest paid on
bank reserves. By setting an appropriate interest on reserves, it is expected that banks will not
attempt to lend out their funds on deposit at the CB, which could unleash inflation if all private
agents tried to convert their (large) money holdings into consumption at once. This strategy
acknowledges that the Federal Reserve System does not have direct control over the quantity
of excess reserves that will be converted into cash. In this paper, we argue that purely setting
interest on reserves is an insufficient tool to achieve price stability; we show that this policy is
subject to “runs.” A CB that persisted using simply interest on reserves as its policy tool in
the face of a run would face hyperinflation. Other, more likely exit scenarios in such adverse
circumstances involve freezing excess reserves or fiscal-policy intervention; these scenarios deserve
thus further attention.
    We conduct our analysis in a simple environment that features flexible prices and a standard
cash-in-advance constraint, where the intuition for our results is simple and transparent; however,
our results would extend to models with frictions. In this setup, we introduce a CB that sets the
one-period interest rate; this interest rate need not be fixed, but rather may depend in arbitrary


                                                  1
ways on all the information that the CB has at the moment it makes its decision. The private
sector is free to choose quantities traded with the CB, up to a limit. In the case of interest on
reserves, this limit is zero: banks cannot hold negative reserves. More generally, the CB could
(and does) allow borrowing, but this is limited, typically by collateral requirements. We show
that setting a policy rate in this way leads to multiple equilibria. Some of the equilibria are
familiar and common to the environments where limits to money growth are not considered.1
However, new equilibria emerge, where money growth and inflation are higher. These equilibria
involve a run on the CB’s interest target: the private sector borrows as much as possible from
the central bank, money in circulation grows fast, and the shadow interest rate in the private
market is different from the policy rate.
       In our environment, the severity of a run is affected by the size of the trades that the private
sector can undertake against the CB. In the case of quantitative easing and interest on reserves,
this is determined by the size of the CB’s balance sheet. More generally, if government bonds
are an important source of collateral to borrow from the CB, fiscal policy plays a prominent
role in defining the characteristics of equilibria that feature runs.2 This is a new channel by
which excessive deficits affect price stability, and it is independent of the familiar unpleasant
monetarist arithmetic of Sargent and Wallace [16] and of the fiscal theory of the price level
(Leeper [12], Sims [17], Woodford [19]). In fact, we deliberately rule out these alternative channels
of monetary-fiscal interaction by postulating fiscal rules that ensure long-term budget balance
independently of the path of inflation.
       In an extension of our model, we consider what happens if the central bank sets interest rates
in a (possibly narrow) sliver of the market, rather than standing ready to buy and sell a large
swathe of securities at a set price. When no run occurs, we show that the equilibrium remains the
same independently of the size of the market in which the central bank operates. But, if a run
   1
       Examples of these equilibria are those identified by Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe [5, 6] and those
discussed in Cochrane [8]. In those equilibria, the Fisher equation linking interest rates and expected inflation
remains valid, while the speculative runs that we identify involve high inflation and severe monetary distortions
coexisting with low (official) nominal interest rates.
   2
     Arguably, the size of a CB’s balance sheet is a measure of “in-house” fiscal policy run by the monetary
authorities, since it involves managing the magnitude of the CB’s interest-bearing liabilities.


                                                         2
occurs, the consequences are more limited the more circumscribed this market is. This suggests
a rationale for why central banks may find it attractive to set targets only for very short-term
interest rates, but refrain from doing the same for a broad spectrum of the yield curve.
        Our model sheds light on two historical episodes. In the more extreme case, the policy of
the Reichsbank during the German hyperinflation fits well within our model. As mentioned by
Sargent [14], the German Reichsbank discounted Treasury and commercial bills at fixed nominal
interest rates in 1923; these rates were far too low to equilibrate loan markets given expected
inflation, and a run of precisely the type that we describe occurred: the policy added fuel to the
hyperinflation by causing the Reichsbank to greatly increase the money supply and transferring
this money to the government and to those private entities lucky enough to borrow from the
Reichsbank at the official discount rate.
        In a more relevant example for the current situation, the Federal Reserve System successfully
managed an “exit strategy” from quantitative easing once before. During the Great Depression,
commercial banks accumulated sizeable excess reserves deposited with the Federal Reserve, that
lasted through the early 1950s. In the 1940s, up to the Treasury accord of 1951, the Fed managed
monetary policy by pegging interest rates. However, at various points this led to inflationary
tensions. As discussed by Eichengreen and Garber [10], the Fed did not rely purely on interest
rates to subdue them, but it rather adjusted required reserves, an instrument that offered direct
control over the quantity of funds that would be available to start a full-blown speculative attack.
In this light, our analysis suggests a new role for the “twin-pillar” doctrine of paying attention to
monetary aggregates (both broad and narrow) as well as interest rates in designing appropriate
monetary policy rules.3



2         The basic cash-in-advance model
Consider a version of the cash-in-advance model. There are a continuum of households of unit
mass and a government/monetary authority. Time is discrete with dates t ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . .}. In
each period, the timing is as follows: First, the government sets nominal taxes, Tt , possibly as a
    3
        For a discussion of the twin-pillar doctrine, see Lucas [13].


                                                             3
function of everything that has happened up to that point in time. Then, asset markets open. In
these asset markets, the central bank sets a nominal interest rate, Rt , at which is stands ready
to trade money for one-period government bonds; this rate can also depend on the entire past
history. The government and central bank can print and destroy money, borrow and lend. In the
asset markets, households can buy (or sell) government bonds, acquire money, as well as trade
zero-net supply securities with other households.
       The description above assumes that the CB sets its interest rate as the discount factor on
government bonds, as was the case for the German Reichsbank. The same equations apply in
the case of modern central banks in the aftermath of quantitative easing, simply by relabeling
variables appropriately. Specifically, in this case −Tt represent seigniorage payments from the
central bank to Treasury (that are in turn rebated to households), and Rt is the interest on excess
reserves; in this case, “money” represents cash or required reserves that banks must hold if they
expand their deposits, and “bonds” are excess reserves that do not provide liquidity services and
are held only if they offer the same return as competing private assets.4 In what follows, we will
continue to use the “Reichsbank labels,” except when deriving remarks that specifically apply
to interest on reserves.
       After the asset markets, a goods market opens. In the goods market, households produce
the consumption good using their own labor for the use of other households (but, as usual, not
their own household) and the government. Each household has one unit of time and a constant-
returns-to-scale technology that converts units of time into units of the consumption good one
for one. Households use money to purchase units of the consumption good produced by other
households. The government uses either money or bonds (it is immaterial which) to purchase
Gt = G ≥ 0 units of the consumption good.
       Figure 1 summarizes the events within each period.5
   4
       When we follow this interpretation, we still separately assume that Treasury taxes and debt are set so that
the fiscal theory of the price level does not apply.
   5
     Our results are robust to a variety of different timing assumptions. However, it is important that households
know the interest rate at which they trade with the central bank: we do not allow the central bank to unilaterally
set its terms of trade ex post, after households have committed to their bond purchase decisions.



                                                         4
         Household        Gov’t pays bonds        CB sets Rt       Asset mkts open,        Goods mkt
       enters period t        with cash,                               household        opens, household
        with nominal           levies Tt                            chooses money,        chooses labor,
        wealth wt−1           (nominal)                              bond holdings        consumption;
                                                                                        gov’t purchases Gt



                               Figure 1: Timeline of events within period t.

       Let Mt denote the amount of money in circulation at the end of the asset market in period
t, after taxes are paid. Let Bt−1 be the nominal amount of government bonds payable at date
t. (If Bt−1 < 0 then it represents a debt that households owe the government at date t.) The
households start with initial nominal claims W−1 against the government.6
       Consider a price sequence {Pt , Rt , R̂t }∞
                                                 t=0 , where Pt is the nominal price of a unit of the

consumption good at date t, Rt is the nominal risk-free rate between period t and t + 1 at which
the government trades with private agents, and R̂t is the rate at which households trade with
each other. A government policy {Tt , Mt , Bt }∞                                                ∞
                                               t=0 is said to be feasible given {Pt , Rt , R̂t }t=0 if for

all t > 0
                                           h                              i
                             Bt = (1 + Rt ) Pt−1 G − Tt − Mt + Mt−1 + Bt−1 ,                               (1)

with the initial condition
                                       B0 = (1 + R0 )[W−1 − M0 − T0 ].                                     (2)

       In what follows, we use lower-case letters to indicate individual household choices and upper-
case variables to indicate aggregates: as an example, mt are individual money holdings, and Mt
are aggregate money holdings. In equilibrium, lower and upper-case variables will coincide, since
we consider a representative household.
       Households are subject to a cash-in-advance constraint: their consumption must be purchased
with money. A household’s path is given by {ct , yt , b̂t , bt , mt }∞
                                                                     t=0 , where b̂t are holdings of privately-
   6
       These claims represent money and maturing bonds, before paying period 0 taxes.



                                                        5
issued bonds maturing in period t + 1.7 In addition, households are potentially constrained in
their holdings of government securities to a set Bt . We will first explore the case in which Bt
is the entire real line, and we will then explore the implications of setting a limit to private
indebtedness against the government.
       A household path is feasible if for all t > 0

                      b̂t          bt
                             +          = Pt−1 (yt−1 − ct−1 ) − Tt − mt + mt−1 + b̂t−1 + bt−1 ,                (3)
                   1 + R̂t       1 + Rt

                                                        m t ≥ Pt ct ,                                          (4)

together with the initial condition

                                          b̂0           b0
                                                  +          = W−1 − m0 − T0                                   (5)
                                        1 + R̂0       1 + R0

and the no-Ponzi condition

               b̂t + bt ≥ At+1 := −Pt − mt + Tt+1 +
                 ∞
                    ( j                 "                                                      ! #)
                X      Y      1                                          1             1                     (6)
                                          Tt+j+1 − Pt+j − max[b̂                    −           ]   .
                j=1     v=1 1 + R̂t+v
                                                          b̂∈Bt         1 + R̂t+j     1 + Rt+j

Equation (6) imposes that households cannot borrow more than the present value of working 1
unit of time while consuming nothing, holding no money in every period after t, and maximally
exploiting any price discrepancy between government-issued and private securities. This present
value is evaluated at the sequence of intertemporal prices {R̂s }∞
                                                                 t=0 .

       When Bt = R, a no-arbitrage condition will ensure R̂t+j = Rt+j , making the corresponding
term disappear from (6). When limits to household indebtedness against the government are
present, we will study equilibria where government securities have a different price than equivalent
privately-issued securities, in which case household can profit from the mispricing (at the expense
of the government), and the corresponding profits are part of their budget resources.8 Facing
   7
       In equilibrium, b̂t ≡ 0.
   8
       Of course, in equilibrium the aggregate profits of the households from this activity are matched by lump-sum
taxes that the government has to impose, so that in the aggregate this limited arbitrage opportunity is a zero-sum
game.


                                                             6
prices {Pt , Rt , R̂t }∞                     ∞
                       t=0 , tax policy {Tt }t=0 , and given initial nominal wealth, a household’s problem

is to choose {ct , yt , b̂t , bt , mt }∞
                                       t=0 to solve

                                                        ∞
                                                        X
                                                  max         β t u(ct , yt )                         (7)
                                                        t=0

subject to (3), (4), (5), (6), and bt ∈ Bt . We assume that u is continuously differentiable, that
both consumption and leisure are normal goods, and that the following conditions hold:

                        lim uc (c, y) = ∞ ∀ y > 0,             lim uy (c, y) = −∞ ∀ c > 0,            (8)
                        c→0                                    y→1


and
                              ∀ y > 0 ∃ uy (y) > 0 : |uy (c, y)| > uy (y) ∀ c ≥ 0.                    (9)

Equation (8) is a standard Inada condition; it will ensure an interior solution to our problem.
Equation (9) imposes that the marginal disutility of labor is bounded away from zero in equilibria
in which production is also bounded away from zero.



3      An interest rate policy
In this section, we construct equilibria for an economy in which the government/monetary au-
thority sets an interest rate rule, without imposing limits to household trades with the central
bank (i.e., Bt = R) . In particular, suppose the central bank offers to buy or sell any amount of
promises to pay $1 at date t + 1 for 1/(1 + Rt ) < 1 dollars at date t. We assume that nominal
interest rates remain strictly positive (Rt > 0); this is purely to save notation. In the equilibria
featuring runs that are the object of study in this paper, the cash-in-advance constraint will
always be binding, even if the policy target is Rt = 0.
    Using Svensson and Woodford’s [18] language, the interest-rate rule is here used as a reaction
function: the central bank adopts the interest rate as its instrument, and sets it as a function of
everything that is observable up to that point in time. We allow for arbitrary history dependence,
so in particular this assumption encompasses Taylor rules that depend on past inflation. In
section 4.2 we discuss the role of this assumption in the broader context of alternatives, and we


                                                              7
also explain why it may be particularly appropriate in the wake of the policy of quantitative
easing pursued by many central banks across the developed world in recent years.
   We suppose that the government sets a “Ricardian” fiscal rule, i.e., a rule that ensures that
the present-value budget constraint of the government (and hence the transversality condition of
the agents) holds whenever all other competitive equilibrium conditions are met, independent of
the price level. We choose such a fiscal policy because we are interested in the set of equilibria
that can arise when money is not directly backed by tax revenues, as it happens instead when
the fiscal theory of the price level holds. We will specify below a class of fiscal rules that satisfies
sufficient conditions for this requirement.
   An equilibrium is a sequence {Pt , R̂t , Rt , Tt , Ct , Yt , B̂t , Bt , Mt }∞                                       ∞
                                                                               t=0 such that {Ct , Yt , B̂t , Bt , Mt }t=0

solves the household’s problem taking {Pt , R̂t , Rt , Tt }∞
                                                           t=0 as given, and such that markets clear

for all t ≥ 0:
                                                   C t = Yt − G                                                   (10)

and
                                                      B̂t = 0.                                                    (11)

   In order for the household problem to have a finite solution, it is necessary that the prices of
government and private assets be the same:

                                                     R̂t = Rt .                                                   (12)

When (12) fails, households can exploit the difference in price to make infinite profits. In addition
to (6) and (12), necessary and sufficient conditions from the household optimization problem yield
the following conditions for all t ≥ 0:

                                                uy (Ct , Yt )      1
                                            −                 =         ,                                         (13)
                                                uc (Ct , Yt )   1 + R̂t
                                     uy (Ct+1 , Yt+1 )        1       Pt+1
                                                       =                   ,                                      (14)
                                       uy (Ct , Yt )     β(1 + R̂t+1 ) Pt
                                                   Mt /Pt = Ct ,                                                  (15)




                                                          8
and the transversality condition
                                        t
                                                      !
                                        Y        1
                                 lim                      (B̂t + Bt − At+1 ) = 0.                              (16)
                                 t→∞
                                        j=0 1 + R̂j

       Substituting (10) and (12) into (13), we obtain
                                             uy (Ct , Ct + G)      1
                                         −                    =        .                                       (17)
                                             uc (Ct , Ct + G)   1 + Rt
       We now turn to constructing equilibria. The initial price level, P0 , is not determined. For
each initial price P0 , one can use the interest rate rule Rt and equations (1), (2), (10), (14), (15),
and (17) to sequentially solve for a unique candidate equilibrium allocation and price system.9
That is, first the fiscal policy rule determines T0 . Given T0 , the interest-rate rule determines
R0 , equation (17) solves for C0 , equation (10) then implies Y0 , and equation (15) implies M0 .
Finally, equation (2) determines B0 . With all time-0 variables now determined, the fiscal policy
rule determines T1 , the monetary policy rule determines R1 , which by no arbitrage is equal to
R̂1 when B = R. As in period 0, equation (17) solves then for C1 and equation (10) for Y1 .
Knowing C1 and Y1 , equation (14) can be solved for P1 , and equation (15) for M1 . Equation (1)
then yields B1 , and from there the process continues to period 2 and on.
       To verify whether the candidate equilibrium allocation and price system we derived above is
an equilibrium, we need only to check that the household transversality and no-Ponzi conditions
(6) and (16) hold. To this end, we will restrict fiscal policy to a (broad) class which ensures
the policy is Ricardian (Assumption A2); but a necessary step to do so is to ensure that the
present-value of seigniorage remains finite. For now, we achieve this by imposing an upper bound
on nominal interest rates:

Assumption 1 ∃ R : Rt ≤ R.

The appendix studies alternative ways of ensuring that the present value of seigniorage remains
finite even when Assumption 1 is violated.10
   9
       The Inada condition and the assumptions of normal goods ensure that an interior solution can be found
and that (17) is strictly monotone in Ct . In our analysis, we do not rule out explosive paths, for the reasons
highlighted in Cochrane [8].
  10
     In the cases considered in the appendix, it may not be possible to find equilibria with a perfectly anticipated

                                                          9
    As a specific class of Ricardian fiscal policies, we assume Tt satisfies

Assumption 2 There exist finite B > 0 and T such that

    • if Bt−1 ∈ [−BPt−1 , BPt−1 ], Tt is unrestricted except |Tt |Pt−1 ≤ T ,

    • if Bt−1 > BPt−1 , Tt ∈ [αBt−1 , Bt−1 ], and

    • if Bt−1 < −BPt−1 , Tt ∈ [−Bt−1 , −αBt−1 ].

    Essentially, we require that if real debt is neither too high nor too low, taxes may be any
function of past information subject only to a uniform bound in real terms. But when real debt
exceeds a threshold (in absolute value), taxes cover at least a fraction α of debt, putting the
brakes to a debt spiral. As an example, one simple rule that belongs to this general class is
Tt = αBt−1 , with α ∈ (0, 1).
    We relegate the proof that (6) and (16) hold (and thus the candidate equilibrium is an
equilibrium) to the appendix.
    The construction above establishes results that are well known from Sargent and Wallace [15],
Woodford [20], and reemphasized by Cochrane [8]. Under an interest rule, the initial price level
P0 is indeterminate, but, once a value of P0 is specified, there exists a unique deterministic
equilibrium allocation and price system. Moreover, in the deterministic equilibrium, in any
period in which the nominal rate set by the central bank is low, so is inflation. As an example,
          1
if Rt =   β
              − 1 for all t ≥ 0, then inflation is exactly zero in all periods. When uncertainty is
present, sunspot equilibria arise; we discuss such equilibria in the appendix. But, even in that
case, a low official interest rate translates into a limit on expected inflation. To see this, note
that the intratemporal optimization condition (13) and the market clearing condition (10) still
hold in a world with sunspots, so equation (17) still holds. Thus consumption and labor in each
period are pinned down by the interest rate policy. If Rt is constant then consumption and labor
                          1
are constant. If Rt =     β
                              − 1, the stochastic version of the consumption Euler equation becomes
                                                        Pt
                                                  Et        = 1.                                             (18)
                                                       Pt+1
run on the central bank’s interest rate peg, such as the one we will study in section 4, but there will instead be
equilibria where runs occur with positive probability.

                                                         10
The expected real value of a dollar remains constant into the future. Furthermore, if we assume
a bound  on how fast the price level can drop (i.e., we impose Pt /Pt+1 < 1/ almost surely ∀t),
then the law of large numbers will apply, and average inverse inflation over long horizons will be
0:
                                        T
                                     1 X Ps
                                 lim            = 1 almost surely.                              (19)
                                T →∞ T     Ps+1
                                       s=1
     In the next section, we show that a very different type of equilibrium emerges when households
are not allowed to borrow unlimited funds from the central bank. In this equilibrium, a low
interest rate set by the central bank is accompanied by high expected inflation from the outset,
and private-market interest rates diverge from the policy rate.



4      Limits to Central Bank Lending
Suppose now we impose the additional constraint on the households that Bt ≥ 0, t ≥ 0: house-
holds are not allowed to borrow from the government/central bank (or, equivalently, they are
allowed to borrow from the central bank only by posting government bonds as collateral). That
the borrowing limit is precisely zero is not central to our analysis, but simplifies exposition some-
what. In this section, we construct additional deterministic equilibria which do not exist when
Bt = R.
     With the no-borrowing limit we just imposed, the official rate Rt only becomes a lower bound
for the private-sector rate R̂t . When households are at the borrowing limit with the central
bank, private nominal interest rates may exceed the official rate. The no-arbitrage condition
(12) becomes
                                  R̂t ≥ Rt ,   Bt > 0 =⇒ R̂t = Rt .                             (20)

All other equilibrium conditions remain the same, except that the private rate R̂t replaces the
government rate Rt in equation (17):
                                        uy (Ct , Ct + G)      1
                                    −                    =         .                            (21)
                                        uc (Ct , Ct + G)   1 + R̂t
     The allocation of section 3 remains part of an equilibrium even when the central bank limits
its lending, provided that households have nonnegative bond holdings in all periods. For a

                                                   11
given sequence of prices, interest rates, consumption and work levels, household holdings of
government debt in this equilibrium depend on the sequence of taxes. Government debt will be
strictly positive in each period t > 0 if and only if the following condition is satisfied:

                             Tt      Bt−1 Mt−1 βĉ(Rt )(1 + Rt )ûy (Rt )
                                 <G+      +      −                        ,                                           (22)
                            Pt−1     Pt−1   Pt−1       ûy (Rt−1 )

where ĉ(R) is the consumption implied by equation (21) when R̂t = R and ûy (R) := uy (ĉ(R), G+
ĉ(R)). It is straightforward to see that there are fiscal rules that satisfy (22) and Assumption 2.11
We assume that fiscal policy is run by one such rule.
       In period 0, government debt will be nonnegative if

                                             T0 ≤ W−1 − ĉ(R0 )P0 .                                                   (23)

An interior equilibrium will only exist if

                                                   T0 < W−1 ,                                                         (24)

which we will assume. While P0 can take any positive value in section 3, now equation (23)
imposes a ceiling.


4.1        Additional Equilibria: A Single Run

The simplest equilibrium that may arise when a limit to private indebtedness is introduced is a
deterministic run, where Bs = 0 for a single date s > 0. In the case of the German Reichsbank,
this is an equilibrium in which all of the government debt is monetized in period s. Under the
QE interpretation, this is an equilibrium in which households demand enough cash (and, in a
richer model, banks expand their deposits so much) that all of the excess reserves are converted
into cash (and required reserves).
       The conditions under which such a simple equilibrium exists are stringent. This is not
surprising: it is true in all models of runs. To use a fixed exchange-rate regime as an example,
  11                                                                                        Pt−1 βĉ(0)(1+R)ûy (R)
       As an example, choose Tt = (1 − α)(Bt−1 /Pt−1 ) + T̂t , with T̂t < Pt−1 G + Mt−1 −            ûy (0)          and
α ∈ (0, 1).


                                                        12
equilibria in which a fixed exchange rate collapses at a perfectly anticipated time exist only in
very specific circumstances. In the appendix, we accordingly extend the analysis to probabilistic
runs, where the date at which inflationary expectations take off and a run occurs is not perfectly
known ahead of time. Such equilibria exist under much more general conditions.

Assumption 3 Define
                                    uy := max ĉ(R)(1 + R)|ûy (R)|.
                                           R∈[0,R]

We assume that fiscal policy satisfies the following stronger version of (22):

                                    Tt      Bt−1 Mt−1      βuy
                                        <G+      +      −        ,                                    (25)
                                   Pt−1     Pt−1   Pt−1   uy (G)

where uy (Ḡ) is defined in (9).

Equation (22) guaranteed that in each period there are positive bonds/excess reserves that can
be converted into money and initiate a speculative run. The stronger condition (25) ensures
that, after a period in which a run occurred and thus previous government debt was monetized,
there are enough new bonds (or the monetary base is sufficiently large) that the economy can
return to a path where households hold positive amounts of government debt and equation (14)
holds. This assumption is required for the run to last a single period.

Proposition 1 Let {Pt , R̂t , Rt , Tt , Ct , Yt , B̂t , Bt , Mt }s−1
                                                                 t=0 be determined as in the equilibrium of

section 3, with P0 satisfying (23), and let fiscal policy satisfy Assumption 2. A necessary and
sufficient condition for the existence of a different (deterministic) equilibrium in which Bs = 0
is that the following equation admits a solution for R̂s > Rs :
                                                                           
                                                            Ps−1
                 β ûy (R̂s )(1 + R̂s )ĉ(R̂s )                               = ûy (Rs−1 ).          (26)
                                                  Ms−1 + Bs−1 + Ps−1 G − Ts

A sufficient condition (based on preferences alone) for (26) to have a solution with R̂s > Rs is

                                     lim |ûy (R)|(1 + R)ĉ(R) → ∞.                                   (27)
                                     R→∞


   Proof: The proof works by construction. Starting from an arbitrary price level P0 that satisfies
    ¯
(23), the equilibrium allocation, price system, and government policy are solved as in section 3

                                                     13
up to period s − 1. Specifically, we use the interest rate rule Rt and the fiscal policy rule with
equations (10), (14), (15), and (17) to sequentially solve for the unique candidate equilibrium
allocation and price system.
   In period s, in order for R̂s > Rs to be an equilibrium, the constraint Bs ≥ 0 must be binding,
which implies
                               Ms−1 + Bs−1      Ts              Ps
                                           +G=      + ĉ(R̂s )      .                                   (28)
                                  Ps−1         Ps−1            Ps−1
Furthermore, equations (14) and (21) require

                                                         Ps−1
                                 β(1 + R̂s )ûy (R̂s )        = ûy (Rs−1 ).                            (29)
                                                          Ps

Substituting (28) into (29), we obtain (26), which is a single equation to be solved for R̂s . If
this equation does not admit a solution for R̂s > Rs , then it is impossible to satisfy all of the
necessary conditions for an equilibrium with Bs = 0. If a solution exists, then we can retrieve
consumption in period s as Cs = ĉ(R̂s ) (the unique solution that satisfies equation (21)), and
hence (by market clearing) Ys = Cs + G. We can then solve equation (28) for the candidate
equilibrium level of Ps . Equation (22) ensures that the solution for Ps is strictly positive.
   From period s+1 onwards, the allocation and price system is once again uniquely determined
(sequentially) by the interest rate rule Rt , the fiscal policy rule, and equations (10), (14), (15),
and (17). Equation (25) ensures that the resulting sequence for government debt is strictly
positive. Once again, the proof that (6) and (16) hold is relegated to the general proof in the
appendix.
   Finally, to verify the sufficient condition (27), set R̂s = Rs . Equations (14) and (22) imply
                                                                      
                                                       Ps−1
              β|ûy (Rs )|(1 + Rs )ĉ(Rs )                               < |ûy (Rs−1 )|.      (30)
                                             Ms−1 + Bs−1 + Ps−1 G − Ts

Since |ûy (R)|(1 + R)ĉ(R) is a continuous function of R, when equation (27) holds, equation (30)
ensures the existence of a solution of (26) with R̂s > Rs . QED.
   To be concrete, we consider a numerical example. In the example, the monetary authority sets
                                                              1
the interest rate at an unconditional constant: Rt =          β
                                                                  − 1, where β = 1/1.01. We set u(ct , yt ) =




                                                     14
c1−σ
1−σ
                                           −y ψ , with σ = 3 and ψ = 1.1, and let G = .1.12 We assume Tt = .5(Bt−1 +Mt−1 )−1.12Pt−1 ,13
and set P0 = 1 and W−1 = 2.57.
                                          Given these assumptions, one equilibrium of this economy is a steady state: In each period
t ≥ 0, Pt = 1, Ct = Mt = .96, Yt = 1.06 and Bt = 1.5.14
                                          350                                                             1


                                          300                                                           0.95
 Private market interest rate (Percent)




                                                                                                         0.9
                                          250
                                                                                                        0.85




                                                                                          Consumption
                                          200
                                                                                                         0.8
                                          150
                                                                                                        0.75
                                          100
                                                                                                         0.7

                                           50                                                           0.65

                                            0
                                             0      1       2          3     4        5                    0    1   2          3   4     5
                                                                Time                                                    Time



Figure 2: Private-market interest rate (left panel) and consumption (right panel) in an equilib-
rium featuring a run in period 2 only

                                          Next suppose households face a restriction that Bt ≥ 0 for all t ≥ 0. Then, Figures 2–4
describe the unfolding of the run. The basic intuition behind a run is simple: when the run
occurs, all government debt is converted into money; this largely increases the money supply.
When all other households are expected not to roll over their debt, each household expects thus
a high money supply and high resulting inflation; in response to this expectation, the optimal
strategy is not to roll over nominal debt, validating the run.
                                          To go beyond this basic intuition and understand why a perfectly anticipated run requires
specific assumptions about preferences, we inspect the evolution of the run in greater detail.
               12
                                          With these parameters, equation (25) becomes

                                                                                 Tt < Bt−1 + Mt−1 − 1.12Pt−1 .                                       (31)


               13
                                          This satisfies (31) whenever Bt−1 + Mt−1 > 0, which holds throughout the example.
               14
                                          There are other deterministic equilibria, indexed by the initial price level P0 , but all of them share the same
level of consumption, output, and real money balances.


                                                                                                           15
First, notice that, if a run occurs, the private-sector interest rate R̂t must be greater than the
interest rate set by the central bank, which is constant at 1/β − 1; in our example, this occurs
in period 2, as shown in the left panel of Figure 2. The intratemporal optimality condition (21)
implies that consumption decreases in period 2, when the run occurs (right panel of Figure 2).
               4.5                                                                 4.5


                4                                                                   4

                                                                                   3.5




                                                     Money used for transactions
               3.5
                                                                                    3
                3
 Price level




                                                                                   2.5
               2.5
                                                                                    2
                2
                                                                                   1.5

               1.5                                                                  1

                1                                                                  0.5
                 0    1      2          3   4    5                                    0       1   2          3   4   5
                                 Time                                                                 Time



Figure 3: Prices (left panel) and money used for transactions (right panel) in an equilibrium
featuring a run in period 2 only

               With consumption down and the money supply up, the price level must jump up so that the
(binding) cash-in-advance constraint holds, as shown by the left panel of Figure 3. Whether such
a candidate allocation can be supported as an equilibrium depends on whether these changes
can be made consistent with the household Euler equations for leisure and consumption, which
are respectively (14) and
                                 uc (Ct+1 , Yt+1 )       1      Pt+1
                                                   =                 .                        (32)
                                    uc (Ct , Yt )    β(1 + R̂t ) Pt
Specifically, in order to have a perfectly anticipated run in period 2, and not before, it must be
the case that households are willing to lend to the government in period 1 (or, to keep excess
reserves deposited at the central bank, depending on the interpretation) even though the nominal
interest rate by the central bank is constant and expected inflation between period 1 and period
2 is high. Since households expect a consumption drop between periods 1 and 2, this can be the
case, but only if either the drop in consumption (and, by market clearing, in the labor supply)
is very steep or the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of consumption is sufficiently low.
Equation (21) implies that the consumption drop is steeper, the less curvature there is in the

                                                                                         16
marginal disutility of labor and in the marginal utility of consumption. So, less curvature in
uy (c, c + G) unambiguously helps in satisfying equation (32). Less curvature in uc (c, c + G) has
an ambiguous effect, since (for given R̂s ) it creates a bigger drop in consumption, but it also
implies a greater intertemporal elasticity of substitution. The second effect turns out to be the
relevant one, so that a perfectly anticipated run can happen when the curvature is low and hence
the function ĉ is not very responsive to R. From these observations, we can thus understand
the role of assumption A2. We can also understand why a run can happen under much weaker
assumptions if it occurs with probability smaller than one, as described in the appendix: in
this case, the potentially negative effect of a run on the households’ willingness to save between
periods 1 and 2 is tempered by the lower probability of the occurrence. In the limit, as the
probability of a run goes to 0, households are content to save at the rate 1/β − 1 between periods
1 and 2 when the no-run allocation remains at the steady state throughout.
   Next, we consider the other intertemporal choice that households face in their decision to save
between periods 1 and 2, i.e., their labor supply. Because of the cash-in-advance timing, this
decision is related to the household labor supply in periods 0 and 1, as shown by equation (14).
Since the allocation and inflation are at the no-run steady state values in these two periods, the
relevant Euler equation for leisure is automatically satisfied. For this reason, the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution of leisure does not play the same role as the one of consumption in
determining whether a perfectly anticipated run can occur.
   Having discussed the economic forces that lead households to save between periods 0 and 1,
we next consider the elements that pertain to the private-market interest rate between periods
1 and 2, in the period of the run. This time, it is simpler to start from the Euler equation for
labor, equation (14). The relevant margin of choice for households is their labor supply in period
1 (paid in period 2) vs. period 2. Here, it is straightforward to see why households optimally
choose not to invest in government bonds in period 2 at the nominal rate 1/β − 1. First, the
nominal wage (which is equal to the price level) increases from period 1 to period 2, which yields
an incentive to postpone labor when the nominal interest rate does not adjust correspondingly.
Second, the equilibrium features actually a lower labor supply (which tracks consumption) in



                                               17
period 2 than in period 1, providing a further incentive not to save in period 1 and to postpone
work. Both of these channels imply that the interest rate offered by the government within the
equilibrium allocation is too low for households to be willing to lend to the government, and
that the private-market interest rate that justifies the labor decision is instead higher. Similarly,
on the consumption side (where the relevant margin is once again shifted one period forward),
households look forward to an increase in consumption between periods 2 and 3, and hence they
require a higher real interest rate to be willing to save than the one offered by the government.
This is particularly true because further inflation occurs between periods 2 and 3, as we establish
next, in our discussion of how the run ends.
                             6                                                                150


                             5
                                                                  Government debt, % of GDP
 Government debt (nominal)




                             4                                                                100


                             3


                             2                                                                 50


                             1


                             0                                                                  0
                              0    1      2          3   4    5                                  0        1   2          3   4   5
                                              Time                                                                Time



Figure 4: Government debt in an equilibrium featuring a run in period 2 only: nominal (left
panel) and real (right panel)

                             After the run ends, households resume lending to the government at the rate R3 = 1/β − 1
in period 3. With a fixed nominal interest rate, inflation between period 2 and 3 must adjust
so that households find it optimal to increase their labor supply between the crisis period 2 and
the return to normalcy in period 3. By equation (14), this requires further inflation between
periods 2 and 3. The increase in both prices and production (and consumption) between periods
2 and 3 implies that money supply must also grow. Since the crisis wiped out government debt,
households cannot acquire this additional money by selling government debt. If the run is to
last a single period, fiscal policy must generate enough new nominal liabilities at the beginning
of period 3, as implies by Assumption 3; this is achieved through a tax cut. From that point

                                                                                                     18
onward, output and consumption return to their pre-run steady state, while government debt
(in real terms) converges back to the steady state gradually.


4.2        Other Equilibria, and Alternative Government Strategies

By repeating the steps outlined in section 4.1, it is easy to construct equilibria in which runs
occur repeatedly, and it is also possible to construct equilibria in which runs last for more than
one period. The conditions under which such equilibria exist are similar to those for a single
run (in particular, Assumptions 1, 2, and 3 are sufficient conditions). In more general cases,
the appendix considers stochastic equilibria, where runs can emerge with probability less than
1. In these stochastic run equilibria, even when the official interest Rt is constant, the levels
of consumption and labor are not constant because the effective interest rate in the household
                                                                                  1
optimization conditions, R̂t , is not constant. Further, when Rt =                β
                                                                                      − 1, it is no longer the case
that on average, Pt /Pt+1 = 1. Setting a low nominal rate no longer guarantees low average real
depreciation of the currency.
       In the simple example above, we assumed that the central bank sets an unconditional interest
rate peg. However, our results hold even when interest rates exhibit arbitrary dependence on
the past; in particular, Taylor rules that depend on past inflation fit our framework well.15
       Our results would of course change if the interest rate is not simply set by the central bank,
by standing ready to trade at the given rate, but is instead simply a target to be attained
through different, potentially more complicated (and unspecified) rules. Following Svensson and
Woodford [18], central banks in the past may have adopted interest-rate rules as “targeting rules,”
but may have then implemented those rules in different ways.16 Indeed, until 2008, most central
  15
       In the case of “active” Taylor rules, Assumption 1 (that nominal interest rates are bounded) is violated, which
implies that a deterministic run would not exist. However, stochastic runs would continue to exist if preferences
are such that the present value of seigniorage revenues remains finite, as discussed in the appendix.
  16
     As an example, Atkeson et al. [3], following the methods in Bassetto [4], devise more sophisticated strategies
to achieve unique implementation by reverting to money supply rules when the inflation rate deviates from its
target. But, as is well known (see e.g. Woodford [19]), money supply rules may also be subject to multiple
equilibria. Alternatively, uniqueness can be attained by strategies where currency is explicitly backed by fiscal
revenues, as in the fiscal theory of the price level.


                                                           19
banks did not set a fixed rate at which they were willing to trade with the private sector, but
rather they relied on controlling the monetary base day to day through open-market operations
to achieve their target; this might be the reason we have not observed any of the runs described
here in the recent past.
   If the interest-rate rules adopted by central banks in the past were mere targeting rules, and
not true reaction functions, our analysis still provides several new insights:

   • A more complete specification of the low-level reaction function is essential to understand
     how central banks successfully kept inflation in check and prevented runs. Most likely, this
     did not involve passively supplying the money required to achieve the interest rate target,
     which would be equivalent to the strategies described below, but would instead be closer
     to the “twin-pillar doctrine,” as discussed in Lucas [13].

   • The advent of quantitative easing may have created a danger of runs that was not previously
     present. Since 2008, the large amount of excess reserves held by commercial banks has
     implied that the chief instrument to attain the interest-rate target is the rate paid by the
     central bank on excess reserves. Paying interest on reserves is also an essential element of
     the planned exit strategy, while central banks gradually reduce the size of their balance
     sheet (see e.g. Bernanke [7]). The strategy of paying interest on reserves is well captured by
     our section 4.1 if we simply reinterpret Bt as the central bank’s own interest-bearing debt
     (excess reserves), rather than the entire stock of government debt. By relying on interest-
     on-reserves as its primary tool to achieve the interest-rate target, a central bank stands
     ready to exchange cash for reserves at the given interest rate (which can be a function of
     anything that the central bank has observed in the past): this is precisely the strategy that
     creates the possibility of a run of the type that we discussed.

   • The Federal Reserve System faced exit from a situation of large excess reserves held by
     the banking sector once before, in the 1940s. Eichengreen and Garber [10] argue that the
     Fed controlled liquidity during those years by changing reserve requirements, which then
     allowed it to stabilize inflation expectations and therefore support stable interest rates.


                                                20
      To the best of our knowledge, changes in reserve requirements have not been cited as one
      of the tools that will be adopted during the exit from quantitative easing. Our analysis
      suggests instead that they would be an essential tool in preventing runs on the interest
      rate set for excess reserves and the associated inflationary consequences.


4.3    Debt and the Severity of Runs

In characterizing the equilibria of Section 3, where bounds to open-market operations are disre-
garded, the depth of the bond market targeted by the central bank plays no role. This changes
when bounds are introduced. We explore here two ways in which this may be relevant for the
conduct of monetary policy.
   The presence of runs generates a new channel of interaction between monetary and fiscal
policy. When we restrict discussion to Ricardian fiscal policies and equilibria without borrowing
limits, fiscal policy is irrelevant in determining equilibrium consumption and labor levels. (In fact,
this is the entire point of Ricardian equivalence.) When limits are present and the equilibrium
features runs, the consequences of a run will be more severe, the greater the pool of bonds that
is available to be monetized. As an example, consider the run equilibrium of the section 4.1,
but with a different tax policy. In particular, instead of Tt = .5(Bt−1 + Mt−1 ) − 1.12Pt−1 , let
Tt = .6(Bt−1 + Mt−1 ) − 1.12Pt−1 . This leaves consumption and output unchanged in the no-run
equilibrium, but decreases the steady state level of debt from 1.5 to 1.09. Now, at date s (when
the run occurs), Bs = 0 (as before), but since Bs−1 is now lower, there is less debt to convert
into money, and thus the money rises less from period s − 1 to period s. In this new example,
Ps rises from 1 to 3.08 (instead of rising to 4.08), Ms rises from .96 to 2.04 (instead of rising to
2.46), Cs falls from .96 to .66 (instead of falling to Cs = .6), and R̂s rises to 2.22 instead of rising
to 3.28. Overall, that the increase in the money supply is smaller due to the smaller date s − 1
debt causes smaller real effects (on consumption and output) from the run.
   Rather than relying on the fiscal authorities to restrict the pool of available bonds, an alter-
native strategy for the central bank to mitigate the consequences of a run is to peg rates on only
a subset of the bonds. In practice, this is a relevant scenario for at least two reasons:


                                                  21
   1. In the real world, there is long-term debt, whose price is not directly targeted by the central
         bank;

   2. It is unlikely that the central bank would be willing to monetize the entire amount of
         government debt; rather, the bound after which a CB would stop accommodating a run is
         likely to be tighter.

       Here, we consider the case in which there are two types of bonds, “red” bonds and “blue”
bonds, both with one-period maturity, whose only difference stems from their treatment by the
central bank.17 We assume that, when asset markets open, the central bank sets the interest rate
on red bonds, being willing to purchase or sell them at a rate Rt (which may depend on past
history, as before). In contrast, blue bonds are auctioned. From the fiscal perspective, red bonds
and blue bonds are identical: both constitute a promise to deliver a dollar to the holder at the
beginning of the subsequent period. We assume that taxes are set according to a fiscal policy
rule that satisfies Assumptions 2 and 3, where Bt refers to the total amount of bonds (red and
blue). In addition, we need to specify a rule that describes the supply of blue bonds at auction,
as a function of past history. Letting BtB be the amount of blue bonds being auctioned in period
t and maturing in period t + 1, we assume that this rule satisfies the following assumption:18

Assumption 4
                                                                      βPt−1 uy
                             0 ≤ BtB < Pt−1 G + Bt−1 + Mt−1 −                  − Tt .                       (33)
                                                                       uy (G)
It is straightforward to prove that Assumption 4 is sufficient for the existence of an interior
equilibrium, in which private agents hold a strictly positive amount of red bonds. The allocation
and price system in this equilibrium coincides with the one computed in Section 3. In this
equilibrium, blue bonds, red bonds, and privately-issued bonds are perfect substitutes from the
household perspective, and trade at the same interest rate. That the central bank targets a
narrower segment of the bond market is thus immaterial for its ability to control inflation and
real activity.
  17
       This is helpful in keeping notation simple, but our analysis would apply equally well to debt of different
maturities, where the central bank sets the interest rate on some maturities and not others.
 18
    Assumption 3 ensures that the interval for BtB is nonempty after all histories.

                                                        22
       In the event of a run, the presence of blue bonds makes a difference. Households again
perceive blue bonds, red bonds, and privately-issued bonds as perfect substitutes. But if a run
occurs in period t, the interest rate Rt sanctioned by the central bank for red bonds is lower
than the private-sector rate R̂t , and consequently households do not buy any red bonds. At the
same time, if a positive amount of blue bonds is offered at auction, households will bid for them,
at the interest rate R̂t . The evolution of money supply in period t will thus be governed by the
following equation:19
                                                                           BtB
                                     Mt = Pt−1 G + Mt−1 + Bt−1 −                   .                            (34)
                                                                         1 + R̂t
Ceteris paribus, the sale of blue bonds reduces the monetization of maturing government debt,
alleviating the consequences of the run. We can illustrate this point using our numerical example
once again. Let all the parameter values, the initial conditions, and the rules for Tt and Rt be
those of Section 4, but assume that, in each period, blue bonds are supplied according to the
following rule: BtB = .4(Bt−1 + Mt−1 ), so that, in steady state, blue bonds represent roughly 2/3
of government debt. In this case, if a run occurs in period s, government debt Bs does not drop
from 1.51 to 0, but to 0.99. Because of this, the increase in money supply is more contained:
money supply rises from .96 to 2.18 (rather than 2.46). This in turn alleviates the effect on
consumption, that falls from .96 to .64 (rather than .6), on the nominal interest rate (rising to
2.56 rather than 3.28), and prices (rising on impact to 3.52 rather than 4.08).20
       The blue bond-red bond model suggests that a central bank would be well advised to peg
the interest rate in a narrow segment of the market, rather than across the entire spectrum of
available bonds. When no run occurs, the two strategies implement the same set of equilibria.
But, when the risk of runs is present, the consequences of a broad peg are more acute than those
of a policy that sets the price in a narrower market. This conclusion provides a rationale for
the widespread practice among central banks to set interest rate targets only for very short-term
  19
       This equation is derived from (1), by assuming that in the event of a run red bonds are 0 and thus Bt = BtB .
  20
       At first blush, the effect of blue bonds on the allocation and prices may seem surprisingly small, considering
that they represent 2/3 of government debt in steady state. This happens because, according to the rule that we
specified, the government auctions a fixed nominal future repayment. Given the very high nominal interest rates
that prevail in a run, the real revenues raised by the auction in the event of a run are comparatively modest.



                                                          23
rates, rather than trying to impose an entire yield curve on the market. Even in recent times,
when several central banks have tried to affect the yield curve by policies of “quantitative easing,”
it is noteworthy that they chose to do so by setting an interest rate target for the short end, and
a quantity target for their purchases of longer-term securities.21 (It is also noteworthy that the
Fed’s attempt to peg the entire yield curve in the 1940’s ultimately led the Fed to be the sole
purchaser of short-term Treasury debt.)



5        Discussion
In this paper, we have shown that considering bounds on open market operations may be crucial
in determining the size of the set of monetary equilibria under interest rate rules. Policies which
have unique equilibria in environments with no bounds may instead have many new equilibria
when bounds are introduced. The nature of these new equilibria depends on the specific bounds
that the central bank sets: inflation will be much higher if the central bank stands ready to
monetize the entire government debt at a given rate than in the more plausible scenario where
the interest-rate peg is abandoned at a tighter bound.
       We should also emphasize that recent large excess reserves by banks have the potential of
making mitigating such runs more difficult. Put simply, it is one thing for the central bank to
stop buying the debt of the fiscal authority to stop a run. It is altogether a different thing for a
central bank to refuse to honor its own debts. Suddenly increasing the reserve requirements of
banks to fight a run may be seen as the central bank refusing to honor its commitment to deliver
currency on demand to the holder of the reserve.
       Can such runs actually happen? In the simple setup that we described, in the event of a run,
households force the central bank to its bound in a single period. In practice, the unfolding of a
run would be slowed by a number of frictions that may prevent all households from running at
once with all of their nominal wealth; these frictions may take the form of limited participation
in bond markets (see e.g. Grossman and Weiss [11], Alvarez and Atkeson [1], and Alvarez,
  21
       In our simple model, of course, quantitative easing would have no effect on the equilibrium allocation and
prices. But our results would apply equally well to richer environments where a preferred habitat is present.


                                                        24
Atkeson, and Edmond [2]), noisy information about other households’ behavior, or the presence
of long-term bonds whose price is not pegged by the central bank. We leave the modeling of
more slowly evolving runs to future research.




                                                25
                                        APPENDIX

A      Analysis of the General Stochastic Case

A.1     The Environment with Sunspots

We modify the environment described in section 2 by introducing a sunspot variable st in each
period. Without loss of generality, st is i.i.d. with a uniform distribution on [0, 1]. Its realization
at time t is observed before any action takes place. All variables with a time-t subscript are
allowed to be conditional on the history of sunspot realizations {sj }tj=1 .
    We assume that the government only trades in one-period risk-free debt, but we allow the
households to trade state-contingent assets, and we denote by at+1 the amount of nominal claims
that a household purchases in period t maturing in period t + 1 (conditional on the sunspot
realization st+1 ). Without uncertainty, at+1 ≡ b̂t . Equation (3) is thus replaced by
                                  bt
            Et [at+1 Qt+1 ] +          = Pt−1 (yt−1 − ct−1 ) − Tt − mt + mt−1 + at + bt−1 ,       (35)
                                1 + Rt
where Qt+1 is the stochastic discount factor of the economy. For the later analysis, it is convenient
to define R̂t := 1/Et Qt+1 − 1. This definition is consistent with the notation that we used in the
main text for the deterministic case: R̂t is the one-period nominal risk-free rate in the market
for private credit.
    In period 0, the household budget constraint becomes
                                                   b0
                                 E0 [a1 Q1 ] +          = W−1 − m0 − T0 .                         (36)
                                                 1 + R0
The no-Ponzi condition (6) generalizes to

              at+1 + bt ≥ At+1 := −Pt − mt + Tt+1 +
               ∞
                  ( j                                                                    )
              X     Y                              
                                                                                  1               (37)
         Et+1            Qt+v+1 Tt+j+1 − Pt+j − max[b̂ Et+j Qt+j+1 −                     ] .
               j=1    v=1
                                                           b̂∈Bt               1 + Rt+j

    With these changes, an equilibrium is defined as in section 3; the market-clearing condition
(11) becomes
                                                   At+1 = 0.                                      (38)

                                                      26
       The conditions characterizing an equilibrium are given by (10), (15), (21), (38), the stochastic
Euler equation
                                         uy (Ct+1 , Yt+1 )   Qt+1 (1 + R̂t ) Pt+1
                                                           =                      ,                 (39)
                                           uy (Ct , Yt )     β(1 + R̂t+1 ) Pt
the transversality condition, which in the stochastic case becomes22
                                  " t+1 !                       #
                                     Y
                           lim E0        Qj (At+1 + Bt − At+1 ) = 0,                                (40)
                                   t→∞
                                                j=1


and finally the no-arbitrage condition for interest rates. This last condition states R̂t = Rt when
B = R and (20) when Bt ≥ 0 is imposed.
       In the main text, we adopted Assumption 1 to ensure that seigniorage revenues remain
bounded and hence that the present-value budget constraint of the households is well defined.
When Assumption 1 is violated, such as in the case of Taylor rules that have no upper bound
on the interest rate, an alternative (sufficient) condition that we can adopt is given by

Assumption 5
                                                 lim ĉ(R)(1 + R) = 0.                              (41)
                                                R→∞

Notice that Assumption 5 is incompatible with the sufficient condition (27) in Proposition 1.
When Assumption 5 is adopted, often perfectly anticipated runs will fail to exist (but probabilistic
runs will continue to occur).


A.2         Verification of the Transversality and no-Ponzi conditions

Proposition 2 Let a sequence {Pt , Qt+1 , Tt , Rt , Ct , Yt , At+1 , Bt , Mt }∞
                                                                              t=0 satisfy equations (10),

(11), (15), (21), (35), (36),and (39), and let fiscal policy satisfy Assumption 2. Assume also
that either Assumption 1 or Assumption 5 holds. Then equations (37) and (40) hold.

       We prove this proposition in 3 steps. First, we prove that At+1 , as defined in (37), is well
defined. Second, we prove that (40) holds, and finally that (37) holds.
  22
       See Coşar and Green [9].




                                                            27
A.2.1       At+1 is well defined.

We work backwards on the individual components of the sum defining At+1 in equation (37).
From (20) we obtain23                                                  
                                                                  1
                                          max[b̂ Et+j Qt+j+1 −           ] = 0.                                                  (42)
                                          b̂∈Bt                1 + Rt+j
Next, use (39) to get
                              j                                                       j
                   (                                    )                        (                                       )
                             Y                                                     Y                     Pt+j
                   Et+1               Qt+v+1 Pt+j            ≤ ûy (0)Et+1                   Qt+v+1                          =
                                v=1                                                    v=1                ûy (R̂t+j )
                                       j−1
                                 (                                                       )
                                      Y                       Pt+j
                   ûy (0)Et+1               Qt+v+1                        Et+j Qt+j+1        =
                                    v=1                     ûy (R̂t+j )
                                 ( j−1                                                   )
                                      Y                              Pt+j                                                      (43)
                   ûy (0)Et+1               Qt+v+1                                          =
                                       v=1                  ûy (R̂t+j )(1 + R̂t+j )
                                       j−2
                                      (                                                           )
                                          Y                             P     t+j−1
                   β ûy (0)Et+1                Qt+v+1                                                =
                                          v=1                 ûy (R̂t+j−1 )(1 + R̂t+j−1 )
                                 ûy (0)Pt+1
                   β j−1
                           ûy (R̂t+1 )(1 + R̂t+1 )
Equation (43) implies24
                                ∞
                                  ( j                               )
                                X  Y                                                   ûy (0)Pt+1
                         Et+1                   Qt+v+1 Pt+j                ≤                                             ,       (44)
                                j=1       v=1                                  ûy (R̂t+1 )(1 + R̂t+1 )(1 − β)

which proves that the second piece of the infinite sum defining At+1 is well defined. From
Assumption 2, we have |Tt+j+1 | ≤ T Pt+j + |Bt+j |, and so
              ∞
                ( j                    )     ∞          Yj
             X    Y                        X                     h               i
        Et+1           Qt+v+1 Tt+j+1 ≤            Et+1       Qt+v+1 Pt+j T + |Bt+j | .                                           (45)
                   j=1        v=1                                   j=1                v=1

We analyze equation (45) in pieces. Using (44), we have
                   ∞
                           ( j                )
                  X         Y                              T ûy (0)Pt+1
               T      Et+1        Qt+v+1 Pt+j ≤                                     .                                            (46)
                  j=1         v=1                  ûy (R̂t+1 )(1 +  R̂t+1 )(1 − β)
  23
       If the borrowing limit is not 0, the expression in (42) would not be 0, but it can be proven that At+1 is
nonetheless well defined.
  24
     We can interchange the order of the sum and the expectations since all elements of the sum have the same
sign.

                                                                       28
To work on the sum of debt, notice first that equation (1) continues to hold even if we replace
Rt by R̂t . This is because Bt = 0 in the periods and states of nature in which R̂t > Rt . If
Assumption 1 is retained, define S := maxR∈[0,R] [ĉ(R)(1 + R)]; alternatively, if Assumption 5 is
adopted instead, define S := maxR∈[0,∞] [ĉ(R)(1 + R)]. Finally, notice that Assumption 2 implies

                        |Tt+j − Bt+j−1 | ≤ Pt+j−1 (T + B) + (1 − α)|Bt+j−1 |.                        (47)

We can then use (1), (15), (39), and (47) to get
                       ( j                   )        j−1
                                                    Y
                         Y                                    h
                 Et+1         Qt+v+1 |Bt+j | = Et+1       Qt+v+1 Pt+j−1 G−
                              v=1                                       v=1
                                                                                 i
                    Tt+j + Bt+j−1 + ĉ(R̂t+j−1 )Pt+j−1 − ĉ(R̂t+j )Pt+j               =
                             j−1
                           Y               h
                    Et+1            Qt+v+1        Pt+j−1 G − Tt+j + Bt+j−1 + ĉ(R̂t+j−1 )Pt+j−1 −
                              v=1
                                                                                                    (48)
                    βPt+j−1 ĉ(R̂t+j )(1 + R̂t+j )ûy (R̂t+j ) i
                                                          ≤
                               ûy (R̂t+j−1 )
                           j−1
                       Y                                                   !
                                       h              β ûy (0)S
                  Et+1         Qt+v+1        G+T +B+                  + ĉ(0) Pt+j−1 +
                           v=1                       û y ( R̂t+j−1 )
                            i
           (1 − α) |Bt+j−1 | .

Using (43) and (48), we obtain (for j > 1)
          ( j                 )         X j               s−1
                                                         Y
            Y                                                      
                                                    j−s
     Et+1       Qt+v+1 |Bt+j | ≤ Et+1        (1 − α)           Qt+v+1 ·
              v=1                                     s=2                v=1
                                                  !          
     h                     β ûy (0)S                                             |Bt+1 |
         G+T +B+                        + ĉ(0) Pt+s−1            + (1 − α)j−1               ≤
                        uy (R̂t+s−1 )                                            1 + R̂t+1
                                        j                                                           (49)
     ûy (0)Pt+1 G + T + B + βS + ĉ(0) X                                             |Bt+1 |
                                                      β s−2 (1 − α)j−s + (1 − α)j−1
                                                                      
                                                                                                 =
               ûy (R̂t+1 )(1 + R̂t+1 )           s=2                                1  + R̂ t+1
                             j−1     j−1
                                                                    
     ûy (0)Pt+1 [(1 − α) − β ] G + T + B + βS + ĉ(0)                              |Bt+1 |
                                                                      + (1 − α)j−1             .
                     ûy (R̂t+1 )(1 + R̂t+1 )(1 − α − β)                           1 + R̂t+1




                                                            29
Using (49) we get
                          ∞
                                       ( j                            )
                          X             Y                   
                                Et+1               Qt+v+1 |Bt+j |          ≤
                          j=1                v=1
                                                                                                       (50)
                          ûy (0)Pt+1 G + T + B + βS + ĉ(0)                               |Bt+1 |
                                                                                   +
                                ûy (R̂t+1 )(1 + R̂t+1 )α(1 − β)                       α(1 + R̂t+1 )
Collecting all terms, equations (44), (46), and (50) imply
                                                                                       
                                                         ûy (0)Pt+1
                              |At+1 | ≤                                  1 + T+
                                         ûy (R̂t+1 )(1 + R̂t+1 )(1 − β)
                                                                    
                                1                                   
                                      G + T + B + βS + ĉ(0) +                                          (51)
                                α
                                 |Bt+1 |                           
                                              + Pt 1 + ĉ(0) + T + |Bt |.
                              α(1 + R̂t+1 )

A.2.2     Equation (40) holds.

Use (49) to obtain
                                 "   t+1
                                                  !      #
                                     Y
                        lim E0               Qj       |Bt | ≤
                       t→∞
                                       j=1
                                                                       
                       ûy (0)P0 G + T + B + βS + ĉ(0)                                                 (52)
                                                                           lim (1 − α)t − β t +
                                                                                            
                          ûy (R̂0 )(1 + R̂0 )(1 − α − β)                  t→∞

                        |B0 |
                                lim (1 − α)t = 0.
                       1 + R̂0 t→∞
We then use (39), (51), and (52) to prove
             " t+1 !          #            
                Y                  ûy (0)
      lim E0        Qj |At+1 | ≤            1 + T+
     t→∞
                j=1
                                   1 −   β
                                               " t+2 !                     #
        1                                            Y             Pt+1
             G + T + B + βS + ĉ(0) lim E0                Qj                    +
        α                               t→∞
                                                      j=1        ûy (R̂t+1 )
               " t+2 !          #                                         " t+1 !                 #
     1            Y                                                          Y          Pt            (53)
        lim E0        Qj |Bt+1 | + ûy (0) 1 + ĉ(0) + T lim E0                    Qj               +
     α t→∞        j=1
                                                               t→∞
                                                                               j=1    ûy ( R̂t )
             " t+1 !        #                                
                Y                    ûy (0)P0            β
      lim E0        Qj |Bt | =                                  1 + T+
     t→∞
                j=1              (1 + R̂0 )ûy (R̂0 ) 1 − β
                                                        
        1
             G + T + B + βS + ĉ(0) + 1 + ĉ(0) + T lim β t = 0.
                                    
        α                                                    t→∞


                                                                 30
Equations (11), (52), and (53) imply (16).


A.2.3    Equation (37) holds.

The same steps used to prove (52) can also be used to prove
                                      ( j+1             )
                                       Y        
                               lim Et       Qt+v |Bt+j | = 0.                                               (54)
                                j→∞
                                           v=1


As previously noted, equation (1) continues to hold even if we replace Rt with R̂t , since the two
values only differ when Bt = 0. We can then iterate (1) forward, taking expectations conditional
on time-t + 1 information, and use (54) to obtain
                                                             ∞  Y
                                                            X   s
                                                                                      !
                   Bt = Mt+1 − Mt − Tt+1 − Pt G + Et+1                       Qt+v+1       ·
                                                             s=1     v=1                                  (55)
                                                   
                    Mt+s+1 − Mt+s + Tt+s+1 − Pt+s G            > At+1 ,

which completes the proof. Equation (55) relies on G < 1 (government spending must be less
than the maximum producible output) and on

                                                          R̂t+s Mt+s
                            Et+s [Mt+s (1 − Qt+s+1 )] =                ≥ 0.
                                                          1 + R̂t+s
This completes the proof of proposition 2.



B       Other Equilibria of the Stochastic Economy
The perfectly anticipated run described in section 4.1 relies on strong assumptions about pref-
                                                                                              c1−σ
erences. As an example, if we assume that preferences are given by u(ct , yt ) =              1−σ
                                                                                                     − y ψ , such
an equilibrium will always fail to exist for σ ≤ 1, since a solution to (26) cannot be found (with
R̂ > R). Nonetheless, even for these preferences other equilibria that feature runs exist, provided
that the occurrence of a run is sufficiently small. Moreover, these equilibria exist even when the
central bank sets no upper bound to its interest rate (provided, of course, that preferences are
such that the present value of seigniorage remains finite).

                                                 31
       As is known since Sargent and Wallace [15], even without considering runs, setting monetary
policy as an interest rate rule leaves open the possibility of sunspot equilibria. But equilibria with
runs are qualitatively very different from these sunspot equilibria. In a standard environment
where B = R and no runs can occur, the nominal interest rate is closely related to expected
(inverse) inflation, so that setting the nominal interest rate still allows the central bank a con-
siderable degree of control, at least over long periods of time. This relationship between nominal
interest rates and expected inflation is lost in equilibria that feature runs, and the dangers from
relying purely on the nominal interest rate as a policy instrument are correspondingly more
acute.


B.1         Sunspot Equilibria with no Runs

We can construct sunspot equilibria recursively as follows. For any arbitrary initial price P0 , the
variables R0 , T0 , C0 , Y0 , M0 , and B0 are determined as in section 3. The time-0 variables and
the policy rules determine R1 and T1 , also as in section 3, which then pin down C1 and Y1 ; this
implies that C1 and Y1 are known as of period 0.25 But now the deterministic Euler equation
(14) is replaced by its stochastic counterpart, (39). In an equilibrium with no runs, we know
that R̂1 = R1 . Substituting this into (39), rearranging and taking expected values we obtain

                                                P0        uy (C0 , Y0 )
                                           E0      =                         .                                     (56)
                                                P1   βuy (C1 , Y1 )(1 + R1 )

We can then pick P1 as an arbitrary function of the sunspot s1 , subject to the single restriction
(56) on its expected value. Given the realization of s1 and thus P1 , equation (15) determines
M1 , equation (1) yields B1 , and the process can be repeated for period 2.
       Provided that either Assumption 1 or 5 hold, Proposition 2 ensures that the transversality
and no-Ponzi conditions are satisfied for the sequences that we constructed: as discussed in
Cochrane [8], in this model only fiscal policy can provide a boundary condition to rule out some
of these arbitrary paths.26
  25
       We assume that the monetary and fiscal authorities follow deterministic rules; this is immaterial to our results.
  26
       Notice that uniqueness results based on the failure of both Assumptions 1 and 5 relate to fiscal policy: some
sunspot paths can be ruled out because seigniorage revenues become infinite, making it impossible for fiscal policy


                                                            32
   While sunspot equilibria imply that inflation is indeterminate, equilibria that feature no runs
still display remarkable similarities across each other. As an example, suppose that monetary
policy sets Rt ≡ 1/β −1 unconditionally. It is straightforward to verify that equation (17) implies
a constant allocation, and that (39) implies (18): the expected real value of a dollar remains
constant. Equation (18) and the assumption of a uniform bound on Pt /Pt+1 in turn imply (19).


B.2      A Probabilistic Run in Period s > 0.

We now construct an equilibrium where a run occurs in period s with probability φ ∈ (0, 1).
As was the case in section 4.1, fiscal policy plays an important role in ensuring that households
have enough nominal wealth to acquire their desired money balanced, and we assume that (25)
holds. Starting from an arbitrary initial price level P0 , we construct recursively a deterministic
allocation and price system up to period s − 1 as we did in section 4.1. For period s, we consider
an equilibrium with just two realizations of the allocation and price level: with probability φ,
the price level is PsH and a run occurs (R̂sH > Rs ), and with probability 1 − φ the price level is
PsL and the private nominal interest rate coincides with the public one: R̂sL = Rs . In order for
R̂sH > Rs to be an equilibrium, the constraint Bs ≥ 0 must be binding, which implies
                                                                H
                              Ms−1 + Bs−1      Ts         H Ps
                                          +G=      + ĉ(R̂s )      .                               (57)
                                 Ps−1         Ps−1            Ps−1

Given any arbitrary value R̂sH > Rs , and given the predetermined time-s − 1 variables and the
fiscal policy rule for Ts , equation (57) can be solved for PsH /Ps−1 , the level of inflation that will
occur if a run on the interest rate peg materializes in period s. As was the case in section 4.1, since
ĉ is a decreasing function and taxes satisfy (22), inflation in the event of a run will necessarily
be strictly greater than inflation in the equilibrium in which no run can take place.
   To determine PsL /Ps−1 , we rely on the household Euler equation (39). Rearranging terms
and taking the expected value as of period s − 1, we obtain
                                                                      
                       H         H Ps−1                           Ps−1
             β φûy (R̂s )(1 + R̂s ) H + (1 − φ)ûy (Rs )(1 + Rs ) L = ûy (Rs−1 ).                (58)
                                    Ps                            Ps
to be Ricardian.



                                                  33
Generically, this equation can be solved for PsL /Ps−1 . However, we need to ensure that the
solution is nonnegative, and that it entails nonnegative bond holdings, i.e., that

                                                                    Ts           PL
                                  Ms−1 + Bs−1 + Ps−1 G ≥                + ĉ(Rs ) s                             (59)
                                                                   Ps−1          Ps−1

A sufficient condition for both is that φ be sufficiently small.27
       If ûy does not decline too fast with R, then equation (58) will imply that PsL /Ps−1 is lower
than in the deterministic equilibrium with no runs. Because of this, the possibility of a run may
cause the central bank to under shoot inflation while the run is not occurring, further undermining
inflation stability.
       From period s onwards, the characterization of the equilibrium proceeds again deterministi-
cally and recursively, separately for the branch that follows PsH and PsL ; this follows the same
steps as in section 4.1. The construction of the equilibrium is completed by Proposition 2 that
ensures that the transversality and no-Ponzi conditions are satisfied for the sequences that we
constructed.
       The nature of the equilibrium that we constructed is quite different from those of section B.1.
To see this more in detail, consider again the case in which the central bank sets Rt ≡ 1/β − 1
in every period. It is now no longer true that consumption is then fixed. If a run occurs, the
relevant shadow cost of consumption in equation (21) is RsH , and consumption drops. This also
implies that consumption is not predetermined, but it depends on the realization of the sunspot.
Moreover, using (21) and (39), we obtain
                                                                                                       
                                          2                                   Ps−1
              uc (Cs−1 , Cs−1 + Ḡ) = β (1 + Rs−1 )Es−1            (1 + R̂s )      uc (Cs+1 , Cs+1 + Ḡ) .
                                                                              Ps+1

With the constant interest rate above, and taking into account that the run occurs in period s
only, consumption is the same in periods s − 1 and s + 1 and we thus find
                                                          
                                                      Ps−1
                                 1 = βEs−1 (1 + R̂s )        .                                                  (60)
                                                      Ps+1
  27
       Note that, as φ → 0, PsL /Ps−1 converges to the inflation in the deterministic equilibrium with no runs, where
(22) guarantees that (59) holds.




                                                          34
We know that β(1 + R̂s ) ≥ β(1 + Rs ) = 1, and the inequality is strict with probability φ. This
implies
                                                       Ps−1
                                           1 > Es−1         .
                                                       Ps+1
When runs can occur, setting the nominal interest rate is not sufficient to even control the
expected real value of a dollar.


B.3       Recurrent Runs

We can generalize the example of subsection B.2 to construct equilibria in which runs can occur
in any number of periods. As an example, there are equilibria in which runs occur with i.i.d.
probability φ in each period. Once again, we construct the allocation and price system recursively,
as we did in section B.2. In each period t, the history of runs up to period t − 1 is taken as given,
and (57) and (58) are used to solve for PtH /Pt−1 and PtL /Pt−1 .
   To contrast these equilibria with the usual sunspot equilibria where no runs occur, consider
again the interest rule Rt ≡ 1/β − 1, and assume that preferences are linear in leisure, i.e.,
u(c, l) = v(c) − l. In this case, equation (39) becomes
                                                     
                                                  Ps               Ps
                            1 = βEs (1 + R̂s+1 )        =⇒ 1 > Es      .
                                                 Ps+1             Ps+1
We then get
                                        T
                                     1 X Ps
                                 lim            < 1 almost surely:
                                T →∞ T     Ps+1
                                       s=1
if runs are a recurrent event, average inverse inflation is necessarily less than 1 over long horizons.



References
 [1] Fernando Alvarez and Andrew Atkeson. Money and Exchange Rates in the Grossman-Weiss
      and Rotemberg Model. Journal of Monetary Economics, 40(3):619–640, 1997.

 [2] Fernando Alvarez, Andrew Atkeson, and Chris Edmond. On the Sluggish Response of
      Prices to Money in an Inventory Theoretic Model of Money Demand. Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, 124(3):911–967, 2009.

                                                  35
 [3] Andrew Atkeson, V. V. Chari, and Patrick. J. Kehoe. Sophisticated Monetary Policies. The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1):47–89, 2010.

 [4] Marco Bassetto. Equilibrium and Government Commitment. Journal of Economic Theory,
    124(1):79–105, 2005.

 [5] Jess Benhabib, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martin Uribe. Monetary Policy and Multiple
    Equilibria. American Economic Review, 91(1):167–186, 2001.

 [6] Jess Benhabib, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martin Uribe. The Perils of Taylor Rules.
    Journal of Economic Theory, 96(1):40–69, 2001.

 [7] Ben. S. Bernanke.     Five Questions about the Federal Reserve and Monetary Policy.
    url=http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20121001a.htm, 10 2012.
    Speech at the Economic Club of Indiana, Indianapolis, Indiana.

 [8] John H. Cochrane. Determinacy and Identification with Taylor Rules. Journal of Political
    Economy, 119(3):565–615, 2011.

 [9] A. Kerem Coşar and Edward Green. Necessary and Sufficient Conditions of Dynamic Op-
    timization.   http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/kerem.cosar/research/CosarGreen_
    NecSufConditionsDynOpt.pdf, 2008. Mimeo, University of Chicago.

[10] Barry Eichengreen and Peter M. Garber. Before the Accord: U.S. Monetary-Financial
    Policy, 1945-51. In R. Glenn Hubbard, editor, Financial Markets and Financial Crises,
    pages 175–206. University of Chicago Press, 1991.

[11] Sanford Grossman and Laurence Weiss. A Transactions-Based Model of the Monetary
    Transmission Mechanism. American Economic Review, 73(5):871–880, 1983.

[12] Eric Leeper. Equilibria under ‘Active’ and ‘Passive’ Monetary Policies. Journal of Monetary
    Economics, 27(1):129–147, 1991.




                                              36
[13] Robert E. Lucas, Jr. Panel Discussion: Central Banking: Is Science Replacing Art? In
    Monetary Policy. A Journey from Theory to Practice. An ECB Colloquium held in honour
    of Otmas Issing 16-17 March 2006, pages 168–171. European Central Bank, 2007.

[14] Thomas J. Sargent. The Ends of Four Big Inflations. In Robert E. Hall, editor, Inflation:
    Causes and Effects, pages 41–97. The University of Chicago Press, 1983.

[15] Thomas J. Sargent and Neil Wallace. “Rational” Expectations, the Optimal Monetary
    Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule. Journal of Political Economy, 83(2):241–
    254, 1975.

[16] Thomas J. Sargent and Neil Wallace. Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic. Federal
    Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 5(1):1–17, 1981.

[17] Christopher A. Sims. A Simple Model for Study of the Determination of the Price Level
    and the Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy. Economic Theory, 4(3):381–399, 1994.

[18] Lars E. O. Svensson and Michael Woodford. Implementing Optimal Policy through Inflation-
    Forecast Targeting. In Ben S. Bernanke and Michael Woodford, editors, The Inflation-
    Targeting Debate, volume 32 of National Bureau of Economic Research Studies in Business
    Cycles, chapter 2, pages 94–118. University of Chicago Press, 2005.

[19] Michael Woodford. Monetary Policy and Price Level Determinacy in a Cash-in-Advance
    Economy. Economic Theory, 4(3):345–380, 1994.

[20] Michael Woodford. Interest & Prices. Princeton University Press, 2003.




                                             37
