                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 ON RETURNS DIFFERENTIALS

                                        Stephanie E. Curcuru
                                         Charles P. Thomas
                                         Francis E. Warnock

                                        Working Paper 18866
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18866


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2013




A revised version of this paper is forthcoming in Journal of International Money and Finance. The
authors thank for helpful comments Kristin Forbes, Ralph Koijen, Philip Lane, Bob McCauley, Enrique
Mendoza, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, Brent Neiman, Maurice Obstfeld, Jules van Binsbergen, and
participants in seminars or conferences at the AEAs, NBER, Georgetown, Federal Reserve Board
and Koc University. Warnock thanks the Darden School Foundation for generous support. The views
in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or of any other person associated with the Federal Reserve
System.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Stephanie E. Curcuru, Charles P. Thomas, and Francis E. Warnock. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
On Returns Differentials
Stephanie E. Curcuru, Charles P. Thomas, and Francis E. Warnock
NBER Working Paper No. 18866
March 2013, Revised May 2013
JEL No. F3,G15

                                              ABSTRACT

Estimates of U.S. returns differentials have ranged from exorbitant to quite small, in part because of
their volatility coupled with the relatively short time series available. We shed light on underlying
drivers of returns differentials by presenting a number of decompositions: a by-asset-class decomposition
into yields and capital gains, the Gourinchas and Rey (2007a) composition and return effects, and
further decompositions of capital gains that focus on exchange rate effects. While each decomposition
informs thinking about returns differentials, one constant is evident throughout: to date the existing
differential favoring the U.S. has owed primarily to one factor, a differential in direct investment yields.
We discuss how our analysis informs the income puzzle (of positive net income flows to the U.S. even
as its net international investment position is negative and substantial) and the position puzzle (of a
sizeable gap between the reported U.S. net international position and cumulated current account deficits),
provide an initial assessment of the literature on the dynamics of returns differentials, and present
a framework to guide a forward-looking view of how returns differentials might evolve in the future.


Stephanie E. Curcuru                                 Francis E. Warnock
Board of Governors                                   Darden Business School
of the Federal Reserve System                        University of Virginia
20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW              Charlottesville, VA 22906-6550
Washington DC 20551                                  and NBER
stephanie.e.curcuru@frb.gov                          warnockf@darden.virginia.edu

Charles P. Thomas
Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System
20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington DC 20551
charles.thomas@frb.gov




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18866
1. Introduction

       The U.S. returns differential—that is, the difference between the rate of return earned by

U.S. residents on their foreign assets and that received by foreign investors on their U.S. assets—

is at the heart of two puzzles in international macroeconomics, both depicted in Figure 1. The

first is the position puzzle: The U.S. net international investment position (IIP) is far less

negative than the large and persistent U.S. current account deficits would suggest (i.e., the

reported IIP is less negative than cumulated current account deficits), leading Obstfeld (2012) to

ask whether the current account is still meaningful. The second is the income puzzle: Even with

a substantial, negative IIP, on net the US earns income on its net international position (i.e., the

income balance is positive). Moreover, not only is U.S. net international income positive—it

amounted to $235 billion in 2011—but over time it has improved even as the net investment

position has deteriorated. These puzzles raise several obvious questions: Is the U.S. IIP much

worse than reported? Does the US have outsized earnings on its foreign positions? Are foreigners

such bad investors that their U.S. positions earn substandard returns? When will the U.S. income

balance finally turn negative (and how in the world can it be positive)? And, as Obstfeld asked,

Is the current account even a meaningful measure? The answers to all of these questions, as well

as an understanding of the two puzzles, hinge at least some extent on return differentials.

       Unfortunately for the lay person, the literature on returns differentials is quite confusing.

Two waves of research prior to the recent financial crisis produced very different estimates of

returns differentials. The first wave backed international returns out of IIP and flow data and

found very large differentials in favor of the US, differentials that exceed three percent per year.

In the second wave either data issues from the first wave were addressed or direct readings of

returns were used. These adjustments showed that for overlapping time periods the first-wave
estimates of capital gains differentials were far too high, biasing upwards the average U.S.

returns differential by a few hundred basis points. Then the pendulum swung partly back during

the crisis when some papers in a third wave produced differentials that were as large as those in

the first wave.

           We aim to alleviate confusion surrounding returns differentials in four steps. Step one is

the categorization and analysis of the three waves of literature on returns differentials. Our

assessment of the literature points to direct investment (DI) yields as the primary source of

whatever returns differential exists, so the second step is an examination of the literature on the

source of the DI yield differential. In the third step we explore implications of our analyses of the

overall differential and DI yields to shed light on two puzzles (the income and position puzzles)

and frame the nascent literature on the dynamics of returns differentials. The fourth step

synthesizes the takeaways from the first three steps to form forward-looking estimates of returns

differentials (and the IIP and income balance), estimates that readers can alter by adjusting some

basic underlying assumptions.1

           Before starting, it is useful to lay out some terminology. While it is unusual to do so in

the introduction of a paper, this topic requires precise language.

           Total Returns are comprised of two components, Yield and Capital Gains. Yield is the

return attributable to income streams (e.g., coupon payments, dividends, earnings on DI),

whereas capital gains are the returns attributable to price movements (including exchange rate

movements). We will be exact in our use of these terms. If we write “yield”, we are referring to

the returns attributable to income streams, not capital gains. If we write “returns”, we are

referring to total returns (unless we include the modifier “capital gains”).



1
    Section 5 contains a description of the spreadsheet.

                                                           2
         Returns differentials, which can describe differentials in yield, capital gains, or their sum,

can be decomposed into three components: the composition, return, and timing effects. The first

two—the composition and return effects—capture average characteristics of U.S. cross-border

claims and liabilities. The composition effect is positive if U.S. claims on foreigners are weighted

toward asset classes with higher average returns; Gourinchas and Rey (2007a) showed

convincingly that there is a positive composition effect for the US. The return effect, at the heart

of the exorbitant privilege view, is positive if U.S. investors earn higher average returns within

each asset class.2 The timing effect, the focus of Curcuru, Dvorak, and Warnock (2010), is driven

by reallocations among different asset classes and captures the covariance between current

weights and subsequent returns; foreigners’ returns in the US are degraded by poor timing when

switching between bonds and equities.

         With these definitions, we note that discrepancies in the literature tend to be about

different views of the return effect (whether U.S. investors earn higher within-asset-class average

returns on their foreign portfolio than foreign investors earn in the US). The forces behind the

Gourinchas and Rey (2007a) composition effect are not controversial. It is clear that U.S. foreign

assets are weighted toward equity and DI, whereas foreigners’ U.S. assets are weighted toward

bonds. While the forces behind the composition effect are indisputable, whether the effect favors

the US is sample dependent. If equities tend to outperform bonds, the composition effect will be

positive for the US. Over some (rather lengthy) periods bonds have outperformed equities; over

those time periods the composition effect can be negative for the US. For the timing effect, to




2
  A precise statement on the return effect is in Gourinchas (2006): “The remaining two thirds (of the U.S. excess
return) arise from return differentials within asset classes. This reflects mostly the ability of the US to borrow at very
low interest rates, a fact sometimes interpreted as evidence of the "exorbitant privilege" that the US enjoys from its
unique position in the international monetary order, as the issuer of the world's reserve currency.”

                                                            3
date there is only one estimate of roughly 50 basis points per year in favor of the US (Curcuru,

Dvorak, and Warnock 2010).

        Our assessment of the returns differentials literature begins in Section 2, where we

distinguish between the three waves of research on average returns differentials, mentioned

above. At the end of the third wave, officials at BEA weighed in: The current vintage of IIP data

should not be used to back out returns. We show that when returns are calculated carefully the

capital gains differential is small (about 0.5%) and entirely due to a composition effect (rather

than a return effect), and that the overall differential is almost entirely due to DI yields.

        If whatever differential exists is due to a differential in DI yields, then discussions of U.S.

returns differentials should focus more on DI and less on asset classes such as portfolio equity

and debt for which the differentials are inconsequential over the long run. Thus, in Section 3 we

discuss the literature on the DI differential, a literature that attributes the wedge between yields

on U.S. direct investment abroad (USDIA) and foreign direct investment in the United States

(FDIUS) to differences in taxes, risk, and age. Part of the DI yield differential is hard-wired:

USDIA earnings reported in the Balance of Payments (BOP) are not net of the U.S. taxes paid on

those earnings, whereas FDIUS earnings are reported after taxes. There are also strong incentives

for U.S. firms to book earnings not at home, where corporate taxes are high, but abroad in low-

tax jurisdictions, thus deferring some of the U.S. tax liability. These tax issues add up to 1.8%

per year to USDIA yields. A conservative adjustment, based on CDS spreads, for the relative risk

of investing outside the US accounts for an additional 0.9%. Finally, young firms face start-up

costs and often use accelerated depreciation schedules, depressing reported earnings; the relative




                                                   4
youth of FDIUS explains about 1.5% of the DI yield differential. Together, taxes, risk, and age

explain much of the DI yield differential.3

           In sum, while before the crisis some estimates suggested that there was a large returns

differential that favored U.S. investors, more recent evidence indicates that the U.S. returns

differential averages not 3-4% per year, but more like 1.5-2%, owing primarily to a roughly 5%

differential in DI yields. A literature that has evolved over three decades shows that age, taxes (in

part due to a pre- and post-tax difference in reporting norms), and risk explain that differential.

And, while a sizeable 2% aggregate yield differential exists (mostly in DI), the aggregate capital

gains differential is small, averaging only 0.5% per year, and is entirely due to the composition

effect. As is also shown in Section 3, over relatively short periods fluctuations in the exchange

value of the dollar substantially impact capital gains differentials.

           In Section 4 we explore implications for the income and position puzzles, as well as for

the nascent literature on the dynamics of returns differentials. Our analysis implies that the U.S.

net income puzzle—that the US on net earns positive income on its negative $4 trillion net

external position—is also the result of the relatively high yield earned on USDIA. The position

puzzle—the large gap between reported net liabilities and those that would be implied by past

current account deficits—appears to be the result of large statistical discrepancies between the

current and financial accounts rather than large average returns differentials. In short, the income

puzzle is no puzzle—it owes to a DI yield differential, much of which is easily explained—and a

large part of the position puzzle owes to a disconnect between the data collection systems for

flows and positions. Finally, for the important new literature on the dynamics of returns

differentials, we caution that while long time series are desirable, relatively recent data are more

accurate because of the many improvements to data collection in recent years.
3
    Factors more difficult to quantify, such as transfer pricing, might also play a role in the DI yield differential.

                                                               5
       We close, in Section 5, with a forward-looking discussion of U.S. returns differentials

and their impact on the IIP and income balance, a discussion that is centered on projections

through 2025. A number of interesting points emerge from this forward-looking analysis. First,

even if we impose a zero return effect—that is, we keep capital gains returns differentials near

their long-term average of near-zero within each asset class—the composition effect will be a

stabilizing force on the net investment position. Because U.S. claims contain a relatively high

share of equity, which has higher capital gains returns than other asset classes, there will be a

positive capital gains returns differential that will keep the U.S. IIP from declining as fast as

cumulated current accounts. Second, this stabilizing force will likely be offset, in part, by

changes in the net income balance, which will put downward pressure on the U.S. current

account. If interest rates increase toward their long-term averages, the net income balance will

decline because U.S. claims are much less heavily weighted toward debt than liabilities. Third,

the more benign case of continued current account deficits but a stable net IIP is easy to depict.

A return effect of 2 percent would do the trick.

       This article can inform several strands of the literature. It informs the literature on the

valuation effect of the current account (see, among many others, Devereux and Sutherland 2010).

An important distinction in that literature is whether valuation effects are anticipated or

unanticipated. To rule on that, as Devereux and Sutherland do, requires an accurate measure of

returns differentials. Our work also directly informs the global imbalances literature. For

example, the theoretical models in Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull (2009) and Mendoza and

Quadrini (2010) are in line with Curcuru et al. (2008) and this paper, in that they imply that the

excess return for the US comes out of the composition of the U.S. external portfolio (that is, the

composition effect of being short in riskless assets and long on risky ones) rather than any ability



                                                   6
to produce higher yields on seemingly homogeneous assets (a returns effect). Empirical

regularities impact what theory is written and, of that, which gets an audience, so it is important

to get the regularities right; were such models inconsistent with the perceived empirical

regularities, they may well be shunned. Finally, our work influences the way we think about the

income and position puzzles. We show that these are not actually puzzles, but well-understood

regularities in the data. This is an important distinction. Puzzles are something to explain and

then move on. In contrast, regularities—especially those that involve significant magnitudes—

must be accounted for in subsequent work.4



2. The Returns Differential Literature: Three Waves and an Assessment

2.1 The First Wave

        The first wave of the returns differential literature occurred during the pre-crisis Great

Moderation period. The main papers are Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2005), henceforth LMF1;

Gourinchas and Rey (2007a), henceforth GR1; Meissner and Taylor (2006, MT); and Obstfeld

and Rogoff (2005, OR). This first set of papers—probably with GR1 and LMF1 leading the way

and MT and OR following—used readily available (revised) series to calculate an implied

returns differential. The total return on U.S. claims or liabilities can be calculated as follows:



                                    AtR  AtR1  FLOWt R INCtR
                           rt R                          R                                              (1)
                                              AtR1        At 1




4
 Our work also impacts another literature—comparisons of returns differentials across countries—that we do not
directly address in this paper. As hinted at in the conclusion, however, we can show that returns differentials are
generally not comparable across countries, a finding that would impact the Habib (2010) and Nguyen (2011) papers.

                                                         7
where ARt is the position (claims or liabilities) at the end of period t, FLOWRt is flows (U.S. flows

abroad or foreign flows into the US) during period t, and INCRt is income (interest, dividend, and

DI earnings) during period t. The superscript R denotes revised, indicating that all variables are

of the latest vintage. The first term in (1) is returns owing to capital gains, while the second term

is the income yield.

       Estimates of the yield (the second term in (1)) do not tend to vary much across

researchers. But there are substantial differences in estimates of average capital gains (the first

term) and, more precisely, the dollar amount of valuation changes (the numerator of the first

term). Call that Val (for valuation changes):



                               ValtR  AtR  AtR1  FLOWt R                                 (2)



The logic behind (2) is straightforward. For any account, if the starting balance (At-1), the ending

balance (At), and the contributions made between the start and end dates (Flowst) are known,

investment gains or losses (Valt) can be readily calculated. Given Valt, percentage (capital gains)

returns are:



                               KG Returnst = 100 * Valt / At-1                               (3)



       The first wave of research on external returns applied this logic to U.S. IIP data. In that

context, A is the U.S. international position and Flows are U.S. net capital outflows. In theory,

one could use (1) - (3) to produce an estimate of the returns the US is earning on its international

assets and liabilities. This is exactly what was done in the first wave of papers, which produced


                                                  8
estimates ranging from 2.7% to 3.7% per year favoring U.S. claims (Table 1). Returns computed

using (1) - (3) seem to indicate that in every asset class U.S. investors abroad manage to

outperform foreign investors in the US, and much of the favorable differential results from

higher capital gains rates.

         The problem that the first wave of papers did not anticipate is that in practice (2) cannot

be used to compute a reasonably accurate estimate of Val, and thus there is no basis for applying

(3). The reason is that A and Flows, which have completely different revisions policies and come

from different data collection systems, are not consistent with one another. In the IIP data it need

not be the case that Flows plus Val are equal to the change in A. This contrasts sharply with

normal accounts, in which contributions plus investment gains/losses should equal the change in

the balance.

         In the IIP this inconsistency between A and Flows is represented by an “other changes”

term, OC, which is similar in spirit to the statistical discrepancy in the BOP.5 Including OC as

part of the change in A:



                                    At = At-1 + Flowst + Valt + OCt                                          (4)



and the first wave of papers can be seen as computing implied (capital gains) returns using not

Val but Val + OC:



                                    KG Returnst = 100 * (Valt + OCt) / At-1                                  (5)


5
 Along with balancing items to offset measurement errors, the OC also picks up changes in valuation methodology
and reclassifications. An example of the latter is when a foreigner becomes a U.S. resident. His prior claims on the
US are no longer U.S. liabilities to a foreigner and his prior claims on the rest of the world become new U.S. claims
on the rest of the world.

                                                          9
Applying (5) produces rather large returns differentials favoring U.S. claims on foreigners

because, as it turns out, in the U.S. IIP presentation OC has been on average more positive for

U.S. claims than for U.S. liabilities. This is not an artifact of the older sample period. Even in the

current vintage of data (i.e., recent data that incorporate all past revisions) OC is on average

positive for the US and drives the return differential strongly in favor of the US.6

           One possible takeaway from the first wave of papers is that the U.S. net debt position,

while quite negative, was more benign than thought because the US earned such large returns on

its foreign positions and paid foreigners very little on their U.S. positions.



2.2 The Second Wave

           A second wave of papers, written in the pre-crisis period but at a time of increasing talk

of a coming U.S. BOP crisis, realized that including OC in valuation adjustments might lead to

an overestimate of U.S. returns differentials. The second wave consisted primarily of Lane and

Milesi-Ferretti (2009, LMF2); Curcuru, Dvorak, and Warnock (2008, CDW); and Curcuru,

Thomas, and Warnock (2009, CTW). LMF2 shines the light on OC and carefully assesses how

much might be attributed to true VAL and how much might be discrepancies in the data. CDW

identifies the main sources of the OC—inconsistent position and flow data resulting from

disparate revisions policies affecting different items in the accounts—then constructs an estimate

of the returns differential after removing this inconsistency.

           Compared with the estimates computed in the first wave of papers, both LMF2 and CDW

provide substantially lower estimates of the capital gains portion of the U.S. returns differential

(Table 2), even for overlapping time periods. CDW estimates that the average capital gains
6
    Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti points out that for the US OC had been positive on net in 19 of 20 years prior to 2012.

                                                           10
differentials for debt and equity were 0.2% and -2.3% per year, respectively; their combined

differential was a relatively modest 0.7% per year. LMF2 estimates that the aggregate capital

gains differential is only 0.6% per year—about one-fifth the magnitude of the estimates in the

first wave of papers.

        LMF2 and CDW both end in a puzzle: If average returns differentials are smaller, there is

a disconnect in the international accounts. If OC represent missing net outflows rather than

valuation adjustments, where are the offsetting inflows needed to balance the BOP? CTW

addresses this disconnect by investigating various known holes in the accounts and finds that

some of the needed offsets might be explained by under-reporting of U.S. exports and the

omission of foreign purchases of U.S. real estate from the international accounts. However, some

of the puzzle remains.

        We place a fourth paper in the second wave—Gourinchas and Rey (2007b), henceforth

GR2—because it did not use (1)-(3) to compute returns, but rather relies on market returns

(similar to the CDW approach). Note that GR2 report total returns, whereas the others in Table 2

are capital gains returns, so there is a disconnect in our table. But as can be seen in the table,

GR2 produces modest returns differentials. Given that yields are generally in favor of the US (as

we show in the next subsection), the U.S. aggregate capital gains returns differentials implied by

GR2 total returns are quite negative.7

        Comparing the first and second waves of papers, one might conclude that there appeared

to be an exorbitant privilege, but that it was largely a function of statistical oddities, and when



7
  The returns differentials for GR2 can be computed from http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~pog/academic/IFA_data.xls,
but are not reported in that paper. We thank Alberto Fuertes for pointing this out. Note that we show GR2 data from
1983 in Table 2, just so it overlaps with the LMF2 sample. The GR2 aggregate returns differential for 1973-2004:Q1
is -0.3%. See also Evans and Fuertes (2011), in which an aggregate returns differential of 0.0% is computed for
1973-2008.

                                                        11
direct readings of returns are used U.S. capital gains returns differentials are positive but near

zero.8 But then came a third wave of papers.



2.3 A Third Wave

         Whereas the second wave of papers produced very low average U.S. returns differentials,

a third wave—Forbes (2010), Habib (2010) and Gourinchas, Rey, and Govillot (2010, GRG)—

produced a range of estimates, reported in Table 3. Several of these estimates are quite large:

Forbes (2010) uses the CDW methodology and finds a very high returns differential: 6.9%

excess returns per year during 2002-2006. Habib (2010) finds U.S. excess returns of about 3.4%

for the period 1981-2007; that most of the differential comes from capital gains; that no other

country in a broad panel has a similarly large differential; and, consistent with GR1, that most of

the U.S. returns differential comes not from a composition effect but from a within-asset-class

return differential. GRG provides two estimates, one of which updates and improves the GR1

dataset, confirms the GR1 results, and highlights a long-term average returns differential of 3.5%

per year from 1973-2009 (GRG Table 1, Panel a).

         How do these third wave estimates square with the previous literature? Forbes found a

high differential, but the very short sample is at a time when the dollar was depreciating (which

adds to any underlying differential). Indeed, owing primarily to dollar depreciation, the period

studied in Forbes (2010) was one of abnormally high differentials favoring the US (Figure 2).9

Forbes also reports returns with exchange rate movements stripped out; excluding exchange rate

movements, the returns differential for the asset class at the heart of the exorbitant privilege


8
 Including the yield differential of about 1-1.5%, the overall returns differential was roughly 1.5-2%.
9
 The volatility of international returns, specifically capital gains returns, depicted in Figure 2 motivates the search
for data sets that span longer time periods—see, for example, the GR1 and GRG data that extend back to the early
1950s. We fully agree that best for returns differentials analysis would be the longest accurate time series available.

                                                          12
view—bonds—is very small at only 0.3%. Although Habib (2010) acknowledges the findings of

the second wave of literature, it uses equation (5) to calculate returns.

        Two other estimates of returns differentials in the third wave were more modest. GRG

also estimates the returns differential after removing the OC. The result is an aggregate

differential of 1.6% per year (GRG Table 1, Panel b), and the differential drops dramatically for

each asset class. Statisticians from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) also weighed in.

Gohrband and Howell (forthcoming, GH) estimate an average returns differential of 1.7% per

year from 1990 to 2005 (GH Tables D and E), of which 1.2% is from income yield and only

0.5% is from capital gains. GH differentials are very similar to those calculated by the second

wave of papers, but much smaller than those from the first wave.

        The lower returns differentials in these latter papers stem from their treatment of “other

changes” (OC). To address the issue of how much of the OC to include in Val, GH states:

        “Other changes” are changes in position that cannot be attributed to price changes,
        exchange rate changes, or financial flows . . . it is unlikely that significant price or
        exchange rate changes have been erroneously included in “other changes” . . . It is far
        more likely that financial flows that could not be identified from revisions to position
        estimates have been commingled with statistical changes in the “other changes”
        category.10

Thus, the guidance from BEA—the compilers of data used in all three waves to estimate the size

of the returns differential—is clear: OC likely represent unrecorded flows, and therefore should

not be included in the valuation adjustments used to calculate the returns differential.11 Therefore

the best estimate of the returns differential is a relatively modest, but still significant 1.6-1.7%

per year.




10
  Gohrband and Howell (forthcoming), p. 17.
11
  “Other changes” for FDI does include some capital gains and losses that should be included in valuation
adjustments, but these data are not available.

                                                        13
3. What Drives the Returns Differential?

3.1 Our Preferred Estimates of Returns Differentials, 1990-2011

         To understand the drivers of whatever returns differential exists, we (i) follow BEA’s

lead and update the GH estimates through 2011, separating out capital gains from yields, and (ii)

lean on the GR1 insight that the overall differential is usefully decomposed into two components,

the within-asset-class returns effect and the across-asset-class composition effect.12

          As the second wave of papers made clear, discrepancies in estimates of returns

differentials owed in large part to past BEA policies of regularly revising positions, rarely

revising flows, and never publicly releasing revisions to valuation adjustments. This changed, to

some extent, with GH, which provides data on revised valuation adjustments for the components

of the IIP—data that were previously unavailable to researchers. In what follows the underlying

returns are formed using the GH data (available through 2005) and their recipe to calculate

returns through 2011. Annual averages are presented in Table 4, with the GR1 decomposition of

the differential into the returns and composition effects at the right side of the table.

         Two insights are immediately evident from Table 4. First, a 6.1 percent differential in

FDI yields is responsible for the bulk of the 1.9% overall (annual) differential for the 1990-2011

period.13 Second, in the decomposition into return and composition effects, the return effect—

specifically, its yield component—accounts for almost the entire differential for that period. Over

the past two decades capital gains differentials are small (0.4%) and, as shown in the




12
   We leave aside a third component, the timing effect of Curcuru, Dvorak, and Warnock (2010).
13
   We use current-cost rather than market-value estimates of FDI positions for several reasons. One reason is that it
is highly doubtful that broad stock market indexes can approximate the returns of privately held corporations.
Another problem is how to form an estimate of the return of USDIA affiliates in tax havens, where much of USDIA
is located; local stock market returns, which are used in market-value measures, clearly would not be appropriate.
Parenthetically, we note that if we did use market-value estimates for DI, the aggregate total differential would
narrow somewhat.

                                                         14
decomposition of capital gains, on average almost entirely due to fluctuations in prices rather

than exchange rates.

         Whether the overall returns differential is decomposed into yields and capital gains by

asset class or into the underlying return and composition effects, one thing emerges: To

understand the returns differential, we must turn to yields, and DI yields in particular.


3.2 On the DI Yield Differential

         Based on the most recent and improved estimates the returns differential in favor of the

US is about 2%, and, as depicted in Figure 3 (and Table 4), owes primarily to a large advantage

in DI income yields. In contrast, the income yields for other asset classes and capital gains for all

asset classes (including DI) are virtually indistinguishable for claims and liabilities.14 This

suggests that any discussion of the average size of the U.S. returns differential should focus

primarily on DI, specifically on the earnings U.S. firms book on their foreign operations relative

to the earnings foreign firms book on their U.S. operations.

         That U.S. firms earn more on their foreign operations than foreign firms earn on their

U.S. operations—shown graphically in Figure 4—has been known for decades and is the subject

of several papers (Lupo et al. (1978), Landefeld et al. (1992), Mataloni (2000), Gros (2006),

Bosworth et al. (2008), McGrattan and Prescott (2010), Curcuru and Thomas (CT, 2012)). The

gap between the USDIA and FDIUS yields averaged 5.6% per year from 1983 – 2010 (first line

of Table 5). To shed light on this gap, we next summarize the evidence on the role of factors for

which time series estimates can be formed (taxes, risk, and age) and other factors for which time

series estimates are more difficult to form (transfer pricing, industry mix, and intangibles).



14
  Capital gains for direct investment current-cost positions reflect changes in real estate or inventory values due to
price or currency fluctuations.

                                                          15
       3.2.1 Taxes

       As discussed in CT, some of the difference between USDIA and FDIUS yields is a hard-

wired illusion of BOP accounting, because BOP-reported USDIA earnings are to some extent

pre-tax while FDIUS earnings are after-tax (i.e., after the deduction of U.S. taxes). For USDIA,

BOP-reported earnings are indeed net of foreign taxes, and the U.S. parent earns credit for some

of the foreign taxes it pays, but the parent usually still owes a substantial amount of U.S tax on

repatriated earnings because the U.S. tax rate is generally higher. The U.S. taxes paid by U.S.

parents on their foreign-generated income are not subtracted from BOP-reported cross-border

income receipts because the tax is paid by the U.S. parent firm and is not a cross-border

transaction. Because the reported USDIA earnings yield is net of (the usually low) foreign taxes

but does not net out U.S. taxes, reported data tend to overstate the after-tax earnings of the U.S.

parent firm on their foreign investment. U.S. taxes on repatriated earnings accounts for an

average of 0.8 percentage points of the USDIA earnings yield (Table 5, row 2). U.S. taxes that

might (or might not) eventually be paid on reinvested earnings account for an additional 1.0

percentage point (Table 5, row 3). These estimates of actual and potential repatriated earnings

are consistent with the Bosworth et al. (2008) estimate that the diversion of income to low-tax

jurisdictions accounts for 1-1.5 percentage points of the USDIA yield.

       3.2.2 Risk

       Some of the wedge between USDIA and FDIUS yields can plausibly represent

compensation for the additional risk associated with investing abroad. USDIA is

disproportionately in emerging markets, and Hung and Mascaro (2004) estimate the average

credit rating of USDIA investments was BBB by weighting country sovereign credit ratings by

USDIA investment shares. They estimate the average risk compensation included in USDIA



                                                16
yields was 1.4 percentage points between 1999 and 2003, the average difference between AAA

and BBB spreads over this time. CT used CDS spreads and arrived at more modest estimate of

risk compensation averaging 0.9 percentage points per year (Table 5, row 4), bringing the total

adjustments for taxes and risk to almost 3 percentage points per year.15

         3.2.3 Age

         The literature consistently reports that FDIUS underperforms other domestic operations

and USDIA, despite the widespread belief that these earnings yields should be similar. However,

this literature finds that a significant portion of the earnings yield differential is related to age

(Lupo et al. (1978), Landefeld et al. (1992), Grubert et al. (1993), Laster and McCauley (1994),

Feldstein (1994), Grubert (1997), Mataloni (2000), McGrattan and Prescott (2010), CT). FDIUS

affiliates are generally younger than USDIA affiliates or U.S. domestic operations. Younger

firms have relatively high expenses because of restructuring and other start-up costs, as well as

accelerated depreciation schedules for fixed assets. These higher expenses lead to low initial

earnings yields that disappear as firms age. Further, retained earnings eventually replaces

external financing as the major source of capital as affiliates age, which also results in lower

expenses and higher yields (Feldstein 1994). Finally, as McGrattan and Prescott (2010)

demonstrate, over time firms can accumulate significant intellectual and brand capital, which

raises earnings, but is not included in the measured capital stock or flows. CT finds that relative

youth lowers the FDIUS yield by an average of 1.5 percentage points per year (Table 5, row 5).

In sum, the adjustments for taxes, risk, and age reported in Table 5 account for much of the DI



15
   Other literature suggests that foreign investments also include compensation for sunk costs specific to investing in
a foreign country. For example, in the models of Helpman et al. (2004) and Fillat and Garretto (2010) FDI
investments are subject to sunk costs beyond those encountered domestically. Fillat and Garetto (2010) estimate that
compensation for these sunk costs adds 25% to MNE yields relative to the yields of domestic-only exporters. CT
estimates that this accounts for 1.2-1.5 percentage points of the USDIA yield. For sunk costs to impact the yield
differential, however, they must be larger for USDIA than for FDIUS.

                                                          17
yield differential, totaling 3.2 - 4.2 percentage points per year (with the low estimate assuming

that no earnings currently abroad are ever repatriated).

         3.2.4 Other Factors

         Other factors influencing the difference between USDIA and FDIUS yields include

transfer pricing, industry mix, and intangibles. While many studies have examined the role of

transfer pricing—that USDIA yields are artificially high or FDIUS yields are artificially low

because of favorable inter-firm pricing of goods or services—most find no effect (Laster and

McCauley (1994), Grubert (1997), Mataloni (2000)). However, more recent work by Bernard et

al (2006) finds some evidence of transfer pricing. This study, which examines detailed price and

transaction data on U.S. exports, finds that the prices of exports to related firms are

systematically lower than exports to unrelated firms, and the difference is strongly related to

foreign tax rates. This mispricing will have a downward effect on the earnings of multinational

firms located in the US and an upward effect on the earnings of multinational firms located

abroad. Unfortunately firm nationality is not reported in the customs data used in that study so a

direct link to USDIA or FDIUS earnings cannot be made. However, after making assumptions on

the magnitude of the mispricing that might be attributed to USDIA vs. FDIUS firms, CT

estimates that favorable transfer pricing might account for 80 basis points of the 480 basis point

difference between USDIA and FDIUS yields in 2004.16

         While the industry mix of FDIUS is dramatically different than USDIA and U.S.

investment more generally, Mataloni (2000) finds that the return on FDIUS assets was below

that of U.S. operations for most industries and did not find evidence of industry effects.


16
  This estimate, based on Bernard et al. (2006), is likely a lower bound, which would suggest the effect of transfer
pricing on the wedge between USDIA and FDIUS yields might be greater than 80 basis points. Their sample and
estimates are for goods trade alone. Trademarks, patents, and other intellectual property, where determining an
“arms-length” price is especially difficult, were not included in their sample.

                                                         18
Similarly, Hung and Mascaro (2004) find no difference in the relative risk of the industry

composition of outward and inward U.S. DI investment.

         Other work suggests that differing amounts of investment in intangible capital (defined in

Bridgeman (2008) as patents, trademarks, trade secrets, and organizational knowledge) is

responsible for the large difference between FDIUS and USDIA yields. The value of intangible

capital is excluded from BEA’s current-cost valuation method for DI because of measurement

difficulties.17 Bridgeman (2008) estimates the stocks of intangible assets and finds that including

them in the USDIA and FDIUS positions reduces the gap between USDIA and FDIUS yields by

three-fourths. McGrattan and Prescott (2010) suggest that the low FDIUS yield reflects the large

amount of research and development investment these firms engage in, which is accounted for as

an expense; in their model, intangible capital accounts for over half of the difference between

USDIA and FDIUS yields during their sample period.18

         3.2.5 Summing Up: Factors Behind the DI Yield Differential

         Most of the wedge between yields on USDIA and FDIUS is well explained by

differences in taxes, risk, and age. USDIA earnings reported in the BOP are not net of the U.S.

taxes paid on those earnings, and there are strong incentives for U.S. firms to book earnings not

at home, where corporate taxes are high, but abroad in low-tax jurisdictions so some of the U.S.

tax liability is deferred. These tax issues add up to 1.8% per year to USDIA yields. An

adjustment for the relative risk of investing outside the U.S. accounts for an additional 0.9%.

And the relative youth of FDIUS explains about 1.5%. While transfer pricing, differences in



17
   Investments in intangible capital are generally excluded from the U.S. national accounts because of difficulties in
measuring its production and depreciation. BEA plans to start including some intangible assets related to research
and development in the accounts in 2013.
18
   In related work Hausmann and Sturznegger (2006) infers from the large net income receipts that USDIA
intangible investment is much larger than FDIUS intangible investment, although Buiter (2006) challenges their
methodology.

                                                          19
industry structure, and intangibles likely matter, much of the DI yield differential can be

explained by taxes, risk, and age.



3.3 The Exchange Value of the U.S. Dollar

       Over relatively short periods, movements in the US dollar have strong effects on returns

on U.S. foreign assets (when translated back into dollars). Foreign currency appreciation

increases U.S. returns on foreign assets; dollar appreciation decreases them. This is highlighted

in Table 6, where the sample is split into two periods: 1990-2000 (a period when the dollar

largely appreciated) and 2001-2011 (when the dollar largely depreciated). The two periods differ

not in yields—over the last two decades the yield differential has averaged 1.4% with little

variation (1.4% for 1990-2000 and 1.5% for 2001-2011)—but in capital gains. The capital gains

differential, -0.5% for 1990-2000, was 1.2% over the past decade, owing to a substantial capital

gains differential on equity positions.

       Table 6 also provides more information on source of the capital gains differential. In the

1990s, abstracting from currency returns, aggregate U.S. assets and liabilities performed

similarly; the aggregate “price” differential was 0.1%. The -0.5% differential on capital gains

during that period owed entirely to dollar appreciation; the differential owing to exchange rate

changes was -0.6%. In contrast, in the past decade the positive 1.2% differential on capital gains

was split between price and currency differentials. Equity markets in the US and elsewhere

performed poorly, but foreign markets performed slightly better (1.7% annual return, versus

0.8% in the US). Just as importantly, the dollar depreciated against most currencies, adding to

the returns on U.S. claims.




                                               20
        Our takeaway from Table 6 is that over the past two decades the yield differential has

been both important and relatively stable at about 1.5% per year (mostly due to the DI yield

differential) and that the capital gains differential has been more volatile, depending in part on

fluctuations in the exchange value of the dollar. This volatility occurred in every asset class, and

is likely to continue.



4. Implications for Two Puzzles and the Dynamics of Returns Differentials

4.1 Implications for the Income and Position Puzzles

        Two puzzles, both highlighted in Obstfeld (2012), were depicted in Figure 1: the income

puzzle that the U.S. receives, on net, income payments on its international investment position

even though the investment position is very negative, and the position puzzle of a large gap

between the reported IIP and cumulated current account deficits. In this section we use evidence

from the preceding sections to shed light on both puzzles.

        4.1.1 The U.S. Net Income Puzzle

        U.S. net income on its international positions is positive even though it is a net debtor

because of the net income it receives on DI. As Figure 5 shows, U.S. net income has averaged

$90 billion per year during the past decade. Net DI income more than accounted for the

aggregate amount, averaging $190 billion per year. On other types of international investments,

U.S. net income has averaged negative $100 billion.

        Figure 6 shows this another way. If the yields on cross border claims equaled those on

liabilities, income would be negative and trending down with the position; this counterfactual is

depicted by the dotted line in the figure. If yields on everything except DI were as reported, but

we constrain DI yields on assets to equal those on DI liabilities, income would still be negative



                                                21
until 2011 (the dashed line).19 Over the 1990 to 2011 period, the cumulated dollar value of the

gap between aggregate reported net income and net income with equal DI yields is $2.3 trillion,

or 60% of the total net recorded liability position.20 This illustrates an important point: Although

the total returns differential is relatively small, it nonetheless generates a significant net wealth

transfer to the US.21

         The unusually high yield on USDIA has been the main driver of the net income puzzle.

As discussed earlier, some of this owes to different treatments of taxes in the international

accounts. For the 2000-2010 period, aggregate net income averaged $90 billion per year. An

upper estimate is that differential tax treatment accounted for $64 billion of that.22 If not for the

fact that BOP-reported USDIA earnings are to some extent pre-tax while FDIUS earnings are

after-tax (i.e., after the deduction of U.S. taxes), the aggregate net income balance would be

much smaller, roughly $20 billion per year for 2000-2010. But even after adjusting for taxes, net

income is positive, and considering how large and negative that the U.S. international position is,

this alone is enough to have macro implications. Because taxes and risk play a large role in

USDIA’s unusually-high yield, unless there is a change in relative tax rates or the relative

riskiness of investing in the US vs. abroad, net investment income should continue to be a

significant stabilizing force for the U.S. current account deficit.

19
   The dotted line in effect allocates claims across instrument types with the same shares as liabilities and sets the
yields on each asset type to that on liabilities. The dashed line computes the effect of the DI differential alone,
plotting what net payments would be with claims allocations and yields set to their actual values except that the
yield on DI claims is set to the yield on DI liabilities.
20
   More dramatically, as of 2010 the cumulated dollar value of the gap between aggregate reported net income and
net income with equal DI yields was 90% of the total net recorded liability position in that year. In 2011 capital
gains losses exceeded net income receipts by $530 billion.
21
   This point also holds for capital gains. Even if the average capital gains differential is small, it can still produce
large valuation adjustments in favor of the US because the differential was negative in the early part of the sample
when the gross positions were small, but positive later in the sample after the gross positions had grown very large.
22
   To form this estimate, we start with estimates of foreign taxes paid by country based on benchmark survey data,
then infer what additional U.S. taxes would be due on the income receipts (assuming full credit for foreign taxes
paid, and including both repatriated and reinvested earnings). If instead we limit the adjustment to only taxes paid on
repatriated earnings, aggregate net income would fall less, to $46 billion. Such calculations are not yet possible for
2010, so our estimates for this adjustment end in 2009.

                                                          22
         4.1.2 The Position Puzzle

         Also depicted in Figure 1 was the position puzzle, the large gap between the reported IIP

and cumulated current account deficits. Were the U.S. capital gains returns differential large, the

puzzle would be explained, but the weight of evidence suggests that the capital gains returns

differential is rather small. As noted by LMF2 and analyzed at length in CTW, low estimates of

the U.S. capital gains differential leave us with a very large gap between reported net liabilities

and those that would be implied by past current account deficits and measured capital gains rates.

Cumulating from 1990, CTW estimated this gap to be $1.7 trillion as of 2007. Rather than

closing the gap by adding these other changes to the valuation adjustments, as was done in the

first wave of literature, GH suggests that these are missing flows, which should be included in

the statistical discrepancy. This implies that what has been previously presented as a returns

puzzle is more likely a missing flows puzzle.23

         CTW attempted to close the gap by addressing three types of known weaknesses in the

U.S. international accounts. First, some assets are not captured in the historical financial

accounts data. These include residential real estate, which should be in the direct investment

data, and financial derivatives, introduced only in 2006. Second, some items (IPOs, asset-backed

repayments, goods exports) have known shortcomings in the transactions data in the current and

financial accounts but have no known accompanying flaws in the positions data. Third, some

items (short positions, direct investment in intangibles) have known shortcomings in the

positions data but for which the associated transactions data are thought to be sound. CTW

developed reasonable plugs to these holes, and was able to narrow the $1.7 trillion gap to $370

billion. However, their reconciliation resulted in a positive statistical discrepancy in the BOP of

23
  If the OC are not capital gains that does not necessarily imply that they are missing flows. Some reclassifications
that should be captured in “other changes”, such as the immigration of wealthy individuals to the United States,
might be significant.

                                                         23
roughly $500 billion ($30 billion per year), representing additional unaccounted net inflows, at a

time when the cumulated reported statistical discrepancy was only $32 billion. The CTW

estimates of the statistical discrepancy—formed as a residual after plugging some known holes

in the U.S. data collection system—were greatly at odds with reported statistics.

        In Figure 7 we update the CTW gap analysis. As the figure depicts, using updated GH

returns and a statistical discrepancy that is part reported and part updated CTW, the resulting gap

is fairly small. It appears that a small returns differential might indeed be consistent with

reported BOP and IIP data, and that the position puzzle is really a missing flows puzzle.



4.2 The Dynamics of Returns Differentials

        Our survey has focused on average returns differentials. A valid point is that our best

estimates of the average U.S. returns differential utilize only 22 data points, because some vital

data are not available prior to 1990. Returns differentials are measured, not observed, so they are

inherently estimates; prior to 1990 too much of the data required to form the estimates is

unavailable. Indeed, in their assessment of the literature, GH provided estimates only back to

1990.

        The short time series available poses problems. Returns differentials are volatile, so to

form expectations of future differentials (or even to confidently calculate the mean, the main

focus of this paper) one would want many more than just 22 observations. Likewise, to

understand the volatility of returns differentials or how they covary with US and global business

cycles requires more observations.

        Another important literature—that on the dynamics and information content of returns

differentials—has moved forward by creating more data points on returns differentials.



                                                24
Gourinchas and Rey (2007b) found that returns differentials contribute 27 percent of the cyclical

external adjustment, and Evans and Fuertes (2011) find that one-half of the variation in quarter-

to-quarter changes in the U.S. external position is due to revisions in expectations concerning

future returns differentials. Both findings imply exchange rate predictability at horizons thought

to be ruled out by Meese and Rogoff (1983) and many subsequent papers.

       We wonder, however, about the underlying returns differentials series. One issue is the

creation of quarterly data—increasing the sample size by a factor of four—when positions data

are available only at the annual frequency. More important are substantial differences in the

dynamics of various returns differentials series. Figure 8 shows that while annual returns

differentials fromGH and CTW are virtually indecipherable from one another, differentials from

GR1 are more positive (on average) and much more volatile. GR2 differentials are much closer

to the CTW and GH series, although differences are evident, especially in the 1990s. Evans and

Fuertes state that over a short period (mid-90s to 2004) their differentials are similar to those in

CDW and, hence, not subject to the data concerns raised inCDW, solidified inCTW, and re-

established in GH. At this point one must conclude that while the accuracy of returns

differentials is vital for this literature to be on solid footing and all else equal more observations

can help, the accuracy of the underlying series is not yet clear. More work on this issue is

recommended.




                                                 25
5. A Post-Crisis View of the U.S. Returns Differential

         As our analysis has indicated, it is useful to decompose the U.S. returns differential into

its return and composition effects (as in GR1) and also into yields and capital gains, with a

further decomposition of capital gains into its price and exchange rate components.

         In this section we make these decompositions more tangible by highlighting their roles in

projections through 2025 of returns, net income and the net investment position. Our baseline

projections use the following assumptions: (a) capital gains rates are 5 percent on equities (both

claims and liabilities) and zero for all other assets, (b) dollar depreciates by 0.15 percent in

2012—the actual change in the FRB’s Major Currencies Index—and then remains flat, (c) bond

yields on both claims and liabilities evolve according to changes in the Blue Chip Financial

Forecast from December 2012, increasing by 4 percentage points by 2019 then remaining

constant, (d) the yield on FDIUS claims increases by 1 basis point per year for a total increase of

1.4 percentage points as the capital stock ages, (e) yields on other assets are held at their long-

term averages, (f) U.S. nominal GDP evolves according to the Blue Chip Financial Forecast

from December 2012, increasing by an average 2.7 percentage points per year, and (g) the goods

and services deficit and net transfers deficit both increase by 1 percent per year, with capital

flows increasing to offset the resulting current account deficits (i.e., zero statistical

discrepancy).24



5.1 The Composition Effect

         As GR1 noted, the composition of U.S. liabilities and assets differ, with liabilities much

more heavily weighted toward debt. For decades equity outperformed debt, so it is natural to

24
  Note these are assumptions to construct an illustrative projection and in no way should be interpreted as a forecast
endorsed by the authors or any member of the staff of the Federal Reserve System. The reader can enter her own
assumptions in a workbook posted at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18866/.

                                                         26
assume that based on a composition effect U.S. asset returns would tend to outperform U.S.

liabilities. But during the crisis—and even for a number of years pre-crisis—debt outperformed

equity to such an extent that since 1990 the composition effect is roughly zero (Table 4). Going

forward, if equity reasserts itself as a well-performing asset class, we would expect the capital

gains aspect of the composition effect to increase. Offsetting this, perhaps, would be the effect of

a normalization of interest rates. Were bond yields to increase, the yield portion of the

composition effect would become more negative.

       Our baseline projections depict this scenario of an equity premium and a normalization of

interest rates. Returns differentials are shown in Table 7; projections for net income and the net

investment position are in Figure 9.

       For capital gains, the baseline scenario highlights the composition effect. With a flat

dollar and assumption (a) of no returns differential in each asset classes (i.e., a zero price return

effect), the capital gains return effect is zero. However, because of a 0.7 percentage point capital

gains composition effect, the overall capital gains returns differential is positive. The overall

returns differential is 1.9 percent, due in large part to a 1.3 percent yield differential that is

largely driven by a 4.5 percent differential in DI yields.

       The baseline scenario has striking implications for yields and, by extension, the income

balance and current account. Assumptions (c)-(e) on yields produce a negative net income

balance starting in 2016 (Figure 9), in large part because debt payments to foreigners would

more than double (and debt is a large portion of U.S. liabilities). In this scenario—with a

normalization of long rates, continued trade deficits, no return effect, and a flat U.S. dollar—the

U.S. net IIP and cumulated current accounts both deteriorate to 70 percent (or more) of GDP by

2025. The swing in the income balance from positive to negative has a substantial impact on the



                                                 27
current account deficit. Even though the trade balance improves from -3.7 percent of GDP in

2011 to -2.9 percent in 2025 (because GDP grows a bit faster than the increase in the trade

deficit), the sharp decline in the income balance causes the current account to deteriorate sharply

from -3.1 percent of GDP to -6.2 percent.



5.2 The Return Effect

       The return effect has been driven by within-asset-class differentials in yields, not capital

gains (Table 4). In turn, the large differential in yields owes to the large gap in FDI yields.

Quantifiable reasons behind this DI yield gap, discussed in Section 3.1 and presented in Table 5,

include taxes, risk, and age. Unless U.S. tax laws governing multinational firms change, we

expect differential tax treatment to continue to result in a yield gap in favor of USDIA. The crisis

does not change our thinking on this. However, we expect this gap to narrow a bit because the

return on FDIUS should increase slightly as the investments mature.

       We show an alternative scenario for the capital gains return effect in Figure 10. Here we

start with the capital gains from Figure 9, in which capital gains on claims and liabilities in each

asset class were equal, but then add 2 percentage points to the capital gains return for U.S.

claims. In this case the capital gains portion of the return effect is quite large—counter to

evidence from the past two decades—and even with continuing current account deficits, the net

IIP is stable because of the growth in the claims position. The income yields in Figure 10 are the

same as Figure 9, but the income balance remains near zero because of the relatively fast growth

of claims.

       This is in essence the world as portrayed in the first wave of the literature on returns

differentials. With a 2 percent return effect, the overall returns differential is 3.9 percent. The



                                                28
U.S. income balance remains positive and, thus, even with continued trade deficits the current

account deficit would not deteriorate. With the substantial return effect, the U.S. IIP would

remain stable.



5.3 The Exchange Value of the U.S. Dollar

        Over the short- to medium-term, fluctuations in the dollar can have a large impact on the

capital gains differential. Prior to the crisis many economists believed the dollar would continue

to fall, owing in part to the large and persistent U.S. current account deficits. However, the crisis

stalled the 7-year-long slide in the dollar. Now, in 2013, while some fundamentals point to dollar

depreciation, there are some emerging longer-term factors that should support the dollar. In

particular, the sharp decline in net imports of energy will, all else equal, provide some support to

the dollar. One given: in years the dollar loses value the U.S. returns differential will be higher.

This was highlighted in Table 6, which showed that in the 1990s (when the dollar appreciated)

FX capital gains subtracted 0.6 percent per year from U.S. returns differentials, whereas dollar

depreciation since 2001 added 0.7 percent per year.

        Our baseline dollar projection in Table 7 and Figure 9 is flat, with no change from 2013

to 2025. If instead the dollar depreciates by -0.5 percent per year through 2025, U.S. returns

differentials would increase by 0.5 percent to 2.4 percent, and this higher returns differential

would lessen the decline in the IIP. Another dollar scenario is provided by the Blue Chip

forecasts, which has the dollar appreciating an average of 0.64 percent per year through 2018 and

then roughly flat thereafter. The appreciation of the dollar would result in a negative capital gains

return effect and lessen the overall return differential to 1.7 percent. As a result, the IIP would

deteriorate slightly faster.



                                                 29
6. Conclusion

        In this paper we surveyed the literature on returns differentials. The first wave of papers

in this literature produced differentials in favor of the US that are large enough that “exorbitant”

is an apt descriptor. The second wave recognized that reported (and, especially, revised) IIP and

BOP data could not be combined to back out returns; this set of papers found much smaller

differentials. Some papers in a third wave found much higher differentials, but then the BEA

weighed in: Differentials are small, with the exception of those for FDI yields. We show that the

FDI literature suggests the large yield differential owes to adjustments for taxes, risk, and for the

relative youth of FDIUS firms.

        One surprising result is that the Gourinchas and Rey (2007a) composition effect is small

over the past 22 years. This does not mean it will not be important over the next 22. The

composition of U.S. assets and liabilities clearly differs, with U.S. liabilities much more heavily

weighted toward debt. Debt returns have fared well vis-à-vis equity returns the past few decades,

so there has not been a positive composition effect for the US If in the future equity returns

exceed debt returns, the composition effect will again be important and will increase the U.S.

returns differential.

        Our analysis informs two puzzles. The income puzzle—the fact that U.S. net

international income is positive (and growing) even as its net IIP is negative (and becoming more

so)—owes entirely to the large (reported) earnings U.S. MNCs earn abroad relative to what

foreign MNCs earn in the US, a wedge well explained by issues such as taxation and risk. The

position puzzle—the fact that the U.S. net IIP is far less negative than cumulated current account




                                                 30
deficits—is consistent with a relatively small returns differential, large recent statistical

discrepancies, and adjustments along the lines of Curcuru, Thomas, and Warnock (2009).

        Our analysis also has implications for the nascent literature on the dynamics of returns

differentials and external positions. While we fully agree that long time series of the highest

frequency possible are desirable for this literature, we caution that more work should be done to

ensure that the underlying series are accurate.

        Finally, we note that while it is tempting to compare returns differentials across a range

of countries, there are a number of pitfalls researchers should be aware of. We highlighted some

of the difficulties in interpreting the differentials for a single country. The same difficulties

associated with statistical series breaks, inconsistent data collection systems and out-of-sync

revision policies that give rise to influential “other changes” in the U.S. IIP also exist for other

countries.25 For example, for the euro area OC average 0.5% per year 2000-2009. If one ignores

our caveats and computes returns for other countries via equations (1)-(3), the resulting

differentials are much smaller than for the US and, indeed, often negative (Habib 2010). Our

unreported analysis using IMF data reveals that portfolio returns differentials across countries are

similar to U.S. differentials (excluding OC), suggesting that DI yield differentials are responsible

for the difference between the aggregate U.S. differential and that reported by other countries.

However, substantial differences in DI data definitions across countries make comparisons




25
   Countries’ income and holdings data are not necessarily compiled using the same methods. One example: Based
on IMF BOP data, French FDI claims earned an average of 1.8% per year from 2000-2009—this is the value that is
likely included in the Euro Area accounts, but a presentation on the Banque de France website suggests that the
return on French FDI equity capital claims was about 5% for this period. We can identify a likely reason for the
discrepancy in this example—that French FDI income excludes intercompany debt payments and earnings
reinvested in indirectly-owned affiliates—but other unidentified issues undoubtedly lurk in the data.

                                                       31
difficult for more than a handful of countries. 26 We caution against such analysis unless one is

willing to begin with an arduous data reconciliation exercise.




26
  Excluding direct investment, U.S. returns differentials are in line with the differentials for other large developed
economies including Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand, as well as the Euro Area.

                                                          32
Glossary of Frequently Used Terms

Terms
BOP: balance of payments
CDS: credit default swaps
FDI: foreign direct investment
        FDIUS: foreign direct investment in the US
        USDIA: U.S. direct investment abroad
IIP: international investment position
MNE or MNC: multinational enterprises or corporations

Variables
At : position amount at end of year t
Flowst : net purchases during period t
Valt: investment gains (+) or losses (-) during period t
KGt: percentage (capital gains) returns during period t
OC: “other changes”

Papers Cited Repeatedly
CDW: Curcuru, Dvorak, and Warnock (2008)
CT: Curcuru and Thomas (2012)
CTW: Curcuru, Thomas, and Warnock (2009)
GH: Gohrband and Howell (forthcoming)
GR1: Gourinchas and Rey (2007a)
GR2: Gourinchas and Rey (2007b)
GRG: Gourinchas, Rey, and Govillot (2010)
LMF1: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2005)
LMF2: Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2009)
MT: Meissner and Taylor (2006)
OR: Obstfeld and Rogoff (2005)




                                                 33
References

Bernard, A., Jensen, J., Schott, P., 2006. Transfer pricing by U.S.-based multinational firms. NBER
        Working Paper No. 12493.
Bosworth, B., Collins, S., Chodorow-Reich, G., 2008. Returns on FDI: Does the U.S. really do better? in
        Brookings Trade Forum 2007: Foreign Direct Investment, Susan M. Collins editor, Brookings
        Institution Press, Washington, D.C., pp. 177-210.
Bridgeman, B., 2008. Do intangible assets explain high U.S. foreign direct investment returns? Bureau of
        Economic Analysis Working Paper 2008-06.
Buiter, W., 2006. Dark matter or cold fusion? Global Economics Paper no. 136, London: Goldman Sachs.
Curcuru, S., Dvorak, T., Warnock, F., 2008. Cross-border returns differentials. Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 123(4), 1495–1530.
Curcuru, S., Dvorak, T., Warnock, F., 2010. Decomposing the U.S. external returns differential. Journal
      of International Economics 80, 22-32.
Curcuru, S., Thomas, C., 2012. The return on U.S. direct investment at home and abroad. FRB
      International Finance Discussion Paper No. 1057.


Curcuru, S., Thomas, C., Warnock, F., 2009. Current account sustainability and relative reliability. in J.
      Frankel and C. Pissarides (ed.) NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2008. University
      of Chicago Press, pgs 67-109.
Desai, M., Foley, C., Hines Jr., J., 2006. The demand for tax haven operations. Journal of Public
        Economics 9 (3), 513-531.
Devereux, M., Sutherland, A., 2010. Valuation effects and the dynamics of net external assets. Journal of
        International Economics 80, 129-143.
Evans, M., Fuertes, A., 2011. Understanding the dynamics of the US external position. working paper.
Feldstein, M., 1994. Taxes, leverage and the national return on outbound foreign direct investment.
      NBER Working Paper No. 4689.
Fillat, J., Garetto, S., 2010. Risk, returns and multinational production. working paper, Boston University.
Forbes, K., 2010. Why do foreigners invest in the United States? Journal of International Economics
      80(1), 3-21.
Gohrband, C., Howell, K., forthcoming. U.S. international financial flows and the U.S. net investment
      position: New perspectives arising from new international standards. In Charles Hulten, Michael
      Palumbo, and Marshall Reinsdorf (editors), Wealth, Financial Intermediation and the Real
      Economy (NBER ).


                                                     34
Gourinchas, P., 2006. Global imbalances and financial factors. Review of Economic Dynamics
      Newsletter (April). Available at http://www.economicdynamics.org/News141.htm.
Gourinchas, P., Rey, H., 2007a. From world banker to world venture capitalist: The U.S. external
      adjustment and the exorbitant privilege. in R. Clarida (ed.) G7 Current Account Imbalances:
      Sustainability and Adjustment (Chicago, Univeristy of Chicago Press), 11-55.
Gourinchas, P., Rey, H., 2007b. International financial adjustment. Journal of Political Economy 115(4),
      665-703.
Gourinchas, P., Rey, H., Govillot, N., 2010. Exorbitant privilege and exorbitant duty. Bank of Japan
      IMES Discussion Paper No. 2010-E-20.
Gros, D., 2006. Foreign investment in the US (II): Being taken to the cleaners? CEPS Working Document
      No. 243, Centre for European Policy Studies, Brussels, April.
Grubert, H., 1997. Another look at the low taxable income of foreign-controlled companies in the United
      States. U.S. Treasury Department, Office of Tax Analysis Paper 74 (October).
Grubert, H., Goodspeed, T., Swenson, D., 1993. Explaining the low taxable income of foreign-controlled
        companies in the United States. in Studies in International Taxation, edited by Alberto
        Giovannini, Glenn Hubbard, and Joel Slemrod, 237-275. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Habib, M., 2010. Excess returns on net foreign assets - the exorbitant privilege from a global perspective.
      European Central Bank Working Paper Series 1158.
Hausmann, R., Sturzenegger, F., 2006. Global imbalances or bad accounting? The missing dark matter in
      the wealth of nations. Harvard University, Center for International Development Working Paper
      124.
Helpman, E., Melitz, M., Yeaple, S., 2004. Exports versus FDI with heterogeneous firms. American
      Economic Review 94(1), 300–316.
Hung, J., Mascaro, A., 2004. Return on cross-border investment: Why does U.S. investment abroad do
      better? Congressional Budget Office Technical Paper no. 2004-17.
Landefeld, J., Lawson, A., Weinberg, D., 1992. Rates of return on direct investement. Survey of Current
      Business 72, 79-86.
Lane, P., Milesi-Ferretti, G., 2005. A global perspective on external positions. NBER Working Paper No.
      11589, 2005.
Lane, P., Milesi-Ferretti, G., 2009. Where did all the borrowing go? A forensic analysis of the U.S.
      external position. Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 23(2), 177–199.
Laster, D., McCauley, R., 1994. Making sense of the profits of foreign firms in the United States. Federal
      Reserve Bank of New York Quarterly Review (Summer-Fall), 44-75.



                                                    35
Lupo, L., Gilbert, A., Liliestedt, M., 1978. The relationship between age and rate of return of foreign
      manufacturing affiliates of U.S. manufacturing parent companies. Survey of Current Business 58,
      August, 60–66.
Mataloni Jr., R., 2000. An examination of the low rates of return of foreign-owned U.S. companies.
      Survey of Current Business 80, March, 55-73.
McGrattan, E., Prescott, E., 2010. Technology capital and the US current account. American Economic
      Review 100, 1493-1522.
Meese, R., Rogoff, K., 1983. Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies: do they fit out of sample?
      Journal of International Economics 14, 3-24.
Meissner, C., Taylor, A., 2006. Losing our marbles in the new century? The Great Rebalancing in
      historical perspective. NBER Working Paper No. 12580.
Mendoza, E., Quadrini, V., 2010. Financial globalization, financial crises and contagion. Journal of
      Monetary Economics 57, 24-39.
Mendoza, E., Quadrini, V., Rios-Rull, J., 2009. Financial integration, financial development and global
      imbalances. Journal of Political Economy 117(3), 371-416.
Nguyen, H., 2011. Valuation effects with transitory and trend productivity shocks. Journal of
      International Economics 85(2), 245-255.
Obstfeld, M., 2012. Does the current account still matter? American Economic Review 102(3), 1-23.
Obstfeld, M., Rogoff, K., 2005. Global current account imbalances and exchange rate adjustments.
      Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 67-123.




                                                     36
    Table 1: Returns Differential Estimates from the First Wave of Literature

                                                     Aggregate
                                                              Capital
    Source              Period                  Total Yield    Gains1    FDI     Debt     Equity    Other
    Gourinchas and Rey (2007a)2
     Table 1.1        1973-     Claims           6.8      ..        ..    9.7      4.1      15.5      4.1
                      2004      Liabilities      3.5      ..        ..    9.3      0.3       9.4      1.2
                                Difference       3.3      ..        ..    0.3      3.7       6.1      3.0
     Table 1.2               Returns Effect      2.5      ..        ..    0.0      0.7       0.6      1.2
                         Composition Effect      0.9      ..        ..    0.7      0.2       0.0        ..
    Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2005) 3
     Table 5           1995-      Claims         7.2      ..        ..     ..      4.3      10.1          ..
                       2004       Liabilities    4.5      ..        ..     ..      2.1       9.9          ..
                                  Difference     2.7      ..        ..     ..      2.2       0.2          ..

    Obstfeld and Rogoff (2005)
     Text              1983-      Difference     3.1     1.2       1.9     ..        ..        ..         ..
                       2003

    Meissner and Taylor (2006)
     Table 3 and 4     1981-      Difference     3.7     1.7       2.0     ..        ..        ..         ..
                       2003

1
  Capital gains inferred from the difference between Total and Yield differential.
2
  Values are from Gourinchas and Rey (2007a) Tables 1.1 and 1.2. In that paper they are labeled as real
returns, although in the associated file posted on the web
(http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~pog/academic/wb_data.xlsx) they match series labeled nominal.
3
  Values from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2005) are real returns averaged over the three time periods in
Table 5.
.. not available.




                                                    37
    Table 2: Capital Gains Differential Estimates from the Second Wave of Literature

    Source       Period                   Aggregate        FDI        Debt        Equity       Other
    Curcuru, Dvorak and Warnock (2008)
     Table II   1994-    Claims                  ..          ..         6.1          9.6            ..
                2005     Liabilities             ..          ..         5.9         11.9            ..
                         Difference              ..          ..         0.2         -2.3            ..

    Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2009)1
     Table 7    1983-       Claims              2.1        0.6          0.8         10.3            ..
                2007        Liabilities         1.6        0.5          0.3          9.1            ..
                            Difference          0.6        0.1          0.6          1.2

    Curcuru, Thomas and Warnock (2009)2
     Table 1    1990-    Claims                 2.3        1.3          2.0           8.2         2.8
                2007     Liabilities            1.1        0.5          0.6           9.7         0.0
                         Difference             1.1        0.8          1.4          -1.5         2.8

    Memo: Gourinchas and Rey (2007b)3
               1983-     Claims                 6.8         8.4         8.5         10.4          5.5
               2004:Q1 Liabilities              7.5         9.0         8.2         12.5          5.2
                         Difference            -0.7        -0.6         0.3         -2.1          0.3


1
  Capital gains from Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2009) are averaged over the three time periods in Table 7.
2
  Curcuru, Thomas and Warnock (2009) aggregate and FDI capital gains include the value of “other
adjustments” for FDI.
3
  Total returns for Gourinchas and Rey (2007b) , calculated from
http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~pog/academic/IFA_data.xls, are average nominal total (i.e., yield plus
capital gains) returns and, thus, to make them directly comparable with the capital gains returns in the rest
of the table one would have to subtract yields from them (about 1.0 – 1.5% for the aggregate).
.. not available




                                                      38
    Table 3: Returns Differential Estimates from the Third Wave of Literature

                                                    Aggregate
                                                             Capital
    Source              Period                 Total Yield    Gains    FDI     Debt    Equity Other
                    1
    Forbes (2010)
     Tables 1,2         2002-    Claims        11.2         ..    ..   16.3     6.7     17.4       ..
                        2006     Liabilities    4.3         ..    ..    5.6     5.3      7.6       ..
                                 Difference     6.9         ..    ..   10.7     1.4      9.8       ..
     Excluding ER Changes        Claims         8.6         ..    ..   12.9     4.9     12.0       ..
                                 Liabilities    4.0         ..    ..    5.6     4.6      7.6       ..
                                 Difference     4.6         ..    ..    7.3     0.3      4.4       ..

    Habib (2010)
     Table 2            1981-    Difference     3.4        1.3   2.1      ..      ..       ..      ..
                        2007

    Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot (2010)2
     Tables 1, 3     1973-     Claims           6.3         ..    ..      ..      ..       ..      ..
     Panel a         2009      Liabilities      2.8         ..    ..      ..      ..       ..      ..
                               Difference       3.5         ..    ..    5.0     4.7      4.2     0.2

    Gourinchas, Rey and Govillot (2010)3
     Tables 1, 3     1973-     Claims           5.0         ..    ..      ..      ..       ..      ..
     Panel b         2009      Liabilities      3.4         ..    ..      ..      ..       ..      ..
                               Difference       1.6         ..    ..    1.9     2.5      1.2    -0.9

    Gohrband and Howell (forthcoming) 4
     Tables D, E   1990-      Claims            7.6        5.0   2.7   10.4     7.7      8.5     4.3
                   2005       Liabilities       5.9        3.8   2.1    6.2     6.4     10.3     3.9
                              Difference        1.7        1.2   0.5    4.2     1.3     -1.9     0.4


1
  Returns in Forbes (2010) for components exclude holdings of foreign official investors but these are
included in total returns.
2
  Includes OC.
3
  Excludes OC.
4
  Gohrband and Howell (forthcoming) aggregate and FDI capital gains include the value of capital gains
that are included in “other changes” for FDI, and calculate returns using the market value of the FDI
position.
.. not available




                                                      39
 Table 4: Returns Differential Estimates, 1990-2011
                                                                                of which:
                                                                            Return     Comp.
                              Claims       Liabilities   Difference         Effect      Effect
 Total
    Total                      7.0%         5.2%           1.9%             1.8%          0.1%
    Yield                      5.4%         4.0%           1.5%             1.7%         -0.3%
    Capital Gains              1.6%         1.2%           0.4%             0.0%          0.4%
       of which:     Price     1.5%         1.2%           0.3%             -0.1%         0.4%
                     FX        0.1%         0.0%           0.1%             0.1%          0.0%
 FDI
    Total                     10.6%         4.7%          6.0%
    Yield                     10.2%         4.1%           6.1%
    Capital Gains              0.4%         0.5%          -0.2%
       of which:     Price     0.4%         0.6%          -0.2%
                     FX       0.0%          0.0%          0.0%
 Debt
    Total                      7.4%         6.3%           1.1%
    Yield                      6.5%         5.9%           0.6%
    Capital Gains              0.8%         0.4%           0.5%
       of which:     Price     0.8%         0.3%           0.6%
                     FX        0.0%         0.1%          -0.1%
 Equity
    Total                      7.5%         8.4%          -0.9%
    Yield                      2.6%         2.1%           0.5%
    Capital Gains              4.9%         6.3%          -1.3%
        of which:    Price     4.5%         6.3%          -1.7%
                     FX        0.4%         0.0%           0.4%
 Other
    Total                      4.1%         3.2%           0.9%
    Yield                      3.8%         3.3%           0.5%
    Capital Gains              0.3%         0.0%           0.4%
       of which:     Price     0.2%         0.0%           0.2%
                     FX        0.1%         0.0%           0.1%

Notes: Return calculations through 2009 use the Gohrband and Howell (forthcoming) Table 3 estimates
of income and capital gains for debt, equity, and other assets. For 2010 and 2011 we use the IIP release
for that year. For FDI we use the current-cost value of the FDI position and infer capital gains on a
current-cost basis on FDI from BEA IIP Table 3, available online at
http://www.bea.gov/international/xls/intinv10_t3.xls.




                                                    40
Table 5: Components of the DI Earnings Yields Differential

                                                             Mean

 1. USDIA – FDIUS yield differential (as reported)           5.6%

 of which:
 2.      Taxes on repatriated earnings                       0.8%

 3.      Taxes on reinvested earnings                        1.0%

 4.     Risk                                                 0.9%

 5.     Age                                                  1.5%



Notes: Estimates are 1983-2010 averages from Curcuru and Thomas (2012).




                                                 41
          Table 6: Returns Differential Estimates for Two Sub-periods


                                            1990-2000                              2001-2011
                                 Claims    Liabilities Difference        Claims    Liabilities Difference
 Total
         Total                    7.3%       6.4%          0.9%           6.7%       3.9%         2.8%
         Yield                    6.0%       4.6%          1.4%           4.8%       3.3%         1.5%
         Capital Gains            1.3%       1.8%         -0.5%           1.9%       0.6%         1.2%
            of which:    Price    2.0%       1.8%          0.1%           1.0%       0.5%         0.6%
                         FX      -0.6%       -0.1%        -0.6%           0.8%       0.2%         0.7%
 FDI

         Total                    9.7%       3.6%          6.1%          11.5%       5.7%         5.8%
         Yield                   10.2%       3.2%          7.1%          10.3%       5.1%         5.2%
         Capital Gains           -0.5%       0.4%         -0.9%           1.3%       0.7%         0.6%
            of which:    Price    0.1%       0.5%         -0.4%           0.6%       0.7%         0.0%
                         FX      -0.6%       -0.1%        -0.5%           0.6%       0.0%         0.6%
 Debt
         Total                    7.5%       6.9%          0.7%           7.2%       5.6%         1.5%
         Yield                    7.5%       7.2%          0.3%           5.6%       4.6%         0.9%
         Capital Gains            0.1%       -0.3%         0.3%           1.6%       1.0%         0.6%
            of which:    Price    0.7%       -0.2%         0.9%           1.0%       0.7%         0.2%
                         FX      -0.6%       -0.1%        -0.6%           0.6%       0.3%         0.3%
 Equity

         Total                    8.7%       14.1%        -5.4%           6.3%       2.7%         3.6%
         Yield                    2.6%        2.4%         0.2%           2.6%       1.9%         0.7%
         Capital Gains            6.1%       11.7%        -5.6%           3.7%       0.8%         2.9%
            of which:    Price    7.4%       11.7%        -4.3%           1.7%       0.8%         0.9%
                         FX      -1.2%        0.0%        -1.2%           2.0%       0.0%         2.0%
 Other
      Total                       4.7%       4.5%          0.2%           3.5%       2.0%         1.5%
      Yield                       4.9%       4.6%          0.4%           2.6%       2.0%         0.6%
      Capital Gains              -0.2%       -0.1%        -0.1%           0.9%       0.0%         0.9%
         of which:       Price   -0.2%       0.0%         -0.2%           0.7%       0.0%         0.7%
                         FX       0.0%       -0.1%         0.1%           0.3%       0.0%         0.2%


Notes: Valuation adjustments based on data (and, to update, the recipe) from Table 3 of Gohrband and
Howell (forthcoming). Returns use the current-cost value of the FDI position.




                                                  42
 Table 7: Returns Differential Estimates, 2012-2025
                                                                                   of which:
                                                                               Return     Comp.
                               Claims       Liabilities    Difference          Effect      Effect
 Total
    Total                       7.2%          5.3%           1.9%               1.6%          0.4%
    Yield                       5.9%          4.6%           1.3%               1.6%         -0.3%
    Capital Gains               1.3%          0.7%           0.7%               0.0%          0.7%
       of which:      Price     1.4%          0.7%           0.7%               0.0%          0.7%
                      FX        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%               0.0%          0.0%
 FDI
    Total                      10.6%          6.2%           4.4%
    Yield                      10.6%          6.2%           4.5%
    Capital Gains               0.0%          0.0%           0.0%
       of which:      Price     0.0%          0.0%           0.0%
                      FX        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%
 Debt
    Total                        6.8%        5.5%            1.4%
    Yield                        7.6%        6.3%            1.3%
    Capital Gains               -0.8%        -0.8%           0.0%
       of which:      Price     -0.8%        -0.8%           0.0%
                      FX         0.0%        0.0%            0.0%
 Equity
    Total                       7.6%          7.1%           0.4%
    Yield                       2.6%          2.1%           0.5%
    Capital Gains               5.0%          5.0%           0.0%
        of which:     Price     5.0%          5.0%           0.0%
                      FX        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%
 Other
    Total                       3.7%          3.3%           0.4%
    Yield                       3.8%          3.3%           0.5%
    Capital Gains               0.0%          0.0%           0.0%
       of which:      Price     0.0%          0.0%           0.0%
                      FX        0.0%          0.0%           0.0%

Assumptions: For DI income rates, the rate on liabilities increases by 1.4 percentage points; the rate on
claims remain at long-term average. The income rate on debt claims and liabilities increases by 4
percentage points by 2019 then remains constant; capital gains correspond to this path for yields. Income
rates on equity and other assets remain at their long-term averages. Capital gains return is 5 percent per
year for equity claims and liabilities and 0 percent for all other asset types. The dollar value of the goods
and services deficit and net transfers deficit increase by 1 percent per year; capital flows increase to offset
changes in the current account (i.e., we assume zero statistical discrepancy). U.S. nominal GDP follows
the Blue Chip forecast (2.7 percent average growth). The dollar is unchanged.



                                                      43
Figure 1: U.S. Net International Investment Position and Cumulated Current Account




                1,000

                    0

                ‐1,000

                ‐2,000

                ‐3,000   Net Investment Income
   $ Billions




                         Net International Investment Position
                ‐4,000
                         Cumulated Current Account

                ‐5,000

                ‐6,000

                ‐7,000

                ‐8,000

                ‐9,000


Source: BEA. The cumulated current account series starts with the U.S. net international investment
position at the end of 1989 then cumulates subsequent U.S. current account balances.




                                                      44
Figure 2: Realized Returns on Cross-Border Claims and Liabilities

       20%                              Claims‐Total
       15%                              Liabilities‐Total

       10%
        5%
        0%
               1990
                        1991
                                 1992
                                          1993
                                                   1994
                                                           1995
                                                                   1996
                                                                           1997
                                                                                   1998
                                                                                           1999
                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                          2001
                                                                                                                  2002
                                                                                                                          2003
                                                                                                                                  2004
                                                                                                                                          2005
                                                                                                                                                  2006
                                                                                                                                                          2007
                                                                                                                                                                  2008
                                                                                                                                                                          2009
                                                                                                                                                                                  2010
                                                                                                                                                                                          2011
       ‐5%
      ‐10%
      ‐15%
      ‐20%

      9%                                 Claims‐Yield
      8%                                 Liabilities‐Yield
      7%
      6%
      5%
      4%
      3%
      2%
      1%
      0%
             1990
                      1991
                               1992
                                        1993
                                                 1994
                                                          1995
                                                                  1996
                                                                          1997
                                                                                  1998
                                                                                          1999
                                                                                                  2000
                                                                                                          2001
                                                                                                                  2002
                                                                                                                          2003
                                                                                                                                  2004
                                                                                                                                          2005
                                                                                                                                                  2006
                                                                                                                                                          2007
                                                                                                                                                                  2008
                                                                                                                                                                          2009
                                                                                                                                                                                  2010
                                                                                                                                                                                          2011
      15%                             Claims‐Capital Gains
      10%                             Liabilities‐Capital Gains

        5%
        0%
               1990
                        1991
                                 1992
                                          1993
                                                  1994
                                                           1995
                                                                   1996
                                                                           1997
                                                                                   1998
                                                                                           1999
                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                           2001
                                                                                                                   2002
                                                                                                                           2003
                                                                                                                                   2004
                                                                                                                                           2005
                                                                                                                                                   2006
                                                                                                                                                           2007
                                                                                                                                                                   2008
                                                                                                                                                                           2009
                                                                                                                                                                                   2010
                                                                                                                                                                                           2011



       ‐5%
      ‐10%
      ‐15%
      ‐20%
      ‐25%



Capital gains through 2009 implied from Tables D and E of Gohrband and Howell (forthcoming); for
2010 and 2011 the IIP release. Yields computed from BOP income and the 2010 and 2011 IIP. Yields
computed from BOP income and the 2010 IIP.



                                                                                                  45
Figure 3: Income Earnings yields and Capital Gains on U.S. Cross-Border Positions

   12%

   10%

    8%

    6%

    4%

    2%

    0%
         U.S. Claims      U.S.     U.S. Claims    U.S.     U.S. Claims    U.S.     U.S. Claims    U.S.
                       Liabilities             Liabilities             Liabilities             Liabilities
                 Total              Direct Investment         Portfolio Equity     Debt and Other Assets




                                        Capital Gains            Income


Graphical depiction of the returns presented in the right side of Table 4. Income is from the balance of
payments reported by BEA. Capital gains through 2009 are implied from Gohrband and Howell
(forthcoming); for 2010 and 2011 data are from the IIP Direct investment valued at current-cost. All
values are 1990-2011 averages.




                                                         46
Figure 4: U.S. Direct Investment Abroad (USDIA) and Foreign Direct Investment in the United
States (FDIUS) Earnings yields

14%                                                                        USDIA       14%
                                                                           FDIUS

12%                                                                                    12%


10%                                                                                    10%


 8%                                                                                    8%


 6%                                                                                    6%


 4%                                                                                    4%


 2%                                                                                    2%


 0%                                                                                    0%
      1983
      1984
      1985
      1986
      1987
      1988
      1989
      1990
      1991
      1992
      1993
      1994
      1995
      1996
      1997
      1998
      1999
      2000
      2001
      2002
      2003
      2004
      2005
      2006
      2007
      2008
      2009
      2010
      2011
‐2%                                                                                    ‐2%


The USDIA series is the ratio of aggregate DI income receipts to the USDIA position at current-cost
reported by BEA. The FDIUS series is the ratio of aggregate DI income payments to the FDIUS position
at current-cost reported by BEA.




                                                 47
Figure 5: U.S. Net Income Balance ($billions)
   350



   300



   250



   200



   150



   100



    50



     0
         1960   1965     1970     1975    1980     1985     1990     1995     2000     2005    2010

                                         Aggregate Income Balance
                                         DI Income Balance



The dark bars are reported U.S. net income (BOP Table 1 line 75). The light bars are the reported U.S. DI
net income, which equals DI receipts from abroad (BOP Table 1 line 14) plus (in BOP terms) DI
payments to foreigners (BOP Table 1 line 31).




                                                   48
Figure 6: Reported and Alternative Net Income Estimates


                250                         Income (reported)
                                            Est. income (net position x agg. liabilities yield)
                200                         Est. income (USDIA yield=FDIUS yield)

                150

                100
   $ Billions




                 50

                  0
                       1990
                              1991
                                     1992
                                             1993
                                                    1994
                                                           1995
                                                                  1996
                                                                         1997
                                                                                1998
                                                                                       1999
                                                                                              2000
                                                                                                     2001
                                                                                                            2002
                                                                                                                   2003
                                                                                                                          2004
                                                                                                                                 2005
                                                                                                                                        2006
                                                                                                                                               2007
                                                                                                                                                      2008
                                                                                                                                                             2009
                                                                                                                                                                    2010
                                                                                                                                                                           2011
                 ‐50

                ‐100

                ‐150

                ‐200



The top line on the chart is the net income reported in the U.S. BOP. Two alternative income estimates
are shown. The dotted line estimates income using the product of the net position and the yield on
aggregate liabilities; that is, it forces the yield on assets to equal the yield on liabilities. The dashed line
estimates income by setting the USDIA income yield equal to that earned on FDIUS.




                                                                                              49
Figure 7: Net IIP, Cumulated Current Account, and Valuation Adjustments


                  0

                       1990
                              1991
                                     1992
                                            1993
                                                   1994
                                                          1995
                                                                 1996
                                                                        1997
                                                                               1998
                                                                                      1999
                                                                                             2000
                                                                                                    2001
                                                                                                           2002
                                                                                                                  2003
                                                                                                                         2004
                                                                                                                                2005
                                                                                                                                       2006
                                                                                                                                              2007
                                                                                                                                                     2008
                                                                                                                                                            2009
                                                                                                                                                                   2010
                                                                                                                                                                          2011
              -1,000



              -2,000
                                       NIIP
                                       NIIP(1989) + Σ Curr. Acct.
              -3,000
                                       NIIP(1989) - Σ Fin. Acct.
                                       NIIP(1989) - Σ Fin. Acct. + Σ Val. Adjs.
 $ Billions




              -4,000


                               Reconciliation of the NIIP and
              -5,000           Cumulated Current Account                                                                                                                          Gap

                                        -4,697            2011 NIIP
                                                                                                                                                                                 Valuation
              -6,000
                                     less
                                                                                                                                                                                   Adjs.
                                          -393            1989 NIIP
                                        -7,012            Cumulated CA
                                            -15           Cumulated KA
              -7,000                       839            Cumulated SD                                                                                                            SD+KA
                                         1,444            Cumulated VA
                                           401            Gap
              -8,000



The figure uses Gohrband and Howell (forthcoming) and the 2010 and 2011 IIP rates of return and
adjustments similar to those discussed in Curcuru, Thomas and Warnock (2009). NIIP = U.S. net
international investment position, CA = current account, FA = financial account, KA= capital account,
VA= valuation adjustments, and SD = statistical discrepancy.




                                                                                       50
Figure 8: Time Series of Selected Returns Differentials Estimates

  25%
                                                                                GR1
                                                                                GR2
  20%
                                                                                CTW
                                                                                GH
  15%


  10%


   5%


   0%


  ‐5%


 ‐10%


 ‐15%


GR1 and GR2 are total returns differentials from Gourinchas and Rey (2007a) and Gourinchas and Rey
(2007b), respectively; CTW is from Curcuru, Thomas and Warnock (2009); and GH is from Gohrband
and Howell (forthcoming) through 2009, updated through 2011 using 2010 and 2011 IIP data. For the
relatively short time period (1990 – 2003) for which all four estimates are available, average U.S.
differentials range from -1.5% per year (GR2) to +2.2% for GR1, with CTW and GH at 1.0 and 1.2%,
respectively.




                                                 51
Figure 9: Evolution of Net Income, the Net Position, and the Current Account

               10%

                0%

               ‐10%

               ‐20%
  % U.S. GDP




               ‐30%

               ‐40%

               ‐50%
                              Net Investment Income
               ‐60%           Net International Investment Position
                              Cumulated Current Account
               ‐70%

               ‐80%


Assumptions are as in Table 7. For DI income rates, the rate on liabilities increases by 1.4 percentage
points; the rate on claims remain at long-term average. The income rate on debt claims and liabilities
increases by 4 percentage points by 2019 then remains constant; capital gains correspond to the path of
yields. Income rates on equity and other assets remain at their long-term averages. Capital gains return is
5 percent per year for equity claims and liabilities and 0 percent for all other asset types. The dollar value
of the goods and services deficit and net transfers deficit increase by 1 percent per year; capital flows
increase to offset changes in the current account (i.e., we assume zero statistical discrepancy). U.S.
nominal GDP follows the Blue Chip forecast (2.7 percent average growth). The dollar is unchanged.




                                                      52
Figure 10: Evolution of Net Income, the Net Position, and the Current Account – Alternative
Scenario

               10%


                0%


               ‐10%
  % U.S. GDP




               ‐20%


               ‐30%


               ‐40%          Net Investment Income
                             Net International Investment Position
                             Cumulated Current Account
               ‐50%


               ‐60%


Assumptions are the same as for Figure 9, except for capital gains rates which are 2 percentage points
higher for claims in each asset class.




                                                     53
