                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    HOW ELASTIC ARE PREFERENCES FOR REDISTRIBUTION? EVIDENCE FROM
                   RANDOMIZED SURVEY EXPERIMENTS

                                           Ilyana Kuziemko
                                           Michael I. Norton
                                            Emmanuel Saez
                                          Stefanie Stantcheva

                                         Working Paper 18865
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18865


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2013




We thank co-editor Marianne Bertrand, Raj Chetty, Amy Finkelstein, Ray Fisman, Lawrence Katz,
Wojciech Kopczuk, James Poterba, Andrea Prat, Jonah Rockoff, four anonymous referees, and numerous
seminar and conference participants for helpful comments and discussions. Pauline Leung provided
outstanding research assistance. Financial support from the Center for Equitable Growth at UC Berkeley,
the MacArthur Foundation, and NSF Grant SES-1156240 is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Ilyana Kuziemko, Michael I. Norton, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Elastic Are Preferences for Redistribution? Evidence from Randomized Survey Experiments
Ilyana Kuziemko, Michael I. Norton, Emmanuel Saez, and Stefanie Stantcheva
NBER Working Paper No. 18865
March 2013, Revised December 2014
JEL No. D63,D72,H2,I3

                                           ABSTRACT

We develop online survey experiments to analyze how information about inequality and taxes affects
preferences for redistribution. Approximately 4,000 respondents were randomized into treatments
providing interactive, customized information on U.S. income inequality, the link between top income
tax rates and economic growth, and the estate tax. An additional 6,000 respondents were randomized
into follow-up treatments to explore mechanisms underlying the initial results. The treatment has very
large effects on whether respondents view inequality as a problem. By contrast, it only slightly moves
policy preferences (e.g., top income tax rates and transfer programs). An exception is the estate tax—
informing respondents of the small share of decedents who pay it more than doubles support for it
and this effect persists in a one-month follow-up. We explore several explanations for our results.
Extreme ex-ante misinformation appears to drive the large estate tax results. The small effects for
all other policies can be at least partially explained by respondents' low trust in government—indeed,
we show that priming people to think negatively about the government substantially reduces support
for transfer programs—as well as a disconnect between concerns about social issues and the public
policies that aim to address them.


Ilyana Kuziemko                                   Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Princeton University                              University of California, Berkeley
Wallace Hall                                      530 Evans Hall #3880
Princeton, NJ 08544                               Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                          and NBER
kuziemko@princeton.edu                            saez@econ.berkeley.edu

Michael I. Norton                                 Stefanie Stantcheva
Marketing Unit                                    Department of Economics
Harvard Business School                           Littauer Center 232
Boston, MA 02163                                  Harvard University
mnorton@hbs.edu                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                  and NBER
                                                  sstantcheva@fas.harvard.edu
   The past several decades have seen a large increase in income concentration in the United
States. While the top one percent of families captured 9.0 percent of total pre-tax income
in 1970, that share rose to 22.4 percent by 2012.1 More recent work has documented a
corresponding trend for wealth concentration: the top 0.1 percent share of wealth has grown
from 8 percent in the mid-1970s to 22 percent in 2012 (Saez and Zucman, 2014). These trends
have not gone unnoticed, at least by some. The Occupy Wall Street movement popularized
the term “the one percent.” Recently, President Obama has called “a dangerous and growing
inequality” the “defining challenge of our time,” a sentiment echoed by the CEO of Goldman
Sachs, who told an interviewer that “too much of the GDP of the country has gone to too
few of the people.”2
   There is a large theoretical literature on the link between inequality and redistribution.
The most widely used median-voter model predicts that a widening gap between the average
and the median income should lead to an increase in redistribution, as politicians respond to
the median voter’s preferences (Meltzer and Richard, 1981). By contrast, top income tax rates
as well as inheritance tax rates have fallen in the United States during this period.3 While
for institutional reasons the policy views of the majority might be ignored by policy-makers
(Bartels, 2009), even more challenging to the model’s predictions is that survey respondents
themselves show no increased demand for redistribution since the 1970s.4 If anything, the
General Social Survey shows that there has been a slight decrease in stated support for
redistribution in the United States since the 1970s, even among those who self-identify as
having below-average income (see Figure 1). These trends have led commentators to suggest
that Americans simply do not care about rising inequality.5
   There are alternative explanations: Americans may be unaware of the extent or growth of
inequality (see Kluegel and Smith, 1986 and Norton and Ariely, 2011), this information may
not be sufficiently salient, or they are skeptical about the government’s ability to redistribute
   1 See the online updates to Piketty and Saez (2003), Table A3 at
http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~saez/TabFig2012prel.xls
   2 See     http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/12/04/remarks-president-
economic-mobility and http://thinkprogress.org/economy/2014/06/13/3448679/goldman-
sachs-income-inequality/, respectively.
   3 For top income tax rates, see Piketty, Saez, and Stantcheva (2014) and for estate taxes see IRS

calculations at http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/ninetyestate.pdf.
   4 See, e.g., Kenworthy and McCall (2008), for evidence from a variety of OECD countries that

saw increases in inequality but no corresponding increase in redistributive demand.
   5 As Newsweek put it in 2001: “If Americans couldn’t abide rising inequality, we’d now be

demonstrating in the streets.”



                                                 1
effectively.6 In this paper, we extensively examine these explanations. We conduct a series
of randomized survey experiments using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (mTurk). mTurk is a
rapidly growing online platform that can be used to carry out social and survey experiments
(see Horton, Rand, and Zeckhauser, 2011 and Paolacci, Chandler, and Ipeirotis, 2010). In our
initial set of experiments, comprising just over 4,000 respondents, half of respondents were
randomized into an “omnibus” treatment providing interactive, personalized information on
U.S. income inequality, the historical correlation between top income tax rates and economic
growth, and the incidence of the estate tax. Both control and treatment groups then reported
their views on inequality, redistributive policies, and government more generally. We then
conducted follow-up experiments with about 6,000 new respondents to analyze potential
mechanisms behind the initial results, for a total of approximately 10,000 respondents.7
   Our treatments exploit the flexibility of the mTurk platform to include several features
that heighten the salience of the information we present. First, some of the information we
present is customized. For example, we ask individuals their household income, allowing us
to show them their place in the income distribution, as well as their counterfactual income
level had aggregate income growth since 1980 been distributed more equally (so as to leave
inequality unchanged). In other parts of the survey, we customize information based on
respondents’ own household composition.8 Second, some of the information is interactive—
for example, our survey allows respondents to enter different household income levels and
the software survey application provides the corresponding percentile, so that the income
distribution can be transparently explored.
   The initial survey experiment provides several findings we believe to be novel relative to
existing literature; the first part of the paper provides a descriptive analysis of these results.
First, we find that respondents’ concern about inequality is very elastic to information—
   6A   number of alternative theoretical models make different predictions than the median voter
model. Corneo and Gruner (2000) propose a model with status effects where the middle class
opposes redistribution when this leads to more social competition with bottom income earners.
Alesina and Angeletos (2005); Piketty (1995) show that different beliefs on the role of effort vs.
luck in success can lead to multiple redistributive equilibria. Benabou and Ok (2001) show that the
prospect for upward mobility can limit the desire for redistribution. There is also a wide empirical
literature on the determinants of preferences for redistribution (see e.g., Corneo and Gruner (2002),
Guillaud (2013), and Senik (2009) for evidence from cross-country survey data).
    7 Survey questions and treatments are all available online at

https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_77fSvTy12ZSBihn.
    8 Recent work has highlighted the potential power of customizing information in interventions.

For example, Hoxby and Turner (2013) credit the customized nature of the information they present
to students for the large effects their intervention had on college application decisions.


                                                 2
for example, the treatment increases the share agreeing that inequality is a “very serious
problem” by over 35 percent. Put differently, the treatment effect is equal to roughly 36
percent of the gap between self-identified liberals and self-identified conservatives on this
question. By contrast, while there are some effects on policy preferences such as top income
tax rates, the minimum wage and food stamps (always in the “expected” direction), they
are small and often insignificant despite the large sample size.
   The only exception is the estate tax—we find that providing information on the (small)
share of estates subject to the tax more than doubles respondents’ support for increasing it.
Focusing on the estate tax result, we attempt to make progress on two long-standing critiques
about survey analysis: that the effects are ephemeral and unrelated to actual behavior. We
benefit from the mTurk technology and re-survey respondents one month later: the estate
tax effect is virtually unchanged. We also find that the treatment significantly increases the
share of respondents who say they would send a petition to one of the U.S. Senators from
their state to raise the estate tax.
   The second half of the paper explores the mechanisms behind the large estate-tax effects
and the muted response for any other policy outcome. Of course, other explanations may
exist and as such we do not view our attempts to tease out the mechanisms behind the
main results as definitive. Consistent with past work, we find that respondents are wildly
misinformed about the share of decedents subject to the estate tax, which appears to account
for the large effects. We further show that the estate tax effect remains strong even when
we take steps to decrease the salience and emotional content of the information provided,
further proof that more information on this issue has large effects.
   We test three potential explanations for the small effects for other policies: limited trust
in government; an overly “clinical” presentation of information; and respondents’ inability
to connect their concerns on a given issue with the public policies meant to address it.
   The first potential explanation is that distrust in government inhibits respondents from
translating concern for inequality into support for redistribution by the government. Several
results from the original survey experiment point in this direction. First, our initial treatment
significantly decreases trust in government. When reminded of the extent of inequality (which
even control group respondents view as a problem), those in the treatment group appear to
at least partially blame the government, perhaps thinking that if politicians “let things
get this bad” they cannot be trusted to fix it. Second, beyond any treatment effect, the
level of government trust among our sample of mTurk respondents is very low: over 89


                                               3
percent agree that “Politicians in Washington work to enrich themselves and their largest
campaign contributors, instead of working for the benefit of the majority of citizens,” with 47
percent “strongly” agreeing. It is thus perhaps not surprising that even when the treatment
increases respondents’ concern with inequality, they remain reluctant to increase support for
government redistributive policies.
   In a follow-up survey experiment, we provide direct evidence for the effect of trust in
government on respondents’ policy preferences. We first asked a small pilot group to an-
swer open-ended questions on their views of government—the main theme that emerges is
that politicians are believed to work to enrich themselves and their wealthiest campaign
donors. We then used these answers to develop “primes” (e.g., asking respondents’ opinions
about lobbyists or the Wall Street bailout) that significantly lowered trust in government
without significantly changing views about the extent of inequality or poverty. Therefore,
the treatment isolates the causal effect of decreasing trust in government. We find that the
treatment significantly lowers support for all poverty-alleviation policies, with the exception,
interestingly, of the minimum wage—a program that does not involve direct transfers from
the government. Support for top tax rates generally falls as well (though only some of these
effects are significant) and respondents elevate “private charity” over government policies in
a list of the best ways to combat inequality. This analysis provides, to our knowledge, the
first direct evidence on the causal effects of trust in government on policy preferences, and is
particularly relevant given the historically low regard with which Americans currently view
their government.9
   Besides distrust muting the policy effects of our treatment, we explore two other potential
explanations for the small results in the original survey experiment. As Brader (2005) and
others argue, policy preferences might respond more to emotional than factual appeals. We
thus develop a treatment—again, interactive and customized—designed to evoke empathy for
households at the poverty line. Just as in the initial survey experiment, the treatment signifi-
cantly increases respondents’ tendency to view inequality and poverty as “serious problems”
but has almost no effect on policy preferences.
   We find more support for a third explanation, the idea in Bartels (2005) that the public
   9 See   analysis from Gallup: http://www.gallup.com/poll/164663/americans-trust-
government-generally-down-year.aspx. The General Social Survey also shows a strongly
negative trend. Related to our finding, Yamamura (2014) finds that above average income
respondents in Japan are more likely to support redistribution when trust in government in their
residential area is high.



                                               4
fails to connect concern for inequality with actual public policy measures. To test this idea,
we repeat much of the information in the “emotional appeal” treatment, but then show re-
spondents concretely the resources provided to such families through government programs
including the minimum wage and food stamps. Therefore, the treatment directly connects
poverty and inequality with policies meant to address them. Emphasizing this connection
appears important: treatment respondents significantly increase their support for the min-
imum wage as well as most of the poverty-alleviation programs that we survey. We view
this result as potentially complementary to the trust results: given the low baseline levels of
trust, it appears to be the case that policy preferences can only be moved if respondents are
explicitly reminded of efficacious examples of government intervention.
   We believe our findings make several contributions to the understanding of how individ-
uals form—and change—their redistributive preferences. Compared to most informational
interventions that merely provide a fixed set of facts to respondents, our informational treat-
ments were interactive and customized—while perhaps not providing a strict upper bound
on the effects of information on preferences, our results do suggest that most policy prefer-
ences are hard to move. This finding echoes Luttmer and Singhal (2011) that redistributive
preferences may have “cultural” determinants that are very stable over time.
   Our results also highlight the potential role of mistrust of government in limiting the
public’s enthusiasm for policies they would otherwise appear to support, a subject that has
garnered limited attention in the economics literature. An exception is Sapienza and Zingales
(2013), who find that a major reason respondents support auto fuel standards over a gasoline-
tax-and-rebate scheme is not because they misunderstand the incidence of fuel standards but
because they simply do not trust the government to actually rebate them their money.
   More generally, our paper relates to the literature on the determinants of redistributive
preferences, to which political scientists, sociologists, psychologists and public economists
have all contributed. Many papers in this literature use survey data to relate individual
traits to redistributive preferences and do not, as we do, take an experimental approach.
Alesina and Ferrara (2005), Alesina and Giuliano (2011), and Fong (2001) show that, re-
spectively, prospects for future income mobility, past experience of misfortune, and beliefs
about equality of opportunity predict redistributive preferences. Other papers have exam-
ined how situational factors (employment status, neighborhood characteristics) predict pref-
erences (see, e.g., Margalit 2013, Luttmer 2001). Singhal (2008) uses OECD survey data
to show that people do not necessarily favor low tax rates at income levels close to theirs,


                                              5
suggesting that redistributive preferences are not completely determined by self-interest.
   As in our paper, some researchers have estimated the effects of randomized informational
treatments on policy preferences.10 The evidence from these efforts is mixed. Sides (2011)
finds that providing information on the very small number of individuals affected by the
estate tax drastically decreases support for its repeal, results that we replicate with our data.
Cruces, Perez-Truglia, and Tetaz (2013) find that showing poor individuals their actual place
in the income distribution increases their support for policies that target poverty, as most
overestimate their income. On the other hand, Kuklinski et al. (2003) find that providing
(accurate) information on the demographic composition of welfare recipients and the share of
the federal budget dedicated to welfare payments has no effect on respondents’ preferences,
despite the fact that their initial beliefs are wildly incorrect.11 We examine a wide variety
of redistributive policy outcomes; indeed, we find that the responsiveness of views on the
estate tax appears to be an outlier and other outcomes suggest a far more modest effect of
information on redistributive preferences.
   As noted, our research is part of a small but growing set of papers using online platforms.
Researchers have used these platforms—most often, mTurk—to have respondents play public
goods games (e.g., Rand and Nowak, 2011, Suri and Watts, 2010), interact in online labor
markets (Amir, Rand, and Gal 2012; Horton, Rand, and Zeckhauser 2011), or simply answer
non-experimental survey questions on views about policy and social preferences (Weinzierl
2012; Saez and Stantcheva 2013). We summarize our experience conducting survey exper-
iments on mTurk in the online Methodological Appendix, which we hope can be of use to
future researchers utilizing this platform.
   The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 introduces the initial survey instrument and
data collection procedures. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3 presents the main results
of the survey experiment. In Section 4, we explore mechanisms behind the large effects
of information on views about the estate tax and why most other effects were so limited,
reporting methods and results from four follow-up survey experiments. Finally, in Section 5,
we suggest directions for future work and offer concluding thoughts. All our online surveys,
data, and programs are available in the online appendix.
  10 While  not related to policy preferences, there is a small literature on how information treatments
affect individuals’ ability to better navigate policies such as Social Security (Liebman and Luttmer,
2011).
   11 Related but distinct from informational treatments are priming and presentational treatments

(see, e.g., Savani and Rattan 2012 on the effect of priming free will and McCaffery and Baron 2006
on the effects of presenting taxes in absolute or percentage terms).


                                                   6
1     The Main Survey Experiment

The main experiment was implemented in four separate rounds from January 2011 to Au-
gust 2012. For expositional clarity, to distinguish this initial experiment from the follow-up
work we describe in Section 4, we refer to these four initial rounds of surveys as the “om-
nibus” treatment surveys. The omnibus treatment surveys had the following structure: (1)
background socio-economic questions including typical demographic questions as well as po-
litical leanings; (2) randomized treatment providing information on inequality and tax policy
(shown solely to the treatment group); (3) questions on views on inequality, tax and transfer
policies, and government more generally.12


1.1      Data collection
Surveys were openly posted on mTurk with a description stating that the survey paid $1.50
for approximately 15 minutes, i.e., a $6 hourly wage. Respondents were free to drop out any
time or take up to one hour to answer all questions. As a comparison, the average effective
wage on mTurk according to Amazon is around $4.80 per hour and most tasks on mTurk
are short (less than one hour).13
     Several steps were taken to ensure the validity of the results. First, there are many foreign
workers on mTurk, especially from Asia. In addition to requiring respondents to confirm their
U.S. residency on the consent form, we also had Amazon show the survey only to workers
who had U.S. addresses. Second, to further discourage foreign workers, we tried to launch our
surveys during East Coast daylight hours (and, to reduce heterogeneity, only on workdays).
Third, to exclude robots, only workers with a past completion rate of at least ninety percent
were allowed to take the survey. Fourth, as our survey comprises many rounds, we screen out
workers who had participated in a previous round of the survey. Fifth, respondents were told
that payment would be contingent on completing the survey and providing a password visible
only at completion. Finally, to discourage respondents from skipping mindlessly through the
pages, pop-up windows with an encouragement to answer all questions appeared as prompts
whenever a question was left blank.
    12 The
         Appendix provides a complete description of the experiment with the questions for each
round of the main experiments, and the follow-up experimental rounds discussed later in the paper.
  13 To gauge the external validity of the mTurk results, we gathered data for round 3 using C&T

Marketing (http://www.ctmarketinggroup.com/). As noted in Section 3, effects are stable across
rounds, suggesting that respondents from the two platforms respond similarly to the treatment.
Per-participant costs for C&T are roughly five times higher than for mTurk.


                                                 7
1.2       The omnibus information treatment
In general, the goal of the information treatments was to provide a large “shock” to in-
dividuals’ knowledge about inequality and redistributive policies, rather than to provide a
Ph.D-level, nuanced discussion about, say, the underlying causes of inequality or the trade-off
between equality and efficiency. Hence, some of the treatments we display will seem overly
simplified to an economics audience, but it should be kept in mind that our goal in the initial
experiment is to test whether any treatment can move redistributive preferences; thus we
erred on the side of presenting information we thought would indeed move those preferences.
As noted in the introduction, we took steps to make the information both interactive and
customized to each respondent.
   The treatment had three basic parts. First, treatment respondents saw interactive infor-
mation on the current income distribution—they were asked to input their household income
and were then told what share of households made more or less than their household. We
also asked them to find particular points in the distribution—they were asked to find the
median and the 90th and 99th percentiles and were encouraged to “play around” with the
application. Appendix Figure 1 presents a screen shot.14
   The second part focused not on the current distribution but a counterfactual: respon-
dents entered their current income and were then shown what they “would have made” had
economic growth since 1980 been evenly shared across the income distribution (i.e., had the
level of inequality stayed the same as in 1980). Of course, this exercise abstracts away from
the trade-off between efficiency (economic growth) and equality that would certainly exist at
very high levels of taxation. The interactive application allowed them to find this counter-
factual value for any point of the current income distribution. Appendix Figure 2 presents a
screen shot.
   The third part of the treatment focused on redistributive policies. To emphasize that
higher income taxes on the well-off need not always lead to slower economic growth, we
presented respondents a figure showing that, at least as a raw correlation, economic growth,
measured by average real pre-tax income per family from tax return data, has been slower
  14 As  detailed in Appendix Table 1 we also ask treatment respondents six “basic comprehension”
questions to determine if the information was confusing. With one exception, each question exhibits
at least eighty percent comprehension. Moreover, more than 74 percent of respondents answer at
least five of the six questions correctly. There are no differential treatment effects by comprehension
level (results available upon request), not surprising given that comprehension is at a fairly high
(and uniform) level.



                                                  8
during periods with low top tax rates (1913 to 1933 and 1980 to 2010) than with high top tax
rates (1933 to 1980). Appendix Figure 3 presents a screen shot. Similarly, we also presented
a slide on the estate tax, emphasizing that it currently only affects the largest 0.1 percent of
estates and that it favors intergenerational mobility. Appendix Figure 4 shows a screen shot.
     Readers can directly experience these informational treatments online at the link below.15
We describe the additional treatments in the follow-up surveys in Section 4.


2      Data

2.1          Summary statistics
Table 1 shows characteristics of the sample who completed the omnibus treatment survey
rounds (we discuss attrition below). We compare these summary statistics to a nationally
representative sample of U.S. adults contacted by a CBS poll in 2011, which we choose
both because it was conducted around the same time as our surveys and asks very similar
questions.16 We also compare it to a more representative (though far more expensive) online
panel survey gathered by RAND, the American Life Panel (ALP).17
     Our sample is younger, more educated and has fewer minorities. It is more liberal, with
a higher fraction reporting having supported President Obama in the 2008 election.18
     Table 2 shows summary statistics on demographic and policy views for self-reported
liberals (col. 1) and conservatives (col. 2) from our control group (so that responses are not
contaminated by the information treatment), as well as the entire control group (col. 3). As
expected, conservatives are older, more white, and more likely to be married. They prefer
lower taxes on the rich and a less generous safety net. Such contrasts are useful to scale
    15 Seehttps://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_77fSvTy12ZSBihn. Note that the control
group went straight from the background questions to the outcomes measures (starting with the
preferred tax rates sliders).
  16 Note that the CBS sample is not as representative as the traditional surveys used by economists

such as the Current Population Survey or the American Community Survey. However, these two
surveys do not have questions on past voting behavior or political preferences, so we rely on the
admittedly less representative CBS survey.
  17 The ALP currently costs researchers $3 per subject per minute, compared to roughly $.10 per

subject per minute for our mTurk surveys. The ALP survey is also limited in sample size.
  18 As a robustness check, we created weights to match our mTurk sample in col. (1) to the CBS

poll in col. (2) with respect to the 32 cells based on: gender (2) × age brackets (2) × white versus
non-white (2) × college degree indicator (2) × Supported Obama in 2008 (2). Reweighting has no
appreciable effects on the results in Tables 4 and 5 (results available upon request) and thus we
focus on the unweighted results in the paper.


                                                 9
the magnitude of our effects. We will often discuss treatment effects both in absolute terms
and as a percentage of the liberal-versus-conservative differences reported in Table 2. For
convenience, we refer to this difference as the “political gap” for a given outcome variable.


2.2        Survey attrition
The omnibus survey experiment had an overall attrition rate of 22 percent, which includes
those who attritted as early as the consent page. For those who remained online long enough
to be assigned a treatment status, attrition was 15 percent.
   As Appendix Table 2 shows, attrition is not random, though it is unrelated to 2008 voting
preferences and liberal versus conservative policy views (the variables most highly correlated
with our outcome variables). The online survey for the treatment group was, by necessity,
different from the online survey for control group. Therefore, a key concern is differential
attrition between those assigned to the treatment versus control arms. As the final row of
Table 2 shows, attrition is higher among the treatment group (twenty percent, versus nine
percent for the control group).19
   Importantly, however, conditional on finishing the survey, assignment to treatment ap-
pears randomly assigned. That is, while the treatment induces attrition overall, it does not
induce certain groups to differentially quit the survey more than others. Table 3 shows the
results from estimating (using the sample who complete the survey) 14 separate regressions
of the form: T reatmentir = βCovariateir + δr + ir , where i indexes the individual, r the
survey rounds, and δr are survey-round fixed effects.20 For each regression, one of the con-
trol variables in Table 2 serves as Covariate. Of the 14 regressions, only two (for the black
and Hispanic indicators) yield significant coefficients on the Covariate variable. However,
given that their point-estimates have opposite signs, it does not seem that, say, minorities
systematically attrit from the sample if they are assigned to the treatment.
   While we will control for these covariates as well as perform additional checks of attrition
in the analysis that follows, it is reassuring to see that, conditional on finishing the survey,
there does not appear to be a discernible pattern in the types of respondents assigned to
  19 For  this comparison, we can obviously only include individuals who remained in the survey
long enough to have been assigned a treatment status. The other comparisons in this table include
all those who remained long enough to answer the given covariate question.
   20 We include round fixed effects δ because in one round we assigned more than half the respon-
                                      r
dents to the treatment. As such, without round fixed effects, T reatment becomes mechanically
correlated to the characteristics of respondents in this round.



                                               10
treatment. We are quite fortunate in this regard, as one might have expected that groups
pre-disposed against reading about inequality—perhaps conservatives or wealthier people—
would have been “turned off” by the treatment and differentially attritted. The follow-up
surveys discussed in Sections 4 have essentially zero differential attrition by treatment status
(see Appendix Table 3), most likely because the treatments in the follow-up surveys are
much shorter (making the treatment and control arms of the survey much closer in length).


3      Results from the omnibus treatment

We present three sets of results. First, we analyze how the treatment affects respondents’
answers to questions related to inequality per se, not policies that might affect it. Second,
we analyze specific policies—e.g., raising taxes or increasing the minimum wage. Third, we
analyze respondents’ views about government as well as their political engagement.


3.1       Views on inequality
Table 4 presents the effect of the omnibus treatment on questions related to inequality.
Odd-numbered columns do not include any controls outside of round fixed effects, while
even-numbered columns include standard controls (essentially, those listed in Table 3).21
     Col. (1) shows that the treatment is associated with a ten-percentage-point (or 36 percent)
increase in the share agreeing that inequality is a “very serious” problem. Similarly, dividing
the point-estimate by the ‘political gap’ (i.e., the liberal-conservative control group difference
for the outcome variable) suggests that the treatment effect is equal to 36 percent of the
political gap on this question (equal to 38 points in Table 2). While a convenient scaling,
dividing by the political gap is hardly a perfect metric—while political views are highly
predictive of many of our outcomes, this tendency varies and therefore some questions have
larger political gaps than others. We thus report both the absolute and scaled effects for all
regressions. Adding covariates in col. (2) has no effect on the estimated treatment effect.
     The effects on the outcome “did inequality increase since 1980?” are presented in columns
(3) and (4) and are even larger both in absolute percentage points and when scaled by the po-
litical gap (54 percent of the conservative-liberal difference), likely because the informational
    21 Specifically,
                 we include fixed effects for racial/ethnic categories, employment status, and state
of residence; indicator variables for voting for Barack Obama in 2008, being married, gender,
and native-born status; continuous controls for age; and categorical variables for the liberal-to-
conservative self-rating, household income, and education.


                                                11
treatment presented information directly related to the question.
   The effects on respondents’ opinion of whether the rich are deserving of their income are
presented in columns (5) and (6). They are statistically significant, but markedly smaller in
magnitude—equal to about five percentage points, or one-sixth the political gap. Therefore, it
does not seem that treatment respondents’ concern about inequality is being driven primarily
by a vilification of the rich.
   In no case does the choice to exclude or include controls change the results (consistent with
the results from Table 3 that conditional on finishing the survey, there was little correlation
between treatment status and standard covariates). Therefore, to conserve space and reduce
noise, we show all results with covariates in the rest of the analysis.
   Overall, our omnibus treatment generated a very strong “first stage,” significantly shifting
views about inequality and its increase in recent decades.


3.2        Views on public policy
Table 5 presents results for questions related to income and estate taxation. The first two
columns report results from the two questions on income taxation—a continuous variable
asking respondents to choose an ideal average tax rate for the richest one percent and a
categorical variable asking them whether taxes on millionaires should be raised—show sta-
tistically significant effects of the treatment, in the “expected” direction.22 However, these
magnitudes are small, equal to about ten percent of the liberal-conservative gap in both
cases. For example, the treatment increases the preferred top 1 percent average tax rate by
0.93 percentage points, whereas the gap between liberals and conservatives on this question
is slightly over ten percentage points (see Table 2). Hence, we can rule out an effect on the
tax rate for the top 1 percent larger than 20 percent of the liberal conservative gap.
   The omnibus treatment was hardly subtle in its discussion of income taxes, focusing on
how income growth might be shared more equitably through higher taxation and illustrating
the temporal correlation between periods of high top tax rate and strong economic growth.
We also asked the income tax question in two different ways, so the small magnitude of the
results is unlikely to be an artifact of framing.
   By contrast, there are very large effects for the estate tax (col. 3), consistent with Sides
(2011). The treatment triples the share of respondents supporting an increase in the estate
tax, and the effect size is more than double the liberal-conservative gap on this question. We
  22 See   Appendix Figure 5 for the screen respondents used to choose their ideal tax rates.


                                                  12
explore in the next section the reasons behind the large estate tax effects. We show that both
the informational and the emotional content of the estate tax treatment matter (a purely
clinical information treatment with no emotional component increases support by 50 percent
instead of more than doubling it).
   A common critique of survey experiments that find large effects on opinion is that one
cannot know how these effects impact actual behavior. We try to partially bridge this gap
by asking individuals whether they would send a petition to their U.S. Senator asking either
to raise or lower the estate tax. We provided a link to Senators’ emails and also provided
sample messages both for and against raising estate taxes. We then asked if the respondent
would send a petition for higher taxes, a petition against higher taxes, or nothing at all.
   We report these results in col. (4). The treatment significantly increases the propensity
of respondents to say they would petition their U.S. Senator to raise the estate tax (though,
not surprisingly, this effect is smaller than the pure opinion question, suggesting attenuation
from belief to action). Naturally, we recognize that we must take respondents’ word that they
will send the email and thus this outcome is not as concrete as, for example, knowing with
certainty how they would vote in the next election. At the very least, this result confirms
the strong effect of the treatment on views about the estate tax. As mentioned, we probe
later on the robustness of this result and offer some thoughts on why it is so different from
the income tax. For now we merely note that these large results serve to dismiss a potential
explanation of why the income tax results were so small—that there is something inherent
in the mTurk experience that mutes respondents’ policy responses.
   While so far we have focused on policies that affect the well-off, we also asked a series
of questions about policies that impact the bottom of the income distribution. While the
treatment induces significant but small (less than ten percent of the political gap) effects for
the minimum wage (col. 5), it induces no significant increase in support for food stamps or
the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) (results reported in appendix Table 4).23 The results
thus suggest a contrast between direct transfer policies such as the EITC and food stamps
and indirect transfer policies such as the minimum wage, a theme that will also emerge in
some of the follow-up work discussed in next section.24
  23 Inlater follow-up work, we asked a small pilot group to write open-ended responses to many of
our outcome variables. Many respondents had little familiarity with the EITC (though we always
provided a description) so the non-result for that outcome might need to be interpreted more
cautiously. No respondent indicated unfamiliarity with food stamps or the minimum wage, however.
  24 There are other possible distinctions between these policies. For example, respondents may

have stronger racial stereotypes of food-stamp recipients than they do of minimum-wage workers.


                                               13
3.3     Views of government and political involvement
Columns (6)-(8) of Table 5 reports results on the effect of the treatment on opinions about
government. The first question asked respondents: “How much of the time do you think
you can trust government in Washington to do what is right?” and we code a respondent
as trusting government if she answers “always” or “most of the time” as opposed to “only
some of the time” and “never.”25 Col. (6) reports a large decrease in the share of treatment
respondents agreeing that the government can be trusted. The treatment is equal to the
entire liberal-conservative gap, but operates in the opposite direction to the other outcomes,
in that it makes respondents take the more conservative—and less trusting—view on this
question.26 Note also that, consistent with the trends noted in the Introduction, the control
group has a very low level of trust in government—only about 16 percent are trusting of
government, by our definition—and that the contrast of liberals and conservatives about
trusting government is fairly small (17 vs. 14.5 percent, see Table 2). The low baseline level
of trust in the control group suggests that the treatment effect we observe might in fact
understate the true effect experienced by the treatment group, as their ability to express an
even lower opinion of government is limited by floor effects.
   The second question assesses respondents’ preferred scope of government: “Next, think
more broadly about the purpose of government. Where would you rate yourself on a scale
of 1 to 5, where 1 means you think the government should do only those things necessary
to provide the most basic government functions, and 5 means you think the government
should take active steps in every area it can to try and improve the lives of its citizens?”27
Intriguingly, the treatment significantly moves people toward wanting a more active govern-
ment (col. 7). Providing information about the growth of inequality and the ability of the
government to raise taxes and redistribute have complicated effects on views of government.
It appears to make respondents see more areas of society where government intervention may
be needed but simultaneously make them trust government less. We return to these results
linking trust in government to preferences on government scope in Section 4.2.1.
   Finally, as shown in col. (8), the treatment has almost no effect on respondents’ planned
  25 This question is taken from ANES http://www.electionstudies.org/nesguide/toptable/
tab5a_1.htm.
  26 We say that being less trusting of government is the “conservative” view because in our data as

well as GSS data from the same time period, conservatives indeed report lower trust in government.
These tendencies are sensitive to the party in power (e.g., in the GSS, during the George W. Bush
administration, conservatives were more trusting of the executive branch than were liberals).
  27 This question comes from Gallup.



                                                14
voting choice for the 2012 Presidential elections (recall that the omnibus-treatment surveys
were completed before the November 2012 election). There is at best a marginal effect in
the direction of supporting President Obama. This result is consistent with the relatively
mild policy effects overall. The treatment may simultaneously make individuals want the
more redistributive policies of the Democratic party and distrust the party in power (the
Democrats under Obama, at least in the executive branch and the Senate).28


3.4       Robustness checks

Persistence of effects. Before mTurk, recontacting survey respondents was onerous, and
thus few papers were able to test the duration of effects from informational survey exper-
iments. None of the papers cited in the Introduction on the effect of information on redis-
tributive preferences follows up with respondents to measure the duration of the effects.29
   The evidence from the few papers that do test persistence is not encouraging. Luskin,
Fishkin, and Jowell (2002) find that even the immediate effects of an extreme intervention—
in which British participants spent a weekend with experts, with the goal of debunking
misconceptions about crime and prison policy—do not persist ten months later. Indeed, in a
similarly intense intervention focused on issues related to campaign finance, Druckman and
Nelson (2003) find that their results dissipate within ten days. While not a survey experiment
per se, Gerber et al. (2011) use variation in the location of campaign television advertising to
show that persuasive effects are strong the week the ad airs but have little persistence beyond
the first week. Perhaps closest to our methodology, Lecheler and Vreese (2011) sample Dutch
respondents to test for the effect of informational treatments on opinions about economic
aid to Bulgaria and Romania; while the treatment effect persisted after one week, it was
insignificant after two.
   The flexibility of the mTurk platform offers the possibility of resurveying participants
months after the original survey. In the third round of the omnibus survey, we attempted
to recontact respondents one month after taking the survey. Out of 1039 respondents who
completed the original survey, 145 (14 percent) completed the follow-up survey. The follow-
up survey asked most of the outcome questions in the original survey, but did not include
the informational treatment.
  28 In the interest of space, there are some outcome variables we relegate to the Appendix. The
full set of all results from the omnibus survey are found in Appendix Tables 4, 5, and 6.
  29 In their review of the use of survey experiments, Gaines, Kuklinski, and Quirk (2007) name

measuring duration effects as their top recommendation for future work in the area.

                                              15
   With a relatively low take-up rate, a concern is that follow-up respondents are differ-
entially selected. Appendix Table 7 suggests that while some selection takes place (by age,
marital status and employment status) the most important variables in terms of predicting
preferences (support of Obama and overall liberal-versus-conservative policy views) show
no differential selection into the follow-up sample. Nor does initial treatment status predict
take-up and thus we have a roughly equal number of control and treatment observations in
the follow-up sample.
   We compare the original results for these 145 observations to their responses one month
later for selected outcomes in Table 6 and for all other outcomes in Appendix Tables 8
and 9. As only some outcomes show a substantial initial treatment effect for the N = 145
subsample, it is not feasible to have meaningful tests of persistence for all outcomes.
   Cols. (1) and (2) show that our most robust outcome result from the original survey—
support for increasing the estate tax—is strongly persistent. In absolute terms, 58 percent
of the effect size remains one month later, more than doubling the share who support the
policy. And the effect one month later remains highly statistically significant.
   Cols. (3) and (4) show similarly strong results for views on the proper scope of gov-
ernment. The follow-up result in col. (4) actually shows an increase in the point-estimate,
though it is within the confidence interval of the result in col. (3).
   Cols. (5) and (6) show that the initial treatment effect on “trust in government” is slightly
larger than for the full sample, with a negative, but now insignificant effect persisting one
month later.
   Unfortunately, as cols. (7) and (8) show, one of the main outcome variables from the
omnibus survey—concern for inequality—yields an initial treatment effect of essentially zero
for the subsample, and thus testing for persistence is not particularly meaningful. Given that
our initial treatment often had small effects for the entire sample, it is not surprising that
only some outcomes yield substantial initial treatment effects for the subsample. We thus
relegate the follow-up results for all these outcomes to Appendix Tables 8 and 9.
   Overall, the follow-up analysis shows, once again, that the estate tax emerges as the
policy most robustly and significantly affected by our omnibus treatment.

Bounding the effects of differential attrition. While we showed in Table 3 that, condi-
tional on finishing the survey, assignment to the treatment appears as good as random, here
we further probe the potential effects of attrition. To conduct a bounding exercise, we assume
either that (1) attriters would have all had the average “liberal” view for each outcome; or


                                               16
(2) they would have had the average “conservative” view for each outcome. Given that at-
trition does not actually vary by political views (see Appendix Table 2) but outcome values
vary substantially by political views (see Table 2), this test should provide generous upper
bounds on the potential effects of attrition. The results in Appendix Table 10 shows that
no signs flip for any of our main outcome variables under either the conservative (columns
labeled “C”) or liberal (columns labeled “L”) attrition assumptions.
   Next, we examine how the level of differential attrition affects our results: do our results
only hold in survey rounds with high differential attrition between the control and treatment
group? The first three rounds of the omnibus surveys had very similar differential attrition
rates (between 12 and 16 percent), whereas the fourth had a substantially lower attrition
rate (five percent). Appendix Tables 11 and 12 show that our main results on concern
for inequality, support for the estate tax, and trust in government are robust and at times
stronger for the low-differential-attrition round, the round where we expect our identification
assumptions to be most robust. As before, the “non-results” for other outcomes remain (not
shown).30 In Section 4, we analyze follow-up surveys where the treatment is much shorter and
where there is virtually no differential attrition by treatment status (see Appendix Table 3).
The fact that these follow-up surveys largely confirm our omnibus treatment results provides
further reassurance that differential attrition is not driving our results.

Robustness across rounds. As our rounds took place at different dates with different
stories dominating the news cycle, we might worry that the treatment effects are being
driven by a single round. We verified that dropping rounds one by one does not change the
sign or significance of the main results.

Survey fatigue. Finally, “survey fatigue” would not seem to explain our results. For exam-
ple, the question “is inequality a serious problem” comes before top tax rates, which precedes
the estate tax question, our strongest effect. Therefore, there is no monotonic relationship
between the strength of the treatment effect and the order of the outcome variables.

Experimenter demand effects. A potential bias that is more difficult to measure is differ-
ential experimenter demand effects—perhaps it is the case that a variable such as “inequality
is a serious problem” is more susceptible to demand effects than concrete policy questions
  30

  In our context, the only observable variable that is correlated with differential attrition between
control and treatment is the round of the experiment. Hence, our comparison across rounds is the
simplest and most transparent non-parametric form of Dinardo-Fortin-Lemieux (DFL) reweighting.


                                                 17
such as “preferred top income tax rates.” An indirect test is to examine gender differences
by outcome variable, as women appear more likely to give the “desired” answer (see, e.g.,
Bernardi, 2006, Dalton and Ortegren, 2011 and citations therein). We find very small gender
differences overall, and no pattern whereby they are larger for women for the “first-stage”
outcomes (results available upon request). Recent work argues that demand effects are likely
muted with internet surveys (see, e.g., Kreuter, Presser, and Tourangeau, 2008 and Gelder,
Bretveld, and Roeleveld, 2010).


4      Understanding our Results with Follow-up Surveys

The follow-up surveys share the following structure. While we repeated most of the out-
come questions used in the omnibus surveys, there are some differences (based on input
from referees and others). For example, we ask respondents to report whether “poverty is
a serious problem,” as well as rank “private charity” and “education” in a list of tools to
address inequality (so as to gauge whether respondents react to the treatments by turning
to options—some non-governmental—more often advocated by political conservatives).31 We
also replace the question about the EITC (which we feared might not be sufficiently familiar
to respondents) with a general question about “aid to the poor” and a specific question
about public housing, while retaining the minimum wage and food stamp questions.
     For the sake of completeness, we used the same battery of outcome questions for all follow-
up surveys, even when certain follow-up treatments were unlikely to affect a given outcome.
For the sake of brevity and exposition, we only discuss in the main text those outcomes that
are relevant to a given treatment, but all other outcomes are reported in the Appendix for
each treatment. Importantly, in this section, we use data solely from the follow-up surveys
because the control groups in the omnibus survey and the follow-up surveys are not directly
comparable, and because the wording of some of the questions has changed.
     Section 4.1 explores why the estate tax appears to be an anomaly, first verifying that the
effect is robust to changes in presentation and then measuring the pure informational impact
of our treatment. Section 4.2 explores potential mechanisms for why most other policies are
more impervious to informational interventions.
    31 For
        example, McCall and Kenworthy (2009) argue that Americans care about inequality but
prefer policy levers such as education to combat it, not income redistribution. In our data, (control
group) conservatives are indeed more likely to rank education and private charity above tools that
more directly involve government redistribution.



                                                 18
4.1       Why are views about the estate tax so elastic to information?
In this section, we present two types of follow-up analysis on the estate tax. First, we verify
whether the estate tax treatment effect—an outlier among the policy outcomes analyzed in
the previous section—is truly robust. After showing that it withstands several significant
modifications of the treatment, we then present evidence as to why this effect is so strong.
Our view is that misinformation about the estate tax is far greater than for the other policies
we surveyed, such that the informational treatment has an especially large impact.32

Verifying the large estate tax effects. Recall that the omnibus treatment includes not
only information about the incidence of the estate tax, but several other components as well
(e.g., the interactive feature showing respondents’ place in the income distribution, among
the others we described in Section 1). To gauge the sensitivity of the estate tax effect to this
additional information, we redid the experiment with a treatment that only included the
slide on the estate tax. Furthermore, the original estate tax treatment shows a picture of a
mansion and notes that the estate tax can help “level the playing field” (see Appendix Figure
4). We thus formulated a treatment that decreased the emotional impact of the estate-tax
treatment and that only mentions the incidence in dry, factual terms (see Appendix Figure
6). We call the first version the “emotional estate tax treatment” and the second the “neutral
estate tax treatment.” Again, neither of these treatments contains the other, non-estate-tax
components of the omnibus treatment.
   Table 7 displays results for the key outcome variables. In contrast to the omnibus treat-
ment, the “emotional” estate tax treatment has no effect on views about whether inequality
is a problem, whether it has increased, or whether the rich are “deserving” (cols. 1, 2 and
3). The “neutral” treatment appears to have countervailing effects: increasing concern for
inequality (though this effect is much smaller than that of the omnibus treatment) while
decreasing the sense that inequality has increased. These much weaker effects are not sur-
prising because these two treatments provide no information about income inequality or its
trends.
   However, col. (4) shows that the effect of even these more limited treatments on opinions
about the estate tax remains strong. The point-estimate for the “emotional treatment” is
  32 Theoretically, the prospect for upward mobility mechanism of Benabou and Ok (2001) that
limits the desire for redistribution might become irrelevant when respondents realize that only 1
decedent out of 1000 pays the estate tax. Following Alesina and Angeletos (2005)’s theory, respon-
dents might also support the estate tax on the very wealthy as they realize that receiving a very
large inheritance is due entirely to luck and not effort of the inheritor.


                                               19
nearly as large as that of the omnibus treatment (0.289 versus 0.357). The “neutral” effect is
smaller (0.109), though both in absolute and scaled terms swamps any policy effect (exclud-
ing the estate tax itself) associated with the omnibus treatment. Recall that the omnibus
treatment provided extensive interactive and personalized information on income inequality
and income tax rates and typically produced scaled effects on the income tax outcomes of
ten percent. The “neutral” estate tax treatment consisted of a total of four sentences but
nonetheless produced a scaled effect on the estate tax four times as large (40.8 percent of
the liberal-conservative gap). This stark contrast highlights how much more elastic to infor-
mation views about the estate tax are than those about the income tax and other policies.
   As shown in col. (5), both treatments make respondents more likely to say they will
petition their Senator (scaled effects greater than 0.2), but this effect is not statistically
significant. The significant effect with the omnibus treatment suggests that the background
information on growing inequality might be required to induce more respondents to connect
their policy views with political activism. Col. (6) shows that the effect on trust in government
is negative (as in the omnibus treatment) but not significant.33

Why are estate tax preferences so malleable to information? At first, we attributed
this finding to our treatment having larger effects for topics that held little ex-ante salience
for our respondents. However, recent polling data suggests the estate tax is very salient
to respondents—in 2010, Gallup respondents named averting an increase in the estate tax
as their top priority for the lame-duck session of Congress, above extending unemployment
benefits and the Bush income tax cuts.34 Moreover, there were no more “missing” responses
on the estate tax question than on other policies questions in the control group, further
evidence that the estate tax is not an obscure issue to respondents in our sample.
   A more promising explanation is that while respondents may view the estate tax as a
salient issue, they may hold misinformed views on the topic. Indeed, as documented by Slem-
rod (2006), 82 percent of respondents favor estate tax repeal but 49 percent of respondents
believe that most families have to pay it, compared to 31 percent who believe only a few
families have to pay, and 20 percent who admit to not knowing. In contrast, the public
appears much better informed about policies such as the minimum wage or the individual
  33 Given  that the omnibus treatment had, at best, small effects on income tax and transfer policies,
it is not surprising that the estate-tax-only treatments do not produce consistently significant effects
on these outcomes either (Appendix Table 13 and 14).
   34 See http://www.gallup.com/poll/144899/Tax-Issues-Rank-Top-Priority-Lame-Duck-

Congress.aspx.


                                                  20
income tax.35 As a result, providing basic information on how the current federal estate tax
is limited to the very wealthiest families might serve as a large informational shock.
   We directly tested this hypothesis by adding a question on the incidence of the estate tax
to the follow-up surveys. Respondents were asked to choose the share of decedents subject
to the estate tax from among the following percentage options: less then 1, 1, 10, 20, 40,
60, and 100 percent. If anything, the greater detail offered for choices below twenty percent
would seem to tip-off respondents that the answer is a small number, but only 12 percent of
control group respondents answered correctly (random guessing would be correct 14 percent
of the time) and accuracy varied substantially by political orientation (16 percent of liberals
versus 6 percent of conservatives).
   Col. (7) of Table 7 shows the effect of the two estate tax treatments on respondents’
likelihood to choose the correct response. Both treatments roughly triple the likelihood of
answering correctly, strongly suggesting that information is a key mechanism behind the large
effects of the omnibus treatment.36 Importantly, misinformation is not a sufficient condition
for an informational treatment to have large effects. As noted earlier, Kuklinski et al. (2003)
found that correcting substantially misinformed views on welfare was not sufficient to change
respondents’ support, though perhaps the lack of elasticity is due to the racial stereotypes
the world “welfare” brings to mind (Gilens, 1996). The estate tax may be one of a few issues
on which voters are highly misinformed but their ignorance is not linked to racial or other
stereotypes. In any case, extrapolating from the estate tax effects would give vastly biased
views of the ability of information to move other redistributive policy preferences, as we saw
in the previous section and as we further document below.
  35 A recent Pew survey shows that 73% of respondents could identify the correct current minimum
wage (see http://www.people-press.org/2014/10/02/from-isis-to-unemployment-what-do-
americans-know/). For the individual income tax, we asked respondents in an earlier pilot to give
us their best guess of actual average tax rates by income brackets. On average, respondents came
fairly close to actual tax rates both in level and in terms of progressivity. For example, for top
bracket taxpayers with income above $379,150, they guessed a tax rate of 29.1% on average when
the actual tax rate based on 2012 IRS statistics is 26.4%. Consistent with these results, Fujii and
Hawley (1988) find that, on average, survey respondents perceive fairly accurately the marginal tax
rates they face.
   36 Our results offer experimental support for the observational regression analysis presented by

Slemrod (2006) showing that support for the estate tax is lower when respondents believe that
most families have to pay it.




                                                21
4.2     Exploring the limited treatment effects on policy preferences
We explore three potential explanations for why the omnibus treatment had small policy-
preference effects (aside from the estate tax). Of course, other explanations may exist, so
one should not not view our analysis of the mechanisms behind the policy “non-results” as
definitive or exhaustive.

4.2.1   Does government distrust explain limited treatment effects?

As documented in Section 3, the omnibus treatment significantly reduces trust in government.
It is perhaps not surprising that an informational treatment emphasizing a dramatic increase
in income inequality would lower respondents’ view of government. But, to our knowledge, it
remains an open question whether lowering trust in government has a causal effect on policy
preferences. This question has perhaps never been more relevant in the U.S. context, given
that Americans’ trust in government is at historically low levels, as noted in the Introduction.
   To test the causal effect of trust in government on policy preferences, we devised a
treatment that lowers trust but does not affect views on other factors that might affect policy
preferences. This task is not easy—as we saw with the omnibus treatment, information about
inequality reduces trust in government, but also increases concern about inequality, meaning
the omnibus treatment effects on the policy outcomes are the joint effect of increasing concern
about inequality (which we hypothesize would increase support for government action) and
reducing trust in government (which we hypothesize would decrease it).
   We began by collecting a small pilot study (N ≈ 150) on mTurk where we asked people
to answer our basic trust question (how often they can trust the government to do what is
right) but then to explain why they answered the way they did. Note that they answer this
question directly after answering the demographic questions and are thus not being primed
to think about inequality. There is no “treatment” in this pilot—we are merely asking people
to explain their opinion. The pilot group cast light into why trust in government is currently
so low. Respondents feel politicians are out to enrich themselves and their wealthiest donors.
“Money,” “corporations” and “special interests” are some of the most commonly used words
and phrases in these answers, as Appendix Figure 7 shows. The detailed descriptions given by
respondents allowed us to develop primes we thought could lower trust in government without
necessarily affecting other factors that would have a direct effect on policy preferences.
   Our treatment consists of several multiple-choice questions that induce respondents to
reflect on aspects of government they dislike. For example, we asked if they agree that

                                              22
“Politicians in Washington work to enrich themselves and their largest contributors, instead
of working for the benefit of the majority of citizens” (90 percent do). We also showed them
results from a ranking of OECD countries in terms of government transparency in which
the US was categorized in the bottom quartile (see Appendix Figure 8 for a screenshot and
Appendix A for the full description).

Results. Table 8 shows the results of this treatment on a variety of outcomes. Col. (1)
shows that the first stage “works”—the treatment significantly decreases respondents’ stated
trust in government, by 5.8 percentage points in absolute terms or 1.78 times the liberal-
conservative gap on this question. This effect is slightly larger than the effect of the omnibus
treatment (roughly 1.1 times the liberal-conservative gap), not surprising given that the goal
of this treatment was to lower trust. As we saw with the omnibus treatment, respondents
appear to separate how much they trust the government with what they view as its proper
scope, as the treatment has no effect on that outcome (col. 2). The treatment makes them
more likely to view the government as wasteful, but the effect is not significant (col. 3).
   Cols. (4) through (6) suggest that we were largely successful in devising a treatment that
isolates the effect of trust, at least with respect to our standard questions on income in-
equality and poverty. There is a marginal effect of the treatment in increasing concern about
inequality, but no effect on the sense inequality has increased or the sense that poverty is
a problem. The results from the omnibus treatment suggest that, if anything, the uptick
in concern about inequality should have a mildly positive effect on treatment respondents’
tendency to support redistributive policies. As such, it would mask the effects of decreas-
ing trust in government on support for redistributive policies, which we hypothesize to be
negative.
   Table 9 displays those results. The treatment decreases support for a tax on millionaires,
though this result is not quite statistically significant (when the continuous top tax rate is
used instead as the outcome, the coefficient is positive but essentially zero, see Appendix
Tables 15 and 16 for this and other results not discussed in the main text). While stated
support for expanding the estate tax is essentially unchanged by the treatment, the stated
willingness to petition for its expansion is significantly reduced (a scaled effect of 0.588).
   The estimated effects of trust on support for transfer programs to the poor are much less
equivocal. While support for the minimum wage is unaffected (col. 4), treatment respondents
significantly reduce their support for “aid to the poor” generally (col. 5), and food stamps
and public housing specifically (cols. 6 and 7). Finally, some interesting results emerge when


                                               23
respondents are asked to rank a list of options for addressing inequality (a higher number
here means more support). Col. (8) shows the treatment causes respondents to elevate a
non-governmental solution to inequality—private charity, which, as noted at the beginning
of the Section, is generally preferred by more conservative respondents.

Discussion. Decreasing respondents’ trust in government appears to have a strong, negative
effect on support for direct government transfers. As further support for the trust mechanism,
the treatment has no effect on support for the minimum wage, which is an indirect transfer
that does not involve the government receiving and redistributing tax dollars. Recall also that
the omnibus treatment failed to increase support for direct transfer programs (the EITC and
food stamps) but did increase support for the minimum wage. As Table 9 shows that support
for the minimum wage appears unaffected by changes in trust, trust emerges as a plausible
mediating variable that can explain the pattern of results for the omnibus treatment.

4.2.2       Emotional versus factual appeals

There is a long psychology literature that suggests that for many issues, emotional appeals
produce larger changes in attitudes than more factual presentations.37 Indeed, the estate
tax follow-up experiment described in Section 4.1 showed that the neutral treatment had a
smaller effect than the emotional treatment. While our omnibus treatment provided extensive
interactive and personalized information, it was mostly numeric in nature, which may have
limited its ability to move policy preferences. Similarly, the focus on the “top one percent”
might be less effective than focusing more intensely on the bottom of the distribution.
   To test this idea, we developed a treatment meant to create empathy between the respon-
dent and low-income families. Again, the treatment was personalized and interactive. For
example, we asked respondents to “[t]hink about a family of X1 with X2 parent(s) working
full time...and X3 kids....What would be the minimal monthly expenses that such a family
would have to make to afford living where you live?” The values X1 , X2 , and X3 were in-
teractively matched to the household composition that the respondent earlier gave in the
demographic module at the start of the survey. The respondent then entered dollar amounts
for monthly rent, utilities, transportation, food, and expenses related to children. We then
showed them how the budget they devised compared with the income at the poverty line
(based on the respondents’ household size), emphasizing to them that the budget did not
  37 See,e.g., Edwards (1990), Rosselli, Skelly, and Mackie (1995), Loef, Antonides, and Raaij
(2001), Huddy and Gunnthorsdottir (2000), and citations therein.


                                              24
even include items such as health care, clothing, furniture, and costs related to schooling
(see the Appendix for a complete description of the treatment and Appendix Figure 9 for a
screenshot).38 The slides with this information also included photos of low-income families.

Results. Overall, the results track very closely to those from the original omnibus treat-
ment. We obtain large “first stage” effects on concern for poverty and inequality, but little
movement on policy preferences.
   Table 10 presents the key outcomes. The treatment has significant effects on concern
about inequality (col. 1), and, not surprisingly, large effects on whether poverty is a serious
problem (equal to over 30 percent of the political gap for this outcome).39 However, just like
the omnibus treatment, this follow-up “emotional” treatment has limited effect on policy
preferences. Of the four poverty-policy questions we asked, only two exhibit a marginally
significant treatment effect (food stamps and aid to the poor, and even then just below 8
percent of the political gap). Similar to the omnibus treatment, this follow-up treatment
reduces trust in government, though the effect is smaller and not significant.40

Discussion. As readers can verify by taking the surveys themselves, the omnibus treat-
ment and this “emotional” follow-up are very different in spirit. The omnibus treatment
focused largely on the top one percent and was more factual in nature, whereas the follow-
up treatment focused on the disadvantaged and sought to create empathy both with our
“put yourselves in their shoes” exercise as well as photographs of low-income families.
   Despite these stark differences, the results are very similar. It is relatively easy for treat-
ments to affect how much individuals are “concerned” with any issue, but much harder to
increase their support for policies that would seem directly related to addressing said issues.
Our final follow-up survey attempts to make the connection to policy measures more explicit.
  38 The  large majority (76 percent) devise a budget in excess of the income at the poverty line for
a household of their type.
   39 As detailed in Appendix Table 17, the treatment increased the likelihood of correctly choosing

the actual poverty rate from multiple choices, though, because many control respondents over-
estimated the poverty rate, it did not on net increase their estimate of the poverty rate. The
fact that the treatment had such a large effect on perceiving poverty as a “very serious problem”
likely works through the intensive margin: perhaps through the creation of empathy, the treatment
highlights how difficult it would be to manage with limited income.
   40 The treatment had very small but positive effects on taxes on the well-off, always well below

ten percent of the political gap and not significant. See Appendix Tables 17 and 18 for these and
all other outcomes not displayed in Table 10.




                                                 25
4.2.3   Connecting “concerns” with policy measures

Bartels (2005) documents the seemingly odd result that even though the individuals in his
2002 sample were worried about inequality and aware that the tax cuts proposed by the Bush
Administration in 2001 favored the wealthy, they still supported them by a large margin.
He concludes that “Americans support tax cuts not because they are indifferent to economic
inequality, but because they largely fail to connect inequality and public policy.”
   We directly test this notion—that respondents do not connect their “concerns” with
policies meant to address them—in our final follow-up survey. In this version, we largely
repeat the low-income “emotional” treatment described in Section 4.2.2, but also add slides
showing how current government programs help these households. First, after entering in
the expenses in the budget exercise, the treatment describes a family earning one full-time
full-year minimum-wage income, making a salient connection between the level of the mini-
mum wage and family income at the bottom of the income distribution. Second, respondents
are told that “The food stamps program helps many low income families, such as those
earning only one minimum wage. It provides $150/month per person to help with food ex-
penses.” Hence, the connection between poverty and a government program is made explicit.
Appendix Figure 10 provides a screenshot.

Results. We repeat the results for the key outcome variables in Table 11. The “first-stage”
effects of this treatment are smaller and not significant. It is not surprising that we do not see
much movement in variables related to inequality, since the treatment did not provide any
direct information on the topic. Despite the focus on the situation of a low-income household,
treatment respondents do not view poverty as a more serious problem. We speculate that
emphasizing the efficacy of a government poverty program might have the effect of making
poverty and inequality seem less severe.
   Despite the somewhat smaller first-stage effects, the effects on our policy outcomes are
consistently positive and significant. Support rises for the minimum wage (col. 3), aid to the
poor (col. 4), food stamps (col. 5), and public housing (col. 6). The effect on “aid to the
poor” is positive but not significant. It should be noted, however, that with the exception
of the minimum wage, these effects are still relatively small (roughly about ten to fifteen
percent of the political gap). It is also the case that the treatment does not consistently
increase support for actually sending money to Washington to pay for these policies: the
effects on income and estate taxes for the well-off are mixed (see Appendix Tables 19 and
20).

                                               26
    However, it does appear that the interaction of the empathic portrayal of low-income
families along with information emphasizing the efficacy of a transfer program has a mean-
ingful effect on the policies respondents support. Col. (7) suggests that, in contrast to the
trust treatment, this treatment reduces the relative attractiveness of the non-governmental
solution to inequality: private charity. Finally, col. (8) shows that there is no significant effect
of the treatment on trust in government, though the point-estimate is negative.

Discussion. While this treatment indeed moved policy preferences, it is worth noting its
highly explicit nature. After completing an exercise where they contemplated the budget
constraints of a low-income family, respondents were shown in concrete terms how a gov-
ernment program helps such a household make ends meet. Even then, while support for
many poverty-related programs significantly increased, the largest effect remains the mini-
mum wage, an indirect transfer program. Moreover, the treatment does not have a consistent
effect in terms of inducing treatment participants to desire higher taxes (even if only on the
wealthy) to pay for these programs.
    Taken together, the results from these three follow-up surveys suggest the difficulty in
moving most policy preferences. While concern for an issue is highly elastic to information,
translating this concern into a change in policy preference appears very difficult, with the
consistent exception of the estate tax.


5    Conclusion

The standard median-voter model predicts that support for redistribution should increase
with income inequality, yet there has been little evidence of greater demand for redistribu-
tion over the past thirty years in the United States—despite historic increases in income
concentration. A possible explanation is that people are unaware of the increase in inequal-
ity, such that greater information would substantially move redistributive preferences. We
gather over 10,000 observations using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk to conduct a series of
survey experiments to extensively explore this hypothesis.
    Our results suggest that, generally, greater information can increase respondents’ sense of
concern about an issue, but not necessarily their support for policies that might ameliorate
it. Information about income inequality and poverty has only a limited (and typically sta-
tistically insignificant) tendency to increase support for higher income taxes on the well-off
or transfer programs for the disadvantaged.


                                                27
   We present evidence that extreme distrust of government appears to explain part of this
null effect. First, trust in government is very low in our sample, as it currently is among
Americans more generally. Second, many of our treatments appear to further reduce this
already low level of trust. Third, and most novel relative to the literature, we show that
decreasing trust has a causal effect on diminishing support for redistribution. We develop a
prime that reduces trust in government without significantly moving respondents’ concern for
inequality and poverty: respondents exposed to this prime significantly reduce their support
for programs that involve the government directly redistributing tax dollars, while increasing
their support for non-governmental solutions such as private charity.
   Only when we explicitly show individuals the concrete effects of government poverty poli-
cies do we observe consistent, statistically significant increases in support for such policies.41
Even so, such effects are small, and are largest for indirect transfer programs such as the
minimum wage that do not involve the government collecting and redistributing tax dollars.
   Future work might further probe the connection between government trust and policy
preferences. Underlying mistrust might help to explain the reluctance to support policies
that would seem to be in the majority’s self-interest. Relatedly, distrust could explain why
minimum wage increases typically enjoy 70-80 percent support in surveys. Many economists
assume that respondents simply misunderstand the incidence of the minimum wage. Instead,
it might be the case that they view the minimum wage as imperfect, but better than other
redistributive policies that involve sending money to Washington.42 In future work, it would
be valuable to test whether treatments that increase trust in the government also increase
support for redistributive policies.
   As we extensively document, the estate tax is the exception to the generally small effects
of information on policy: even a four-sentence description providing information on its inci-
dence significantly increases support for the policy. At least part of this effect appears due
to vast misinformation—many respondents both in our survey and past work on the estate
tax believe a majority of families are subject to it, whereas the actual share is 0.1 percent.
   It remains an open question if misinformation fully explains the difference. For example,
Americans might view the moral claims to inheritance versus income differently. If the goal of
the estate tax is to prevent the self-perpetuation of extreme wealth, then respondents might
  41 Future  work could also explore how emphasizing the negative aspects of redistribution, such as
reduced labor supply, could affect preferences for redistribution.
   42 Notably, voters in several conservative states passed minimum wage hikes in the 2014 midterm

elections, consistent with their not viewing the minimum wage as a “government program.”


                                                28
still support it even if, say, the government merely burns the money it collects. Therefore, low
levels of trust in government may not inhibit support for the estate tax as much as for other
policies where efficiency is a more salient goal. Independent of the origin of the treatment
effect, the large elasticity of support for the estate tax in response to basic information
that we and past work have documented is highly policy-relevant, given the recent rise in
inheritance flows in many developed countries.43
   Randomized online surveys are a powerful and convenient tool for studying the effects of
information treatments on attitudes and behaviors, one we imagine can be used to extend
the results we have documented. The tool is powerful because it can reach large samples of
U.S. residents (in the thousands) at fairly low cost ($1-$2 per respondent). It is convenient
because, using widely available software, online surveys are now very easy to design. Hence,
it becomes more feasible to explore mechanisms behind results. For example, we were able to
easily design companion experiments to test mechanisms potentially underlying the effects
in our original, omnibus treatment. Therefore, in contrast to field experiments which are
very costly to set-up and replicate, online survey experiments lend themselves naturally
to conducting series of experiments where results from an initial experiment lead to new
experiments to cast light on potential mechanisms.
   Such flexibility will allow researchers to gain a more nuanced understanding of redistribu-
tive preferences. While projections are by nature uncertain, the U.S. government is expected
to face a long-run fiscal imbalance, largely due to the aging of the population and rising
health care costs.44 European countries face similar challenges. The distributional effects of
any future fiscal rebalancing—raising taxes, cutting spending, or both—will depend in large
part on voters’ redistributive preferences, how strongly they hold them, and whether and how
they act on them. As such, these questions are of first-order importance in public economics.
We believe that the methodology we employed in this paper can be used in future research
to better understand how individuals’ redistributive preferences are formed and shaped.
  43 See Piketty (2014), Ch. 11. Unfortunately, data limitations make it difficult to know whether
this trend applies specifically to the United States.
  44 See, e.g., the Congressional Budget Office’s 2014 long-run budget projections (www.cbo.gov/

publication/45471).




                                               29
References
Alesina, A. and G.-M. Angeletos (2005). “Fairness and redistribution.” American Eco-
  nomic Review, pp. 960–980.
Alesina, A. and E. L. Ferrara (2005). “Preferences for redistribution in the land of
  opportunities.” Journal of Public Economics 89(5             6), pp. 897 –931.
Alesina, A. F. and P. Giuliano (2011). “Preferences for Redistribution.” Handbook of
  Social Economics, Vol. 1A. Ed. by M. O. J. Jess Benhabib and A. Bisin. North-
  Holland.
Amir, O., D. Rand, and Y. K. Gal (2012). “Economic games on the internet: The effect
  of $1 stakes.” PloS ONE 7(2), e31461.
Bartels, L. M. (2009). “Economic inequality and political representation.” The Unsustain-
  able American State. Ed. by L. Jacobs and D. King. Oxford University Press, pp. 167–
  196.
Bartels, L. (2005). “Homer gets a tax cut: Inequality and public policy in the American
  mind.” Perspectives on Politics 3(01), pp. 15–31.
Benabou, R. and E. Ok (2001). “Social mobility and the demand for redistribution: The
  POUM hypothesis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2), pp. 447–487.
Bernardi, R. A. (2006). “Associations between Hofstedes cultural constructs and social
  desirability response bias.” Journal of Business Ethics 65(1), pp. 43–53.
Brader, T. (2005). “Striking a responsive chord: How political ads motivate and persuade
  voters by appealing to emotions.” American Journal of Political Science 49(2), pp. 388–
  405.
Corneo, G. and H. P. Gruner (2000). “Social Limits to Redistribution.” American Eco-
  nomic Review 90(5), pp. 1491–1507.
— (2002). “Individual preferences for political redistribution.” Journal of Public Economics
  83, pp. 83–107.
Cruces, G., R. Perez-Truglia, and M. Tetaz (2013). “Biased perceptions of income dis-
  tribution and preferences for redistribution: Evidence from a survey experiment.” Journal
  of Public Economics 98, pp. 100 –112.
Dalton, D. and M. Ortegren (2011). “Gender differences in ethics research: The impor-
  tance of controlling for the social desirability response bias.” Journal of Business Ethics
  103(1), pp. 73–93.
Druckman, J. N. and K. R. Nelson (2003). “Framing and deliberation: How citizens’
  conversations limit elite influence.” American Journal of Political Science 47(4), pp. 729–
  745.
Edwards, K. (1990). “The interplay of affect and cognition in attitude formation and
  change.” Journal of personality and social psychology 59(2), p. 202.
Fong, C. (2001). “Social preferences, self-interest, and the demand for redistribution.” Jour-
  nal of Public Economics 82(2), pp. 225–246.
Fujii, E. and C. Hawley (1988). “On the accuracy of tax perceptions.” Review of Economics
  and Statistics 70(2), pp. 344–347.
Gaines, B. J., J. H. Kuklinski, and P. J. Quirk (2007). “The logic of the survey experiment
  reexamined.” Political Analysis 15(1), pp. 1–20.
Gelder, M. M. H. J. van, R. W. Bretveld, and N. Roeleveld (2010). “Web-based Ques-
   tionnaires: The Future in Epidemiology?” American Journal of Epidemiology 172(11),
   pp. 1292–1298.
Gerber, A. S., J. G. Gimpel, D. P. Green, and D. R. Shaw (2011). “How large and long-
   lasting are the persuasive effects of televised campaign ads? Results from a randomized
   field experiment.” American Political Science Review 105(01), pp. 135–150.
Gilens, M. (1996). ““Race coding” and White opposition to welfare.” American Political
   Science Review 90, pp. 593–604.
Guillaud, E. (2013). “Preferences for Redistribution: an Empirical Analysis over 33 Coun-
   tries.” Journal of Economic Inequality 11(1), pp. 57–78.
Horton, J., D. Rand, and R. Zeckhauser (2011). “The online laboratory: Conducting
   experiments in a real labor market.” Experimental Economics 14(3), pp. 399–425.
Hoxby, C. and S. Turner (2013). “Expanding college opportunities for high-achieving,
   low income students.” Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper
   (12-014).
Huddy, L. and A. H. Gunnthorsdottir (2000). “The persuasive effects of emotive vi-
   sual imagery: Superficial manipulation or the product of passionate reason?” Political
   Psychology 21(4), pp. 745–778.
Kenworthy, L. and L. McCall (2008). “Inequality, public opinion and redistribution.”
   Socio-Economic Review 6(1), p. 35.
Kluegel, J. R. and E. R. Smith (1986). Beliefs about Inequality: Americans’ Views of what
   is and what ought to be. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Kreuter, F., S. Presser, and R. Tourangeau (2008). “Social Desirability Bias in CATI,
   IVR, and Web Surveys: The Effects of Mode and Question Sensitivity.” Public Opinion
   Quarterly 72(5), pp. 847–865.
Kuklinski, J., P. Quirk, J. Jerit, D. Schwieder, and R. Rich (2003). “Misinformation
   and the currency of democratic citizenship.” Journal of Politics 62(3), pp. 790–816.
Lecheler, S. and C. H. de Vreese (2011). “Getting real: The duration of framing effects.”
   Journal of Communication 61(5), pp. 959–983.
Liebman, J. B. and E. F. Luttmer (Aug. 2011). Would People Behave Differently If They
   Better Understood Social Security? Evidence From a Field Experiment. Working Paper
   17287. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Loef, J., G. Antonides, and W. F. Raaij (2001). The Effectiveness of Advertising Match-
   ing Purchase Motivation. Tech. rep. ERIM Report Series Research in Management.
Luskin, R. C., J. S. Fishkin, and R. Jowell (2002). “Considered opinions: Deliberative
   polling in Britain.” British Journal of Political Science 32(3), pp. 455–487.
Luttmer, E. (2001). “Group loyalty and the taste for redistribution.” Journal of Political
   Economy 109(3), pp. 500–528.
Luttmer, E. and M. Singhal (2011). “Culture, Context, and the Taste for Redistribution.”
   American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3(1), pp. 157–179.
Margalit, Y. (2013). “Explaining Social Policy Preferences: Evidence from the Great Re-
   cession.” American Political Science Review, forthcoming.
McCaffery, E. and J. Baron (2006). “Thinking about tax.” Psychology, Public Policy,
   and Law 12(1), p. 106.


                                           31
McCall, L. and L. Kenworthy (2009). “Americans’ social policy preferences in the era
   of rising inequality.” Perspectives on Politics 7(03), pp. 459–484.
Meltzer, A. and S. Richard (1981). “A rational theory of the size of government.” The
   Journal of Political Economy 89(5), pp. 914–927.
Norton, M. I. and D. Ariely (2011). “Building a better America One wealth quintile at
   a time.” Perspectives on Psychological Science 6(1), pp. 9–12.
Paolacci, G., J. Chandler, and P. Ipeirotis (2010). “Running experiments on Amazon
   Mechanical Turk.” Judgment and Decision Making 5(5), pp. 411–419.
Piketty, T. (1995). “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics.” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 110(3), pp. 551–584.
— (2014). Capital in the Twenty-first Century. Harvard University Press.
Piketty, T. and E. Saez (2003). “Income inequality in the United States, 1913–1998.” The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1), pp. 1–41.
Piketty, T., E. Saez, and S. Stantcheva (2014). “Optimal Taxation of Top Labor In-
   comes: A Tale of Three Elasticities.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(1),
   pp. 230–71.
Rand, D. and M. Nowak (2011). “The evolution of antisocial punishment in optional public
   goods games.” Nature Communications 2, p. 434.
Rosselli, F., J. J. Skelly, and D. M. Mackie (1995). “Processing rational and emotional
   messages: The cognitive and affective mediation of persuasion.” Journal of Experimental
   Social Psychology 31(2), pp. 163–190.
Saez, E. and S. Stantcheva (2013). Generalized Social Marginal Welfare Weights for
   Optimal Tax Theory. Working Paper 18835. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Saez, E. and G. Zucman (Oct. 2014). Wealth Inequality in the United States since 1913:
   Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data. Working Paper 20625. National Bureau of
   Economic Research.
Sapienza, P. and L. Zingales (2013). “Economic Experts versus Average Americans.” The
   American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 103(3), pp. 636–642.
Savani, K. and A. Rattan (2012). “A choice mind-set increases the acceptance and main-
   tenance of wealth inequality.” Psychological science 23(7), pp. 796–804.
Senik, C. (2009). Income Distribution and Subjective Happiness: A Survey. Working Paper
   96. OECD.
Sides, J. (July 2011). “Stories, Science, and Public Opinions about the Estate Tax.”
Singhal, M. (2008). “Quantifying Preferences for redistribution.” Harvard University, Work-
   ing Paper.
Slemrod, J. (2006). “The role of misconceptions in support for regressive tax reform.”
   National Tax Journal 59(1), p. 57.
Suri, S. and D. Watts (2010). “Cooperation and contagion in networked public goods
   experiments.” PLoS ONE 6(3), e16836.
Weinzierl, M. C. (Dec. 2012). The Promise of Positive Optimal Taxation: A General-
   ized Theory Calibrated to Survey Evidence on Normative Preferences Explains Puzzling
   Features of Policy. Working Paper 18599. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Yamamura, E. (2014). “Trust in government and its effect on preferences for income redis-
   tribution and perceived tax burden.” Economics of Governance 15(1), pp. 71–100.


                                            32
    Figure 1: The government should reduce income differences (scale from 1–7, GSS)
This figure depicts responses since 1978 in the US General Social Survey (GSS) on whether the
government should reduce income differences. The empty diamond series is for all respondents while
the full circle series is for respondents with below average income. Regression fits are depicted for
each series. The graph uses the eqwlth variable from the GSS (though subtracts it from eight so
that it is increasing in support for redistribution).




                                                 33
       Table 1: Summary statistics and comparison to other polling and online data

                                             (1)              (2)                  (3)
                                         mTurk sample   CBS election poll   American Life Panel
Male                                         0.428            0.476                0.417
Age                                         35.41            48.99                48.94
White (non-Hisp)                            0.778            0.739                0.676
Black                                       0.0756            0.116                0.109
Hispanic                                    0.0444           0.0983                0.180
Other racial/ethnic group                   0.0759           0.0209               0.0410
Employed (full or part)                      0.465            0.587                0.557
Unemployed                                   0.123            0.104                0.103
Married                                      0.397            0.594                0.608
Has college degree                           0.433            0.318                0.309
Voted for Obama                              0.675            0.555                0.559
Political views, cons. (1) to lib. (3)       2.176            1.586
Observations                                 3741             808                  1002
Notes: This table displays summary statistics from our mTurk omnibus surveys in column (1)
along with (weighted) averages based on a 2011 CBS news survey in column (2) and RAND’s
online American Life Panel (ALP) in column (3). We are grateful to Ray Fisman for providing us
with summary statistics from the ALP.




                                                34
 Table 2: Summary statistics for the Control Group, split by Liberals and Conservatives

                                                                      (1)           (2)             (3)
                                                                    Liberals    Conservatives       All
Male                                                                  0.407          0.472        0.422
Age                                                                  32.618         39.823        35.557
White                                                                 0.752          0.838         0.776
Black                                                                 0.090          0.063         0.085
Hispanic                                                              0.039          0.027         0.037
Asian                                                                 0.090          0.053        0.078
Married                                                               0.302          0.543        0.402
Has college degree                                                    0.462          0.455         0.430
Unemployed                                                            0.140          0.076         0.121
Not in labor force                                                   0.093          0.208         0.144
Voted for Obama in 2008                                               0.914          0.303         0.674
Inequality has increased                                              0.836          0.615        0.738
Inequality is a very serious problem                                 0.414          0.129         0.285
Top Tax Rate                                                         34.181         23.996        30.205
Increase Millionaire Tax                                             0.904          0.452         0.740
Increase Estate Tax                                                  0.254          0.080         0.171
Increase min wage                                                    0.822          0.496         0.690
Support food stamps                                                   0.850          0.446         0.686
Support EITC                                                          0.722          0.418        0.611
Trust Govt                                                            0.171          0.148         0.158
Scope of Govt is broad                                                3.552          2.349         3.076
Said would petition for higher inc taxes (early rounds only)          0.288          0.118         0.238
Send petition for high estate tax                                    0.305          0.141         0.234
Plan to vote democrat 2012                                           0.800          0.182         0.529
 Observations                                                         821             475           1976
Notes: This table displays summary statistics based on control respondents from the omnibus
surveys, stratified by self-reported liberal vs. conservative status (on a five-point scale, very liberal,
liberal, center of the road, conservative, very conservative). Column (1) is for liberals (less than three
on the scale) while column (2) is for conservatives (more than three on the scale). Col. (3) shows
summary statistics for the entire control group, including the “center of the road” respondents.
The complete wording of these survey questions is reported in the Appendix.




                                                   35
Table 3: Ability of covariates to predict treatment status, conditional on finishing the survey


Variable                                                   Coefficient                            P-value
Voted for Obama in 2008                                       0.003                                  0.856
Age                                                          -0.001                                  0.479
Liberal policy view                                           0.002                                  0.751
Household income                                             0.005                                   0.109
Married                                                      -0.013                                  0.434
Education                                                    -0.003                                  0.575
Male                                                          0.013                                  0.447
Black                                                        -0.066                                  0.031
Hispanic                                                      0.091                                  0.021
Native                                                       -0.043                                  0.201
Employed full time                                           -0.012                                  0.502
Unemployed                                                    0.015                                  0.539
Not in labor force                                           0.021                                   0.376
Student                                                      -0.027                                  0.235
Notes: For each row, the coefficient and p-value are from regressions of the form
Assigned to treatmentir = α + βCovariatei + δr + ir , where Covariate is listed to the left in
the row and δr are survey round fixed effects. Those tests are used to detect selective attrition (as
treatment respondents are approximately ten percentage points less likely to complete the omnibus
survey than are control respondents, see Appendix Table 3). If we regress treatment status jointly
on all covariates and survey round fixed effects, we obtain a p-value for joint significance of 0.12.


Table 4: Effect of omnibus treatment on opinions about inequality (“first-stage” outcomes)

                       Ineq. v. serious            Ineq. increased               Rich deserving
                       (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)
Treated             0.102∗∗∗      0.104∗∗∗      0.119∗∗∗       0.120∗∗∗    -0.0500∗∗∗      -0.0526∗∗∗
                    [0.0154]      [0.0144]      [0.0130]       [0.0128]     [0.0119]        [0.0114]
Control mean         0.285         0.285         0.738          0.738         0.180           0.180
Scaled Effect        0.357         0.365         0.539          0.540         0.173           0.182
Covariates?           No            Yes           No             Yes           No              Yes
Obs.                 3703          3703          3704           3704          3690            3690
Notes: The three outcome variables are binary indicator variables, coded as one if the respondent
says that “inequality is a very serious problem,” “inequality has increased,” and “the rich are deserv-
ing of their income,” respectively. All regressions have round fixed effects, even those labeled as in-
cluding “no” covariates. Controls for covariates further include all variables in the randomization ta-
ble (Table 3), plus state-of-residence fixed effects. “Scaled effect” is the coefficient on Treated divided
by the difference between control group liberals and conservatives. The row “Control mean” reports
the mean of the outcome variable for the entire control group. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01


                                                    36
                                          Table 5: Effect of omnibus treatment on policy preferences

                         Top rate       $1M tax         Estate         Petition     Min. wage           Trust        Scope        Dem 2012
                            (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)                 (6)       (7)            (8)
     Treated              0.931∗        0.0502∗∗∗      0.357∗∗∗       0.0648∗∗∗      0.0325∗∗         -0.0292∗∗     0.132∗∗∗        0.0152
                          [0.549]        [0.0126]      [0.0140]        [0.0156]      [0.0141]          [0.0115]     [0.0339]       [0.0125]
     Control mean         30.21           0.740         0.171           0.234         0.690             0.158        3.076          0.529
     Scaled Effect        0.0914          0.111         2.043           0.394         0.0995            1.250        0.110          0.0246
     Obs.                  3741           3704          3673            3060           3690             3702         3704            3703
     Notes: “Top rate” is continuous (respondents’ preferred average tax rate (in percent) on the richest one percent). “Scope” is also continuous
     (a 1-5 variable, increasing in the preferred scope of government activities). All other variables are binary. “$1M tax” and “Estate” indicate
     the respondent wants income taxes on millionaires and the estate tax to increase, respectively. “Petition” indicates she would write her
     Senator to increase the estate tax. “Min. wage” indicates support for increasing the minimum wage. “Trust” indicates trust in government
     and “Dem 2012” indicates the respondent plans to vote for the Democrat (Obama) in the 2012 Presidential election. “Covariates” and
     “scaled effects” are as specified in the notes to Table 4. The row “Control mean” reports the mean of the outcome variable in the control
37




     group. All regressions in this and subsequent tables include control variables as defined in Table 4. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01

                                          Table 6: Results from the follow-up survey one month later

                            Increase Estate Tax                  Govt scope                    Trust gov.               Ineq. v. serious
                            (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)              (6)          (7)             (8)
                           First        Follow-up         First        Follow-up       First         Follow-up       First        Follow-up
     Treated             0.337∗∗∗        0.195∗∗          0.259         0.364∗        -0.122∗∗        -0.0691       0.00833          0.102
                         [0.0953]        [0.0910]        [0.207]        [0.200]       [0.0611]        [0.0582]      [0.0809]       [0.0770]
     Control mean          0.180          0.179          2.995           2.910         0.122            0.128        0.283          0.218
     Obs.                   145            145            145             145           145              145          145            145
     Notes: All outcomes and terms are as defined in Tables 4 and 5. For each dependent variable, Column “First” is the result from the first
     survey, while Column “Follow-up” is the result from the follow-up survey one month after the initial survey. We use a more limited set of
     control variables given the small sample size. All regressions are run on the subsample of respondents who entirely completed the follow
     up survey. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                          Table 7: Results from the estate tax survey

                       Ineq. v. ser. Ineq. inc. Deserving Estate tax Petition Trust Estate tax corr.
                            (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)           (5)        (6)          (7)
Treated (Emotional)       0.0381     -0.00239   -0.0247     0.289∗∗∗       0.0313 -0.0164        0.316∗∗∗
                         [0.0258]    [0.0243]   [0.0206]    [0.0258]      [0.0208] [0.0205]      [0.0263]
Treated (Neutral)        0.0511∗∗   -0.0501∗∗ -0.0244       0.109∗∗∗       0.0239 -0.00558       0.375∗∗∗
                         [0.0259]    [0.0244] [0.0206]      [0.0259]      [0.0209] [0.0205]      [0.0264]
 Control mean             0.307       0.771      0.174      0.210      0.132    0.153         0.120
 Scaled Emot. Effect      0.118       0.011      0.098      1.085      0.265    0.235         3.386
 Scaled Neutral Effect    0.159       0.223      0.097      0.408      0.202    0.080         4.014
 P-Value                  0.612       0.049      0.991      0.000      0.722    0.598         0.026
 Obs.                      1777        1777       1777      1777       1762     1756           1773
Notes: The “emotional” treatment repeats the estate tax slide from the omnibus treatment, but
eliminates the rest of the treatment. The “neutral” treatment is a version of the “emotional”
treatment that attempts to remove any framing effects or emotional appeals to focus solely on the
information. The outcomes in cols. (1) through (6) are as defined in Tables 4 and 5. (“Deserving” is
the abbreviation for “the rich are deserving of their income”). “Estate tax corr.” indicates that the
respondent chose the correct multiple-choice outcome for a question asking what share of people
who die are subject to the estate tax. P-value is the p-value of the test that the coefficients on the
treated “emotional” and the treated “neutral” are the same. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01




              Table 8: Effect of negative trust prime on “first stage” variables

                          Trust       Scope     Efficient    Ineq. v. ser.        Ineq. inc.   Pov. v. ser.
                           (1)          (2)        (3)              (4)              (5)           (6)
Treated                -0.0582∗∗∗     0.0236     -0.0278       0.0547∗             0.0119       -0.00257
                        [0.0203]     [0.0688]    [0.0346]      [0.0311]           [0.0289]      [0.0313]
 Control mean               0.125        3.031   1.423        0.343         0.755         0.383
 Scaled Trust Effect        1.730       0.0170   0.109        0.182         0.341        0.00828
 Obs.                        899          899     898          899           899           899
Notes: The negative trust prime treatment consists of several multiple-choice questions that made
respondents reflect on aspects of government they dislike. For outcomes, “Efficient” is taken from
a 1-3 scale of how much respondents think the government wastes money (we “flip” it so that
it is increasing with perceived government efficiency). “Pov. v. ser.” is an indicator variable for
whether the respondent views poverty as a very serious problem. All other outcomes are as defined
previously. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                 38
                                             Table 9: Effect of negative trust prime on outcome variables

                              $1M tax           Est. tax        Petition        Min. wage         Aid poor       Food st.      Housing      Priv. char.
                                 (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)            (7)          (8)
     Treated                  -0.0421           -0.00168        -0.0602∗∗         -0.00428        -0.139∗∗       -0.153∗∗      -0.163∗∗∗     0.187∗∗
                              [0.0275]          [0.0266]        [0.0236]          [0.0902]        [0.0616]       [0.0673]      [0.0614]      [0.0791]
      Control mean               0.722         0.204         0.174          2.673          2.675           2.454           2.581      1.800
      Scaled Trust Effect       0.0949        0.00728        0.580         0.00531         0.128           0.119           0.133      0.169
      Obs.                        899           895           899            899            899             899             899        850
     Notes: The negative trust prime treatment consists of several multiple-choice questions that made respondents reflect on aspects of
     government they dislike. Outcome variables are defined as follows. “Min. wage” is a 0-4 categorical variable increasing in support for the
     minimum wage (0 indicates most opposition and 4 indicates most support). “Food st.” is a 0-4 categorical variable increasing in support
     for food stamps. “Aid poor” is a 0-4 categorical variable increasing in support for programs that aid poor households. “Housing” is a
     0-4 categorical variable increasing in support for funding public housing programs. “Priv. char.” is an indicator of where (among a list
     of five policy approaches) the respondent puts “private charity” as a preferred method for addressing inequality (the variable increases
     with relative support for private charity). All other outcomes are as defined previously. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
39




                                         Table 10: Effect of “emotional” treatment on outcome variables

                               Ineq. v. ser.       Ineq. inc.      Pov. v. ser.      Min. wage       Aid poor      Food st.      Housing    Trust gov.
                                       (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)            (6)       (7)          (8)
     Treated                    0.0783∗∗∗            0.0410         0.0885∗∗∗           0.0469         0.117∗       0.177∗        0.0397     -0.00979
                                 [0.0292]           [0.0258]         [0.0313]          [0.0989]       [0.0665]      [0.101]      [0.0670]    [0.0211]
      Control mean                 0.337          0.775          0.296           2.546         2.559          1.832     2.539        0.124
      Scaled Poverty Effect        0.221          0.225          0.257          0.0449        0.0714         0.0866    0.0291       0.0931
      Obs.                         1002           1001            799             799           799            799       799         1002
     Notes: The “emotional” treatment aimed at creating empathy between the respondent and families living in poverty. Respondents were
     told about poverty rates and filled out a minimum budget for a family like theirs living in the same city. Respondents were then shown
     how their minimum budget compared to the poverty line. All outcomes are as defined previously. “Min. wage”, “Aid poor”, “Food st.”,
     “Housing” are all categorical 0-4 and increasing in support as in Table 9. The lower number of observations in columns 3-7 is due to the
     fact that these questions were not asked in one smaller wave (sample of 200). ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                                             Table 11: Effect of policy treatment on outcome variables

                             Ineq. v. ser.      Pov. v. ser.   Min. wage   Aid poor    Food st.    Housing     Priv. char.    Trust gov.
                                 (1)                (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)
     Policy Treatment           0.0405           -0.00637       0.323∗∗∗    0.133∗∗    0.313∗∗∗    0.176∗∗∗       -0.137∗      -0.0325
                               [0.0279]          [0.0272]       [0.0949]    [0.0638]   [0.0970]    [0.0636]      [0.0709]      [0.0207]
     Control mean               0.343              0.326         2.546       2.559       1.832      2.539         2.025         0.149
40




     Scaled Policy Effect       0.108             0.0196         0.310      0.0811       0.153      0.129        0.0740         0.654
     Obs.                       1111               1111           806         806         806        806          1068          1111
     Notes: The policy treatment aimed at creating empathy between the respondent and families living on a minimum wage. Respondents
     filled out a minimum budget for a family like theirs living in the same city. Respondents were then shown how their minimum budget
     compared to the minimum wage and how food stamps add $150 per person/month to the budget of such a family. All outcomes are as
     defined previously. “Min. wage”, “Aid poor”, “Food st.”, “Housing” are all categorical 0-4 and increasing in support as in Table 9. The
     lower number of observations in columns 3-7 is due to the fact that these questions were not asked in one smaller wave (sample of 300).
     ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                               Web Appendix of
      How Elastic are Preferences for Redistribution?
      Evidence from Randomized Survey Experiments
    By Ilyana Kuziemko, Michael I. Norton, Emmanuel Saez, and
                       Stefanie Stantcheva

A     Detailed Description of the Experiment

A.1     Omnibus Treatment Description
This Section describes in detail the omnibus experiment. The omnibus treatment experiment
was carried out in 4 separate rounds from January 2011 to August 2012. The structure of
the experiment was as follows:
(1) Background socio-economic questions including age, gender, race, marital status, chil-
dren, state of residence, education, household income, work status, whether the respondent
considers himself conservative or liberal on economic policy, voting choice in 2008 presiden-
tial election.
(2) Randomized treatment showing information on inequality, the estate tax, and tax policy
shown solely to the treatment group. Those treatments are illustrated through screenshots
in appendix Figures 1, 2, 3, and 4.
(3) Set of questions on inequality, taxes and transfers, policy views and 2012 voting plans.
Those questions are listed in detail after the screenshots.
    Surveys were openly posted on mTurk and their description stated that they would pay
$1.50 for approximately 15 minutes of survey time, i.e., a $6 hourly wage. People were free
to drop out any time or take up to one hour to answer all questions.
    Round 3 was conducted with CT Marketing Group instead of mTurk at a cost of $5 per
respondent. The survey software remained exactly the same.
    The link to this survey is: https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_77fSvTy12ZSBihn


                             List of all Outcome Questions

Note: Sentences in italic were not seen by the respondents. Bold fonts are just labels for each
section. Sentences in normal font are exactly as they appeared in the survey. Text in bracket
represents the answer choices given to respondents. Text in curly brackets are explanatory
notes for the readers of this paper (not presented to respondents).
Tax rate questions:
    1. Choose the tax rate on the top 1%, next 9%, next 40% and bottom 50% (see screenshot).
[Slider with continuous percentage choices 0%-100% for each of the four income groups]
    2. Do you think top income tax rates were higher in the 1950s and 1960s than they are
today? [Yes, higher in the 1950s and 1960s/No, lower in the 1950s and 1960s]


                                              41
   3. As you may know, there have been proposals recently to decrease the federal deficit
by raising income taxes on millionaires. Do you think income taxes on millionaires should
be increased, stay the same or decreased? [Increased/Stay the same/Decreased]
   4. The Federal Estate tax (also known as the Death Tax) is a tax imposed on the transfer
of wealth from a deceased person to his or her heirs. Do you think the Federal Estate tax
should be decreased, left as is or increased? [Decreased/Left as is/Increased]
First stage questions on knowledge and perceptions of inequality:
    5. Do you think annual economic growth was faster in the period 1980-2010 than in the
period 1933-1980? [Faster in 1980-2011/The same in both periods/Faster in 1933-1980]
    6. Do you think inequality is a serious problem in America? [Not a problem at all/A
small problem/A problem/A serious problem/A very serious problem]
    7. Do you think income inequality in the US has increased or decreased in recent decades?
[Decreased/Stayed the same/Increased]
    8. Are you satisfied with your current income? [Very satisfied/Somewhat satisfied/Not
too satisfied/Not at all satisfied]
    9. Do you think that the very high earners in our society deserve their high incomes?
[Most of the time/Sometimes/Rarely]
    10. Which statement do you agree with most? [A: “One’s income and position in society
is mostly the result of one’s individual effort”/ B:“One’s income and position in society is to
a large extent the outcome of elements outside of one’s control (for example, including but
not limited to family background, luck, health issues, etc..)”?]
Political Outcomes:
    11. Which party do you plan to support in the 2012 presidential elections? [Demo-
cratic/Republican/Other/None] {note: the surveys were carried out before the 2012 elec-
tions}
    12. How much of the time do you think you can trust government in Washington to do
what is right? [Just about always/Most of the time/ Only some of the time/ Never]
    13. Next, think more broadly about the purpose of government. Where would you rate
yourself on a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means you think the government should do only those
things necessary to provide the most basic government functions, and 5 means you think the
government should take active steps in every area it can to try and improve the lives of its
citizens? [1/2/3/4/5]
    14. What do you think the most important goal of the federal income tax should be? [Raise
money for infrastructure projects such as roads and bridges/ Raise money for universal social
services such as Social Security and Medicare/ Raise money from the wealthiest citizens to
support programs that aid low-income citizens, such as Medicaid and Food Stamps)]
Poverty Reduction Policies Outcomes:
   15. The minimum wage is currently $7.25 per hour. Do you think it should be decreased,
stay the same or increased? [Decreased/Stay the same/Increased]
   16. Do you support or oppose the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) program? [Sup-
port/Indifferent/Oppose]
   17. Do you support or oppose the Food Stamps program? [Support/Indifferent/Oppose]


                                              42
   18. In the next month, do you plan to donate any money to an organization that supports
those in need? [Yes/No]
   19. In the past month, have you donated any money to an organization that supports
those in need? [Yes/No]
   20. In the next month, do you plan to donate some of your time to an organization that
supports those in need? [Yes/No]
   21. In the past month, have you donated some of your time to an organization that
supports those in need? [Yes/No]
Real Outcome: Petition for Estate Tax
    22. Writing to the Senators of your state gives you an opportunity to influence taxation
policy. Few citizens email their elected officials, therefore Senators and their staff take such
emails from their constituents very seriously. If you would like to write to your Senator, go to
the official US Senate list and click on your Senator’s contact webpage. Two sample letters
are provided below, one asking for higher estate taxes on the rich, one asking not to increase
estate taxes on the rich. Feel free to cut-and-paste and edit the text before sending it to your
Senator. Most Senators’ websites ask for your name and address to avoid spam. We are not
able to record what you write on the external (Senator’s) website, so your letter and private
information are kept fully confidential.
    For the purpose of our survey, we would just like to know from you: I sent or will send an
email to my Senator asking for higher estate taxes on the rich/ I sent or will send an email
to my Senator asking to not increase estate taxes on the rich/ I do not want to email my
Senator
    Sample letter for higher estate taxes on the rich: Dear Senator, In the coming months
as you debate the federal budget, one of the priorities for Congress should be raising estate
taxes on the wealthiest Americans so that they pay their fair share to fund government
programs and help solve our federal budget deficit problem.
    Sample letter for not increasing estate taxes on the rich: Dear Senator, In the coming
months as you debate the federal budget, one of the priorities for Congress should be keeping
estate taxes on the wealthiest Americans low. The government should not punish people who
are financially successful or well-off.
    [I sent or will send an email to my Senator asking for higher estate taxes on the rich/I
sent or will send an email to my Senator asking to not increase estate taxes on the rich/I do
not want to email my Senator]

A.2     Estate Tax Experiment Description
The follow up estate tax experiment was conducted in March 2014 on a sample of 1800
respondents. Respondents were randomized into one of two treatment groups, or into the
control group. The first treatment group saw the same screen as in the omnibus treatment
(only the part regarding the estate tax), as in appendix Figure 4. The second group saw a
plain explanation for the estate tax, as in appendix Figure 6.
    The link to this experiment is: https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_0vOecp2MDPBpInb

                              List of all Outcome Questions

                                              43
Note: Sentences in italic were not seen by the respondents. Bold fonts are just labels for each
section. Sentences in normal font are exactly as they appeared in the survey.
    1. Choose the tax rate on the top 1%, next 9%, next 40% and bottom 50% (see screenshot).
[Slider with continuous percentage choices 0%-100% for each of the four income groups]
    2. Do you think income inequality in the United States has increased or decreased since
1980? [Decreased/Stayed the same/Increased]
    3. Do you think inequality is a serious problem in America? [Not a problem at all/A
small problem/A problem/A serious problem/A very serious problem]
    4. The Federal Estate Tax is a tax imposed on the transfer of wealth from a deceased per-
son to his or her heirs. What percentage of people who die have to pay the Federal Estate tax?
If you don’t know, just give your best guess. [Less than 1%/1%/10%/20%/40%/60%/100%]
    5. Do you think poverty is a serious problem in America? [Not a problem at all/A small
problem/A problem/A serious problem/A very serious problem]
    6. Do you think that the very high earners in our society deserve their high incomes?
[Most of the time/Sometimes/Rarely]
    7. Do you think the federal estate tax should be decreased, left as is or increased? (Recall
that the federal estate tax is a tax imposed on the transfer of wealth from a deceased person
to his or her heirs.) [Decreased/Left as is/Increased]
    8. As you may know, there have been proposals recently to decrease the federal deficit
by raising income taxes on millionaires. Do you think income taxes on millionaires should
be increased, stay the same or decreased?[Increased/Stay the same/Decreased]
    9. Which of the tools below do you consider the best to address inequality in the United
States? Please drag and drop the items to the box on the right and rank them in your
preferred order. Your preferred method for addressing inequality should be at the top, your
least preferred one at the bottom. [Education Policies, Private Charity, Progressive Taxes,
Government Transfers (e.g., food stamps, Medicaid,..), Government regulation (e.g., min
wage, caps on top compensation,...)]
    10. Should the federal government increase or decrease spending on aid to the poor?
[Significantly increase/Slightly increase/Keep at current level/Slightly decrease/Significantly
decrease]
    11. The federal minimum wage is currently $7.25 per hour. Do you think it should be
decreased, stay the same or increased? [Significantly increased/Slightly increased/Stay the
same/Slightly decreased/Significantly decreased]
    12. Should the federal government increase or decrease its spending on public housing for
low income families? [Significantly increase /Slightly increase/Keep at current level/Slightly
decrease/Significantly decrease]
    13. Should the federal government increase or decrease its spending on food stamps?
(Food stamps provide financial assistance for food purchasing to families and individuals with
low or no income.) [Significantly increase/Slightly increase/Keep at current level/Slightly
decrease/Significantly decrease]
    14. Petition for Estate Tax : same as in A.1
    15. Which party do you plan to support in the 2014 congressional elections? [Demo-
cratic/Republican/Other/None]
    16. How much of the time do you think you can trust government in Washington to do
what is right? [Just about always/Most of the time/Only some of the time/Hardly ever]

                                              44
    17. Next, think more broadly about the purpose of government. Where would you rate
yourself on a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 means you think the government should do only those
things necessary to provide the most basic government functions, and 5 means you think the
government should take active steps in every area it can to try and improve the lives of its
citizens? [1/2/3/4/5]
    18. Do you think that people in the government waste a lot of money we pay in taxes,
waste some of it, or don’t waste very much of it?” [Waste a lot of money we pay in
taxes/Waste some of the money we pay in taxes/Don’t waste much of the money we pay in
taxes]
    19. How do you feel about the following statement: “Currently, the federal government is
very effective in limiting fraud, waste and abuse in the programs it administers”? [Strongly
agree/Agree/Disagree/Strongly disagree]
    20. How do you feel about the following statement: “Politicians in Washington work to
enrich themselves and their largest campaign contributors, instead of working for the benefit
of the majority of citizens”? [Strongly agree/Agree/Disagree/Strongly disagree]

A.3     Emotional Poverty Experiment
The emotional poverty treatment was conducted in March 2014 on a sample of 1200 respon-
dents. Respondents were first as usual asked for their demographic information. Depending
on their answers to the questions about their marital status and whether they have children
living with them, they were redirected to a specific, customized branch. They were then
randomized into treatment and control group. The treatment group saw information about
poverty that was adapted to their family situation, without knowing that the information
was actually customized. Each respondent estimated the basic expenses that a family of the
configuration of his own family (living where the respondent lives) would have to incur for
rent, utilities, transportation to work, food, and, depending on the family situation, expenses
for children. Appendix Figure 9 shows the screenshot where respondents were asked to es-
timate the minimal budget of a family similar to theirs. Between this page and the next,
the program computed the total expenses estimated. If those were above the actual poverty
threshold for the family, the next page told respondents that given their estimates, the family
would fall short by such and such amount. If the total was below the poverty threshold, the
next page told respondents that given their estimates, the family would only be left with
such and such amount for all other expenses.
    The link to the survey is https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_1B8MczKSMIvWaqx
    The outcome questions were the same as in section A.2, except that the question about
how many people pay the estate tax was not asked. Instead the following three questions
were added:
    1. What percentage of Americans live in poverty? If you don’t know, just give your
best guess. (Poverty is officially defined as having monthly resources below $970 for a single
person, $1310 for a two person family, $1650 for a three person family, etc...) [Less than 5%
/ 9% / 16% / 24%].
    2. What percentage of children under age 18 live in poverty in the US, approximately?
If you don’t know, just give your best guess. [10% / 20% / 30% / 40%].


                                              45
   3. How many workers in the US earn the minimum wage? If you don’t know, just give
your best guess. [2 million / 6 million / 10 million].

A.4     Policy Experiment
The policy experiment was conducted in March 2014 on a sample of 1300 respondents. Re-
spondents were randomized into a control group or a treatment group. The treatment group
was again redirected to a customized branch, depending on their answers to the questions
about their marital status and whether they had children living with them. In the treatment
screens, they were asked about and shown information about a family whose configuration
was similar to theirs. First, respondents were asked to estimate the minimum expenses neces-
sary for a family earning the minimum wage, for rent, utilities, transportation to work, food,
and, if applicable, children expenses. That screen is shown in appendix Figure 10. Between
this page and the next, the program computed the total expenses implied and informed the
respondents either of the shortfall that the family living on a single minimum wage would
have to face, or the surplus that would be left over, if they had to incur the expenses as
estimated by the respondent. That second screen also showed information about the food
stamps program, informing respondents that: “The Food Stamps program helps many low
income families, such as those earning only one minimum wage. It provides $150/month per
person to help with food expenses.”
    The link to the experiment is https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_1B8MczKSMIvWaqx.
    The outcome questions were exactly the same as in section A.3.

A.5     Trust Experiment
The trust treatment was conducted in March 2014 on a sample of 1000 respondents. The
treatment showed people information about how the United States is ranked in terms of
corruption among a list of countries of similar income and development levels (the United
States is ranked in the worst group of countries given income and development levels), as
shown in appendix Figure 8.
    The link to this survey is in: https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_bgEuJfl1Y3UreKh
    Respondents in the treatment group were asked questions designed to elicit negative
reactions regarding the government. The full list of questions were:
    1. What is your view of the “Wall Street bailout”, the legislation signed into law by
President Bush in 2008 whereby the federal government lent $700 billion to banks and other
financial institutions that faced bankruptcy? [Strongly support this legislation/Support this
legislation/Oppose this legislation/Strongly oppose this legislation]
    2. Because of a recent Supreme Court decision, for the first time in decades there are now
no limits on the amount of money that corporations and other special interests can give to
political campaigns for President or Congress. Do you agree with the following statement:
“Corporations and other specials interests have far too much influence on politicians in
Washington”? [Strongly agree/Agree/Disagree/Strongly disagree]
    3. How do you feel about the following statement: “Currently, the federal government is
very effective in limiting fraud, waste and abuse in the programs it administers”? [Strongly
agree/Agree/Disagree/Strongly disagree]

                                            46
    4. How much confidence do you have in the federal government’s administering of eco-
nomic and military aid to foreign countries (which totals over $50 billion annually)? [A great
deal of confidence/Some confidence/Little confidence/No confidence]
    5. How do you feel about the following statement: “Politicians in Washington work to
enrich themselves and their largest campaign contributors, instead of working for the benefit
of the majority of citizens”? [Strongly agree/Agree/Disagree/Strongly disagree]
    The outcome questions were the same as in section A.2, except that we did not ask any
of the knowledge questions about poverty rates, child poverty rates, minimum wage earners,
or how many people pay the estate tax.

A.6     List of all constructed variables
Below we provide a full definition of all variables used in the tables. In brackets, we provide
the coding of the variable.

   • “Ineq vs.” (or “Ineq. v. serious”) is a binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent replies
     that “inequality is a very serious problem.” [0/1]

   • “Ineq. inc.” (or “Ineq. increased”) is a binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent
     replies that inequality has increased since 1980. [0/1]

   • “Deserving” (or “Rich deserving”) is a binary variable equal to 1 if the respondent
     believes that the rich are deserving of their income “most of the time.” [0/1]

   • “Top tax” (or “Top tax rate”) is the chosen average tax rate on the richest one percent.
     [0 to 100]

   • “Mill. tax” (or “Increase Mill. Tax”) is an indicator variable for whether the respondent
     wants to increase the income tax on millionaires. [0/1]

   • “Estate tax” (or “Increase Estate Tax”) is an indicator variable for whether the re-
     spondent wants to increase the estate tax. [0/1]

   • “Petition” is an indicator variable for whether the respondent wants to send a petition
     to her State Senator to increase the estate tax. [0/1]

   • “Min. wage” in the omnibus treatment indicates support for increasing the minimum
     wage. [0/1]

   • “Min wage” in the follow up surveys indicates the strength of the support for increasing
     the minimum wage [0/1/2/3/4, increasing in support].

   • “Aid” indicates support for expanding aid to the poor. [0/1/2/3/4, increasing in sup-
     port].

   • “Housing” indicates support for expanding funding for public housing. [0/1/2/3/4,
     increasing in support].



                                              47
• “Food stamps” in the omnibus indicates support for expanding the food stamps pro-
  gram. [0/1]
• “Food stamps” in the followup surveys indicates the strength of the support for ex-
  panding the food stamps program [0/1/2/3/4, increasing in support].
• “EITC” indicators support for expanding funding for the EITC. [0/1]
• “Trust” or (“Trust govt”) is an indicator variable for whether the respondent believes
  the government can be trusted. [0/1]
• “Scope” (or “Govt scope”) is a categorical variable indicating how active the govern-
  ment should be in redistributing income. [1/2/3/4/5, 5 being the broadest scope of
  government].
• “Dem 2012” indicates that the respondent plans to vote for the Democrat (Obama) in
  the 2012 Presidential election. [0/1]
• “Dem 2014” indicates that the respondent plans to vote for the Democrat in the 2014
  Congressional election. [0/1]
• “Taxes redistr.” indicates that the respondent thinks that the role of income taxes is
  to redistribute income (as opposed to just financing infrastructure). [0/1]
• “Growth” indicates that the respondent’s reply to the question of whether growth was
  higher in 1933-1980 than in 1980-200 was correct. [0/1]
• “Tax 1950” indicates that the resppndent’s reply to the question whether top income
  taxes were higher in the 1950s than today was correct. [0/1]
• “Satisfied” indicates whether the respondent is satisfied with his current income. [0/1]
• “Money charity” is a dummy variable for whether the respondent plans to give money
  to charity in the next month. [0/1]
• “Money given” indicates whether he has already given money in the past month. [0/1]
• “Time charity” is a dummy variable for whether the respondent plans to give time to
  charity in the next month. [0/1]
• “Time given” indicates whether he has already given time in the past month. [0/1]
• “Income mostly result of effort” is a binary variable indicating that the respondent
  believes that one’s income is mostly the result of one’s own effort. [0/1]
• “Tax on next 9%”, ”Tax on next 40 %” and ”Tax on Bottom 50%” are the respondent’s
  chosen tax rates for, respectively, people in the 90th to 99th percentile, in the 50th to
  90th percentile and in the Bottom half of the income distribution. [0 to 100]
• “Diff tax top 1 and Bottom 50” is the tax differential between the preferred tax on the
  top 1% and that on the Bottom 50%.

                                          48
    • “Charities” refers to the ranking (from 1 to 5, with 1 being the highest ranking) that re-
      spondents attribute to private charities as a means to redistribute income. [1/2/3/4/5]

    • “Educ. pol” refers to the ranking (from 1 to 5, with 1 being the highest ranking)
      that respondents attribute to education policies as a means to redistribute income.
      [1/2/3/4/5]

    • “No waste” takes values from 1 to 3, with 1 representing that the government is wasting
      a lot of tax revenue and 3 indicating that the government is not wasting much tax
      revenue at all. [1/2/3]


B     Methodological issues related to online survey experiments
In this section, we share what we have learned through our experience with these mTurk sur-
vey experiments to highlight both the advantages and disadvantages of using online surveys
for research as well as provide advice for future researchers.
    The most obvious advantage is the ease and speed of gathering relatively large samples.
At a per-survey price of $1.50 it typically took at most five or six days to gather a sample of
1,000 U.S. residents, and samples of 300-400 could usually be gathered within 24 hours. An
important piece of advice for future researchers studying American domestic policy questions
is to ask mTurk to limit the sample to U.S. residents (Amazon documents this information
for tax purposes). In pilot surveys we conducted before becoming aware of this problem, over
forty percent of our respondents turned out to have non-U.S. IP addresses (likely an ever
greater share were foreign residents since respondents can connect through remote servers
and appear to be in the US). Launching surveys at night (during the workday in Asia)
exacerbates this problem.

B.1     How representative is the mTurk sample?
As noted earlier, respondents to our surveys are not representative of the U.S. population.
However, this lack of representativeness does not appear substantially worse than in other
surveys. For example, the mTurk sample is about 13 years younger and 13 percentage points
more likely to have a college degree than the representative sample of U.S. adults in our
national CBS sample (see Table 1). But that same CBS poll we use as a basis for comparison
is itself weighted. The raw CBS sample is about nine years older than the weighted sample
and, like our mTurk sample, about 13 percentage points more likely to have a college degree.
It under-represents Hispanics to the same extent as our sample and is even worse than our
sample in terms of the under-representation of men. As such, while the mTurk sample is not
representative, neither are other standard polls (though some of the biases, such as age, are
in opposite directions from standard polls).
     As noted in the text, the American Life Panel is more representative than the mTurk
sample. However, this sample is much smaller and roughly 30 times more expensive than
mTurk.




                                               49
B.2     How serious is attrition in the mTurk sample?
As noted earlier, for the omnibus treatment, we have an overall attrition rate (the share of
respondents who start but do not finish the survey) of 22 percent: a 21 percent rate for the
CT Marketing Group survey and a 22 percent rate for the mTurk surveys. In fact, when
we compare surveys 4 and 5—which were in the field at the same time, with the former on
mTurk and the latter on CT Marketing Group—attrition is actually lower on mTurk. Even
Gallup has an attrition rate of nine percent on its 15-minute Daily Poll.45 Given that our
survey requires people to read through informational treatments, we suspect that a pure
opinion survey conducted on mTurk would have a lower attrition rate.
    The omnibus survey has differential attrition between treatment and control, probably
because of the relatively long length of the treatment (respondents had to scroll through
6 treatment pages in the omnibus survey). Importantly, the follow-up surveys do not have
such differential attrition because the treatment was much shorter (2 pages at most) so that
there was no noticeable length difference between the treatment and control group.
    A related point is that researchers using this methodology should ask background ques-
tions first. In settings with little to no attrition, background questions can ideally be asked
at the very end to avoid priming, but given the importance of assessing non-random attri-
tion, it may be preferable for online survey experiments to ask demographic and background
questions at the outset.

B.3     How many unique observations can one collect on mTurk?
Although the exact number of workers registered on mTurk is not publicly reported, the
pool is thought to be quite large, approximately 500,000.
    However, the pool available for any given survey experiment is more limited. First, work-
ers select into tasks voluntarily, choosing among types of tasks. As a result, the pool of
workers interested in survey experiments is more limited. Indeed survey experiments are
typically longer than a standard task on mTurk and might require more attention. Second,
we filter workers based on past ratings: this is to avoid careless workers who consistently
do not complete tasks properly and have been rated negatively by previous amazon mTurk
requesters (i.e., employers on mTurk). Third, the pool of registered workers is not online all
the time. Many workers could be working for a few weeks, then switch to another occupa-
tion, and potentially come back later or only work during some times of the year, month,
or week. Finally, there is competition between tasks. Many tasks are posted simultaneously
on the platform and workers have to search for each individual task. Large sample survey
experiments sometimes fall lower in the list and are less visible to workers (although, one
way to make it more visible and which we employ, is to stop and relaunch the survey several
times so that it moves back up to the top of the list of tasks).
    We always exclude workers who have already taken one of our survey experiments in the
past to avoid any spillovers from previous treatments. Hence, we need a fresh sample every
time. Accordingly, we noticed that when we launch a survey experiment several weeks after a
  45 Email  correspondence when Jeffrey Jones at Gallup, January 16, 2013. The nine-percent figure
refers to all Daily Polls from 2012.



                                               50
previous one, we easily get a large sample very quickly. However, when we repeatedly launch
experiments one after the other, the rate at which we get workers slows down.
    To mitigate the constraint of being unable to reach a sufficiently large sample of workers,
researchers can do all of the following: a) leave sufficient times between survey dates, b)
pay sufficiently high wages to make the tasks competitive relative to others, c) keep survey
time short, d) choose more generic titles for the task, such as “Opinion Survey” rather than
“Academic Research Survey in Economics.” However, researchers should be warned that
even after taking these steps, survey samples are not unlimited in mTurk and if “fresh”
respondents are needed for each survey date a large share of respondents clicking on the task
will be screened out (or will need to be dropped ex-post based on repeated mTurk worker
IDs).




                                              51
Appendix Figure 1: Inequality Component: “Where are you in the income distribution?”




Notes: This interactive slider allows people to explore the income distribution in the US and to
determine their position in it. Available online at
https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_77fSvTy12ZSBihn




                                              52
Appendix Figure 2: Inequality component: “Where would you have been in the income
distribution?”




Notes: This interactive slider shows the “counterfactual” household income had income growth
been shared equally since 1980. Available online at
https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_77fSvTy12ZSBihn




                                            53
Appendix Figure 3: Taxes component: Correlation between growth and top tax rates over
time




                                         54
            Appendix Figure 4: Showing information about the estate tax




Notes: Available online at
https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_77fSvTy12ZSBihn




                                        55
                  Appendix Figure 5: Preferred tax rates outcome




Notes: Available online at
https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_77fSvTy12ZSBihn




                                        56
             Source: Calculations based on IRS Estate Tax Statistics




          Neutral Treatment



             These page timer metrics will not be displayed to the recipient.
             First Click: 0 seconds.
             Last Click: 0 seconds.
             Page Submit: 0 seconds.
                                 Appendix Figure 6: Neutral information about the estate tax
             Click Count: 0 clicks.



             The Federal Estate Tax applies when a deceased person leaves more than $5 million in wealth to his or her heirs.
             Wealth left to a spouse or charitable organizations is exempt from estate tax.

             Only 1 person out of 1000 is wealthy enough to face the estate tax.

             Average Americans have far less than $5 million in wealth when they die, so the estate tax does not affect them and they
             can pass on their property to their children tax-free.


          Notes: Available online at
             Source: Calculations based on IRS Estate Tax Statistics
          https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_0vOecp2MDPBpInb


          Control Group




4 of 11                                                                                                                                 4/13/14 4:44 PM




                                                                         57
Appendix Figure 7: A word cloud based on open-ended responses to the question “How much
of the time can you trust the government in Washington to do what is right?”




Notes: Based on the pilot group survey on mTurk described in Section 4.2.




                                              58
    Qualtrics Survey Software                                                                     https://s.qualtrics.com/ControlPanel/?ClientAction=EditSurve...


                 Q75
                          How do you feel about the following statement: "Politicians in Washington work to enrich
                          themselves and their largest campaign contributors, instead of working for the benefit of the
                          majority of citizens"?


                                Strongly agree                Agree                    Disagree             Strongly disagree

             Appendix Figure 8: Negative information about corruption in the U.S.

                                                                 Page Break


                 Q67
                          Each year, the non-partisan organization Transparency International rates countries based on the
                          amount of government corruption. When the US is compared to countries with similar levels of
                          income and development how do you think it ranks?




                                  The best 6            Better than average        Worse than average         The worst 6




                                                                 Page Break


                 Q68
                          These are the actual results from the report:




Notes: Available online at
https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_bgEuJfl1Y3UreKh




    2 of 3                                                                                                                                     6/15/14 6:43 AM




                                                                              59
  Qualtrics Survey Software                                                            https://s.qualtrics.com/ControlPanel/Ajax.php?action=GetSurve...
                        Appendix Figure 9: Customized information about poverty




                Think about a family of four with two parents working full time at low pay and two kids.

                What would be the minimal monthly expenses that such a family would have to make to afford living in
                your city?

                Please enter numbers only, with no "$" sign and no commas, e.g., 1000.




                 Rent

                 Utilities (electric, heating,
                 cable/phone)
                 Car payment + car insurance + gas
                 to go to work

                 Food

                 Child care while working




Notes: Available online at
https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_1B8MczKSMIvWaqx
             Married 2 kids Poverty Block 2


                50 million of Americans, or 16% of the population, are living in poverty. For a family of four with two children, the poverty
                threshold is $1990/month.

                Based on the numbers you gave, the family at the poverty threshold would be left with only ${Invalid
                Expression}-${q://QID535/ChoiceTextEntryValue/2}-${q://QID535/ChoiceTextEntryValue/3}-${q:
                //QID535/ChoiceTextEntryValue/4}-${q://QID535/ChoiceTextEntryValue/5}}/month for all other expenses




  18 of 37                                                                60                                                                    4/2/14 11:04 AM
     Qualtrics Survey Software                                                        https://s.qualtrics.com/ControlPanel/Ajax.php?action=GetSurve...


                   health care.




                Single no kids control


                   Please click on "Next".

                    Appendix Figure 10: Customized information about policies
                Married kids block 1



                   Think about a family of four with one parent working full time at the minimum wage and two kids.

                   What would be the minimal monthly expenses that such a family would have to make to afford living
                   where you live?

                   Please enter numbers only, with no "$" sign and no commas, e.g., 1000.




                    Rent

                    Utilities (electric, heating,
                    cable/phone)
                    Transportation (public transit fare
                    and/or car payments, insurance,
                    gas…)

                    Food

                    Expenses related to children




Notes: Available online at
https://hbs.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_1B8MczKSMIvWaqx
             Married kids block 2



                   The current  federal minimum wage is $7.25/hour. That’s a net of $1,100/month when working 40 hours/week.
                   About   6 million US workers are paid the minimum wage.

                   Based on the numbers you gave, the family of four with one minimum wage worker and 2 children would be left with only
                   ${Invalid Expression}-${q://QID455/ChoiceTextEntryValue/2}-${q://QID455/ChoiceTextEntryValue



     16 of 37                                                                                                                          4/2/14 11:04 AM




                                                                         61
Appendix Table 1: Share of treatment respondents correctly answering basic comprehension
questions

                                                                          (1)
                                                            Percent that answered correctly
Pct of households earn less than 386,000                                  0.866
Pct of households earn less than 108,000                                  0.855
Pct of households earn less than 33,800                                   0.838
Household now making 386,000 would be making...                           0.484
Household now making 108,000 would be making...                           0.414
Household now making 33,800 would be making...                            0.395
Observations                                                          2417
Notes: This table displays the percent of respondents who answered the comprehension questions
correctly during the treatment (see the treatment screenshots in the Appendix for the complete
wording and outlay of these questions).




 Appendix Table 2: Ability of covariates to predict whether respondents finish the survey

Variable                                                  Coeff                                P-val
Voted for Obama in 2008                                   0.014                                0.227
Age                                                      -0.003                                0.000
Liberal policy view                                       0.002                                0.676
Household income                                          0.001                                0.449
Married                                                   0.008                                0.480
Education                                                -0.001                                0.724
Male                                                      0.018                                0.105
Black                                                    -0.006                                0.765
Hispanic                                                  0.072                                0.007
Native                                                   -0.011                                0.624
Employed full time                                       -0.008                                0.483
Unemployed                                                0.024                                0.145
Not in labor force                                       -0.029                                0.055
Student                                                   0.023                                0.137
Treatment Group                                          -0.113                                0.000
Notes: For each row, the coefficient and p-value are from regressions of the form F inishedir =
α + βCovariatei + δr + ir , where Covariate is listed to the left in the row and δr are survey round
fixed effects.




                                                 62
                          Appendix Table 3: Attrition by survey round

Survey                                 Attrition                             Obs. (Completed)
                    Control          Treatment          Differential
Omnibus               0.09              0.21                0.11                    4045
Estate Tax            0.06              0.03                -0.03                   1760
Trust                 0.03              0.02                -0.01                    901
Poverty               0.03              0.02                -0.01                   1003
Policy                0.06              0.04                -0.02                   1114

Notes: Note that the attrition numbers count those respondents who started and continued long
enough to be at least assigned a treatment status. Respondents could drop out before being assigned
to treatment for a variety of reasons, including that they were not U.S. citizens (albeit U.S. residents)
or did not agree with the consent form.




                                                   63
                                   Appendix Table 4: Effect of omnibus treatment on all outcomes, part 1

                    Ineq vs. Ineq. inc. Deserving Top tax Mill. tax Estate tax Petition Min. wage Food stamps EITC                Trust     Scope
                       (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)          (9)        (10)      (11)      (12)
     Treated        0.104∗∗∗ 0.120∗∗∗ -0.0526∗∗∗ 0.931∗ 0.0502∗∗∗ 0.357∗∗∗ 0.0648∗∗∗ 0.0325∗∗                0.0149     0.0212 -0.0292∗∗ 0.132∗∗∗
                    [0.0144] [0.0128] [0.0114] [0.549] [0.0126] [0.0140] [0.0156] [0.0141]                  [0.0141]   [0.0151] [0.0115] [0.0339]
     Control mean 0.285         0.738      0.180    30.21      0.740      0.171      0.234     0.690        0.686       0.611     0.158     3.076
     Scaled Effect 0.365        0.540      0.182    0.0914     0.111      2.043      0.394     0.0995       0.0369      0.0698    1.250     0.110
64




     Obs.          3703         3704       3690      3741      3704       3673       3060       3690         3690        3690     3702      3704
     Notes: The first three outcome variables are binary indicator variables, coded as one if the respondent says that “inequality is a very serious
     problem,” “inequality has increased,” and “the rich are deserving of their income,” respectively. “Top rate” is continuous (respondents’
     preferred average tax rate on the richest one percent). “Mill. tax” and “Estate” indicate the respondent wants income taxes on millionaires
     and the estate tax to increase, respectively. “Petition” indicates she would write her Senator to increase the estate tax. “Min wage,” “Food
     st.” and “EITC” indicate support for increasing the minimum wage, and funding for SNAP and EITC, respectively. “Trust” indicates
     trust in government and “Scope” indicates the respondent favors a broad range of interventions by the government (1-5 categorical
     variable). “Covariates” and “scaled effects” are as specified in the notes to Table 4. The row “Control mean” reports the mean of the
     outcome variable in the control group. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                                  Appendix Table 5: Effect of omnibus treatment on all outcomes, part 2

                     Dem. 2012 Taxes redistr.     Growth     Tax 1950 Satisfied Money charity Money given Time charity Time given
                         (1)           (2)           (3)       (4)         (5)          (6)             (7)             (8)           (9)
     Treated            0.0152      0.0396∗∗∗     0.137∗∗∗   0.131∗∗∗   -0.0266       0.00717         0.00565        0.00188       -0.00655
                       [0.0125]      [0.0132]     [0.0160]   [0.0158]   [0.0264]      [0.0157]        [0.0158]       [0.0160]      [0.0157]
     Control mean      0.529          0.199        0.437      0.556      2.881         0.559           0.523          0.480          0.378
     Scaled Effect     0.0246         0.314        0.946      0.927      0.102         0.167           0.0823         0.0219         0.255
65




     Obs.               3703          3700         3696       3619       3690          3681             3683           3684          3684
     Notes: “Dem 2012” indicates the respondent plans to vote for the Democrat (Obama) in the 2012 Presidential election. “Taxes redistr.”
     indicates that the respondent thinks the role of income taxes is to redistribute income. “Growth” indicates that the respondent correctly
     replied to the question of whether growth was higher in 1933-1980 than in 1980-2000. “Tax 1950” indicates that the respondent correctly
     replied to the question whether top income taxes were higher in the 1950s than today. “Satisfied” indicates whether the respondent is
     satisfied with his current income. “Money charity” (respectively, “Time charity”) is a dummy variable for whether the respondent plans
     to give money (respectively, time) to charity in the next month and “Money given” (respectively, “Time given”) indicates whether he
     has already given money (respectively, time) in the past month. “Covariates” and “scaled effects” are as specified in the notes to Table
     4. The row “Control mean” reports the mean of the outcome variable in the control group. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                                   Appendix Table 6: Effect of omnibus treatment on all outcomes, part 3

                     Income due to effort Tax on top 1% Tax on next 9% Tax on next 40% Tax on Bottom 50% Top 1% tax - Bottom 50% tax
                            (1)                (2)              (3)              (4)                 (5)                        (6)
     Treated             -0.0571∗∗∗          0.931∗           -0.311           -0.593∗              0.304                      0.628
                          [0.0152]           [0.549]          [0.380]          [0.341]             [0.442]                    [0.428]
     Control mean          0.419             30.21             17.60            10.71               18.93                      11.28
66




     Scaled Effect         0.156             0.0914            0.195            0.232              0.0531                      0.140
     Obs.                  3689               3741             3740             3721                3741                       3741
     Notes: “Income due to effort” is a binary variable indicating that the respondent believes that one’s income is mostly the result of one’s
     own effort. “Tax on top ‘%”, “Tax on next 9%”, ”Tax on next 40 %” and ”Tax on Bottom 50%” are the respondent’s chosen tax rates for,
     respectively, people in the 99th percentile, 90th to 99th percentile, in the 50th to 90th percentile and in the Bottom half of the income
     distribution. “Top 1 tax - Bottom 50 tax” is the tax differential between the preferred tax on the top 1% and that on the Bottom 50%.
     “Covariates” and “scaled effects” are as specified in the notes to Table 4. The row “Control mean” reports the mean of the outcome
     variable in the control group. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                       Appendix Table 7: Selection into the follow-up

Variable                                             Coefficient                           P-value
Voted for Obama in 2008                                 -0.001                              0.957
Age                                                     0.002                               0.029
Liberal policy view                                     -0.011                              0.285
Household income                                        0.006                               0.101
Married                                                  0.056                              0.014
Education                                                0.007                              0.389
Male                                                    -0.009                              0.677
Black                                                    0.041                              0.348
Hispanic                                                 0.079                              0.177
Native                                                  -0.059                              0.216
Employed full time                                      0.003                               0.897
Unemployed                                               0.004                              0.901
Not in labor force                                      0.080                               0.038
Student                                                 -0.064                              0.020
Notes: For each row, the coefficient and p-value are from regressions of the form
F ollowupir = α + βCovariatei + ir , where Covariate is listed to the left in the row. Those tests
are used to detect selection into the follow-up survey.




                                                67
                                         Appendix Table 8: Effect of omnibus treatment one month later

                               Ineq. v. serious                     Ineq. inc.                Rich deserving                  Top tax rate
                            (1)                (2)          (3)                (4)          (5)              (6)           (7)              (8)
                           First           Follow-up       First           Follow-up       First         Follow-up        First         Follow-up
     Treated              0.00833            0.102         0.0732           -0.0160       0.0589           0.0195         2.440           2.674
                          [0.0809]          [0.0770]      [0.0716]          [0.0786]     [0.0799]         [0.0785]       [3.602]         [3.547]
     Control mean          0.283           0.218          0.785           0.756           0.166          0.128            32.86           30.76
     Obs.                   145             145            145             145             145             145             144             144
     Notes: All outcomes are as defined previously. For each dependent variable, Col “First” is the result from the first survey, while Col
     “Follow-up” is the result from the follow-up survey. All regressions include our standard controls. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
68




                                     Appendix Table 9: Effect of omnibus treatment one month later (cont.)

                                     Mill. tax                      Estate tax                     Trust gov.                     Govt scope
                             (1)                (2)          (3)               (4)          (5)               (6)          (7)              (8)
                            First           Follow-up       First          Follow-up       First          Follow-up       First         Follow-up
     Treated              -0.00817            0.0273      0.337∗∗∗          0.195∗∗       -0.122∗∗         -0.0691        0.259          0.364∗
                          [0.0801]           [0.0803]     [0.0953]          [0.0910]      [0.0611]         [0.0582]      [0.207]         [0.200]
     Control mean          0.758            0.782         0.180            0.179          0.122           0.128           2.995           2.910
     Obs.                   145              145           145              145            145             145             145             145
     Notes: All outcomes are as defined previously. For each dependent variable, Col “First” is the result from the first survey, while Col
     “Follow-up” is the result from the follow-up survey. All regressions include our standard controls. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
Appendix Table 10: Bounding effects of attrition (using “liberal” and “conservative” values
for outcomes)

                  Ineq. v. serious    Increase Mill. Tax Increase Estate Tax          Trust Gov
                   (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
                    C          L         C         L          C          L           C          L
Treated         0.0666∗∗∗ 0.0980∗∗∗ 0.00915 0.0503∗∗∗ 0.284∗∗∗        0.310∗∗∗   -0.0232∗∗ -0.0221∗∗
                 [0.0129] [0.0128] [0.0120] [0.0117] [0.0122]         [0.0121]   [0.00970] [0.00970]
Control mean      0.267      0.293     0.709     0.743      0.170      0.192       0.159      0.159
Obs.              4547       4547      4546      4546       4519       4519        4546       4546
Notes: All outcomes are as defined previously. No controls are included. For each dependent variable,
Col C assumes that all attritors gave the average answer among those who label themselves as
conservative or very conservative. Col L assumes that all attritors would have given the average
answer among those who label themselves as liberal or very liberal. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01




                                                 69
               Appendix Table 11: Views on inequality and taxes for high- and low-attrition rounds in the omnibus surveys

                                Ineq. v. serious       Ineq. increased             Rich deserving             Top tax rate      Increase Mill. Tax              Estate tax
                                 (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)         (7)      (8)         (9)         (10)           (11)        (12)
     Treated                   0.0794∗∗∗ 0.117∗∗∗ 0.0849∗∗∗ 0.138∗∗∗ -0.00327 -0.0672∗∗∗ 0.155 2.003∗∗∗ 0.0183 0.0555∗∗∗ 0.421∗∗∗ 0.365∗∗∗
                                [0.0248] [0.0219] [0.0222] [0.0176] [0.0199] [0.0169] [1.031] [0.716] [0.0210] [0.0187] [0.0247] [0.0212]
     Control mean               0.276      0.289       0.767        0.780         0.160          0.180      34.40     28.88       0.794        0.754          0.179      0.178
     Scaled Effect              0.278      0.387       0.475        0.615         0.0118         0.209      0.0131    0.203       0.0487       0.108          1.761      2.396
     Differential attrition?    Low        High        Low          High           Low           High        Low      High         Low         High           Low        High
     Obs.                       1260       1635        1260         1636           1254          1631        1271     1650         1260        1636           1250       1626
     Notes: All outcomes are as defined previously. “Differential attrition?” separates observations according to whether they were in “Low”
     differential attrition round (round 4) or in “High” differential attrition rounds (rounds 1, 2 and 3). Otherwise, all terminology follows
     that in previous tables. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
70




     Appendix Table 12: Opinions on other policies and views of government for high- and low-attrition rounds in the omnibus
     surveys

                                       Min. wage                    EITC                   Food stamps                       Trust gov.                        Scope
                                   (1)        (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)             (6)          (7)              (8)            (9)            (10)
     Treated                    0.00695     0.0408∗      -0.0199        0.0260            0.0203          0.0197     -0.0630∗∗∗     0.000987        0.0576            0.248∗∗∗
                                [0.0244]    [0.0210]     [0.0257]      [0.0230]          [0.0240]        [0.0210]     [0.0205]      [0.0169]       [0.0579]           [0.0494]
     Control mean                0.708       0.706        0.683        0.589             0.710           0.702         0.181          0.133            3.140           2.997
     Scaled Effect               0.0227      0.129        0.0679       0.0808            0.0490          0.0451        5.724          0.0311           0.0441          0.195
     Differential attrition?      Low        High          Low          High              Low             High         Low             High             Low            High
     Obs.                         1254       1631          1254         1631              1254            1631         1259            1635             1260           1636
     Notes: See previous table. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                              Appendix Table 13: Effect of estate-tax-only treatments on outcome variables

                            Ineq. vs. Ineq. inc. Estate corr. Pov. vs. Deserving Top tax Mill. tax Estate Petition Charities Educ. pol
                              (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)        (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)       (11)
     Treated (Emotional)     0.0381    -0.00239   0.316∗∗∗    0.0224    -0.0247     1.595    0.00123 0.289∗∗∗ 0.0313     0.0421    -0.0319
                            [0.0258]   [0.0243]   [0.0263]   [0.0274]   [0.0206]   [1.121]   [0.0243] [0.0258] [0.0208] [0.0699]   [0.0755]
     Treated (Neutral)      0.0511∗∗ -0.0501∗∗    0.375∗∗∗    0.0191    -0.0244    2.280∗∗ -0.00456 0.109∗∗∗ 0.0239 -0.0214         0.0157
                            [0.0259] [0.0244]     [0.0264]   [0.0276]   [0.0206]   [1.124] [0.0244] [0.0259] [0.0209] [0.0701]     [0.0757]
71




     Control mean              0.307     0.771      0.120       0.285     0.174      33.67    0.717      0.210     0.132     1.945    3.611
     Scaled Emot. Effect       0.118    0.0106      3.386      0.0858    0.0984      0.142 0.00251 1.085           0.265    0.0329   0.0524
     Scaled Neutral Effect 0.159         0.223      4.014      0.0732    0.0974      0.202 0.00934 0.408           0.202    0.0167   0.0257
     Obs.                      1777      1777       1773        1508      1777       1785      1764      1777      1762       1709    1732
     Notes: The “emotional” treatment repeats the estate tax slide from the omnibus treatment, but eliminates the rest of the treatment. The
     “neutral” treatment is a version of the “emotional” estate tax treatment that attempts to remove any framing effects. All outcomes are
     defined as previously. “Charities” and “Educ. pol” refer to the ranking (from 1 to 5, with 1 being the highest ranking) that respondents
     attribute to private charities and education policies as means to redistribute income. The lower number of observations in column 4 is
     due to the fact that this question was not asked in one smaller wave (sample of 300). ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                           Appendix Table 14: Effect of estate-tax-only treatment on outcome variables (cont.)

                              Min. wage       Aid       Food stamps      Housing      Trust      Govt scope     No waste     Dem. 2014
                                  (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)
     Treated (Emotional)        0.0529       0.109         0.0982        0.236∗∗∗    -0.0164        0.0172       -0.0281        0.0344
                               [0.0865]     [0.0837]      [0.0861]       [0.0824]    [0.0205]      [0.0585]      [0.0303]      [0.0213]
     Treated (Neutral)         -0.0838       0.0273        0.0628         0.127      -0.00558       0.0259       -0.0587∗     -0.00310
                               [0.0870]     [0.0842]      [0.0866]       [0.0829]    [0.0205]      [0.0587]      [0.0303]     [0.0213]
72




     Control mean                2.608         2.130        1.797           1.927        0.153         3.074          1.456          0.470
     Scaled Emot. Effect        0.0913        0.0624       0.0534           0.140        0.235        0.0150         0.0896         0.0490
     Scaled Neutral Effect       0.145        0.0156       0.0341          0.0755       0.0803        0.0225          0.187        0.00441
     Obs.                        1495          1495         1495            1495         1756          1756           1754           1756
     Notes: See above. “No waste” takes values from 1 to 3, with 1 representing that the government is wasting a lot of tax revenue and 3
     that the government is not wasting much tax revenue at all. Note that the only statistically significant effect for a poverty-related
     outcome is for increased public housing. We speculate that this effect is due to seeing the picture of the mansion in the “emotional”
     estate tax treatment (but not in the neutral treatment). The lower number of observations in columns 1-4 is due to the fact that these
     questions were not asked in one smaller wave (sample of 300). ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
                                         Appendix Table 15: Effect of trust treatment on outcome variables

                            Ineq. v. ser.          Ineq. inc.      Pov. v. ser.     Deserving        Top tax              Mill. tax         Estate          Petition
                                   (1)                (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)                (6)              (7)              (8)
     Treated                  0.0547∗               0.0119          -0.00257         -0.0555∗∗            0.490            -0.0421          -0.00168        -0.0602∗∗
                              [0.0311]             [0.0289]         [0.0313]          [0.0239]           [1.326]           [0.0275]         [0.0266]         [0.0236]
     Control mean               0.343           0.755         0.383             0.185          34.70   0.722   0.204         0.174
     Scaled Trust Effect        0.182           0.341        0.00828            0.204         0.0452  0.0949  0.00728        0.580
     Obs.                        899             899           899               899            898     899     895           899
     Notes: The negative trust prime treatment consists of several multiple-choice questions that made respondents reflect on aspects of
     government they dislike. All terms are defined as previously. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
73




                               Appendix Table 16: Effect of trust treatment on outcome variables (cont.)

                          Min wage           Aid       Food st.     Housing         Trust        Active         No waste       Dem. 2014        Charity       Educ. pol.
                             (1)             (2)            (3)        (4)           (5)           (6)              (7)               (8)            (9)         (10)
     Treated               -0.00428        -0.139∗∗     -0.153∗∗    -0.163∗∗∗     -0.0582∗∗∗      0.0236        -0.0278            -0.0462∗     0.187∗∗         0.0615
                           [0.0902]        [0.0616]     [0.0673]     [0.0614]      [0.0203]      [0.0688]       [0.0346]           [0.0258]     [0.0791]       [0.0885]
     Control mean           2.673     2.675    2.454                  2.581         0.125         3.031            1.423            0.479           1.800        3.732
     Scaled Trust Effect   0.00531    0.128    0.119                  0.133         1.730        0.0170            0.109           0.0686           0.169        0.265
     Obs.                    899       899      899                    899           899           899              898              899             850          874
                       ∗       ∗∗        ∗∗∗
     Notes: See above. p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01
                                 Appendix Table 17: Effect of “emotional” treatment on outcome variables

                            Ineq. v. ser. Ineq. inc. Pov. corr. Childpov. corr. Min wage corr. Pov. vs. Deserving Top tax Mill. tax Estate                     Petition
                                (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)                 (5)             (6)         (7)          (8)        (9)      (10)       (11)
     Treated                 0.0783∗∗∗     0.0410    0.258∗∗∗    -0.0717∗∗           0.0676∗∗        0.0885∗∗∗    -0.0131        0.484 0.0316 0.0149 -0.0000573
                              [0.0292]    [0.0258]   [0.0314]     [0.0298]            [0.0341]       [0.0313]     [0.0228]      [1.268] [0.0256] [0.0274] [0.0252]
     Control mean               0.337       0.775      0.442        0.363           0.302          0.296      0.173     34.47    0.728     0.276    0.184
     Scaled Poverty Effect      0.221       0.225      17.54        1.522           1.105          0.257     0.0413 0.0357 0.0589 0.0440 0.000390
     Obs.                       1002        1001        999          994             799            799       1002      1002     1001       999     1002
     Notes: The “emotional” treatment aimed at creating empathy between the respondent and families living in poverty. Respondents were
     told about poverty rates and had to fill out a minimum budget for a family like theirs living in the same city. Respondents were then shown
     how their minimum budget compared to the poverty line. All outcomes are as defined previously. The lower number of observations in
     columns 5 and 6 is due to the fact that these questions were not asked in one smaller wave (sample of 200). ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
74




                             Appendix Table 18: Effect of “emotional” treatment on outcome variables (cont.)

                              Min wage      Aid      Food st.   Housing       Trust        Scope       No waste      Dem. 2014         Charity    Educ. pol.
                                 (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)            (6)         (7)             (8)            (9)         (10)
     Treated                    0.0469     0.117∗     0.177∗     0.0397      -0.00979      0.0537      -0.0655∗        0.0120           0.0608      -0.145∗
                               [0.0989]   [0.0665]    [0.101]   [0.0670]     [0.0211]     [0.0626]     [0.0334]       [0.0234]         [0.0715]    [0.0831]
     Control mean              2.546     2.559    1.832           2.539       0.124        3.098         1.420          0.488           1.929       3.723
     Scaled Poverty Effect    0.0449    0.0714   0.0866          0.0291      0.0931       0.0352         0.210         0.0181          0.0333       0.204
     Obs.                       799       799      799             799        1002         1002          1002           1002             963         981
                      ∗        ∗∗        ∗∗∗
     Notes: See above. p < 0.1, p < 0.05, p < 0.01
                                      Appendix Table 19: Effect of policy treatment on outcome variables

                         Ineq. v. ser. Ineq. inc. Pov. corr. Childpov. corr. Min wage corr. Pov. vs. Deserving Top tax Mill. tax Estate Petition
                              (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)                (5)             (6)         (7)           (8)     (9)      (10)        (11)
     Treated                0.0405        0.0206      0.0353      0.0369            0.228∗∗∗         -0.00637 -0.00219       2.023∗ 0.0311 -0.0217 -0.0222
                           [0.0279]      [0.0263]    [0.0306]    [0.0302]           [0.0300]         [0.0272] [0.0219]       [1.209] [0.0240] [0.0258] [0.0236]
     Control mean             0.343        0.744      0.415        0.365       0.355       0.326    0.180    33.79  0.713    0.269 0.187
     Scaled Policy Effect     0.108        0.0892     0.909        1.056       7.237      0.0196 0.00695 0.140 0.0536 0.0642 0.131
     Obs.                     1111          1111       1105        1107        1110        1111     1111     1111    1110    1110   1111
     Notes: The policy treatment aimed at creating empathy between the respondent and families living on a minimum wage. Respondents
     had to fill out a minimum budget for a family like theirs living in the same city. Respondents were then shown how their minimum
     budget compared to the minimum wage and how food stamps adds $150 per person/month to the budget of such a family. All outcomes
     are as defined previously. ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
75




                               Appendix Table 20: Effect of policy treatment on outcome variables (cont.)

                           Min wage         Aid       Food st.   Housing     Trust           Scope     No waste      Dem. 2014         Charity    Educ. pol.
                               (1)          (2)          (3)       (4)        (5)             (6)            (7)           (8)           (9)         (10)
     Treated                0.323∗∗∗      0.133∗∗     0.313∗∗∗   0.176∗∗∗   -0.0325       0.0569        -0.0428           0.0248        -0.137∗     -0.117
                            [0.0949]      [0.0638]    [0.0970]   [0.0636]   [0.0207]     [0.0613]       [0.0308]         [0.0223]      [0.0709]    [0.0797]
     Control mean              2.546        2.559      1.832  2.539      0.149     3.097                  1.394        0.484      2.025       3.699
     Scaled Policy Effect      0.310       0.0811      0.153  0.129      0.654     0.0362                 0.125       0.0354     0.0740       0.186
     Obs.                       806          806        806    806       1111       1111                  1111         1111       1068        1085
     Notes: See above. The lower number of observations in columns 1-4 is due to the fact that           these questions were not asked in one smaller
     wave (sample of 300). ∗ p < 0.1,∗∗ p < 0.05,∗∗∗ p < 0.01
