NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCENTIVIZING CHINA’S URBAN MAYORS TO MITIGATE POLLUTION EXTERNALITIES:
THE ROLE OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC ENVIRONMENTALISM
Siqi Zheng
Matthew E. Kahn
Weizeng Sun
Danglun Luo
Working Paper 18872
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18872

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013

We thank the UCLA Ziman Center for Real Estate for funding. Siqi Zheng and Weizeng Sun thank
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 70973065 and No. 71273154) and Tsinghua University
Initiative Scientific Research Program for research support. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18872.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Siqi Zheng, Matthew E. Kahn, Weizeng Sun, and Danglun Luo. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Incentivizing China’s Urban Mayors to Mitigate Pollution Externalities: The Role of the Central
Government and Public Environmentalism
Siqi Zheng, Matthew E. Kahn, Weizeng Sun, and Danglun Luo
NBER Working Paper No. 18872
March 2013
JEL No. H23,H41,Q48,Q53,R5
ABSTRACT
China’s extremely high levels of urban air, water and greenhouse gas emissions levels pose local and
global environmental challenges. China’s urban leaders have substantial influence and discretion over
the evolution of economic activity that generates such externalities. This paper examines the political
economy of urban leaders’ incentives to tackle pollution issues. Based on a principal-agent framework,
we present evidence consistent with the hypothesis that both the central government and the public
are placing pressure on China’s urban leaders to mitigate externalities. Such “pro-green” incentives
suggest that many of China’s cities could enjoy significant environmental progress in the near future.

Siqi Zheng
Institute of Real Estate Studies
Department of Construction Management
Tsinghua University
Beijing 100084, P. R. China
zhengsiqi@tsinghua.edu.cn

Weizeng Sun
Institute of Real Estate Studies
Department of Construction Management
Tsinghua University
Beijing 100084, P. R. China
sunweizeng@gmail.com

Matthew E. Kahn
UCLA Institute of the Environment
Department of Economics
Department of Public Policy
Anderson School of Management
UCLA Law School, Box 951496
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1496
and NBER
mkahn@ioe.ucla.edu

Danglun Luo
Lingnan College
Sun Yat-sen University
135 Xingang Xi Road, Guangzhou, China, 510275
luodl@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Introduction
China’s pollution challenges are well documented. Many cities in China have
extremely high air pollution levels. In early 2013, the terrible smog haze pollution in
North China caught the world’s attention.1 The PM2.5 concentration in those cities
has been two, three, even four times the emergency threshold of 250 µg/m3 (and up to
40 times levels the WHO considers healthy).2 Based on an ambient particulate
concentration criterion of PM10, twelve of the twenty most polluted cities in the
world are located in China (World Bank, 2007b). This pollution has mainly been
caused by emissions from the heating and electricity sector (based on coal), and the
industrial and transportation sectors.
Electricity demand is soaring in China as China surpassed Japan as the second
largest economy in the world at the end of 2009.

China’s energy consumption

accounted for 17.3% of the world’s total. The nation’s electricity consumption
reached roughly 4.5 trillion kilowatt hours in 2011.3

Given that 80% of China’s

electricity is produced by coal fired power plants this has led to a huge increase in
greenhouse gas emissions.
If China’s central and local governments stepped in and mandated credible
regulations, then pollution externalities across China’s cities could be mitigated.
Environmental economists have long argued based on cross-national evidence that
there is a “J” curve for regulation such that middle income nations start to implement
such regulation which grows more intense as these nations develop from being middle
income to being rich (Selden and Song 1995).
As China becomes one of the world’s leading economies, it is possible that a
similar dynamic could play out there.

Such an optimistic, and deterministic, vision

of endogenous regulatory adoption as a function of only national per-capita income
abstracts away from institutions and incentives as important determinants of whether
government officials are “up to the job” of combatting pollution.

Yet, leading

studies in growth economics have emphasized the fundamental role that institutions
1

See http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2013-01/14/content_16115953.htm for more background information.
See http://www.chinafile.com/airpocalypse‐now‐china‐tipping‐point. Particles 2.5 microns or less in diameter
(PM2.5) are referred to as "fine" particles and are believed to pose greater health risks than larger particles because
they can embed deep in people's lungs.
3
See:
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-01-28/china-s-power-demand-growth-may-slow-to-9-this-year-nea-says.ht
ml
2
2

play in economic development (Acemoglu and Robinson 2012).
Until recently, neither China’s national government officials nor local urban
officials prioritized environmental protection.

China’s central government focused

on economic growth with an emphasis on GDP as the key evaluation criterion for
local officials’ performance (Chen et. al. 2005; Li and Zhou 2005). Local officials
thus sought to boost their local economy through attracting dirty industries, but had
little incentive to reduce energy consumption or protect the environment in their own
jurisdictions since such actions did not help their political career (Wu et. al. 2013).
The Chinese central government creates a “tournament competition” among local
mayors by promoting or demoting them on the basis of relative performance (Bo 1996;
Wu 2010). Such a tournament raises the possibility that the central government can
incentivize urban officials to devote more attention to environmental challenges. In
recent years the central government has been changing the performance evaluation
criteria for local officials from purely output-based to including more “greenness” in
the performance vector (Landry 2008). Below we discuss why the central government
changed its focus on GDP growth to an objective function that also includes
environmental goals.

The driving forces were both a desire to improve the people’s

quality of life and a desire to establish legitimacy in the public’s mind to help retain
political power (Wang 2013).
Local residents provide a second source of pressure on urban mayors.

In

democracies, voters have the ability to hold the politicians accountable for their policy
choices (Hårsman and Quigley, 2010; List, 2006). While China’s urbanites do not
directly vote, they have alternative strategies for expressing their views. As the new
urban cohorts become richer and more educated, they are increasingly likely to value
safety and greenness and thus their demand for information and political
accountability will also rise. Improvements in information technology have reduced
the cost of information acquisition.

Examples include the Internet media, micro

blogs (weibo, the Chinese version of Twitter)4, instant phone messages, and more
liberated local newspapers. Access to this information has allowed local people to
be better informed about pollution challenges.

The salience of this news allows

them to overcome potential free rider issues and to unite to express their concerns and
displeasure with current urban quality of life. Since social stability is an important
target when the State evaluates local officials, those local officials are keen to address
4

The micro blog, as a nascent web application emerged in 2009, had 250 million users by the end of 2011.
3

their people’s demand for a cleaner environment.
This paper uses unique city level panel data to test a variety of predictions based
on a principal-agent model of regional environmental enforcement. In this paper, the
urban leaders are the agents. They have private information over the key local firms’
pollution emissions into the air, ground water and underground water, and they have
private information about their own environmental regulation enforcement efforts in
their cities.

In the absence of highly powered incentives, local government officials

have little incentive to enforce such regulations in their own jurisdictions if that does
not help their political career. In the past, when the central government had a news
monopoly, even environmental disasters might not have been widely known. In the
absence of such information, industrial malfeasance would be more likely to take
place as firms would under-invest in precautions.
We hypothesize that relative to the past, urban mayors in China now face political
pressure from the central government and the local public who are each demanding
environmental progress.

In a metaphorical sense, the mayors are “sandwiched” by

these two different pressure groups and thus have less discretion than they had in the
recent past.
We use data sets of prefecture-level city mayors, energy intensity and ambient
particulate matter (PM10) indicators within our study period (2004-2009) to test
whether there is an association between environmental performance and an urban
leader’s probability of being promoted? We also test whether objective measures of
urban resident concern are associated with environmental progress.

We present

evidence consistent with the hypothesis that both the central government’s regime
shift and urban households’ rising demand for greenness are contributing to local
politicians’ accountability for their city’s energy and environmental performance.
This paper contributes to a nascent empirical literature on the role that political
leadership plays in determining government priorities over public goods provision
versus economic growth.

Jones and Olken (2005) document the role that national

leaders play in affecting macroeconomic growth. List and Sturm (2006) documents
using evidence on U.S governors who due to term limits cannot seek to run again that
the priorities change.

Ferreira and Gyourko (2009) document differentials in U.S

mayor policies over taxes，spending and public sector employment. This literature
suggests that urban leader differences in observable attributes predict their choices
and policy outcomes.

Below, we will use demographic information about Chinese
4

mayors to test whether attributes such as their education play a role in determining the
city’s pollution dynamics.
The rest of the paper is organized in five sections. Section 2 describes the
political economy of environmental regulation in China, especially the role of
promotion criteria. Section 3 discusses our data creation as we construct several
indices to reflect Chinese urbanites’ concern intensity over pollution, and test whether
those indices can effectively capture the spatial variation of this concern. Section 4
presents the empirical results measuring local governments’ actions and outcomes.
Section 5 concludes.

2. The Principal-Agent Problem in Mitigating China’s Urban
Pollution Problems
2.1 Nudges from the State
China has a strong one-party central government, but hundreds of local
governments act as competing enterprises. The State Council appoints the governors
of provinces, municipalities, and some major cities (so-called “provincial-level” and
“vice-provincial” cities) directly. Provincial governments appoint the governors of
prefecture-level cities. How to select and reward subordinate officials is central to the
effective governance of every large organization. The selection and promotion process
is performed by the upper-level CCP (China’s Communist Party) Committee’s
personnel department, which is a key sector in the upper-level government. This
process is quite complicated, including performance evaluation with objective and
quantitative targets, individual interview, and qualitative assessment of capacity and
potential. Therefore, the promotion rule cannot be written out as a simple function.
Quantitative performance evaluation is becoming more important because it is
relatively easy to be performed, and it is regarded by the local leaders as a fair way to
compare their performance with their peers. The State also wants to push local
governments to achieve its goals.
In the past, GDP growth was the main criteria used by upper-level governments
in evaluating the performance of lower-level officials’ performance and deciding
whether to promote them to higher positions. Very recently, sustainability and social
stability are included in the promotion criteria. Below we discuss the reasons for this
5

regime switch.
The Chinese State has established a number of notable targets for energy
efficiency and pollution reduction. Specific energy efficiency and pollution reduction
targets were clearly set and included in the tenth, eleventh and twelfth “Five-Year
Plan” (2001-2005, 2006-2010, 2011-2015 FYP, respectively). At the Copenhagen
Climate Summit in 2009, China pledged to achieve a carbon intensity reduction of
40-45% by 2020 (Department of Climate Change, NDRC, 2010). In the tenth FYP,
the target was set that major water and air pollutants should decrease by 10 percent
over the five-year period. In the eleventh FYP, the target was that major pollutants
such as COD and SO2 to decrease by 10 percent each year from the 2005 level;
Energy consumption per unit of GDP to decline by about 20% from the 2005 level.
There are several motivations behind the Chinese central government’s ambitious
shift to emphasize pollution reduction and climate change mitigation goals. First,
domestic energy security concerns have risen on the central government’s agenda as a
result of electricity shortages and rapidly rising energy consumption. Second, the
central government believes that the rest of the world is embracing the low-carbon
energy agenda has created a market imperative for China to become a technological
and economic leader in this nascent field (Boyd 2012).

Third, the central

government may be concerned about the direct productivity loss and the disamenity
effects caused by pollution exposure.

Another possible explanation is that the

central government seeks "legitimacy" with the Chinese people and also in the
international arena, and making a commitment to pursuing environmental goals is one
way to credibly signal to both domestic constituents and international actors that
China is an international leader and that the Communist Party leadership cares about
its own people (Wang 2013). This suggests that environmental protection is a type of
public relations campaign to boost popular support and to reduce the risk of social
instability.
Including greenness targets in the performance evaluation and promotion criteria
of local government leaders is the State’s key approach to address the principal-agent
problem in pursuing its sustainable development strategy. Since the 11th FYP, the
State has started to mobilize local government via the application of the target
responsibility system (TRS) of energy conservation and pollution reduction, which is
a top-down policy implementation mechanism based on China’s prevalent top-down
pressure transfer political hierarchy (Qi, 2013). TRS involves four major steps:
6

disaggregating targets, signing target responsibility contracts, accounting and
monitoring energy consumption, and assessing target performance. For the first step,
the central government disaggregated the total energy conservation and pollution
reduction targets to provincial governments, and then provincial governments
disaggregate their targets to municipal governments. The target responsibility contract
is normally signed between the top officials of the upper and lower level
governments.
Assessment and evaluation of target responsibility is a quantitative exercise. The
energy conservation target, with the decline of energy intensity (EI, energy
consumption per unit of GDP) as the major indicator, accounts for 40 points out of the
total 100 points. The accounting system of this EI decline indicator was set up by the
State Council. The other 60 points include many items, ranging from regularly
reporting energy consumption numbers to upper level governments; investing in
energy conservation and pollution reduction infrastructures, to effectively
implementing environmental regulations. The assessment result is used in the
performance evaluation of local leaders.5
A potential problem of the TRS is that the main targets are not closely linked to
environmental outcomes that have significant impacts on the public’s health and
quality of life. Instead, they are linked to the accounting indicators such as energy
intensity and environmental infrastructure investment. One possible reason is that
those accounting indicators are easier to measure. Credit for pollution reduction might
be granted, for example, for the construction of a waste gas treatment plant or
installation of pollution control technology in a power plant. Therefore local officials
are incentivized to invest in environmental infrastructure and pollution control
technology. With insufficient monitoring, there was much less focus on whether these
investments are operated properly such that they actually reduce pollution. It was
reported that factories adjusted pollution control equipment to report false data,
treatment plants were left idle, local governments forced emergency shutdowns of
electricity to local public services to meet energy efficiency targets, and so on
(Wang, 2013).
2.2 Nudges from the urban public
While the central government has set performance standards based on criteria
5

See the requirement in “Interim Procedures for Comprehensive Assessment and Evaluation of Local Leading
Groups and Leading Cadre of CPC and Governments Embodying the Scientific Outlook on Development”,
published in September 2006.
7

such as the number of pollution control facilities, the urban public has different
priorities. They care about clean air and water. In the past, the public faced greater
information costs concerning the environmental challenges their city faced.

The

State and local governments monopolized the media – newspaper, radio and television.
When a one party state controls information releases it may systematically choose to
release information that helps it to achieve its political goals and may suppress
negative information (Liu and Yang 2009; Guan et al., 2012).
With the rise of the modern media and IT technologies such as blogs, micro blogs,
instant phone messages, China’s government has been losing its information
disclosure monopoly. Local newspapers are also more liberalized. To attract readers,
they report negative news such as pollution, corruption and land seize disputes.
Improvement in remote sensing and cheaper pollution monitors has allowed external
research teams to measure and distribute information about China’s pollution levels
(Zhang et. al. 2007).
Recent research set in the US, India, Brazil, and Indonesia highlight the power of
the media and information disclosure to mitigate classic principal-agent problems and
to nudge government officials to supply public goods (Gentzkow, Matthew and
Shapiro, 2010; Besley and Burgess 2002; Ferraz and Finan 2008; Pargal and Wheeler
1996). But those studies are all conducted in democracies. We are interested in
whether the rising of information transparency in Chinese cities plays a similar role.
The recent upsurge of environmental mass incidents provides some clues of this. In
those mass incidents, the modern media helps to trigger a snowball effect, and this
allows the public to co-ordinate and overcome transaction costs to unite together to
pretest against pollution accidents. Representative examples include the Xiamen PX
protest in 20076, Dalian PX protest in 20117, Shifang MoCu project protest in 20128,
and Qidong protest on the paper mill’s pollution discharge into the sea in 20129.
According to statistics, the number of mass incidents caused by pollution increased at
an annual rate of 29% (Tong, 2007). Those events significantly threatened social
6

http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/7195434.stm
In August 2011, messages were widely spread through micro blogs, blogs, Twitter and other internet forums that
a PX (paraxylene) chemical factory (a joint venture between the city and a private company) built in Dalian city
was at high risk to flood the town with the highly toxic chemical. Twelve thousand Dalian residents organized a
peaceful public protest in Dalian’s People's Square on August 14, demanding the factory to be immediately shut
down and relocated, and that the details about the investigation into the factory should be made public. The Dalian
government forbade the factory from opening. See http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-pacific-14520438
8
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/05/world/asia/chinese-officials-cancel-plant-project-amid-protests.html?_r=0
7

9

http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/29/world/asia/after-protests-in-qidong-china-plans-for-water-discharge-plant-are
-abandoned.html
8

stability, which is now another key target when evaluating local officials’ performance.
Therefore mayors are becoming more concerned about local people’s concern about
environmental quality and local quality of life.

2.3 Empirical Hypotheses
Based on the above discussion, we focus on testing four hypotheses related to the
correlates of urban leaders pursuing policies that bring about environmental progress:
H1: Local officials are more likely to be promoted if their city experiences
environmental progress.
H2: Public concern over urban pollution varies across space. Those regions
(province/city) facing stronger demand for environmental quality and with higher
media openness have higher public concern intensity.
H3: The attributes of the local leaders are associated with environmental
outcomes. Cities with higher educated leaders experience greater energy and
environmental progress.
H4: Cities facing more pressure from the public will engage in greater energy
conservation and environmental protection so that they exhibit a different
Environmental Kuznets Curve shape.

3. Measuring Pollution-Mitigation Incentives from the State and the
Public
3.1 The inclusion of greenness in local officials’ promotion criteria
In this section we test hypothesis #1 and #2. First, we test whether energy
conservation and pollution reduction indicators are reflected in city mayors’
promotion criteria. We select three energy/environment indicators. One is the energy
intensity measure, which is the top indicator in TRS. Energy intensity of urban
productivity (EI) is measured as “energy consumption per GDP dollar” (ton standard
coal per 10,000 RMB) by city/year (Equation (1)).

9

J

EI it 

Energyit
=
GDPit

J

 (GDP

 (GDP

ijt  EI jt )

j

GDPit

ijt

=

j



Energy jt
GDPjt

)

(1)

GDPit

Where subscript i represents city; t represents year; and j represents industry. The
energy consumption and GDP data are collected from the “China City Statistical
Yearbook”. Figure 1 shows the energy intensity values for the 86 cities in our sample
in 2009. The energy intensity had decreased for many cities during this period. The EI
variable measures a city’s industry composition effect.

If a city’s industrial

composition shifts towards industries that use little energy then the EI will decline
over time.

*** Insert Figure 1 about here ***

We have collected two indicators on air pollution. One is an “accounting”
indicator – annual expenditure on waste gas treatment facilities per GDP dollar
(FACILITY_EXP); and the other one is the “real feeling” indicator – the ambient
particulate concentration in the air (PM10). 10 The first variable measures local
governments’ effort in providing air pollution mitigation facilities, which help them to
gain some credit in the TRS. For the second measure, we first collect the API (air
pollution index) of each city by week from the website of the Ministry of
Environmental Protection, People’s Republic of China 11 , and then calculate the
average PM10 concentration (mg/m3) by city by year (PM10). Since people are more
sensitive to severely polluted days, we also construct the variable PM10p75 which
stands for the 75 percentile value of PM10 concentration by city/year. Figure 2 shows
the PM10 values for the 86 cities in 2004 and 2009. Again, many cities enjoyed air
quality improvement during this period.

*** Insert Figure 2 about here ***

10

Total suspended particles (TSP) measures the mass concentration of particulate matter in the air. Within TSP,
PM10 stands for particles with a diameter of 10 micrometers or less. Particulates that are ten micrometers or greater
are filtered and generally do not enter the lungs. Particulates smaller than ten micrometers are likely to enter the
lungs.
11
http://datacenter.mep.gov.cn/.
10

A city has two leaders – the mayor and the CCP secretary. Our local official data
set is by city/year and it contains the mayor’s and the CCP secretary’s information of
age, gender, education attainment, starting year of his/her term on this position, the
previous position and the next position. The data was collected from The China
Yearbook of Municipalities, provincial yearbooks and reports from the mass media.
By law, the mayor is the executive officer of the municipal (city) government. At
the same time, the law also says that the mayor is under the guidance of the city
communist party committee of which the party secretary is the head. In practice, the
division of labor is that the party secretary is in charge of the personnel and other
political duties, while the mayor is in charge of the daily operation of the government
for which economic growth is a top priority and now energy conservation and
environmental protection are also addressed.12 Since the determinants of promotion
may differ between party secretaries and mayors, we run the probit model for mayors
and secretaries separately. Here we mainly discuss the regression results of the
mayor’s promotion equation, and place those of the city’s CCP secretary in the
Appendix.
As economic growth is well known to be a prime determinant for promotion (Li
and Zhou, 2005), we test that if the upper level government has begun to also include
proxies for greenness into the promotion evaluation system.
Promotionit   0  1  GDP _ Growthit  β 2  GREEN it  β 3  Z it
 City fixed effects  Year fixed effects   it

(2)

In Equation (2) the unit of analysis is city/year. The dependent variable is a
dummy indicating whether the mayor of city i gets promoted or not in year t, which
equals 1 if the officer moves to a higher level (including a mayor promoted to be a
CCP secretary in the same or another city), and equals 0 if he or she remains on the
current position, or moves to another position in the same or lower level, or retires.
“Abnormal” changes, e.g. death, arrest due to corruption, etc., are excluded from the
sample. We include GDP growth which is measured as the difference between the
average annual GDP growth during this mayor/secretary’s term (till that year) and that
12

In most cities, the party secretary is clearly the No. 1 leader because key decisions are made in the party
committee. However, his power is checked by the mayor because in theory the executive orders should be
delivered through the mayor. In the end, the party secretary and the mayor share power in a city. To the extent that
the mayor has to rely on the bureaucracy to manage the economy, his contribution to local economic growth is tied
to the party secretary’s efforts to select more capable subordinates. The interaction between the party secretary
and the mayor takes many forms and the pattern of their contributions to local economic growth cannot be readily
parameterized (Yao and Zhang, 2012).
11

during his or her predecessor’s tenure (Wu et. al. 2013). Our focus is the green
indicators (GREEN) – EI (the key indicator in the TRS), FACILITY_EXP (the
“accounting” indicator of pollution mitigation effort), PM10 and PM10p75 (“real
feeling” pollution indicators) measures. EI, PM10 and PM10p75 are measured in
annual percentage decreases. 13

The annual percentage decrease in EI is a

commonly-used quantitate target when evaluating local officials’ performance.
FACILITY_EXP is an annual flow variable so we lag this variable to mitigate concerns
about reverse causality.
Personal attributes (age, educational attainment and the term length till that year)
of the officer are also included in the model. Year fixed effects are included. To
address possible endogeneity concerns with estimating equation (2), we include city
fixed effects to control for time invariant city attributes such as natural endowments
(lake, river, coal, etc.) and pollution incidents, may affect both the mayor’s promotion
odds and the city’s environmental progress.14
Our empirical study is based on data for 86 cities from 2004 to 2009. Among
these 86 cities, there are 35 major cities (4 municipalities plus 31 provincial capital
cities) and 51 medium and small-sized cities. We also collect the data of city attributes
from China Statistics Yearbooks and China City Yearbooks, including GDP per capita
(GDPPC), city population (POP), annual rainfall in year 1999 (RAIN, in mm),
temperature discomfort index in year 1999 (See Zheng, Fu and Liu (2009) for the
construction of this index) (TEMP). The variable definitions and descriptive statistics
are listed in Table 1.

*** Insert Table 1 about here ***

Table 2 reports the results of mayors’ promotion equation regressions. Our results
13

Since we do not have energy and air pollution data before 2003, we are unable to construct the variables
measuring EI/PM10 declines by officer terms as GDP.
14

In estimating equation (2), we are implicitly assuming that unobserved attributes of mayor quality

are uncorrelated with the key explanatory variables. We acknowledge the possibility that a capable
mayor may be sent to a dirty city to help cleaning that city, or to a clean city with big potential to grow.
We only have a limited number of mayors’ attributes (age, years on position and education attainment).
Therefore omitted mayor attributes may also correlated with both the mayor’s promotion probability
and his effort in reducing pollution (as well as booming the economy).
12

indicate that the relative GDP growth rate (comparing to the previous mayor) is the
most important determinant of a mayor’ s promotion. This variable (GDP_Growth_M)
is statistically significant at 1% level in all regressions with city and year fixed effects.
Column (1) is the baseline model. In column (2) we augment the regression by
including the PM10 decline measure. It contributes to the promotion probability and
the effect is statistically significant at the 10% level. In column (3) we replace this
variable with the improvement in air quality in severely polluted days (PM10p75). This
variable has a larger positive effect (statistically significant at the 5% level) on the
promotion probability, indicating that air quality improvement in the most polluted
days helps the mayor in his/her performance evaluation. In column (4) we replace the
air quality measure to the energy intensity (EI) decline measure. It is positive and
statistically significant at the 10% level. In column (5) we change to the lagged waste
gas treatment facility expenditure (FACILITY_EXP), which is significantly positive at
1% level. Based on the coefficients reported in columns (1) to (5), we find that a 1%
decrease in the PM10 rate, and a 1% decrease in the energy intensity rate, and a 1%
increase in waste gas treatment facility expenditure will increase the mayors’
promotion odds by 0.34%, 0.32% and 1%, respectively. In column (6), we include the
three green indicators (PM10, EI and FACILITY_EXP) together in the same regression.
The facility variable is significantly positive at 1% level and the other two are
statistically significant at the 10% level. The joint F-test shows that the three variables
are jointly significant at the 1% level. In column (7) we replace PM10 with PM10p75.
The above results support the hypothesis that energy/environmental improvements are
positively associated with a mayor’s promotion odds.15

*** Insert Table 2 about here ***

The highly significant facility expenditure variable but less significant air quality
measures supports the claim that the promotion criteria emphasize “accounting”
measures over the more relevant public health variables such as PM10. In fact, PM10
and FACILITY_EXP have a very weak correlation of 0.02 during our study period.16
15
We acknowledge the possibility that environmental progress is positively correlated with other unobserved
improvements in a city’s quality of life. In this case, we would over-attribute the mayor’s promotion to
environmental progress when instead the true mechanism is improved overall quality of life.
16
In results that are available on request, we have re-estimated equation (2) for a subset of 35 major cities and
estimated this equation for a later period (2006-2009). We sought to test for heterogeneity with respect to the
correlation between urban environmental performance and promotion probabilities. We reject the hypothesis that
13

3.2 Measuring public concern intensity over pollution and its spatial variation
We construct two indices to reflect urban residents’ concern intensity over
environmental issues. The first is the Google Insights index based on the internet
search intensity of the key word – “environmental pollution (huan jing wu ran)”, as a
measure of public concern intensity on internet. Google Insights17 is a publically
available online tool for tracking aggregate Google search intensity over time for
specific geographic areas.18 Recent research (Kahn and Kotchen 2011) shows that
Google search terms are a powerful tool to predict trends in U.S concern about global
warming and are negatively correlated with state’s monthly unemployment rate.
Google Insights can report a search intensity index of a specific key word by
geographic area (in the Chinese version of Google Insights, the geographic unit is
province) during a time period specified. Here, we construct this public concern index
(PCI_1) by province/year (Figure 3).

Provinces with heavy industrial pollution

(such as the northeast region, Shan’xi, Chongqing and Yunan) have higher index
values.
The second index aims to measure the frequency of pollution-related articles
reported in a city’s local newspapers. We search for the same key word
“environmental pollution (huan jing wu ran)” in Google search and set the search
criteria to be the articles published in a city’s major local newspapers in a year.19 We
count the number of entries and divide this number by the total circulation of those
local newspapers in each year to obtain a standardized index by city/year.

Once

published, newspapers articles will be cited by web media sites and appear on those
sites. This index captures the total concern intensity based on the original articles
published in local newspapers, and the webpages citing those articles. Figure 3 shows
the spatial variation of this index across cities.

in larger cities that there is a stronger correlation between environmental performance and promotion. To our
surprise, we also reject the hypothesis that this association has grown larger in recent years (we compare the
estimate of β 2 in 2004-2005 to an estimate of this coefficient between 2006 and 2009). Table A1 in the Appendix
report the same regression results for cities’ CCP secretaries. In Table A1, the relative GDP growth rate is also the
most important determinant of party secretaries’ promotion odds. However, neither of the green indicators show
significant contribution to party secretaries’ promotion probability. They are also not jointly significant.
17
Google Insights is available at http://www.google.com/insights/search/#.
18
Baidu is a local search engine that is widely used in China. It started to provide a similar search intensity index
from June 2006. We do not use the Baidu index due to two reasons. First, the availability of this Baidu index
cannot cover our study period; second, some have claimed that the Baidu search engine manipulates the relative
sorting order of some search outcomes.
19
This specific search cannot be done in Google Insights so we use Google Search.
14

*** Insert Figure 3 about here ***

We estimate equation (3) to explore the spatial and temporal variations in the two
indices. Our hypothesis is that the public concern intensity about pollution will be
higher if urban households’ demand for environmental quality is stronger, the city
(province) has a higher level media openness level, and the city (province) has poorer
environmental condition. We estimate:
log( PCI it )   0  1  log (DIS_HK i )+ 2  log (INTERNETit )+ 3  log (GDPPCit )+ 4  EDU it
+ 5  ACC _NUM it + 6  log (POP )  region fixed effects  year fixed effects   it

(3)
Due to data availability, the unit of analysis is province/year for the first index
(PCI_1) and city/year for the second index (PCI_2). In Equation (2), DIS_HK is
city/province i’s distance to Hong Kong. Those places close to Hong Kong are
exposed to a relatively freer media environment. People there can watch Hong Kong
TV, have a better access to Hong Kong newspapers and publications, and also have
some contacts with Hong Kong people. Therefore they have a better understanding of
civil society, how the media works and they can do. This effect diminishes fast as the
distance to Hong Kong increases so we measure the distance in logarithm term.
INTERNET is the number of internet users in city/province i in year t. This measure
should be positively correlated with media openness. Cities/provinces with higher
GDPPC (per capita GDP) and EDU (average years to schooling) are expected to face
a stronger demand for environmental amenities. People in the provinces with more
pollution accidents (ACC_NUM, this variable is only available at province level) may
have higher concern intensity over environmental issues. We control for a
city/province’s population, city/province fixed effects and year fixed effects.
Table 3 reports the regression results for Equation (3). The dependent variable in
column (1) is log(PCI_1). Provinces close to Hong Kong and with more internet users
have higher public concern intensity over pollution. These two variables are both
statistically significant. Richer provinces have higher index values. People in the
provinces with worse air quality (higher PM10) have significantly higher public
concern intensity on “environmental pollution”. In column (2), the dependent variable
is log(PCI_2). We find that distance to Hong Kong and the number of Internet users
15

both significantly contribute to higher public concern intensity over pollution in local
newspapers. All else equal, a one percent increase in the distance from Hong Kong is
associated with 1.4 and 0.5 percent increase in PCI_1 and PCI_2, respectively. The
elasticities of PCI_1 and PCI_2 with respect to the number of IT users are 1.1 and 0.2,
respectively. High levels of air pollution triggers more attention. Cities with higher
human capital (EDU) have significantly higher public concern over pollution. One
more year in local residents’ average years of schooling contributes to a 26.5% higher
value of PCI_2.

*** Insert Table 3 about here ***

4. Local Officials’ Effort and Environmental Outcomes
In this section we test our hypothesis #3 and #4. We investigate whether the
nudges from the State and the public affect a city’s energy consumption and
environmental outcomes.
4.1 Local officials’ combatting-pollution actions and the role of leadership
A distinctive feature in Chinese cities is that local governments have a “visible”
hand in influencing economic activity. That is why the TRS places local governments
at the center of policy implementation. City leaders face trade-offs between economic
growth and environmental quality. They can use cheap land and favorable tax
deduction policies to attract the firms that can generate high GDP output, high tax
revenues and more job opportunities, but those firms may be energy-intensive ones.20
If city leaders want to achieve pollution control requirement, they can also shut down
heavily-polluted factories, and force those factories to leave (Witte et. al. 2009). In
this way the city will lose tax revenue and certain types of jobs. In addition, city
leaders have a powerful control over the big SOE energy-intensive firms within their
jurisdictions. Those SOE firms are also included in the TRS. City leaders will sign
target responsibility contracts with those firms’ managers, and the evaluation of the
20

For example, in Zhejiang Province’s “new technology zones”, the government spent $96,000 US dollars per
acre on average to provide basic infrastructure for the industrial land, but the average sale price of such industrial
land to firms was only $83,000 US dollars per acre. Half of the industrial land parcels were sold at a price less than
50% of the infrastructure construction cost. In some inland provinces, industrial land is sold at a zero price (see
http://www.snzg.cn/article/2011/0318/article_22780.html).
16

managers’ performance on the energy and environmental dimensions will affect those
managers’ career (Qi, 2013).
In Table 4, we examine if the leaders in those cities with higher public concern
intensity put more effort in pollution mitigation activities. The dependent variable of
column (1) and (2) is log(FACILITY_EXP). On the right-hand side, we include the
one-year lagged public concern indices. Population and GDP per capita are controlled
for. Province fixed effects (or city fixed effects) are also included. For those provinces
with lagged higher PCI_1 (or cities with lagged PCI_2 growth), they experience
significantly larger increase in waste gas treatment facility expenditure. In column (3)
and (4), the dependent variable is log(EI). The public concern indices have weaker
effects on energy intensity though the signs are intuitive.

*** Insert Table 4 about here ***

We examine the role of political leadership in determining energy/environmental
actions and outcomes. Here we focus on city leaders’ human capital level, measured
by years to schooling (EDU_MAYOR, EDU_SECRETARY). Higher-educated leaders
may devote more efforts in protecting the environment, and thus their cities may
benefit from their leadership and enjoy an aggressive environmental/energy progress.
In a similar spirit as Jones and Olken (2005), who use the deaths of leaders while
in office as a source of exogenous variation in leadership, and ask whether these
plausibly exogenous leadership transitions are associated with shifts in country
growth rates, we exploit leadership transitions across China’s cities. For each city i,
if there is a leadership transition for the mayor (or CCP secretary) position during our
study period, we calculate the change of air pollution, energy intensity and waste gas
treatment facility expenditure between the last year of the new leader (mayor II) and
the last year of the previous leader (mayor I), and see if this change is correlated with
the human capital differential between the former and the new leader (Equation (4)).
 i ,mayorII  mayorI PM 10  1   i ,mayorII  mayorI EDU  2   i ,mayorII  mayorI POP
 3  Time _ lengthi ,mayorII  mayorI  4  PM 10i ,mayorI   it

(4)

Table 5 reports the regression results for the mayor transitions. We include the
time length between the two time points to control for the time trend in the dependent
17

variable. City population change is also controlled for. We find that if a new mayor
has a higher educational attainment than the former mayor, the city enjoys a
significant air quality improvement. A one year increase in the mayor’s years of
schooling is associated with about a 2% decrease in the PM10 concentration.21
*** Insert Table 5 about here ***

4.2 Do public concern and political leadership influence the shape of the
Environmental Kuznets Curve
Building on the influential Grossman and Krueger (1995) study of the
“Environmental Kuznets Curve” (EKC), an entire subfield of environmental
economics has emerged that focuses on this “inverse-U” association between national
per-capita income and pollution (Andreoni and Levinson 2001, Stokey 1998). In past
research, we have estimated Environmental Kuznets Curve across China’s cities (see
Zheng, Kahn and Liu 2010).

We examine how the shape of the EKC and in

particular the GDP “turning point” varies as a function of city attributes and the city’s
political leader’s attribute. We expect that those cities with higher public concern
intensity on pollution or higher human capital, or those cities with higher-educated
mayor/secretary can reach the turning point at a relatively low income level.
Harbaugh, Levinson and Wilson (2002) suggests that the EKC is a fragile
empirical result, and the pollution-income relationship is quite sensitive to functional
forms (the order of the income polynomial function), the variable form, additional
covariates, and the sample composition. Here we do not embrace the EKC as a
unique “law of physics” that offers a deterministic law of motion for pollution in
every city at every point in time. Instead, we borrow the idea of EKC and estimate the
gradients of energy intensity and air quality with respect to GDP per capita (see
equation (5) below). We let the data itself tell the best order of the polynomial
expression of GDPPC and the form of this variable (in logarithm or not) to produce
the highest R2. City population, temperature index, rainfall are included as controls.
Year fixed effects are also included.

21

The education background of CCP secretaries does not show any significant effect on the city’s energy and

environmental progress (Table A2 in the Appendix).
18

J

log(Yit )  0  1 j  GDPPCitj  η2  X it  Year fixed effects  it
j 0

(5)

Where, Y represents EI or PM10. City leaders in urban China have stronger
power than their counterparts in the US in influencing their cities’ industrial
composition. They use cheap land and big tax reduction to attract those firms they
favor, and also shut down or move those firms they dislike. City leaders’ “visible”
hand will reinforce this inverse U relationship between energy intensity and per capita
GDP. Our data also tells us that for EI-GDPPC relationship, including the level and
quadratic terms of GDPPC as explanatory variables generates the best fit of the
regression.
Table 6 reports the baseline regression results of estimating equation (5).
Standard errors are clustered by city. Column (1) and (2) are trend regressions for
PM10 and EI. We only control for city population and examine the coefficients of
year dummies. We can see that, for the average city, air pollution (PM10) has been
sharply declining since 2006 (the beginning of the 11th FYP), and energy intensity’s
decline followed since 2007. In column (3), after controlling for city population,
rainfall and temperature index, there is a clear inverted-U relationship between EI and
GDPPC. The turning point is about 69.1 thousand Yuan (8,324 US dollars, in 2003
constant price22). When estimating the PM10 gradient with respect to GDP per capita
(column (4)), we include the level, quadratic and cubic terms of GDPPC to achieve a
better fit of goodness. The result shows an S-shape of the PM10-GDP path.23 Those
cities that already have passed the turning point and enter the declining part on the
right of that point face a bright future in air quality improvement. The peak point is
about 40.7 thousand Yuan (4,900 US dollars, in 2003 constant price) per capita.
Figure 4 and Figure 5 plot all the cities on the predicted inverted-U shape of the
EI-GDP curve, and the S-shape of the PM10-GDP curve.24

22

23

$1=RMB8.3, in 2003.

Harbaugh, Levinson and Wilson (2002) also find such an “S” shape relationship for

sulfur dioxide and GDP per capita in their cross-country study.
24

All other independent variables are set at their mean values.
19

*** Insert Figure 4 about here ***
*** Insert Figure 5 about here ***
*** Insert Table 6 about here ***

We compare the turning points of the curves for different city sub-groups based
on the city’s human capital level, public concern about environmental issues (as
revealed by our Google indices discuss above) and the mayor’s educational
attainment.

In Table 7, we report estimates of a version of equation (5) where we

run separate EKC regressions for subsets of the data.

We hypothesize that cities

with more educated citizens, more concerned citizens, and more educated mayors are
likely to have an earlier per-capita income EKC turning point than other cities.
We use the median value of each public concern index to divide the city sample
into two subsamples. Cities with higher public concern intensity over pollution
(PCI_1 or PCI_2) do have earlier turning points for both the energy intensity and the
PM10 curves (column (1) - (4)). In columns (5) and (6), we identify the subset of
cities whose pollution concern indices is higher than the median for both indices
(PCI_1 and PCI_2).

These high concern cities have much earlier per-capita income

turning points for both greenness indicators (see columns (5) and (6)). Cities with
higher human capital have a stronger demand for quality of life, and we observe those
cities have an earlier turning point for both EI and PM10’s gradients with respect to
GDP (column (7) and (8)). These patterns support the optimistic hypothesis that
stronger civil society and public participation will help China to achieve higher
energy efficiency and a cleaner environment.

As shown in columns (9) and (10),

cities with higher-educated mayors have earlier turning points in their EI and PM10
gradients with respect to GDP. Table A2 (and Table 7’s columns (11) and (12)
indicates that this correlation does not exist for CCP secretaries.

*** Insert Table 7 about here ***

4. Conclusions
China’s urban environmental challenges are well known. While acknowledging
20

the serious challenges that China’s amazing growth has posed for its own
environmental quality and for global greenhouse gas emissions, this paper has
examined the urban political economy of why there are reasons to be optimistic about
future externality mitigation progress.
Our study shows early evidence that the state and the public opinion are both
nudging local governments for pursuing greenness, and this push has generated
desirable outcomes in Chinese cities. We find that energy and environmental targets
have begun to be reflected in city mayors’ promotion criteria. The power of media and
information disclosure helps to clean Chinese cities. Cities with higher human capital
and higher public concern about environmental issues have earlier EKC per-capita
income turning points for energy intensity and particulate matter. Higher-educated
city leaders have a stronger “green” push. Our results indicate that China’s layers of
government and the general public form a “sandwich” that will contribute to increased
environmental sustainability.
Such environmental progress is likely to translate into improvements in the urban
standard of living in China and to mitigate a paradox uncovered by Easterlin et. al.’s
(2012) work;
“Despite its unprecedented growth in output per capita in the last two decades, …,
there is no evidence of an increase in life satisfaction of the magnitude that might
have been expected to result from the fourfold improvement in the level of per capita
consumption that has occurred.”
The rise of China’s “green cities” would directly improve quality of life for
hundreds of millions of people. This optimistic view hinges on rising middle class
demand for quality of life, increased information transparency that encourages the
accountability of governments and firms, and the inclusion of environmental
indicators that have a direct impact on urban quality of life in the local politicians’
performance criteria.

21

Reference

Acemoglu, Daron, and James Robinson, 2012. Why nations fail: the origins of power,
prosperity, and poverty, crown business, New York.
Andreoni, James, and Arik Levinson, 2001. The simple analytics of the environmental
kuznets curve. Journal of Public Economics. 80, 269-286.
Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess, 2002. The political economy of government
responsiveness: theory and evidence from india. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics. 117(4), 1415-1451.
Bo, Z., 1996. Economic performance and political mobility: Chinese provincial
leaders. Journal of Contemporary China. 5(12), 135–154.
Boyd, Olivia T, 2012. China’s energy reform and climate policy: the ideas motivating
change. CCEP Working Paper 1205. Crawford School of Public Policy. Australia
National University.
Chen, Ye, Hongbin Li, and Li-An Zhou, 2005. Relative performance evaluation and
the turnover of provincial leaders in China. Economics Letters. 88(3), 421-425.
Department of Climate Change, NDRC, 2010. Appendix II - nationally appropriate
mitigation actions of developing country parties: China, letter including
autonomous domestic mitigation actions, United Nations framework convention
on climate change.
Easterlin, Richard A., Robson Morgon, Malgorzata Switek, and Fei Wang. 2012.
China’s life satisfaction 1990 to 2010. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences. 109, no. 25 (2012): 9775-9780.
Ferreira, Fernando, and Joseph Gyourko, 2009. Do political parties matter? Evidence
from U.S. cities. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 124(1), 399–422.
Ferraz, Claudio, and Frederico Finan, 2008. Exposing corrupt politicians: the effect of
Brazil’s publicly released audits on electoral outcomes. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 123(2), 703-745.
Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse Shapiro, 2010. What drives media slant? Evidence
from U.S. daily newspapers. Econometrica. 78(1), 35-71.
Grossman, Gene M., and Alan B. Krueger, 1995. Economic growth and the
environment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 110(2), 353-377.
22

Guan, Dabo, Zhu Liu, Yong Geng, Sören Lindner and Klaus Hubacek, 2012. The
gigatonne gap in China’s carbon dioxide inventories. Nature Climate Change. 2,
672-675.
Harbaugh, William T., Arik Levinson, David Wilson, 2002. Reexamining the
empirical evidence for an environmental kuznets curve. The Review of
Economics and Statistics. 84(3), 541-551.
Hårsman, Björn, and John M. Quigley. "Political and public acceptability of
congestion pricing: Ideology and self‐interest." Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management 29, no. 4 (2010): 854-874.
Jones, Benjamin F., and Benjamin A. Olken, 2005. Do leaders matter? National
leadership and growth since World War II. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics120. no. 3, 835-864.
Kahn, Matthew E. and Matthew J. Kotchen, 2011. "Business Cycle Effects on
Concern about Climate Change: The Chilling Effect of Recession." Climate
Change Economics 2, no. 03: 257-273.

Landry, Pierre Francois. 2008. Decentralized Authoritarianism in China: The
Communist Party’s Control of Local Elites in the Post-Mao Era. Cambridge:
Cambridge Press.
Li, H., Zhou, L., 2005. Political turnover and economic performance: the disciplinary
role of personnel control in China. Journal of Public Economics. 89, 1743-1762.
List, John A., and Daniel M. Sturm, 2006. How Elections matter: theory and evidence
from environmental policy. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Liu, Junguo and Hong Yang, 2009. China fights against statistical corruption. Science.
325, 675-676.
Pargal, Sheoli, and David Wheeler, 1996. Informal regulation of industrial pollution
in developing countries: evidence from Indonesia. Journal of Political Economy.
104(6), 1314-1327.
Qi, Ye, 2013. Annual review of low-carbon development in China (2013) – Policy
implication and institutional innovation. Tsinghua University and Climate Policy
Initiative.
Selden, T. M., & Song, D., 1995. Neoclassical growth, the J curve for abatement and
the inverted U curve for pollution. Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management. 29, 162-168.
23

Stokey, N., 1998. Are there limits to growth? International Economic Review. 39,
1-31.
Tong, Zhifeng, 2013. Reflections on environmental mass incidents in China. Chinese
Research Perspectives Online. Brill Online. See:
<http://www.paulyonline.brill.nl/entries/chinese-research-perspectives-online/refl
ections-on-environmental-mass-incidents-in-china-C9789004173491_021>
Wang, Alexander. 2013. The search for sustainable legitimacy: environmental law
and bureaucracy in China. Harvard Environmental Law Review, forthcoming.
Witte, J.C., Schoeberl, M.R., Douglas, A.R., Gleeason, J.F., Krotkov, N.A., Gille, J.C.,
Pickering, K.E. and Livesey, N., 2009. Satelite observations of changes in air
quality during the 2008 Beijing Olympics and Paralympics. Geophys. Res. Lett.
36, L17803.
World Bank. 2007b. World development indicators. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Wu, M., 2010. How does central authority govern the provincial leaders? Evidence
from China. 1–27.
Wu J, Deng Y, Huang J, Morck R., Yeung B., 2013. Incentives and outcomes: China’s
environmental policy. NBER working paper.
Yao, Y M Zhang, 2012. Subnational leaders and economic growth.
Zhang, M., Wang, S., Wu, F., Yuan, X., Zhang, Y., 2007. Chemical compositions of
wet precipitation and anthropogenic influences at a developing urban site in
southeastern China. Atmospheric Research. 84, 311–322.
Zheng, Siqi, Kahn, M.E. and Hongyu Liu, 2009. Towards a system of open cities in
china: home prices, FDI flows and Air quality in 35 major cities. Regional
Science and Urban Economics. 40, 1-10.
Zheng, Siqi, Yuming Fu, and Hongyu Liu, 2009. Demand for urban quality of living
in China: evidence from cross-city land rent growth. Journal of Real Estate
Finance and Economics. 38, 194-213.

24

Figure 1

Energy Intensity in 86 Chinese Cities in 2004 and 2009

Energy Intensity in 86 Cities (2004)

Figure 2

Energy Intensity in 86 Cities (2009)

PM10 in 86 Chinese Cities in 2004 and 2009

Air Quality (PM10) in 86 cities (2004)

Air Quality (PM10) in 86 cities (2009)

25

Figure 3 Google Insights Index and Google Search Index of Public Concern Intensity on
Environmental Pollution (2009)

Google Insights Index of “Environmental
Pollution” (PCI_1)

Google Search Index of “Environmental
Pollution” (PCI_2)

26

Figure 4

Energy Intensity Gradient with Respect to GDP Per Capita (2004-2009)

Figure 5

PM10 Gradient with Respect to GDP Per Capita (2004-2009)

27

Table 1

Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics

Variable

Definition

Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

498

2.58

1.67

461

0.03

0.04

490

0.02

0.04

535.16

397.17

City attibutes
GDPPC

GDP per capita (RMB yuan), by city by year.

GDP_GROWTH_

Relative GDP growth rate comparing to the previous

M

mayor, by city by year.

GDP_GROWTH_S

Relative GDP growth rate comparing to the previous
secretary, by city by year.

POP

City population, by city by year in 1,000s.

498

EDU

Average years to schooling, by city by year.

498

6.17

4.32

DIS_HK

The distance to Hong Kong (km).

498

1292.65

687.49

498

69.48

126.58

INTERNET

FDI

FACILITY_EXP
RAIN

The number of internet users in region (10 thousand), by
city by year.
Accumulatively foreign direct investment in the city (10
thousand RMB yuan), by city by year.
Per unit GDP annual expenditure on waste gas treatment
facilities, by city by year.
Annual Rainfall in year 1999 (mm), by province.

498

787706.
8

1363649

498

0.408%

0.904%

31

922.99

568.28

31

19.61

6.11

484

0.21

0.41

Temperature discomfort index in year 1999, defined in Eq:
TEMP

TEMi=Sqrt{[Winter_temperaturei-max(Winter_temperatur
e)]2+[Summer_temperaturei-min(Summer_temperature)]2}
See Zheng, Kahn and Liu (2010)

Mayor attributes
PROMOTION_M

Whether the mayor is promoted: 1=yes, 0=no, by city by
year.

AGE_MAYOR

Mayor’s age, by city by year

484

51.13

4.21

MASTER_MAYOR

Mayor’s years to schooling, by city by year

484

0.40

0.49

TERM_MAYOR

Whether the mayor is on his/her second term: 1=yes, 0=no.

484

0.07

0.25

491

0.20

0.40

Secretary’s age, by city by year

491

52.37

4.19

Secretary’s years to schooling, by city by year

491

0.40

0.49

491

0.10

0.30

186

16.76

16.28

498

0.43

2.59

498

0.09

0.03

Secretary
PROMOTION_ S
AGE_SECRETARY
MASTER_
SECRETARY

Whether the secretary is promoted: 1=yes, 0=no. By city by
year.

TERM_

Whether the secretary is on his/her second term: 1=yes,

SECRETARY

0=no.

Environment indicators
PCI_1

PCI_2
PM10

Google insight index of “environment pollution”, by
province by year.
Google Search Index of “Environmental Pollution”, by city
by year.
Average PM10 concentration (mg/m3), by city by year.

28

PM10p75
PM10_DECLINE
PM10p75_DECLIN
E

75th percentile of PM10 concentration (mg/m3), by city by

498

0.12

0.03

Rate of decline of PM10 concentration.

461

-0.02

0.11

Rate of decline of PM10p75 concentration.

461

-0.02

0.12

498

1.05

0.26

498

0.09

0.09

year.

Energy indicators
EI
EI_DECLINE

Energy Intensity: energy consumption per GDP added
value (t standard coal per 10,000 RMB added value).
Decline of Energy Intensity in the year.

29

Table 2 Probit Estimates of a Mayor’s Promotion Probability
(Dependent Variable: PROMOTION, whether the mayor was promoted in that year)
(1)
GDP_GROWTH_M

3.710

(2)
***

(3)
***

3.673

(4.61)

(4.61)

(4)
***

3.657

(4.59)

3.745

(5)
***

(4.62)

(6)
***

3.738

(4.64)

*

0.319

PM10_DECLINE

(1.75)
0.361**
(2.11)
0.312

*

0.331

(1.70)

FACILITY_EXP(lag1)

TERM_MAYOR

(4.64)

(2.10)

**

**

3.720***

*

0.358**

EI_DECLINE

MASTER_MAYOR

(4.66)
0.333

(1.67)

PM10p75_DECLINE

AGE_MAYOR

3.741

(7)
***

**

0.0188

0.0180

(2.11)

(2.00)

(1.97)

0.0643

0.0578

0.0519

0.0176

0.335*

(1.82)

(1.84)

0.952***

1.009***

0.983***

(2.83)

(3.01)

(2.93)

0.0184

0.0170

0.0167*

(2.08)

(2.08)

(1.92)

(1.89)

0.0606

0.0661

0.0561

0.0499

0.0185

**

*

**

*

(0.91)

(0.82)

(0.74)

(0.86)

(0.94)

(0.81)

(0.72)

0.466***

0.477***

0.491***

0.456***

0.472***

0.477***

0.492***

(2.69)

(2.76)

(2.89)

(2.60)

(2.74)

(2.74)

(2.87)

City fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

422

422

422

422

422

422

422

Pseudo R

0.227

0.232

0.234

0.230

0.235

0.245

0.247

chi2

87.34

88.08

90.85

87.06

92.39

2

93.80

96.28

Joint F test for PM10_DECLINE (PM10p75_DECLINE),

14.88***

15.87***

EI_DECLINE and FACILITY_EXP(lag1)

(0.0019)

(0.0012)

Notes: (1) z-statistics are reported in parentheses. (2) ***: significant at the 1% level; **: significant at the 5%
level;*: significant at the 10% level. (3) See Table 1 for variable definitions.

30

Table 3

Public Concern Index Regressions

Dependent Variables

log(PCI_1)

log (PCI_2)

(1)

(2)
***

-1.417
(-3.46)
1.118*
(1.90)
1.632*
(1.74)
3.254***
(4.91)
-2.804***
(-4.47)
0.961
(1.33)
3.292
(0.40)

-0.500***
(-5.05)
0.241*
(1.84)
0.524**
(2.07)
0.0516
(0.35)
0.538***
(4.85)
0.265***
(3.13)
6.056***
(2.80)

East/west/central region
dummies

Yes

Yes

Year fixed effects

Yes

Yes

By province

By city

180
0.505

498
0.492

log(D_HK)
log(INTERNET)
log(PM10)
log(GDPPC)
log(POP)
EDU
Constant

Standard errors clustered
Observations
R2

Notes: (1) t-statistics are reported in parentheses. (2) ***: significant at the 1% level; **: significant at the 5% level;*:
significant at the 10% level. (3) See Table 1 for variable definitions.

31

Table 4

Environmental Outcomes as a Function of Mayor Attributes and Public Concern

Dependent Variables

log(FACILITY_EXP)
(1)
(2)
*

log(PCL_1) (lag1)

0.0793
(1.88)

log(EI)
(3)

(4)

-0.00279
(-1.38)

0.716***
(3.08)
0.191
(1.23)
-4.229***
(-2.99)

0.0950***
(3.15)
1.372***
(7.68)
2.210**
(2.20)
-18.00**
(-2.22)

-0.291
(-1.35)
-0.773
(-1.41)
4.786
(1.32)

-0.000758
(-0.13)
-0.669***
(-19.27)
-1.410***
(-5.63)
11.52***
(5.73)

Yes

-

Yes

-

City fixed effects

-

Yes

-

Yes

Year fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

153
0.939

415
0.901

153
0.951

415
0.946

log(PCL_2) (lag1)
log(GDPPC)
log(POP)
Constant
Province fixed effects

Observations
R2

Notes: (1) t-statistics are reported in parentheses. (2) ***: significant at the 1% level; **: significant at the 5% level;*:
significant at the 10% level. (3) See Table 1 for variable definitions.

32

Table 5

City Leaders’ Attributes and Environmental Outcomes
△PM10

△PM10p75

△EI

△FACILITY_EXP

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.00870

-0.297

(-1.30)

(-0.90)

**

EDU_MAYOR

POP

YEAR

PM10_lag

**

-0.00212

-0.00237

(-2.59)

(-2.17)

*

*

0.0101
(1.80)

0.00248

0.0131
(1.77)

**

(2.03)

0.00427

0.0700

**

(2.06)
**

(2.43)

-0.0471

***

(-4.28)

3.09***
(3.28)

(-3.07)
-0.231***
(-3.30)
-0.117***

EI_lag

(-2.99)
0.646

FACILITY_EXP_lag
Observations

(-2.55)

-0.186***

PM10p75_lag

R2

-2.53**

(1.64)
70

70

88

88

0.296

0.299

0.760

0.440

Notes: (1) t-statistics are reported in parentheses. (2) ***: significant at the 1% level; **: significant at the 5% level;*:
significant at the 10% level. (3) See Table 1 for variable definitions.

33

Table 6

Energy Intensity and PM10 Gradients with Respect to GDP Per Capita
Trend Regressions

log(POP)

log(EI)
(2)

log(PM10)
(3)

log(EI)
(4)

0.135***
(6.89)

-0.00106
(-0.07)

0.00126
(0.04)
GDPPC
0.152***
(4.29)
GDPPC2
-0.0110**
(-2.44)

-0.0381
(-0.71)
-0.149
(-1.42)
Year dummies:
Yes

0.163***
(4.60)
log(GDPPC)
-0.189**
(-2.16)
log(GDPPC)2
0.383***
(3.06)
log(GDPPC)3
-0.150***
(-2.91)
-0.126*
(-1.84)
0.275
(1.61)
Year dummies:
Yes

log(RAIN)
log(TEMP)
year=2005
year=2006
year=2007
year=2008
year=2009
Constant
Observations
R2

Baseline EKC Regressions

log(PM10)
(1)

-0.0675
(-1.32)
-0.0512

0.000800
(0.03)
-0.0933***

(-1.00)
-0.105**
(-2.16)
-0.142***
(-2.96)
-0.165***
(-3.44)
-3.132***
(-24.18)

(-2.93)
-0.219***
(-7.17)
-0.346***
(-11.21)
-0.371***
(-11.95)
0.199**
(2.19)

Peak turning point
(2003 RMB 10,000)
6.91

Peak turning point
(2003 RMB 10,000)
4.07

(2003 US dollars)
8324

(2003 US dollars)
4904

498
0.112

498
0.354

498
0.558

498
0.372

Notes: (1) t-statistics are reported in parentheses. (2) ***: significant at the 1% level; **: significant at the 5% level;*:
significant at the 10% level. (3) See Table 1 for variable definitions.

34

Table 7

Peak Turning Points on EI-GDP and PM10-GDP Curves (by City Type)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Higher

Lower

Higher

Lower

Higher

Lower

PCI_1

PCI_2

(6)

PCI_1&PCI_2

EI

(RMB 10,000)
(US dollar)

5.24
6319

7.61
9166

6.62
7979

8.23
9912

4.41
5314

7.55
9092

PM10

(RMB 10,000)
(US dollar)

3.48
4193

4.27
5145

3.66
4412

4.48
5400

2.53
3052

4.20
5058

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

City human capital

Mayor education

CCP secretary education

Higher

Lower

Lower

Higher

Lower

Lower

EI

(RMB 10,000)
(US dollar)

6.45
7773

8.17
9838

7.41
8922

8.29
9990

6.78
8172

6.99
8423

PM10

(RMB 10,000)
(US dollar)

3.93
4735

6.27
7554

4.06
4892

4.30
5181

3.75
4518

4.10
4940

Notes: (1) Variables are the same with equation (3) and (4) in Table 6. (2) See Table 1 for variable definitions. (3)
“Human Capital” is measured as the ratio of people who have the highest educational attainment as senior high
school or above.

35

Appendix
Table A1 CCP Secretaries’ Promotion Equation with Environmental Variables
(Dependent Variable: PROMOTION, whether the secretary gets promoted in that year)

(1)
GDP_GROWTH_S

4.434

(2)
***

(3)
***

4.418

(5.59)

(5.58)

PM10_DECLINE

(4)
***

4.417

(5.56)

4.443

(5)
***

(5.58)

TERM_ SECRETARY

(5.62)
0.201
(1.12)

0.201
(1.19)

0.00505

0.00448

0.00429

4.494***
(5.60)

0.211
(1.25)
0.0778

0.0805

0.0814

(0.43)

(0.46)

(0.46)

FACILITY_EXP(lag1)

SECRETARY

(5.63)

4.495

0.190

EI_DECLINE

MASTER_

4.500

(7)
***

(1.06)

PM10p75_DECLINE

AGE_SECRETARY

(6)
***

0.00483

0.786

0.825

0.825

(1.39)

(1.47)

(1.47)

0.00447

0.00358

0.00339

(0.74)

(0.66)

(0.63)

(0.71)

(0.66)

(0.54)

(0.51)

-0.200***

-0.203***

-0.203***

-0.198***

-0.196***

-0.197***

-0.198***

(-4.33)

(-4.44)

(-4.45)

(-4.27)

(-4.25)

(-4.30)

(-4.30)

0.471

***

***

0.476

***

0.477

0.470

***

***

0.492

0.498

***

0.500***

(3.09)

(3.11)

(3.11)

(3.09)

(3.26)

(3.29)

(3.29)

City fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Year fixed effects

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

443

443

443

443

443

443

443

Pseudo R2

0.264

0.266

0.267

0.265

0.268

0.271

0.272

chi2

102.7

100.3

101.2

102.4

101.5

98.73

99.73

Joint F test for PM10_DECLINE (PM10p75_DECLINE),
EI_DECLINE and FACILITY_EXP(lag1)

3.14

3.77

(0.333)

(0.288)

Notes: (1) z-statistics are reported in parentheses. (2) ***: significant at the 1% level; **: significant at the 5%
level;*: significant at the 10% level. (3) See Table 1 for variable definitions.

36

Table A2

CCP Secretaries’ Attributes and Environmental Outcomes

EDU_ SECRETARY

POP

YEAR

PM10_lag

△PM10

△PM10p75

△EI

△FACILITY_EXP

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-0.00104

-0.00136

0.00715

-1.16

(-1.36)

(-1.46)

(0.97)

(-0.88)

0.00648

0.0109

0.134

-0.663

(1.03)

(1.56)

(1.20)

(-0.18)

-0.000250

-0.000248

-0.0538***

1.60*

(-0.25)

(-0.20)

(-5.99)

(1.85)

-0.0621
(-1.46)
-0.0626

PM10p75_lag

(-1.59)
-0.103***

EI_lag

(-3.28)
0.425*

FACILITY_EXP_lag
Observations
R2

(1.79)
74

74

91

91

0.193

0.198

0.768

0.163

Notes: (1) t-statistics are reported in parentheses. (2) ***: significant at the 1% level; **: significant at the 5% level;*:
significant at the 10% level. (3) See Table 1 for variable definitions.

37

