NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BIOFUELS, BINDING CONSTRAINTS AND AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY
PRICE VOLATILITY
Philip Abbott
Working Paper 18873
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18873
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013

The author would like to thank Wally Tyner, Chris Hurt, Tom Hertel, Brian Wright, an anonymous
referee and participants at the NBER conference on “Economics of Food Price Volatility” for sharing
their insights on the issues discussed in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Philip Abbott. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Biofuels, Binding Constraints and Agricultural Commodity Price Volatility
Philip Abbott
NBER Working Paper No. 18873
March 2013
JEL No. Q02,Q16
ABSTRACT
The share of U.S. corn production used to produce ethanol increased from 12.4% in the 2004/05 crop
year to over 38.5% in the 2010/11 crop year, and remained at that high level in 2011/12. Even after
accounting for return of by-products to the feed market, this is a large and persistent new demand for
corn that surely has changed price dynamics. Nevertheless, the role of biofuels in determining recent
high corn and other agricultural commodity prices, as well as their volatility, remains controversial.
Policy measures to encourage biofuels production, including the Renewable Fuels Standard (RFS)
mandates, subsidies to ethanol blenders, regulations on gasoline chemistry and import tariffs, helped
to create this new, persistent demand for corn and contributed to incentives to create the capacity
to produce ethanol and to use corn for fuel rather than food. Various aspects of implementing that
policy and the economics of ethanol plant operation suggest very inelastic industrial demand for corn,
contributing to both higher prices and greater price volatility. But turbulence in recent economic events
have caused the mechanisms through which biofuels demands influence corn and other agricultural
commodity prices to vary over time in ways that are observable in data. Price volatility and “subsidy
incidence” also depend on which regime is in place. Simple theory along with data on supply, use
and pricing are used to identify when each regime matters as policy influenced constraints bound to
varying degrees. Capacity constraints appear to have dominated in the short run, allowing rents to
absorb differences in variations of corn prices versus energy prices. Apparent price volatility seems
due to mechanism switching and to changing trends more so than to random short run shocks under
inelastic demand.
Philip Abbott
Department of Agricultural Economics
Purdue University
Krannert Bldg, Rm 576
403 W State Street
West Lafayette, IN 47907-2056
Phone:(1) 765-494-4274
abbottpc@purdue.edu

Biofuels, Binding Constraints and Agricultural Commodity Price Volatility

Introduction
The share of U.S. corn production used to produce ethanol increased from 12.4% in the 2004/05
crop year to over 38.5% in the 2010/11 crop year, and remained at that high level in 2011/2012
(ERS, 2012). Even after accounting for return of by-products to the feed market1, this is a large
and persistent new demand for corn that surely has changed price dynamics (Wright, 2011;
Abbott, Hurt and Tyner, 2008 and 2011). Moreover, policy measures to encourage biofuels
production, including the Renewable Fuels Standard (RFS) mandates, subsidies to ethanol,
regulations on gasoline chemistry and import tariffs, have contributed to incentives to create the
capacity to produce ethanol and to use corn for fuel rather than food (Tyner, 2008 and 2011).
The role of biofuels in determining high agricultural commodity prices in both 2007-08 and 2011
(as well as in drought affected 2012) remains controversial, nevertheless (National Academy of
Sciences, 2011). Some have argued since the 2007-08 food crisis that increased biofuels demand
has been a key factor for both the level and volatility of commodity prices (Mitchell, 2008;
Collins, 2008; Abbott, Hurt and Tyner, 2008 and 2011). Others assert that biofuels shocks should
mostly affect corn, and that common factors across commodities are more important in
explaining price increases (Gilbert, 2010; Baffes and Haniotis, 2010). The link between energy
and corn prices, according to their logic, is the result of speculation and/or macroeconomic
factors, not biofuels. Others have argued that these common factors are less important (Irwin and
Sanders, 2011; Ai, Charath and Song, 2006). A Texas A&M study in 2008 (Agricultural Food
and Policy Center, 2008) also argued for a link from input costs, especially fertilizer and fuel, to
agricultural production, but a history of short run losses by farmers when commodity prices have
been low relative to input prices argues this factor may be influential only in the longer run.
Time series econometric investigations have been inconclusive (Heady and Fan, 2010), with
some identifying structural change just before the 2007-08 food crisis (Enders and Holt, 2012;
Harri, Nalley and Hudson, 2009), but offering little economic insight into the changes found.
McPhail (2011) has even argued that causality runs from ethanol demand to crude oil prices, not
in the other direction. Calibrated simulation models have also struggled to reproduce plausible
effects from biofuels on agricultural prices (Babcock and Fabiosa, 2011; Hertel and Beckman,
2012). Many studies have as a result been vague in assigning the relative significance of factors
behind high agricultural commodity prices (e.g. Trostle, 2009).
The notion that commodity prices had become not only higher but also more volatile emerged
early in the debate on the energy-biofuels-agricultural commodity price relationships (Delgado,
2009). Numerous studies have investigated commodity price variability, using both time series
econometrics (Balcombe, 2009; Cha and Bae, 2011; Gilbert, 2010) and calibrated simulations
(e.g., Hertel and Beckman, 2011; Gohin and Treguer, 2010; Diffenbaugh, Hertel, Sherer and
1

Verma, 2012). Even the notion that agricultural commodity prices are now more volatile has
faced some controversy, however. Whether volatility is measured by variances, coefficients of
variation, or deviations from a short run trend matters, as does the interdependence of factors
influencing conditional volatility (Balcombe, 2009). The role of policy incentives and constraints
has emerged as a key factor in this debate, especially EPA regulations.
It has been argued that this new demand for corn is highly inelastic, contributing to greater corn
price volatility, if it is the result of meeting a policy-set minimum – the RFS mandate (Tyner,
Taheripour and Perkis, 2010; deGorter and Just, 2009; Hertel, Tyner and Birur, 2010) . Others
have noted that a “blend wall” – a limitation on the percentage of ethanol that may be used with
gasoline regulated by the EPA – may establish maximum ethanol use, and that this maximum
was by 2011 not far from the minimum set by the RFS for corn-based ethanol (Tyner and Viteri,
2010). Recent models have at times used a combination of mandated ethanol use with blend wall
limitations to capture effects on agricultural commodity prices (McPhail and Babcock, 2012;
Tyner, 2010). But in 2011 exports of ethanol increased dramatically (Wisner, 2012; Collins,
2011), suggesting capacity constraints rather than the RFS mandate or “blend wall” may
determine ethanol production and so industrial demand for corn, at least in the short run.
Capacity constraints have been important to varying degrees throughout the evolution of
corn/ethanol demand, as capacity has been increased to stay ahead of the RFS mandate and in
response to market and policy determined incentives.
During this period of increased use of corn for ethanol, several regimes can be identified based
on which constraint on ethanol demand is binding. In 2005-06, low corn prices and high crude
oil prices, hence high gasoline prices, likely led to rents to binding ethanol capacity constraints
as incentives to increase that capacity. Only in late 2008 and early 2009 has there been a
significant, non-zero price for ethanol RINS (the instrument to insure the RFS mandate is met
and to allow sale of “quota rights” under the mandate), indicating that this minimum seldom
binds (Thompson, Meyer and Westhoff, 2010; OPIS, 2012; Paulson, 2012). In 2011 the blend
wall may have limited domestic demand, but exports brought ethanol production near plant
capacity. In 2012, subsidies ended, exports declined, production has fell below capacity, and the
blend wall became more limiting. In early 2008 it may have been the case that high oil prices
drove demands for ethanol and corn that were above mandates but below capacity or blending
constraints, so variations in the crude oil price were transmitted to corn prices. As we shall see
below, when capacity constraints bind, the direct link between corn and energy prices through
biofuels is weaker.
Which constraint is binding, if any, determines relationships between corn, ethanol, gasoline and
crude oil prices. It also determines whether industrial demand for corn is essentially perfectly
inelastic or is adjusting in response to relative corn and/or energy prices. When demand is more
inelastic, hence when a constraint is binding, corn prices will be more volatile, and that will
likely spill over onto other crops. It is likely that there have been several different regimes
2

between 2005 and 2011, based on variations in which constraint binds, explaining structural
shifts observed in econometric estimation of price relationships.
Evidence on what is determining ethanol and corn pricing and demand should be seen in both
supply-utilization balances relative to capacity, the mandate and the “blend wall”; and in margins
between relevant prices. A careful examination of detailed short term data on corn, ethanol and
gasoline market performance is one approach that has been noticeably absent in the debate on
biofuels and volatility. Therefore, simple theory will be developed here that incorporates these
constraints on ethanol demand, and predictions of that theory under alternative regimes will be
compared to actual price and quantity data. Empirical application of that theory may be used to
compare predicted versus actual price volatility that varies over critical periods, and will also
show how the benefits of subsidies and mandates are shared between farmers, ethanol producers,
blenders, and gasoline refiners as the regime changes. The underlying incentives for exports –
either mandates elsewhere or profitable substitution for gasoline – will also be explored to gauge
whether and how they will influence future increases in ethanol production capacity.
In summary, energy policy favoring biofuels has helped to create a new, large and persistent
demand for corn. Various aspects of implementing that policy suggest very inelastic industrial
demand for corn, contributing to both higher prices and greater price volatility. But turbulence in
recent economic events has caused the mechanisms through which biofuels demands influence
corn and other agricultural commodity prices to vary over time in ways that should be observable
in data. Price volatility and “subsidy incidence” depend on which regime is in place. Simple
theory along with data on supply, use and pricing can be used to identify when and to what
extent each regime matters.
In the next section, trends and apparent volatility in the relationship between corn and crude oil
prices are presented to justify the origins of this debate on volatility and to gauge the relative
importance and extent of short run versus long run volatility. Details on the policy determined
constraints that impact ethanol and corn are then briefly elaborated and a timeline is developed
showing when each constraint is most likely to have mattered. Theory related to decisions by
gasoline blenders and ethanol producers under these constraints is then developed, followed by
the links these create from ethanol to the U.S. corn market. Supply and use balances in the corn
market are considered in light of this theory. Special attention is then given to ethanol trade and
its implications for market outcomes and modeling. Both quantity and price outcomes are then
investigated using monthly data for crude oil, gasoline, corn and ethanol as well as the timeline
of policy set constraints and external economic shocks. Short and long run volatility is also
examined across these “watershed” periods. Conclusions emphasize how important biofuels have
been in determining agricultural market outcomes, and how binding constraints have shaped the
evolution of agricultural commodity prices.

3

Apparent Volatility
Figure 1 presents monthly corn and crude oil prices from 1960 to 2012. Over this longer time
horizon these series exhibit imperfectly long periods of relative stability interrupted by shortlived spikes that are sometimes noted in the literature (reviewed in Abbott, 2010). The spikes
appear more frequently for corn, and trends appear to last longer for crude oil. While some
longer term correlation may be seen between these series, there also appear to be periods when
these prices are less well connected. The upward trend of these prices is largely due to inflation,
as similar graphs of these series when deflated would exhibit variations around downward trends
from the early 1970s onward. The U.S. CPI is also shown on Figure 1 to demonstrate this effect.
[ Figure 1. Corn and Crude Oil Prices, 1960-2012. about here ]
Three questions related to these series are investigated here: How is variability properly
measured? Does it differ for short run versus long run perspectives on the data (e.g. annual
versus daily observation)? Has the variability (and correlation) of these series changed over
time? To answer these questions, means, standard deviations, coefficients of variation and
correlation coefficients are calculated from the data in Figure 1 as well as from daily and annual
observations of similar prices for the entire period and sub-periods from 1960 to 2012.The
effects of short run trends in apparent volatility are also considered. The sub- periods considered
here are the stable period of 1998 to 2005, the current period from 2006 to 2012, and the two
“food crisis/ commodity boom” periods of 2007-08 and 2010-2012. Those results are shown in
Table 1. (Later we will explore these measures for periods between 2005 and 2012 according to
regimes defined by energy policy constraints and corn stockholding.)
[ Table 1. Crude Oil and Corn Price Volatility, 1960-2012.

about here ]

Longer run mean prices are heavily weighted by lower nominal prices in the early years, and are
comparable to prices realized from 1998 to 2005. Much higher nominal prices prevail for both
corn and crude oil after 2005. Correlation coefficients are similar, above 0.85 for annual and
monthly measures, except for the period 1998 to 2005. During that period, when prices are quite
low, correlations are lower, and decline as the frequency of observation increases. Annual corn
and oil prices are correlated at 0.3, whereas the daily price correlation is negative, in 1998-2005.
The frequency of observation in cases other than the daily corn-crude oil correlation appears not
to matter much to these measures of prices and their volatility. For recent prices the daily
correlation is slightly lower, and since 2010 the daily standard deviation of crude oil prices is
somewhat lower. Otherwise, daily, monthly and annual measures are of similar magnitudes.
Since the original intent of this paper was to focus on short run volatility, we will subsequently
focus on monthly measures.
The period of observations is far more important than frequency according to these results, and
particularly for volatility. Standard deviations are often higher for longer periods, with some
4

exceptions. These are strongly influenced by the means of sub-periods, which differ
significantly. The reason to choose a coefficient of variations is that it corrects for differing
means that could be due to nothing more than inflation raising the level of nominal prices.2
While some in recent literature use standard deviations to measure variability3, the coefficient of
variation will be the focus here, as it corrects that problem. For the coefficients of variation for
crude oil and corn, it is almost always the case that shorter periods exhibit lower volatility. The
two exceptions are the 1998-2005 period for corn, which exhibited extreme stability relative to
other periods, and crude oil in 2007-08. Not only have means also varied by period, so have
correlations. Once again, 1998-2005 is the exceptional case.
An alternative measure of volatility would take into account effects of short run trends that give
rise to large coefficients of variation, not due to random fluctuations around that trend. Standard
errors around estimated short run trends were also calculated for these series to gauge this affect.
For shorter periods this approach is sensitive to how well the established periods match turning
points in the series. For the 2007-08 food crisis period the very strong coincident trends give rise
to larger measures of apparent volatility based on coefficients of variation. For other periods this
approach makes less difference. This approach does suggest that trends may have been mistaken
for increased volatility in some cases.
One hypothesis then is that the apparent price volatility is influenced by trends, and by regime
changes.4 The trend of rising crude oil prices from 2003 to mid-2008 is what gives rise to higher
measured volatility over that period. For corn, the first (1973-74), second (1995) and third (200708) food crises, trends and regime switching led to much higher prices. This shows up in annual
measures and is what makes longer run volatility seem so high. Volatility does appear to change
over comparably long sub-periods, however. The volatility of corn prices for 1998-2005 was
exceptionally low, as is crude oil volatility in 2010-12. As before, these are strongly influenced
by change in mean prices – crude oil standard deviations are similar in 2010-12 and 1998-2005,
but mean prices were much lower in 1998-2005.
From Figure 1 it is apparent that both stability and low prices of 1998-2005 were not
unprecedented. Similar outcomes are observed in the 1960s and early 1990s. But judging the
level and volatility of crude oil and corn prices can be distorted if short memories exclude years
before 1998. Whether mechanisms determining prices before 1998 and after 2005 are similar is
another matter – while the food versus fuel debate had been raised in the 1980s (Brown, 1980),
the emergence of ethanol production as a large user of corn is a new phenomenon.
We will from here forward focus entirely on the period after 2005, when biofuels emerged as
important to corn and energy markets. After identifying relevant sub-periods, defined by the
policy constraints that bind gasoline blenders and ethanol producers, we will find similar
behaviors. Mean prices will vary across sub-period and so will volatility and correlations. For
shorter periods, volatility is lower, and regime switching that changes mean prices will lead to
observed higher volatility. These will show up imperfectly in annual data, since crop years and
5

calendar years used for EPA regulations do not coincide, and dates that legislation is passed or
takes effect can influence when regimes switch (with anticipation by market participants).
Ethanol Supply Chain Constraints
Ethanol production, its use in reformulated gasoline, and the subsequent demand for corn as a
feedstock, are subject to constraints along the supply chain. Some constraints have arisen due to
energy legislation (RFS mandates) and EPA regulation (blend wall, MTBE substitution).
Capacity constraints on production also matter to market performance, and investment in
capacity is influenced by policy constraints. An important distinction is that some constraints are
applied cumulatively on an annual basis – the RFS mandate applies on a calendar year basis
(with some flexibility across years), not on monthly production, while others apply over the short
run, such as capacity and the blend wall. Constraints that apply annually will be referred to as
“stock” constraints, and among these are the condition that annual corn carry-out stocks cannot
fall below zero, as anticipation of potential stock-outs can raise corn prices well ahead of when
those stocks might actually fall to zero. Anticipation that other “stock” constraints may bind will
influence pricing, production, stockholding, and investment in capacity. Constraints that apply
instantaneously will be referred to as “flow” constraints, and include capacity constraints on
gasoline as well as ethanol. This distinction is not necessarily apparent in an annual model, but
matters to which constraint may actually appear to bind, and hence determine the regime under
which short term prices are set. Stock constraints considered here include RFS mandates and
carry-out stocks for corn. Flow constraints include capacity constraints, MTBE substitution
(gasoline chemistry) and the blend wall. Flow constraints are more likely to impact production
(quantities), whereas stocks constraints influence expectations, hence prices.
The history of constraints on gasoline blending and ethanol production, particularly as a result of
energy legislation and EPA regulations, have been extensively documented in literature cited
earlier (e.g. Tyner, 2008; Carter, Rausser and Smith, 2012). Only the critical elements
determining relevant constraints during 2005-2012 are discussed below.
RFS Mandates
Legislation favoring ethanol production from corn has been debated and in place since the late
1970s (Tyner, 2008). In 2005, significant changes in legislation governing ethanol production
and use were enacted. The Renewable Fuels Standard (RFS), which mandated minimum
production levels for future years for ethanol, was enacted then (U.S. Congress, 2005). That
legislation also included continued subsidization of ethanol production, then through a tax credit
to gasoline blenders of $0.51 per gallon (referred to as VEETC), and a tariff on imported ethanol,
ostensibly to insure foreign producers did not get the subsidy, of $0.45 per gallon plus 2.5% of
imported value. The Energy Policy Act of 2007 (U.S. Congress, 2007) substantially increased
RFS mandated minimum ethanol production levels for the future. The VEETC was reduced to
$0.45 during the 2007-08 food crisis, and was eliminated on December 31, 2011. The tariff on
6

imported ethanol for fuel use was also cut in 2012. Numerous other federal and state policy
measures influence the profitability of ethanol production, but the tax credit (subsidy), tariff, and
mandates were the most significant measures among those impacting the corn market. That
legislation also affects ethanol produced from feed stocks other than corn – second generation
biofuels. A limit is placed on the amount of ethanol from corn that can be used to meet the
various RFS mandates. Renewable Identification Numbers (RINs) are created along with ethanol
production and are used to allow firm specific quotas imposed on gasoline blenders, which
implement the RFS mandate, to be traded (McPhail, Westcott and Lutman, 2011).5 In principle,
the market values for RINs will reflect the extent to which the RFS mandate binds as a constraint
on ethanol production. Important features of this policy were the minimums on annual ethanol
production from corn that went from 4 billion gallons in 2006 to 15 billion gallons in 2015, and
subsidies that affect profit margins for either gasoline blenders, ethanol producers, consumers or
farmers – depending on how the supply chain functions.
Blend Wall
EPA regulations limit the amount of ethanol that may be used in reformulated gasoline produced
and sold by blenders. Ethanol is corrosive and may do harm in older engines, or engines not
designed to tolerate high concentrations of ethanol. While modern flex-fuel vehicles can use
blends including up to 85% ethanol, many vehicles can tolerate no more than 10-20% without
damage. While the science on this may not be exact, the EPA had set a limit at 10% (E10) for
gasoline not explicitly marketed as E85, and recently permitted 15% ethanol (E15) for newer
vehicles. There is debate as to whether the allowed concentration can be raised without harming
many existing engines, thus changing the effective limit on ethanol use. Logistical and legal
issues have meant gasoline stations have been reluctant to switch toward selling E15 or even
E85, so for the moment use of ethanol in gasoline is still limited to 10%. Tyner and Viteri (2009)
describe how this affects ethanol and gasoline markets, and refer to this limitation as the “blend
wall”. Moreover, they argue that additional logistical and other regional constraints effectively
limited ethanol use to about 9% of gasoline demand, noting that this may creep upward a bit
(toward 10%) when the RFS mandate exceeds the apparent blend wall, as it did in 2012. Like
the RFS mandate, this constraint is imposed on gasoline blenders, but its effects are then felt all
along the ethanol supply chain. A maximum is imposed on ethanol demand for fuel use in the
U.S. that is proportional to gasoline demand, but ethanol production may be affected by ethanol
trade, as well.
MTBE/Oxygenate Substitution
Reformulated gasoline sold by blenders mixes “pure” gasoline bought from crude oil refiners
with various additives including ethanol and MTBE. The Clean Air Act has required since the
early 1990s additives to reduce carbon monoxide emissions by including an oxygenate –
commonly either MTBE or ethanol (Carter, Rausser and Smith, 2012)6. Additives such as
ethanol are an alternative source of energy to “pure gas” and may also improve the chemistry of
7

reformulated gasoline, for example by increasing octane or making the gas burn cleaner.
Specifications of reformulated gasoline depend on both performance characteristics of additives
and on EPA regulations. At lower concentrations ethanol may serve as an additive, improving
gasoline chemistry, and accruing a premium, while at higher concentrations it may simply serve
as an energy substitute for “pure gas”. Since ethanol has fewer BTUs (less energy) per gallon
than gasoline, a gallon of reformulated gasoline yields lower mileage in vehicles the larger is the
ethanol concentration. If ethanol serves as an energy substitute, its pricing should reflect this
difference in energy content. If ethanol serves as an additive to improve gasoline chemistry, its
price may be above the energy equivalent price.
In the 1990s it was recognized that MTBE, an inexpensive by-product of crude oil refining, was
toxic in groundwater (EIA, 2000). By 2006 25 states had banned the use of MTBE in gasoline.
Gasoline blenders sought waivers from liability due to MTBE, since they were using it to meet
clean air regulations. By mid-2006 it was clear that such waivers would not be granted, as MTBE
liability waivers had not been part of the 2005 energy act, and subsequent related legislation
failed to provide this waiver. This has encouraged blenders to use more expensive ethanol rather
than face potential liability costs from MTBE use. These decisions occurred at about the same
time as the RFS mandate was established, and so MTBE substitution was another factor
contributing to rapid expansion of ethanol production after 2005 (Hertel and Beckman, 2012).
According to the EIA (2000), reformulated gasoline meets oxygenate requirements at a 5.8%
ethanol concentration, so this may serve as a rough minimum requirement for ethanol until that
concentration is exceeded. Thus, in 2006 this may have been a serious constraint on blenders,
giving rise to premiums on ethanol relative to “pure gas”, but by 2008 enough ethanol was
produced nationally to exceed this concentration.
Ethanol production capacity constraints
The various policy measures discussed above created incentives for greater ethanol production
and use as fuel. In 2005 the capacity to produce ethanol matched the small demand at that time.
As demand for ethanol grew, new production capacity has been built. This occurred at a very
rapid pace shortly after both the 2005 and 2007 Energy Acts. High crude oil prices relative to
corn and subsidies (VEETC) insured new plants would be profitable, while the RFS mandate
guaranteed a market for the output of those plants. Plant construction has stayed ahead of the
RFS mandate, but the combination of the limit on corn ethanol to satisfy the mandate and the
blend wall have discouraged further increases in capacity, which for corn ethanol is now at the
15 billion gallon maximum set for 2015 and beyond in the RFS. Hence, new capacity
construction is now quite small (RFA, 2012). Over the period 2005-2012, our results will show
that plant capacity has been the determining factor behind ethanol production and short run
pricing, except for a couple of periods – briefly in late 2008 and now that the RFS mandate
exceeds the blend wall. The RFS mandate and blend wall were influential over the long run in
shaping this investment, but were not binding constraints on short run market performance for
most of this period.
8

Corn Stocks
Corn is produced/ harvested once a year but is consumed continuously over the year. Stocks
allow consumption not only to be spread over a crop year, but also to be carried into the next
crop year if prices are low and good production had yielded surpluses. Annual carry-out stocks
cannot fall below zero, however, and in practice cannot fall below some higher pipeline level –
in the case of corn this may be near 5% of use. The demand for these carry-out stocks is
understood to be relative elastic when there are surpluses, but becomes quite inelastic as
expected annual carry-out stocks become tight. A non-linear relationship between stocks-to use
ratios and both cash and futures market prices therefore informs expectations and behaviors in
agricultural commodity markets. Stocks positions have been seen as important in determining
price outcomes, especially around periods of food crisis (Trostle, 2009; Wright, 2010; Carter,
Smith and Rausser, 2012). In the early period when ethanol production was expanding, corn
prices remained low due to abundant stocks and surpluses, but prices increased once those stocks
were drawn down. In the 2011/12 crop year, low supplies led to expectations of extremely low
carry-out stocks and high prices, which futures markets had indicated could fall dramatically
once a good new crop is harvested. While corn prices were low in May, 2012, as the 2012/13
crop year progressed a shortfall due to drought became evident. Corn prices reached historic
highs again, and stocks are unlikely to be rebuilt.
Understanding the impact of increased demand for corn to produce ethanol on corn prices
requires understanding the expected stocks positions when those changes in demand occur, and
its impact on that position. As Abbott, Hurt and Tyner (2011) argue, impacts of any given factor,
such as biofuels demands, interact with other factors, such that two shocks can have a bigger
impact that each shock might individually, especially if the two shocks together push the market
into a low stocks position. If demand increases when expected stocks are high, overall demand
is elastic and increased demands can be accommodated by stocks releases. When stocks are low,
the corn market is much less elastic, and price increases will be higher. Persistently higher
demand also eventually drove down stocks, as happened from 2005 to 2008.One way of thinking
about this relationship between annual carry-out stocks and corn prices is as if zero (or pipeline)
stocks are an annual “stock” type constraint. The pricing mechanism for corn changes when
stocks bind at zero, versus when they do not.
Timeline of “Watershed” Periods and Related Legislation
Table 2 presents a timeline for the events shaping development of the corn-ethanol business from
2005 to 2012. It defines “watershed periods” over which constraints shaping market outcomes
may have changed. For example, the first period from July 2005 to July 2007 is referred to as the
“ethanol gold rush” when high crude oil prices, low corn prices, RFS mandates and MTBE
substitution all encouraged rapid construction of ethanol plant capacity. The second period, from
August 2007 to July 2008 is when then corn prices then increased, in what is now called the
“food crisis”. The “great recession” brought an end to the commodity boom, for both crude oil
9

and corn, starting by August 2008, and coinciding more closely with financial crisis than with
the beginning of recession in the U.S. The NBER dates the end of the great recession as June,
2009, when another commodity boom had already restarted. By January 2010, the effects of a
binding blend wall began to be apparent, but exports relieved pressure on ethanol production
starting about September 2010. In 2012, after the subsidies to ethanol ended, exports slowed as
well.
[ Table 2. Watershed Periods for Ethanol Related Constraints. about here ]
These watershed period distinctions are admittedly inexact. They are informed by when
legislation was enacted, as indicated in Table 2, and when prices, production and trade behavior
changed. Since they are informed by institutional factors such as legislation, they do not always
coincide with turning points of short run trends. Figure 2 shows a graph that presents U.S. prices
for corn, crude oil, gasoline and ethanol from 2005 to 2012, with the watershed periods indicated
by horizontal lines at their beginning/end. Table 2 notes the changes in price trends that can be
seen in Figure 2. These period definitions were also informed by the experience of observing
these events and trying to understand the underlying economic forces as they occurred, as well as
by the results presented later in this paper. Clear differences in mean prices as well as variances
can be seen across these periods, as well as the effects of quantity adjustments due to the
constraints discussed above. Those outcomes will be reported below after theory is developed to
help interpret those outcomes.
[ Figure 2. Energy and Corn Prices, 2005-2012.

about here ]

Setting the month when “watershed” periods begin or end presents difficulties due to anticipation
of both market events and policy changes by firms. For example, the energy acts were discussed
and subsequently passed in several steps, and then enacted provisions did not all apply
immediately. It is also likely that firms anticipated the removal of subsidies at the end of 2011,
since that was known well in advance. Firms may make operational changes ahead of when
requirements are imposed. This results in some seemingly gradual transitions as conditions
change. Similarly, commodity markets anticipated the end of the great recession, so crude oil and
corn prices started increasing ahead of the NBER declared end of the recession. Nevertheless,
observing differences in quantities and prices in gasoline, ethanol and corn markets across these
watershed periods is informative in understanding how market regimes and so outcomes may
have changed.
Theory on Firm/Plant Constraints
The RFS mandates and blend wall apply directly to gasoline blenders, but effects can spill over
onto ethanol producers as well as farmers. Simple theory based on profit maximization by
gasoline blenders and ethanol refiners subject to constraints can inform how these constraints
impact use and pricing. First, ethanol refiners and then gasoline blenders are modeled here as
competitive profit maximizing actors. Results will be used understand interactions with the corn
10

market and to interpret short term market data. Theory presented here also considers extensions
to imperfectly competitive markets, but market conditions suggest the competitive models are
more likely to be relevant.
Ethanol Refiners
Ethanol refining involves purchase of corn and natural gas to distill alcohol from the corn. Costs
are mostly from the feedstock and energy, and in this model by-products will be subsumed into
net other production costs for simplification. For firm or plant i, profit maximization subject to
constraints can be represented as:
Maximize

πei = Pe qei - Pc qcei – Costei (qei)

Profit

Subject to

qei ≤ kei

Capacity constraint

qcei = γcei qei

Leontief intermediate requirements for corn

where πei is profit realized by ethanol firm/plant i,
Pe is the market price of ethanol,
qei is ethanol production of plant i,
Pc is the market price of corn,
qcei is the derived demand for corn by plant i,
Costei is total additional cost (beyond corn cost) to produce ethanol by plant i,
kei is capacity of ethanol firm/plant i, and
γcei is the quantity of corn required to produce one unit of ethanol.
Market aggregations over the i=1,…,N firms gives:
Qe = ∑ q , Qce = ∑ q

, Ke = ∑ k

where Qe is market production of ethanol,
Qce is market derived industrial demand for corn to produce ethanol, and
Ke is market capacity for ethanol production.
A competitive outcome with identical firms7 yields complementary slackness conditions on
capacity and rent to that capacity:
λe = Pe – γcei Pc -

Rent to ethanol capacity

Qe ≤ Ke

Market capacity constraint

λe > 0 if Qe = Ke

Complementary slackness, capacity binding

λe = 0 if Qe ˂ Ke

Marginal cost determines ethanol supply

11

We shall assume for the moment that gasoline demand is large relative to ethanol demand, and
that the gasoline price effectively determines the ethanol price. If capacity constraints bind,
variations in the price of gasoline relative to the price of corn show up as variations in the rent to
capacity (λe). If capacity constraints do not bind, if marginal “additional” cost is approximately
average “additional cost” cost for ethanol production, and if ethanol production is large relative
to the corn market, then variations in the gasoline price drive variations in the corn price. These
are the fundamental relationships that will govern any linkage between corn and energy prices
through biofuels.
The rents to capacity (λe) offer incentives for new plant construction, hence investment in
expansion of ethanol production. Those rents depend on the price of ethanol (hence gasoline), the
cost of corn, and other costs or revenues of plants. Policy also influences expectations that matter
to investment decisions (Kesam, Ohyama and Yang, 2011).
Oligopolistic firms in either ethanol (upstream) or corn (downstream) markets would require
relaxing the small actor assumptions invoked above, so that:
λe = Pe – γcei Pc -

+

- γcei

Rents depend on market capacity utilization (especially if firms are heterogeneous, and plant i is
typical and not necessarily the least efficient operating firm). They may also depend on corn and
ethanol market conditions captured by the conjecture on ethanol price effects (
conjecture on corn price effects (

) and the

) – hence on factors related to corn market elasticity (e.g.

stocks), and demand for ethanol and so the gasoline price. If plants face binding capacity
constraints, and that determines the market outcome (Qe and qei ), conjecture terms are
theoretically irrelevant as firms cannot adjust qei to influence prices.
Qe may be determined by blender demand constraints (e.g. the “MTBE/ oxygenate requirement”)
that supersede capacity constraints. If ethanol is simply to provide an oxygenate, its demand by
blenders is a fixed concentration that still prevents qei from varying to maximize profit. In that
case, ethanol refiners face perfectly inelastic demand. Those constraints should look like capacity
constraints when they limit ethanol production, and may lead to positive rents, λe. On the other
hand, the blend wall minimum would lower Pe offered by blenders, and with fixed quantity could
give rise to negative λe, or losses to ethanol, since corn demand is also fixed by the blender
constraint. Understanding how blender demand relates to ethanol production requires specifying
the gasoline blender’s profit maximization problem.
Gasoline Blenders
In order to understand linkages between gasoline and ethanol and to see how policy constraints
may spill over, it is useful to consider reformulated gasoline blending. After all, EPA enforces
12

mandates and regulations on gasoline blenders, not ethanol refiners. Gasoline supply by profit
maximizing blenders may be modeled as follows, assuming identical blenders aggregated to
reflect market outcomes:
Maximize

πr = Pr Qr - (Pe - τe) Qe – Pg Qg - Costr (Qr, Qmbte)

Subject to

Qr ≤ Kr
Qr = Qg + γge Qe

Profit

Gasoline/blending capacity constraints
Blending ethanol and “pure gas” based on energy

Qe ≥ γgo Qr – γgm Qmtbe

Oxygenate/octane (chemistry) constraint

∑

RFS-- annual minimum ethanol production

≥ RFS

Qe ≤ γbw Qr

Blend wall maximum on ethanol in gas

Where πr is profit realized by reformulated gasoline blenders,
Pr is the market price of reformulated gasoline,
Qr is market production of reformulated gasoline (energy basis),
τe is the tax credit given to blenders for use of ethanol in reformulated gasoline (VEETC),
Pg is the market price of gasoline bought by blenders (“pure gas” ex refiner),
Qg is demand for reformulated gasoline from blenders,
Qmtbe is the quantity of MTBE used to fulfill oxygenate requirements,
Costg is total additional cost (beyond ethanol and “pure” gasoline cost) to produce
reformulated gasoline, including taxes on sales of gasoline and penalties for MTBE use,
Kr is gasoline/refining/blending capacity,
γge is the relative energy content of ethanol (as compared to “pure gas”),
γgo is the blending requirement for ethanol to meet oxygenate or octane requirements,
γgm is the contribution of MTBE to meet those requirements, and
γbw is the EPA set maximum ethanol concentration for reformulated gasoline.
This model applies on a monthly basis, but the RFS constraint applies annually. A dynamic
model with this behavior repeated over the course of a year, and with any linkages across
months, would need to be built to properly capture the RFS constraint. For now we simply
assume each month’s production is added and that sum must exceed the annual RFS mandate.
Reformulated gasoline market demand is given by:
Qr = Qdr(Pr, other variables)
Competitive blenders take Pr as given at the equilibrium market price for reformulated gasoline.
Competitive refiners offer gasoline at Pg, determined by the world price of oil and the cost of
crude oil refining. We shall for now assume gasoline demand is inelastic but small relative to
world energy markets, making Pg exogenous. Binding refining constraints or oligopoly would
13

drive a wedge between gasoline and crude oil prices. If ethanol use is small relative to gasoline
demand, the price of gasoline may still be exogenous to blenders.
Some outcomes may be determined when Pg is fixed, the competitive case. If no constraints bind,
and gas refining as well as blending are competitive, ethanol should be priced at its energy
equivalent to gasoline, plus the tax credit. In this case, the VEETC is fully passed down to
ethanol refiners:
Pe - τe = γge Pg = γge (Pr -

)

Blending capacity constraints would raise Pr relative to Pg, so:
Pe - τe = γge Pg = γge (Pr -

+ λr)

where λr is the rent to capacity for blenders. In addition to this capacity rent, constraints related
to ethanol use in blending may affect the difference between Pg and Pr. Pr will reflect any
premiums or discounts accruing to ethanol relative to its energy value, and any impacts on
blending costs, such as avoiding costs due to MTBE usage or liability.
If the oxygenate or octane (Chemistry) constraint binds:
Pe - τe = γge Pg + λo
where λo is the marginal value to ethanol, beyond its energy contribution, due to the blending
chemistry benefits it brings. If ethanol raises octane in reformulated gasoline, a premium should
accrue to ethanol from this effect. Similarly, if ethanol meets oxygenate requirements for
gasoline in lieu of MTBE, this will also contribute a premium to ethanol relative to its energy
content. That premium will reflect any costs associated with continuing to use MTBE as an
oxygenate, subsumed here in the additional cost function. The extent of ethanol use in gasoline
will cause these premiums to vary over time. If the price of gasoline is high, and if these
constraints do not bind, λo may approach zero.
The RFS mandated minimum could also generate a premium for ethanol over its energy
equivalent price:
Pe - τe = γge Pg + λrfs
Like the corn stock-out condition, this constraint applies over a year (calendar year, not crop
year). Hence, this premium likely would depend on expectations that the RFS may eventually
bind. This premium should give rise to a positive price for corn ethanol RINS, the tradable
instrument that implements this constraint for blenders.

14

It is likely in a strict math program that either the oxygenate/octane or RFS constraint binds, but
not both, since both are minimums on ethanol use in blending, and their being equal would be an
unlikely coincidence. But the chemistry constraints are flow constraints that bind at each instant,
whereas the RFS mandate is a stock constraint that binds on an annual basis. In an uncertain
world, both could influence expectations and so short run ethanol prices. The RFS constraint in
practice is further complicated by the possibility that RINs, hence ethanol production, may be
used to satisfy the RFS constraint in the year used or in an adjacent year, as chosen by the
blender subject to restrictions (Paulson, 2012). It is not in practice the strict inequality posited
above.
A binding blend wall constraint puts pressure on the ethanol price in the other direction, leading
to discounts on ethanol so that a maximum usage restriction is not exceeded:
Pe - τe = γge Pg – λbw
where λbw is the discount on the ethanol constraint due to a binding blend wall. Once again, it is
unlikely that a blend wall minimum and RFS or oxygenate maximum would bind
simultaneously, though in recent years these constraints have moved quite close together.
Moreover, if the blend wall is lower than the RFS minimum, the solution to this problem is
infeasible in the absence of ethanol trade.
Key results include that ethanol prices will follow gasoline prices and so crude oil prices if
blenders are competitive and chemistry or blending capacity constraints do not bind. Ethanol
prices will be passed on to corn prices only if ethanol production capacity constraints do not
bind. When those capacity constraints bind ethanol generates a perfectly inelastic demand for
corn, and rents absorb corn versus crude oil price variations.
Corn Market Implications
In order to determine linkages between energy markets and corn, a simple model of the U.S. corn
market will be developed here. That model is then used to interpret implications of the above
results for corn prices, demand and volatility, as well as to assess data on prices and quantities
for corn, ethanol and gasoline.
Modeling U.S. Corn
Equilibrium in the corn market equates supply with various demand components, including feed
use, food use, derived industrial demand for corn to produce ethanol, and export demand:
Qc(Pc) = Qcf(Pc) + Qcs(Pc) + Qcx(Pc) + Qce
where Qc is corn supply that is fixed in the very short run and responds to price over the longer
run, including beginning stocks;

15

Qcf is feed, food, seed and residual demand for corn (everything in domestic use but ethanol),
which is presumably relatively price inelastic, with elasticity mostly coming from feed use.
Qcs is carry-out stocks demand, which would be very elastic in periods of abundant supply
(surplus) and quite inelastic in periods of short supply. Stock-out conditions could be thought of
as a constraint on corn demand that sometimes binds, affecting the overall elasticity of corn
demand. Stock-outs are an annual phenomenon, occurring just before next year’s harvest, so in
the short run expectations on this future outcome should influence the corn price. This is
captured by specifying a non-linear carry-out stocks demand function as described above.
Qcx is net export demand for corn, which would be price elastic for a small country trader, but is
likely inelastic for the U.S., since it accounts for over half of world corn trade in most recent
years; and
Qce is the derived demand for corn by the ethanol market. If capacity constraints are binding this
is perfectly inelastic at γcei Ke, and if capacity constraints do not bind this demand may be
perfectly elastic at a price determined by the price of gasoline, Pc = (Pe-

)/γcei.

Alternatively, Qe and therefore Qce = γcei Qe may be determined by gasoline blending
requirements, such as the RFS mandate or oxygenate rules. In those cases industrial corn demand
is perfectly inelastic, as well.
Figure 3 graphically depicts this model in a two-panel diagram framework commonly used for
trade analysis. In it the demand components are summed to arrive at the kinked overall demand
function for corn, similar to that found in Tyner (2010) and McPhail and Babcock (2012). The
demand for corn to produce ethanol includes two horizontal portions determined by the RFS
mandate (minimum) and either the blend wall or capacity constraints (maximum). The novel
feature here is that it is capacity constraints in the short run, not the RFS or blend wall, which
will bind, determining prices. The flat portion of that demand curve, so also for the overall
domestic demand curve, occurs when ethanol production falls between its upper and lower
bounds, and will be higher or lower depending on crude oil/ gasoline prices, as given by the
ethanol pricing relationship derived above when capacity rents are zero. Hence, there is a region
where corn and gasoline prices may be directly linked, but given current constraints that is over a
quite small range.
This graph is based on a simple Excel model implementing the above theory, and calibrated to fit
the 2005/06 crop year using elasticities that are on the low side of those found in the literature.
The shift in demand for ethanol from 2005 to 2009 is represented here as an exogenous shift to
the right of corn demand for ethanol corresponding with the actual increase over that period.
[ Figure 3. Corn Supply, Use and Exports. about here ]

16

Equilibrium is found here in the right hand panel that depicts foreign trade in corn.8 That is done
to highlight the nature and uncertainty of foreign demand. Several cases can be seen in that
graph. If the U.S. were a small country in the world market, taking the world price as given, corn
exports fall to zero as the U.S. net export supply of corn shifts leftward as a result of the
domestic demand increase. If corn export demand is relatively elastic, exports fall substantially
with a small increase in the U.S. and so world corn price. If export demand is quite inelastic, a
larger price increase follows from a smaller export decline. The result for inelastic export
demand is close to several results from some more complex calibrated modeling exercises (e.g.
McPhail and Babcock, 2012), with ethanol raising corn prices by about 33%, hence from $3.00
per bushel in 2005 to about $4.00 in 2009. The net export demand elasticity facing U.S. corn
market has been the subject of controversy over time, with some insisting that export demand
over the time frame modeled in Figure 3 (4 years) should be relatively elastic. An early study
(Elobied et. al., 2007) forecasting the implications of biofuels demands found assuming
relatively elastic foreign demand the implausible result that the U.S. would import corn while the
world price need not rise above $4.00 per bushel to accommodate ethanol production at more
than twice levels seen in 2011/2012 . Modeling results depend critically on the corn export
demand elasticity as well as domestic behavioral parameters. To get bigger price impacts than
are found here in the short run, very low elasticities need to be assumed – or some other driving
factors need to be invoked.
Prices, subsidies and volatility
Implications for price volatility can be found from the above theory. Key relationships governing
the corn market include an equilibrium condition that includes derived demand for corn based on
ethanol production -- that in many circumstances is exogenous:
Qc(Pc) = Qcf(Pc) +Qcs(Pc) + Qcx(Pc) + γcei Qe

Corn market equilibrium

and the relationship between corn and ethanol prices, that includes rents to capacity in addition to
the net marginal cost of ethanol production:
λe = Pe – γcei Pc -

Ethanol rents

Several cases may be identified depending on which constraint binds. For ethanol producers
these include capacity constraints and the blend wall:
Case e1: λe = 0, Pc = 1/ γcei (Pe –

)

Case e2: Qe = Ke , Qe = γgo Qr, or Qe = RFS/T
Case e3: λe = F( Qe / Ke,

,

)

Elastic ethanol demand
Binding production constraints
Oligopolistic mark-ups

17

Case e4: λe < 0 and Qe = γbw Qr

Blend wall binding

Case e1 corresponds with a competitively determined price for ethanol linked directly to the
price of corn, or the flat part of overall corn demand in Figure 3. In that case, ethanol demand is
perfectly elastic at a price driven by the price of gasoline and the cost to produce ethanol, so corn
and energy prices are strongly related, the volume of ethanol production varies with those prices,
and subsidies and other factors influencing the ethanol price are transmitted to the corn market.
Figure 3 showed that this held over a narrow range, and more often a constraint would bind.
Case e2 corresponds with capacity constraints (maximum) binding for ethanol production. It may
also represent cases where ethanol production is set by capacity constraints on gasoline blending
or the RFS mandate. Ethanol production is fixed by those constraints, so exogenous to the corn
market. In that case the rent to capacity absorbs variations in corn and ethanol prices, which
move independently. Subsidies would not be passed to the corn market, and the effect on corn of
ethanol is entirely the consequence of adding a fixed, large demand. Case e3 shows that the rents
to capacity could also be non-zero in an oligopolistic market, but quantities of ethanol produced
would need to be managed (reduced) to generate these oligopolistic rents. Since there are now
over 200 plants, and if ethanol production is essentially at capacity, this case is unlikely to be
relevant. Case e4 occurs when the blend wall binds, at levels below capacity. Ethanol production
is fixed here by the maximum on ethanol demand by blenders, and rents can be negative in this
case, reflecting the limitation on demand rather than supply. Subsequent data investigations will
suggest case e2 is the case most often encountered from 2005 to 2011, with a brief period when
case e1 applied. In 2011 and 2012 the blend wall appears to bind (case e4), but exports of ethanol
allowed production between the blend wall and capacity. The nature and consequences of
ethanol trade will be discussed later.
To investigate constraints on gasoline blenders we also need their pricing relationship:
Pe - τe = γge Pg + λx

Blender pricing

Once again, several cases can be identified, based on which constraint binds:
Case b1: λx = 0

Energy equivalent pricing

Case b2: λx > 0

and Qe = Qe

Case b3: λx < 0

and Qe = γbw Qr

RFS, Oxygenate or Octane premiums
Blend wall binding

In the competitive case with no binding constraints (b1) ethanol would be priced at its energy
equivalent value, so the price of ethanol should follow the price of gasoline. If blending
chemistry, such as premiums to ethanol as an oxygenate or octane booster, are relevant or if the
RFS mandate is binding, ethanol is purchased by blenders at a premium relative to its energy
value, and demand for ethanol by blenders is determined by the relevant constraint. If the blend
wall limits purchases of ethanol it will sell at a discount. In each case ethanol demand, hence
18

production, is fixed by a constraint. In the competitive case any subsidy (τe) is transmitted from
blenders to the ethanol price, and some of it may be absorbed by rents to blenders (λx) in
constrained cases.
Volatility of the corn price in most cases is the consequence of a fixed, non-price responsive
demand having been added to the market. Only when the two competitive cases apply (e1 and
b1) will variability in crude oil prices be passed to the corn market directly via the biofuels
channel. Examining market performance recently for corn will illustrate that the fixed demand
cases have dominated, except during brief periods. Ethanol prices follow gasoline, subject to
premiums or discounts due to constraints on blenders, largely independent of the corn price. The
one factor through which ethanol most affects volatility would be that the increased demand for
corn moves the market away from surplus, characterized by large carry-out stocks, and into a
period in which stocks are low so that component of corn demand becomes inelastic. If corn
production catches up with demand, both lower prices and lower variability should return.
Corn Market Performance
Figure 4 shows quarterly supply and use data for corn taken from the feed grains database of
ERS (2012). Production is shown as a diamond at the beginning of each crop year and carry-out
stocks are shown at the end. Both show substantial variability over 2005-2012. Demand is
divided into demand to produce ethanol (alcohol for fuel), all other domestic demand
components (feed, food, seed and other industrial uses), and exports. Both seasonality and
substantially variability are seen for domestic uses excluding ethanol, and export demand is now
smaller than both domestic uses, showing somewhat more variability recently. The “other use”
category shows the most volatility, and has absorbed much of the increased biofuels demand, as
production has not yet grown sufficiently to meet 2005 feed usage. Export demand fell from its
2007/08 peak, but is similar to 2005 levels. Demand for ethanol use is growing over this period,
but at a very steady rate. Little variation around trend is seen in the derived demand for ethanol,
corresponding with demand levels fixed by growing capacity to meet the RFS mandate and
earlier the oxygenate requirements. That demand exhibits a flat period around the great recession
(2008/09), and its trajectory slows as the RFS is nearly met and the blend wall starts to bind. This
path is consistent with the notion that ethanol demand is determined in energy markets and by
policy, largely independent of events in the corn market. But it is also apparent that ethanol
demand has grown to be a large component of corn use.
[ Figure 4. Quarterly Corn Supply-Use Balances, Including Ethanol Demand. about here ]
International Trade of Ethanol
While there have been both imports and exports of small quantities of ethanol at least over the
last decade (and before), trade became large enough to matter in 2006, when ethanol imports
reached 15% of U.S. domestic production. Neither its share nor volume later reached the levels
during this “ethanol gold rush” period when both MTBE substitution and the RFS mandate
19

created a demand well in excess of capacity. As production capacity increased in 2007 net
imports fell to 6.7% of production, and by 2009 that share was only 2%. 2010 saw a rise in
ethanol exports and substantial two-way trade, with net exports reaching 7.6% of production in
2011, in spite of imports at levels comparable to those in 2007. High corn prices due to drought
and elimination of the subsidy caused export to fall in 2012. Figure 5 plots imports and exports
of ethanol against production, highlighting their small shares, apparent seasonality of trade, and
the relation between price changes and trade flows. High prices in 2006, 2008 and 2009 appear
to have pulled in imports later in each year, but the prices increases (and then fall) after 2009
appear more closely related to export demand.
[ Figure 5. Ethanol Trade, 2000-2012. about here ]
Figure 6 presents ethanol prices, trade unit values and margins between those prices.9 It should
first be observed that margins between domestic and border prices are quite volatile. While
transportation costs matter for ethanol, they are unlikely to vary to that extent. Import unit values
follow domestic prices at least somewhat until 2009. The great recession and collapse of trade,
and the strengthening dollar caused import unit values to fall much more than domestic prices,
but cheap imports did not elicit much trade. Export unit values were remarkably stable,
suggesting this was a specialty, differentiated product until 2010, when export unit values begin
to closely follow U.S. domestic prices. This switch corresponds with the switch in direction of
trade at about the same time.
[ Figure 6. Ethanol Iowa and Border Prices, 2005-2012.

about here ]

Explaining the two way trade, and imports at a high cost in 2011, requires another differentiated
product story. Ethanol imports in 2011, from Brazil and made from sugar cane, were used to
satisfy second generation biofuels mandates and regional regulations that could not include corn
based ethanol. They commanded a premium large enough to bring a small volume of imports
from Brazil when price relatives had the U.S. exporting ethanol to Brazil as well (RFA, 2010;
Cooper, 2012; Wisner, 2012). It is policy constraints that created this differentiation, not product
quality.
The relationship to Brazil’s ethanol industry also helps to explain the shift in trade to U.S.
ethanol exports, as well. Brazil’s ethanol industry is advanced, and has for a long period
provided an alternative there to crude oil imports for gasoline (Valdes, 2011). Ethanol produced
from sugar cane has historically been more cost-effective than from U.S. corn, yielding a price in
Brazil below U.S. prices. Figure 6 also shows a short price series for Brazil (Newman, 2011) that
captures this low price from the series’ start in 2007 to 2009, and shows that prices in Brazil
reached and then tracked U.S. prices after mid-2009 – when net trade reversed direction. During
this period there have been major increases in world sugar prices and a shortfall in Brazilian
sugar production, inciting a switch from ethanol to cane sugar production there. In Brazil
switching from ethanol to sugar is relatively easy, and occurs when prices dictate the switch
20

(Valdes, 2011). Brazil’s ethanol regime is also strongly conditioned by its own policy. For
example, mandates there to use ethanol were reduced over this recent period. Changes in the
exchange rate between the Brazilian Real and the dollar have also significantly influenced these
relative prices. A strong Real in 2011 made imports of ethanol from Brazil more expensive, and
U.S. exports to Brazil cheaper. A strong dollar contributed to the low U.S. ethanol import unit
values in early 2009. A better Brazilian sugar crop in the future, a change in the value of the
Real, and lower world sugar prices could change the incentives now dictating the direction and
magnitude of ethanol trade at the U.S. border. In 2012, some of these effects were already
evident as Brazilian ethanol imports fell significantly.
Policy influenced trade in export markets in which the U.S. replaced Brazil in 2011, as well. For
example, imports by the European Union are influenced by policy constraints there (Hertel,
Tyner and Birur, 2010). Newman (2011) argued that the European Union took advantage of
subsidies and loopholes in trade classifications that gave rise to increasing ethanol imports until
2012. Those imports were under 20% of small U.S. exports until 2010, but over one-quarter of
the dramatically larger U.S. exports in 2010 and 2011. Higher corn prices, removal of the
subsidy, and tighter trade regulations led to EU ethanol imports falling over 40% in 2012. In
2011 EU imports were two-thirds of Brazilian imports, and only 2.1% of U.S. ethanol production
when exports peaked.
Imports into the U.S. have also benefited from provisions of the Caribbean Basin Initiative that
allowed duty-free ethanol imports under a tariff rate quota. The quota under that agreement has
never been reached, however (Newman, 2011).
Ethanol exports in 2011 appear to have benefited from the VEETC, so production approached
capacity, domestic demand remained at the “blend wall”, and exports made up the difference. In
2012, after the subsidy was eliminated, export margins increased and ethanol prices fell.
Production appears to have fallen near the RFS mandate while exports make up the difference
between that lower production level and the blend wall.
One trade-related question concerns whether the subsidy to ethanol use (VEETC) is also paid to
foreigners. The tariff on ethanol was intended to prevent (actually counteract) the subsidy from
being paid to foreigners, and some have argued that it was more than sufficient to accomplish
that when ethanol was primarily imported. No such provisions prevent exports from receiving
the subsidy, so long as the ethanol passes through blenders and contains a small amount of
gasoline. While the RFA has argued that exports do not receive a subsidy as blended products
are not exported, industry analysts have argued otherwise, and trade data are not sufficiently
differentiated to tell. The small margin between the domestic price of ethanol and export unit
values, that increased once the subsidy was removed, also suggests exports have received at least
some of the subsidy, consistent with theory presented above so long as exporters buy ethanol
from blenders not ethanol refiners.

21

Another question is what modeling approach should be used to capture ethanol trade, and should
that be used to revise the theory elaborated above? The volatility of margins suggests any short
term model relying on the law of one price (i.e. standard trade price linkages) is bound to fail.
That theory gave rise to the prediction of the U.S. importing corn due to ethanol (Elobeid et. al.
2007). Armington approaches based on domestic-international differentials will also miss much
of the detail of trade, such as the change in direction of trade, two way trade in 2011, and the
emergence of newly large trade flows in 2006. Armington specifications will hold trade near the
status quo. Elobeid and Tokagoz’s (2008) trade model that incorporates both imperfect
transmission of prices and an Armington-like net demand function misses the switch from
imports to exports by construction. It has been argued that ethanol programs were created to
meet domestic policy goals, and trade levels are a residual response to shortages or surpluses
arising from those programs (Newman, 2011). An example is U.S. exports in 2011, necessitated
by a binding blend wall and the need to meet a larger RFS mandate, or constrained by capacity.
This suggests old “vent-for-surplus” trade models. Trade flows have also arisen to capture profits
from loopholes in policy regimes, such as differing tariff definitions and opportunities to benefit
from subsidies (as in trade with the EU). While trade flows have emerged in response to
international price signals, the resulting flows have been just too small to fully arbitrage large
price differentials. It is therefore likely that it is necessary to examine effects of trade on ethanol
pricing separately under different trade regimes. What worked for the period of high imports will
be likely to fail in the period of high exports. The magnitudes of trade flows remain relatively
small compared to domestic markets. Domestic events in trading partner economies are also
important to explaining those trade flows, especially in Brazil.
Evidence over Watershed Periods
Monthly quantity and price data for ethanol are examined over the “watershed periods” between
2005 and 2012 as defined in Table 2. Quantity data is compared to capacity, RFS mandate, blend
wall, and MTBE substitution constraints. Price data is used to determine profit margins for
ethanol refiners and gasoline blenders as well as to examine price volatility and correlations over
these sub-periods.
Quantities – Ethanol Production
Figure 7 plots monthly ethanol production expressed as an annual flow. Capacity data in that
graph are approximated from observations reported by RFA (2012) in January of each year and
by assuming a linear trend between each year’s observation on capacity. The RFS mandate
applies on a cumulative annual basis, with bars on the graph showing the target level over the
course of the year, and diamonds indicating the year end mandated minimum use. The blend wall
is approximated here at 9% of gasoline production (from Tyner and Viteri, 2010 – and as they
suggest, the binding blend wall may now be closer to 10%). The MTBE/ oxygenate substitution
requirement is at 5.8% of gasoline production based on the reformulated gasoline specification
(EIA, 2000). Each of these is an approximation to the actual restrictions on gasoline blenders.
22

[ Figure 7. Ethanol Production, Capacity and Policy Constraints, 2000-2012. about here ]
It is apparent from Figure 7 that capacity constraints bind most often, and appear to determine
production in most months. The ethanol production line lies on top of the capacity approximation
except for a couple of brief but notable periods. While capacity in 2005 was below the RFS
mandate for 2006, during the ethanol gold rush period capacity was increased to stay above the
mandated minimum. Except in 2008, following the dramatic increase in the RFS mandate in the
2007 Energy Act, capacity exceeded the mandate by January of the year to which it would apply.
In 2008 it took four months to get ahead of the RFA, and then the collapse of oil, gasoline and
corn prices after recession and financial crisis in mid- 2008 brought ethanol production below
capacity. Ethanol profitability fell to its lowest level during this one period when production was
obviously below capacity. In mid-2009 production had risen to capacity and was sufficient to
meet the RFS mandate, and over 2010 production was slightly above capacity. Industry analysts
argue that optimization of plant operations now (and in 2010) allows them to operate above
nameplate capacity – the figure reported by RFA – for sustained periods, and this data is
consistent with that claim.10 In 2011, when the blend wall was imminent, and then when exports
allowed production above the blend wall, production flows at or slightly below reported capacity
are probably below actual capacity. It is apparent from this data that the RFS mandate may have
shaped investment in capacity, but it only threatened to constrain production in early2009, and
this is the one period when RINs were not effectively zero. Moreover, from 2000 to 2011
production has been essentially at capacity, except during that period in early 2009, and fell
below capacity again in 2012. This smooth, constrained growth in production generated
similarly smooth growth in demand for corn as a feedstock to ethanol production.
The MTBE/ oxygenate substitution requirement was not met by ethanol production until late
2007. The need to meet that requirement surely helped to spur investment during the gold rush
period, but was no longer binding as the food crisis set in and afterwards. The blend wall
maximum on usage began to bind in early 2010, but production exceeded this constraint soon
afterwards. Trade data show that from mid-2010 onwards ethanol production could remain above
the blend wall as surpluses were exported. The effects of these two constraints are more apparent
in prices and profitability margins than they are in quantities.
During the initial gold rush watershed period, the RFS mandate and MTBE substitution both
shaped investment in capacity, which in turn dictated production. During the food crisis period,
MTBE substitution was no longer binding, and the increased RFS mandate evoked large
increases in capacity, which once again determined production. The great recession and collapse
of commodity prices brought production briefly below capacity. Recovery and a renewed
commodity boom brought production back to capacity until the blend wall and drought
threatened to limit production. But in 2010 onwards exports have allowed production to exceed
the blend wall at a level near capacity. Changes in circumstances in Brazil and the end of
subsidies captured by exporters limited export demand for ethanol and made simultaneously
meeting the blend wall (at E10) and the RFS mandate infeasible without exports. One can see
23

evidence of that in 2012. As conditions in world sugar markets changed and Brazil realized a
better sugar crop, U.S. ethanol exports have declined, leading to idled capacity and a more
severely limiting blend wall.
Prices, Margins and Profits
Prices for ethanol, corn, gasoline and crude oil shown in Figure 2 are averaged over the
watershed periods in Table 3. That figure shows ethanol prices peaking during the gold rush
period, remaining high during the food crisis, and then falling until export demand and high
energy prices caused ethanol prices to peak again in 2011. Crude oil and gasoline prices rose
through the food crisis, fell rapidly during the great recession period, and have been generally
rising for each period afterwards. Corn prices are somewhat less regular. They were low until the
food crisis period, when they trended upward rapidly, then fell rapidly during the early part of
the great recession period. They remained at levels that were low relative to the food crisis, but
higher than pre-crisis levels until the export relief period saw high corn prices – precisely when
one might have expected those higher corn prices and hence higher ethanol costs to discourage
production and exports.
[ Table 3. Energy and Corn Prices by Watershed Period.

about here ]

It is useful to compute profit and trade margins from the gasoline and corn prices discussed
above in order to see the incentives to ethanol production. Moreover, these margins reflect the
constraints that define each period. Figure 8 presents profit margins for ethanol refiners over
variable costs as calculated by Hofstrand (2012) using ethanol and corn prices for representative
plants in Iowa. It also presents margins for gasoline blenders buying ethanol, relative to strict
energy based pricing, adjusted for the VEETC subsidy. These margin as well as the trade
margins shown in Figure 6 are averaged over the watershed periods in Table 4.
[ Figure 8. Ethanol Margins relative to Corn and Gasoline, 2005-2012.

about here]

[ Table 4. Ethanol Margins by Watershed Period. about here ]
Ethanol production margins over variable cost (rents - λe) are positive in every period, but lowest
once the subsidies ended in 2012. These margins were highest during the early gold rush period,
when both the RFS mandate and MTBE substitution called for greater capacity. They were lower
as corn prices increased during the food crisis, and lower still during the great recession period,
when production briefly fell below capacity. Figure 7 shows that these margins were quite low in
late 2008, but never went negative and subsequently showed seasonal peaks late in each
subsequent year. Rising gasoline prices raised margins in the restarted commodity boom, but
pressure from the imminent blend wall then lowered these margins. In late 2011 and early 2012,
the export relief period, high crude oil and gasoline prices counteracted the higher corn prices,
yielding positive margins to ethanol production. When drought in 2012 brought even higher corn
prices, margins fell.
24

Prior to the gold rush period, ethanol was priced below its energy value, but the need to use
ethanol as an MTBE substitute led to the largest observed blending margins in 2006-07. During
the food crisis this margin (λx) turned negative again as MTBE substitution requirements were
exceeded, in spite of the subsidy, and became quite negative as the blend wall constraint
approached. As export demand and high oil prices caused the demand for ethanol to increase,
these margins turned positive, but fell once the subsidy was removed. Changes in these data
crudely suggest only $0.15 of the $0.45 subsidy was found in margins to blenders, with the
remainder passed through to the ethanol price. Margins relative to energy cost are always smaller
than the margins accruing to ethanol refiners, consistent with ethanol prices more often following
gasoline prices than corn prices. RINs are even smaller, and only above $0.03 during the food
crisis and great recession, when production briefly fell below capacity. This again was likely
driven by greater variations over this period in crude oil and so gasoline prices, with corn prices
sustaining a higher level after the great recession than before the food crisis.
What is notable about trade margins is that they are driven by switches in the predominant
direction of trade flows and by product differentiation. The differential between exports and
domestic prices fell to its lowest level when exports became significant, and an outlet for
domestic surpluses, during the export relief period (excluding an anomaly in the gold rush
period). Export prices had become close to, and related to, domestic ethanol prices only during
this export relief period. When subsidies ended in 2012, export margins increased nearly $0.37
(ITC, 2012), suggesting exports received only a portion of the subsidy, smaller than the portion
accruing to blenders. In the case of imports, the margin in the later periods reflects the premiums
accruing to imports that meet the second generation RFS mandate, not the corn ethanol mandate.
Volatility and Correlation
Data on price volatility and correlations across watershed periods further highlight the
importance of mechanisms related to constraints on ethanol refiners and gasoline blenders. Table
5 reports coefficients of variation computed from monthly price data for the watershed periods of
2005-2012. Table 6 reports correlation coefficients for prices over these sub-periods.11
[ Table 5. Price Volatility by Watershed Period. about here ]
[ Table 6. Price Correlations by Watershed Period. about here ]
Over the entire 2005-2012 period, volatility as measured by coefficients of variation was much
lower for crude oil but comparable for corn, relative to volatility from 1960 to 2012. Once again,
shorter sub-periods yield lower volatility. Trends during sub-periods generate much of observed
volatility, and differences in price levels are explained by differing circumstances during each of
the watershed periods. Remarkably low coefficients of variation are found for watershed periods,
especially after the end of the great recession. Corn is an excellent example. In each sub-period
after the great recession the coefficient of variation is less than 0.15, while it was above 0.4 for
both 1960 to 2012 and 2005 to 2012. Volatility is also lower for gasoline prices than for crude oil
25

or corn prices, and that carries over to ethanol prices. The food crisis and great recession
exhibited the greatest volatility for all prices, characterized by strong upward coincident trends
during the food crisis and rapid collapse of prices shortly afterwards. This led to a misperception
that volatility had increased. These data are also not consistent with the notion that the high price
volatility observed from 2007 to 2009 has persisted in more recent years. That there are several
sub-periods since 2009 contributes to these low sub-period volatility measures. Had we
measured volatility without trying to understand the changing economic mechanisms (see
measures for mid-2009 to 2012 in Table 5), we would have found higher volatility, comparable
to what is found during the food crisis period. But changes in means and short run trends
explainable by economic conditions led to this apparent volatility, and these measures remain
generally smaller than those found for the longer periods, 1960-2012 and 2005-2012.
Similar to volatility, correlations of corn and energy prices are higher over longer periods of time
than they are over sub-periods. Also, correlations vary across sub-periods in ways that are
broadly consistent with changing economic mechanisms as explained above, with some
anomalies. For example, the correlation between ethanol and corn prices should be lower when
capacity constraints bind (case e2) than during periods when capacity rents are low and these
prices are linked by refiner pricing decisions (case e1). Ethanol and corn prices over 2005 to
2012 are correlated only at a coefficient of 0.53, and this measure was lower during the gold rush
and restarted commodity boom periods. As the blend wall became imminent and then exports
relieved the blend wall constraint, as expected correlations when capacity may not bind are
higher, above 0.7. The anomaly to this logic is the food crisis and great recession periods that are
characterized by strongly rising and then falling trends. The high correlations, over 0.9 for these
periods, may reflect other forces that drove the trends, rather than these biofuels mechanisms.
Capacity constraints were non-binding only briefly over these periods.
The ethanol-gasoline price correlation exhibits similar patterns. It is higher over the entire period
than over several sub-periods. When the blend wall became imminent, and the rent to that
constraint increased, this correlation actually turned negative. This correlation was also much
higher during the food crisis and great recession than for other periods, again reflecting the
strong trends. The correlations of the margin between gasoline and ethanol prices are also highly
correlated with the profit margin of ethanol refiners in periods when the blend wall binds.
A somewhat surprising aspect is that crude oil-corn prices correlations are higher for the overall
period and for several sub-periods, than are the correlations directly related to the biofuels
mechanism. This also suggests other factors beyond biofuels contribute to this correlation. But
the lowest crude oil-corn correlations do occur in recent sub-periods when the correlation
between gasoline and crude oil prices is weaker.

26

Conclusions
Increasing ethanol production since 2005 has led to a large, persistent, new demand for corn that
has contributed to higher corn prices and sometimes tighter links between energy and
agricultural prices. Constraints that arose from energy legislation and EPA regulations have
shaped the trajectory of the derived demand for corn to produce ethanol, and determined
mechanisms dictating the short run relationships across prices. The influence of specific
regulations has varied over time – substitution of ethanol in place of MTBE was an early factor
in 2006 while the blend wall limit on concentration of ethanol in gasoline is now more important.
While each of these factors has surely mattered to the evolution of ethanol and corn markets, it is
constraints on production capacity that have determined corn demand and pricing relationships
over the short to medium run during most of the period from 2005 to 2012.
Capacity constraints are what have generally bound, determining ethanol production and hence
derived demand for corn, except briefly in late 2008-09 and again in 2012. Energy policy (RFS,
MTBE and blend wall) influenced capacity increments, shaping incentives to invest, but haven’t
strictly bound ethanol refiner behavior to date. Capacity has always remained somewhat ahead of
the RFS mandate, and investment slowed as the mandate maximum on corn ethanol approached
and the blend wall was reached. Exports relieved pressure from the blend wall in 2011and
allowed a solution to meeting the infeasible problem of satisfying an RFS mandated minimum
above the blend wall determined maximum. How we get around the blend wall is important to
the future – with the corn based RFS mandate met, some second generation mandates were
waived, and the blend wall was binding, so new construction of corn ethanol plants has slowed
dramatically. Large exports were possible due to circumstances in Brazil. High world sugar
prices, a sugar production shortfall, and a strong currency caused Brazil to shift from a large
exporter to an importer of ethanol, but those circumstances are unlikely to persist over the longer
term. Lower exports were already evident in 2012.
Two mechanisms stand out as key in this analysis as a consequence of binding capacity
constraints. Rents to capacity allow independent variation of gasoline (hence ethanol) and corn
prices. Smoothly trending capacity has in most months determined demand for corn, leading to a
perfectly inelastic demand component to satisfy biofuels needs.
When capacity constraints bind, corn and crude oil prices can live independent lives. Ethanol
profit margins vary as these prices vary, and have yielded positive profits except during subperiods when capacity constraints don’t bind. During those periods, crude oil price volatility is
not passed directly to the corn market via the biofuels mechanism. When we are between
constraints, in theory corn and crude prices are directly linked. But that is a small window – that
opened only in late 2008 to early 2009, and recently. Data on price variability, correlations and
profit margins are largely consistent with this theory over the short term.

27

With ethanol capacity constraints binding, industrial demand for corn to produce alcohol is
inelastic but not highly variable around its increasing trend. Its effect on corn markets is through
the increased, persistent but stable demand. Corn stocks and the capacity to produce enough corn
to meet that demand determine the corn price regime, hence variability. Ethanol contributes a
large, inelastic demand component, and drove us to a low stocks state when corn production was
unable to catch up with demand.
Now the combination of the blend wall and RFS are infeasible without trade or use of RINs.
Exports have relieved pressure from the blend wall, but with plants now operating below
capacity, profit margins for ethanol are lower. Subsidized exports in 2011 were the difference
between production near capacity and the blend wall. That exports have not vanished with high
corn prices reflects the importance of the blend wall now. Once subsidies were removed, export
margins increased, ethanol prices fell, export demand declined, and production fell to nearer the
RFS mandate. Prices of corn and ethanol are more strongly linked under this circumstance.
Flow constraints, such as capacity and the blend wall, directly impact quantities and determine
production, whereas the effects of stocks constraints, such as the RFS mandate and corn carryout stocks, have had noticeable effects on prices, even if they didn’t strictly bind. Stocks
constraints have worked through expectations, which in turn influenced pricing.
Volatility has varied as the regime determining corn prices has changed. Short term volatility has
been small, and regime changes or trends lead to larger apparent long run volatility as seen in
annual data. Strong, coincident short run trends, particularly in 2007-08, led to a misperception
that volatility had permanently increased. It is the big moves, not noise around long run
equilibrium, which gave rise to observed volatility. From this perspective, it is high prices, not
greater volatility, which defines the current era.
While the expanding biofuels demand has surely mattered to the high prices for corn and other
agricultural commodities, the simple longer term model here yields effects comparable to many
other factors found in the literature. While that demand may have raised corn prices by about
33% from 2005 to 2009, to get both price and volatility results required that this effect be
combined with others that moved the corn market to a position of low stocks. Such price effects
can seldom be judged in isolation. For example, if/when production catches up to this demand
lower corn prices, and so lower biofuels demand impacts, are expected. To get the high short
term prices observed for agricultural markets recently, either much lower short term elasticities
must be assumed, or other factors contributed to market outcomes.
In the future, modifications to energy policy, trade adjustments, and capacity investment will
determine the role biofuels play in shaping agricultural commodity prices. Expansion from the
corn mandate is finished and progress on second generation biofuels is not evident. But reliance
on trade to get around the blend wall is a strategy likely to contribute to lower prices in the
future.
28

Figures and Tables
Figure 1. Corn and Crude Oil Prices, 1960-2012.
Figure 2. Energy and Corn Prices, 2005-2012.
Figure 3. Corn Supply, Use and Exports: A Two Panel Diagram.
Figure 4. Quarterly Corn Supply-Use Balances, Including Ethanol Demand.
Figure 5. Ethanol Trade, 2000-2012.
Figure 6. Ethanol Iowa and Border Prices, 2005-2012.
Figure 7. Ethanol Production, Capacity and Policy Constraints, 2000-2012.
Figure 8. Ethanol Margins relative to Corn and Gasoline, 2005-2012.

Table 1. Crude Oil and Corn Price Volatility, 1960-2012.
Table 2. Watershed Periods for Ethanol Related Constraints.
Table 3. Energy and Corn Prices by Watershed Period.
Table 4. Ethanol Margins by Watershed Period.
Table 5. Price Volatility by Watershed Period.
Table 6. Price Correlations by Watershed Period.

29

Figure 1. Corn and Crude Oil Prices, 1960-2012.
350

175

300

150

Corn
250

125

Crude Oil
CPI

200

100

150

75

100

50

50

25

0
1960

0
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

Source: Commodity Price Statistics, IMF 2012.
30

1995

2000

2005

2010

Figure 2. Energy and Corn Prices, 2005-2012.
8.00

Food
Crisis

Crude oil
7.00

Great
Recession

Gasoline RBOB
Ethanol

6.00

Blend
Wall
Imminent

Gasoline retail

Export
Relief

Corn
5.00

Ethanol Gold Rush
4.00

3.00

2.00

1.00

0.00
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Sources: EIA,2012; Hofstrand, 2012.
31

2010

2011

2012

Figure 3. Corn Supply, Use and Exports: A Two Panel Diagram.

US domestic corn market in 05‐06

World market

8.00

7.00

6.00

RFS
5.00

4.00

Crude‐
Corn link
3.00

2.00

Capacity or
Blend wall
constrained

1.00

0.00
0.00

4.00

8.00

12.00

16.00

‐4.00

0.00

4.00

8.00

12.00

Feed, Food & Seed

Ethanol

09 Shock

US Exports

Stocks

Demand

09 Shock

Elastic net foreign demand

Inelastic net foreign demand

Supply

in 09

Small country

Higher crude price

32

09 Shock

Figure 4. Quarterly Corn Supply-Use Balances, Including Ethanol Demand.
4,000

16,000

Alcohol for fuel
Other domestic use

14,000

Exports
3,000

Production

12,000

Ending stocks
10,000

8,000

2,000

6,000

4,000

1,000

2,000

0

0

Source: ERS, 2012.
33

Figure 5. Ethanol Trade, 2000-2012.
4

16000

Ethanol production

14000

3.5

Capacity
12000

3

Approximate capacity
Ethanol imports

10000

2.5

exports
2

8000

Price
6000

1.5

4000

1

2000

0.5

0

JAN
MAY
SEP
JAN
MAY
SEP
JAN
MAY
SEP
JAN
MAY
SEP
JAN
MAY
SEP
JAN
MAY
SEP
JAN
MAY
SEP
JAN
MAY
SEP
JAN
MAY
SEP
JAN
MAY
SEP
JAN
MAY
SEP
JAN
MAY
SEP
JAN

0

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Sources: RFA, 2012; ITC, 2012; Hofstrand, 2012.
34

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011 2012

Figure 6. Ethanol Iowa and Border Prices, 2005-2012.

4.00

Ethanol ‐ Iowa

Import unit value

Export Unit value

Brazil

Import margin

Export margin

3.00

2.00

1.00

0.00

‐1.00
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Sources: Hofstrand, 2012; ITC, 2012; Newman, 2011.
35

2010

2011

2012

Figure 7. Ethanol Production, Capacity and Policy Constraints, 2000-2012.
16000

14000

12000

10000
Ethanol production
Cap acity
8000

Approximate capacity
Blend Wall (9%)

6000

RFS minimum
RFS Goal
MTBE OX sub

4000

2000

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

Sources: EIA, 2012; RFA, 2012.
36

2008

2009

2010

JAN

JUL

JAN

JUL

JAN

JUL

JAN

JUL

JAN

JUL

JAN

JUL

JAN

JUL

JAN

JUL

JAN

JUL

JAN

JUL

JAN

JUL

JAN

JUL

JAN

0

20112012

Figure 8. Ethanol Margins relative to Corn and Gasoline, 2005-2012.

2.50

Ethanol margin over variable cost ‐Corn
2.00

Ethanol margin over Gasoline RBOB ‐VEETC adjusted
1.50

RINs
1.00

0.50

0.00

‐0.50

‐1.00
2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Sources: EIA, 2012; Hofstrand, 2012; OPIS, 2012
37

2010

2011

2012

Table 1. Crude Oil and Corn Price Volatility, 1960-2012
1960‐2012 1998‐2005 2006‐2012
Means
Crude Oil
$/barrel
Corn
$/mt
Standard deviations
Crude oil
Annual
Monthly
Daily
Corn
Annual
Monthly
Daily
Coefficients of variation
Crude oil
Annual
Monthly
Daily
Corn
Annual
Monthly
Daily
Correlations
Crude oil‐Corn Annual
Monthly
Daily

2007‐08

2010‐12

24.27
106.52

28.57
98.06

81.59
197.32

84.08
193.25

94.89
245.17

26.24
25.58
‐‐‐
51.24
49.46
‐‐‐

13.21
12.26
13.04
8.30
11.15
10.63

18.59
21.97
20.44
62.46
61.25
59.13

‐‐‐
25.35
26.03
‐‐‐
41.55
42.89

‐‐‐
14.81
10.97
‐‐‐
57.13
54.66

1.08
1.05
0.48
0.46
‐‐‐

0.46
0.43
0.46
0.08
0.11
0.11

0.23
0.27
0.25
0.32
0.31
0.30

‐‐‐
0.30
0.31
‐‐‐
0.22
0.22

‐‐‐
0.16
0.12
‐‐‐
0.23
0.22

0.88
0.85
‐‐‐

0.30
0.13
‐0.06

0.87
0.81
0.71

‐‐‐
0.89
0.86

‐‐‐
0.89
0.77

Sources: Annual and Monthly prices are "world prices" (cash, fob) from IMF Commodity Price
Statistics. Daily prices are nearby futures prices from DATASTREAM (Thompson Reuters,
2012).
-

38

Table 2. Watershed Periods for Ethanol Related Constraints.

Beginning Date

End Date Period and related legislation

July‐05
July‐07 Ethanol Gold Rush
July‐05
Energy Act of 2005 ‐ RFS1
June‐06
MTBE liability issue "resolved"
August‐07
July‐08 Food crisis
December‐07
Energy Act of 2007 ‐ RFS2
August‐08
May‐09 Great recession
VEETC reduced to $0.45
January‐09
June‐09 December‐09 Commodity boom restarted
January‐10
August‐10 Blend Wall imminent
September‐10 December‐11 Export relief
January‐12
Subsidies ended
January‐12
VEETC and ethanol tariffs eliminated

39

World Price Events
High oil prices
Low corn prices
Rising corn prices
Commodity prices collapse
Gasoline demand drops
Rising oil and corn prices
Commodity boom stalls
Sugar prices high
Ethanol exports and prices fall
Blend wall binding

Table 3. Energy and Corn Prices by Watershed Period.

2005‐2012
Early 2005
Ethanol Gold Rush
Food Crisis
Great recession
Commodity boom
Blend wall imminent
Export relief
Subsidies ended

Crude oil
1.77
1.07
1.39
2.23
1.45
1.63
1.79
2.29
2.57

Gasoline
RBOB
2.15
1.45
1.88
2.56
1.64
1.90
2.11
2.65
3.00

Ethanol
2.00
1.23
2.16
2.10
1.70
1.72
1.59
2.45
2.11

Gasoline
retail
2.90
2.12
2.64
3.29
2.52
2.63
2.81
3.40
3.75

Corn
3.93
1.82
2.43
4.48
3.95
3.53
3.46
6.22
6.29

Table 4. Ethanol Margins by Watershed Period.
Production
Margin over
margin over Gasoline RBOB,
variable cost VEETC adjusted
2005‐2012
0.54
0.07
Early 2005
0.34
‐0.27
Ethanol Gold Rush
1.08
0.36
Food Crisis
0.45
‐0.16
Great recession
0.23
0.10
Commodity boom
0.40
‐0.03
Blend wall imminent
0.26
‐0.31
Export relief
0.40
0.20
Subsidies ended
0.11
0.06

RINs

0.05
0.09
0.10
0.03
0.02
0.02

Import
margin
0.43
0.36
0.24
0.27
0.04
‐0.12
0.96
0.93
1.16

Export
margin
0.34
0.59
0.01
0.33
0.72
0.51
0.61
0.22
0.64

Sources: EIA, 2012; Hofstrand, 2012; OPIS, 2012; ITC, 2012 and author calculations.

40

Table 5. Price Volatility by Watershed Period

1960‐2012
2005‐2012
Early 2005
Ethanol Gold Rush
Food Crisis
Great recession
Commodity boom
Blend wall imminent
Export relief
mid 2009‐2012

Crude oil
1.05
0.31
0.09
0.09
0.22
0.47
0.09
0.04
0.12
0.19

Gasoline
RBOB

Ethanol

Gasoline
retail

0.27
0.10
0.16
0.19
0.42
0.06
0.06
0.14
0.20

0.22
0.15
0.16
0.18
0.18
0.10
0.08
0.11
0.21

0.20
0.08
0.12
0.14
0.33
0.05
0.02
0.11
0.15

Corn
0.46
0.43
0.03
0.34
0.27
0.17
0.09
0.04
0.14
0.30

Table 6. Price Correlations by Watershed Period.

1960‐2012
2005‐2012
Ethanol Gold Rush
Food Crisis
Great recession
Commodity boom
Blend wall imminent
Export relief

Crude oil/
Corn
0.85
0.83
‐0.13
0.94
0.96
‐0.12
0.04
0.83

Ethanol/
Corn
0.52
‐0.08
0.92
0.95
0.39
0.71
0.77

Ethanol/ Crude oil/ Margins ‐
Gasoline Gasoline Corn/Gasoline
0.67
0.62
0.89
0.96
0.52
‐0.69
0.73

Sources: Author calculations from EIA, 2012; Hofstrand, 2012

41

0.95
0.90
0.99
0.98
0.73
0.78
0.90

0.70
0.70
0.71
‐0.29
0.81
0.94
0.85

References
ABBOTT, P. 2010. Stabilization Policies in Developing Countries after the 2007-08 Food Crisis.
OECD Working Paper TAD/CA/APM/WP(2010)44. Paris: OECD.
ABBOTT, P., HURT, C. & TYNER, W. 2008. What’s Driving Food Prices? : Farm Foundation
Issue Report.
ABBOTT, P. C., HURT, C. & TYNER, W. E. 2011. What’s Driving Food Prices in 2011? Oak
Brook, IL: Farm Foundation.
AGRICULTURAL FOOD AND POLICY CENTER 2008. The Effects of Ethanol on Texas
Food and Feed. College Station, TX: Texas A&M University.
AI, C., CHATRATH, A. & SONG, F. 2006. On the Co-movement of Commodity Prices.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 88, 574-588.
BABCOCK, B. A. & FABIOSA, J. F. 2011. The Impact of Ethanol and Ethanol Subsidies on
Corn Prices: Revisiting History. Ames, Iowa: Center for Agricultural and Rural
Development (CARD).
BAFFES, J. & HANIOTIS, T. 2010. Placing the 2006/08 Commodity Price Boom into
Perspective Washington DC: World Bank.
BALCOMBE, K. 2009. The Nature and Determinants of Volatility in Agricultural Prices: An
Empirical Study from 1962-2008 Workshop on Institutions and Policies to Manage
Global Market Risks and Price Spikes in Basic Food Commodities. Rome: FAO.
BROWN, L. R. 1980. Food or fuel: new competition for the world's cropland, Washington, DC,
Worldwatch Institute.
CARTER, C., RAUSSER, G. & SMITH, A. 2012. The Effect of the U.S. Ethanol Mandate on
Corn Prices. Giannini Foundation Working Paper. Davis, CA: Univ. of California.
CHA, K. S. & BAE, J. H. 2011. Dynamic impacts of high oil prices on the bioethanol and
feedstock markets. Energy Policy, 39, 753-760.
COLLINS, K. 2008. The Role of Biofuels and Other Factors in Increasing Farm and Food
Prices. Chicago: Kraft Global Foods.
COOPER, G. 2011. The Ethanol Shuffle. The E-Exchange. Washington DC: Renewable Fuels
Association.
CUI, J., LAPAN, H., MOSCHINI, G. & COOPER, J. 2011. Welfare Impacts of Alternative
Biofuel and Energy Policies. American J. of Agricultural Economics, 93, 1235-1256.
DEGORTER, H. D. & JUST, D. R. 2009. The Economics of a Blend Mandate for Biofuels Am.
J. Agr. Econ., 91, 738-50.
DELGADO, C. Year. Driven by Increased Price Volatility, the Global Food Crisis is Not Over.
In: Policy Dialogue on High Food Prices: Outlook and Donor Mid-term Responses,
February 12-13, 2009 2009 Paris. OECD.
DIFFENBAUGH, N. S., HERTEL, T. W., SCHERER, M. & VERMA, M. 2012. Response of
corn markets to climate volatility under alternative energy futures. Nature Climate
Change, advance online publication.

42

DU, X. & HAYES, D. J. 2009. The impact of ethanol production on US and regional gasoline
markets. Energy Policy, 37, 3227-3234.
EIA 2000. MTBE, Oxygenates, and Motor Gasoline. Washington DC: Energy Information
Administration, Department of Energy
EIA 2012. Monthly Energy Review. Washington DC: Energy Information Administration, Dept.
of Energy.
ELOBEID, A., TOKGOZ, S., HAYES, D. J., BABCOCK, B. A. & HART, C. E. 2007. The
Long-Run Impact of Corn-Based Ethanol on the Grain, Oilseed, and Livestock Sectors
with Implications for Biotech Crops. AgBioForum, 10, 11-18.
ELOBEID, A. & TOKGOZ, S. 2008. Removing Distortions in the U.S. Ethanol Market: What
Does It Imply for the United States and Brazil? American Journal of Agricultural
Economics, 90, 918-932.
ENDERS, W. & HOLT, M. T. 2012. Sharp Breaks or Smooth Shifts? an Investigation of the
Evolution of Primary Commodity Prices. American Journal of Agricultural Economics,
94, 659-673.
ERS 2012. Feed grain database. USDA, Washington DC..
FOOD AND AGRICULTURAL POLICY RESEARCH INSTITUTE (FAPRI) 2011. US
Biofuels Baseline and impact of extending the $0.45 ethanol blenders credit. Columbia,
MO: Food and Agricultural Policy Research Institute (FAPRI) at the University of
Missouri–Columbia.
GILBERT, C. L. 2010. How to understand high food prices. Journal of Agricultural Economics,
61, 398-425.
GOHIN, A. & TRÉGUER, D. 2010. On the (De) Stabilization Effects of Biofuels: Relative
Contributions of Policy Instruments and Market Forces. Journal of Agricultural and
Resource Economics, 35, 72-86.
HARRI, A., NALLEY, L. & HUDSON, D. 2009. The Relationship between Oil, Exchange
Rates, and Commodity Prices. Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics, 41, 501510.
HEADEY, D. & FAN, S. 2010. Reflections on the Global Food Crisis, Washington, DC, IFPRI.
HERTEL, T., TYNER, W. & BIRUR, D. 2010. The Global Impacts of Multinational Biofuels
Mandates. Energy Journal, 31(1), 75-100.
HERTEL, T. W. & BECKMAN, J. 2012. Commodity Price Volatility in the Biofuel Era: An
Examination of the Linkage between Energy and Agricultural Markets. Cambridge, MA:
NBER.
HOCHMAN, G., RAJAGOPAL, D. & ZILBERMAN, D. 2011. The Effect of Biofuels on the
International Oil Market. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 33, 402-427.
HOFSTRAND, D. 2012. Ethanol Supply Chain Profitability. Ames, Iowa: Agricultural
Marketing Resource Center, Iowa State University.
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND (IMF) 2008. Food and Fuel Prices—Recent
Developments, Macroeconomic Impact, and Policy Responses: An Update. Washington,
DC: International Monetary Fund.
43

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND (IMF). 2012. International Commodity Prices
[Online]. Washington DC: International Monetary Fund. Available:
http://www.imfstatistics.org/imf/ [Accessed April 2012].
IRWIN, S. H. & SANDERS, D. R. 2011. Index Funds, Financialization, and Commodity Futures
Markets. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 33, 1-31.
ITC 2012. Trade dataweb. Washington DC: International Trade Commission, Dept. of
Commerce.
JUST, D. R. & JUST, R. E. 2008. Monopoly Power, Futures Market Manipulation, and the Oil
Price Bubble. Journal of Agricultural & Food Industrial Organization, 6, Article 2.
KESAM, J. P., OHYAMA, A. & YANG, H. S. 2011. An Economic Evaluation of the Renewable
Fuel Standard (RFS) Biofuel Program: An Industrial Policy Approach. UrbanaChampaign, IL: University of Illinois.
KHANNA, M., ANDO, A. W. & TAHERIPOUR, F. 2008. Welfare Effects and Unintended
Consequences of Ethanol Subsidies. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 30, 411421.
MCPHAIL, L., WESTCOTT, P. & LUTMAN, H. 2011. The Renewable Identification Number
System and U.S. Biofuel Mandates. Washington DC: Economic Research Service, United
States Department of Agriculture.
MCPHAIL, L. L. 2011. Assessing the impact of US ethanol on fossil fuel markets: A structural
VAR approach. Energy Economics, 33, 1177-1185.
MCPHAIL, L. L. & BABCOCK, B. A. 2012. Impact of US biofuel policy on US corn and
gasoline price variability. Energy, 37, 505-513.
MITCHELL, D. 2008. A note on rising food prices. Washington, DC: World Bank.
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES 2011. Renewable Fuel Standard: Potential Economic
and Environmental Effects of U.S. Biofuel Policy (2011) Washington DC: National
Academies Press.
NEWMAN, D. 2011. U.S. Ethanol Policy and Trade. Washington DC: U.S. International Trade
Commission.
OECD 2008. Biofuel Support Policies: An Economic Assessment. Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, Paris.
OPIS 2012. Ethanol RINs. Gaithersburg, MD: Oil Price Information Service.
PAULSON, N. 2012. Is the Ethanol Mandate Truly a Mandate? An Estimate of Banked RINs
Stocks. Farmdoc Daily. Illinois FBFM and Department of Agricultural and Consumer
Economics, University of Illinois
RAJAGOPAL, D., SEXTON, S. E., ROLAND-HOLST, D. & ZILBERMAN, D. 2007.
Challenge of biofuel: filling the tank without emptying the stomach? Environmental
Research Letters, 2, 044004.
RFA 2010. The Paradox of Rising U.S. Ethanol Exports: Increased Market Opportunities and the
Expense of Enhanced national Security? Washington DC: Renewable Fuels Association.
RFA 2012. Ethanol Industry Statistics. Washington DC: Renewable Fuels Association.
44

SEARCHINGER, T. 2008. Summaries of Analyses in 2008 of Biofuels Policies by International
and European Technical Agencies. Washington, DC: The German Marshall Fund of the
United States.
THOMPSON, W., MEYER, S. & WESTHOFF, P. 2010. The New Markets for Renewable
Identification Numbers. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 32, 588-603.
THOMSON REUTERS 2012. Datastream. Thomson Reuters.
TIMILSINA, G. R. & SHRESTHA, A. 2010. Biofuels: Markets, Targets and Impacts.
Washington DC: World Bank.
TROSTLE, R. 2009. Fluctuating Food Commodity Prices: A Complex Issue With No Easy
Answers. Amber Waves, 6, 11-17.
TYNER, W. & VITERI, D. 2010. Implications of blending limits on the US ethanol and biofuels
markets. Biofuels, 1, 251-253.
TYNER, W. E. 2008. The US Ethanol and Biofuels Boom: Its Origins, Current Status, and
Future Prospects. BioScience, 58, 646-53.
TYNER, W. E. 2010. The integration of energy and agricultural markets. Agricultural
Economics, 41, 193-201.
TYNER, W. E. & TAHERIPOUR, F. 2008. Policy Options for Integrated Energy and
Agricultural Markets. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 30, 387-396.
TYNER, W. E., TAHERIPOUR, F. & PERKIS, D. 2010. Comparison of fixed versus variable
biofuels incentives. Energy Policy, 38, 5530-5540.
U.S. CONGRESS 2005. Energy Policy Act of 2005, Public Law 109-58. Washington, D.C.
U.S. CONGRESS 2007. Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007. H.R. 6, 110 Congress,
1st session.
VALDES, C. 2011. Brazil’s Ethanol Industry: Looking Forward. Washington DC: Economic
Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture.
WILLIAMS, J. C. & WRIGHT, B. D. 1991. Storage and Commodity Markets, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.
WISNER, R. 2012. Ethanol Exports: A Way to Scale the Blend Wall? Renewable Energy &
Climate Change Newsletter. Ames, Iowa: Agricultural Marketing Resource Center.
WRIGHT, B. 2001. Storage and Price Stabilization. In: RAUSSER, B. G. A. G. (ed.) Handbook
of Agricultural Economics. Baltimore, MD: Hopkins University.
WRIGHT, B. D. 2009. Speculators, Storage, and the Price of Rice. Giannini Foundation of
Agricultural Economics. Berkeley, CA: Giannini Foundation of Agricultural Economics,
University of California, Berkeley.
WRIGHT, B. D. 2011. The Economics of Grain Price Volatility. Applied Economic Perspectives
and Policy, 33, pp. 32-58.

45

Endnotes
1

The Renewable Fuels Association (RFA, 2012) and others (e.g. Abbott, Hurt and Tyner, 2011)
assert the net demand for corn is closer to 28%, as distiller’s dry grain, a by-product of ethanol
production, provides feed to replace about one-third of the corn used for ethanol.
For these series, differing means over time are due to more than inflation. Coefficients of
variation calculated for monthly data on prices deflated by the U.S. CPI from 1960 to 2012 are
lower for crude oil, falling from 1.05 to 0.68, but are nearly identical for corn, at 0.45. It is
evident from Figure 1 that real prices have varied significantly over this long time period.
2

3

Some use variances, which are essentially standard deviations squared. The standard deviation
is preferred here because it is in units of measure comparable to the mean price, and squaring this
measure would distort the perception of the extent of variability. Coefficients of variation divide
standard deviations by corresponding means, to normalize the measure of variability, to facilitate
comparisons across series with differing means, and to correct for the fact that as a nominal price
increases, its standard deviation is likely to increase in the same proportion – and that does not
correspond with the notion of increased volatility.
Regime changes correspond with changes in the mechanisms that are most important in
determining market prices – which could be policies or real external shocks. For example, a
binding RFS mandate and a binding “blend wall” are different regimes. Similarly, periods of low
corn stocks (food crisis) and of abundant corn stocks (ethanol gold rush) give rise to different
regimes.
4

5

Blenders are allowed to decide whether RINs acquired in a given year are applied in that year
or an adjacent year, so the mandate does not strictly limit production in a given calendar year.
That mechanism allows RINs to be traded across years as well as across firms. Paulson (2012)
argues that this has contributed to very low observed values for RINs for corn ethanol.
6

The EPA no longer uses a specific oxygenate requirement, but continues to regulate carbon
monoxide emissions. Both MTBE and ethanol are used to reduce those emissions in gasoline
blending.

7

From this point forward we will work at the market level. Issues related to heterogeneous firms
will be left for future research.
8

Net export supply from the U.S. in the right panel of Figure 3 represents the difference between
supply and overall demand in the left panel. Overall demand is the sum of the separate domestic
demand components – feed, food, seed and industrial uses. Equilibrium equates net export
supply by the U.S. with net foreign demand for corn.
9

Unit values, equal to the value of imports or exports divided by the corresponding quantity of
imports or exports, are a commonly used but imperfect proxy for border prices. If ethanol is a
relatively homogeneous product then these should be a reasonable approximation, but there is
some diversity in the quality of products traded.
46

10

The EIA now reports both “nameplate” and “sustainable” capacity. “Sustainable” capacity is
about 4% higher. Nameplate capacity used here is as reported by RFA.
11

Monthly price series include too few observations to determine volatility and correlations after
ethanol subsidies ended in 2012.

47

