                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   WHY DO EMERGING MARKETS LIBERALIZE CAPITAL OUTFLOW CONTROLS?
              FISCAL VERSUS NET CAPITAL FLOW CONCERNS

                                          Joshua Aizenman
                                        Gurnain Kaur Pasricha

                                        Working Paper 18879
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18879


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2013




We would like to thank Jamshid Mavalwalla, Gagandeep Pabla and Derrick Schroeter for research
assistance. We also thank Martin Bijsterbosch, Ian Christensen, Yothin Jinjarak, Rhys Mendes, Ila
Patnaik, Brian Peterson, Subrata Sarker, Eric Santor and seminar participants at Bank of Canada, December
2012 NIPFP-DEA Research Meetings, and the January 2013 American Economic Association Meetings
for useful comments and suggestions. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors. No
responsibility for them should be attributed to the Bank of Canada or the NBER. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not reflect the views of the Bank of Canada or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Joshua Aizenman and Gurnain Kaur Pasricha. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Why do emerging markets liberalize capital outflow controls? Fiscal versus net capital flow
concerns
Joshua Aizenman and Gurnain Kaur Pasricha
NBER Working Paper No. 18879
March 2013, Revised June 2013
JEL No. F3,F31,F32,F36,F6

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper, we provide empirical evidence on the factors that motivated emerging economies to
change their capital outflow controls in the recent decades. Liberalization of capital outflow controls
can allow emerging market economies (EMEs) to reduce net capital inflow (NKI) pressures, but may
cost their governments the fiscal revenues that external financial repression generates. Our results
indicate that external repression revenues in EMEs declined substantially in the 2000’s compared with
the 1980’s. In line with this decline in external repression revenues and their growth accelerations
in 2000’s, concerns related to net capital inflows took predominance over fiscal concerns in the decisions
to liberalize capital outflow controls. Emerging markets facing high volatility in net capital inflows
and higher balance sheet exposures liberalized outflows less. Countries eased outflows more in response
to higher net capital inflows, higher appreciation pressures in the exchange market, higher real exchange
rate volatility and greater accumulation of reserves.


Joshua Aizenman
Economics and SIR
USC
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90089-0043
and NBER
aizenman@usc.edu

Gurnain Kaur Pasricha
Bank of Canada
234 Wellington Street
Ottawa, ON K1A 0G9
Canada
gpasricha@bankofcanada.ca
I.      Introduction


Recent years have seen a re-emergence of the policy debate on the appropriateness of capital
controls. Opponents of capital controls argue that these controls can lead to local and global
misallocation of resources, perpetuate global imbalances (by allowing countries to maintain
undervalued real exchange rates) and encourage corruption. Further, opponents of capital
controls argue that in the empirical literature these controls have been found to be of limited
effectiveness in stemming net capital inflows (NKI). Proponents of capital controls have argued
that capital controls are macro-prudential measures and an optimal response to distortions in
financial markets (for example herd behaviour, too-big-to-fail, etc.). These controls are deemed
to be an important tool to prevent the build-up of financial sector risks and to reduce the damage
associated with sudden stops.2 Adding fuel to the debate, the IMF has softened its longstanding
opposition to capital controls, and now suggests that such controls may be a valid tool of
macroeconomic and macroprudential management when other tools have been exhausted (IMF,
2011a).

The debate on what emerging market economies (EMEs) should or should not do has two key
missing elements. The first is a fact-based analysis of the macroeconomic and financial pressures
that EME policymakers most often respond to when imposing capital controls. The empirical
literature assessing emerging market motivations for capital controls is scant.3 The second
missing element in the debate is a discussion of the use of capital outflow controls as a potential
response to NKI pressures. Most of the recent policy debate has focused on tightening of capital
inflow controls in response to surges in net capital inflows.4 However, because NKI are the
difference between capital inflows and outflows, countries that have existing outflow controls
have another potential tool to reduce NKI - the liberalization of outflows.5 This tool was
discussed in the literature on managing capital flows of the 1990’s (see Laban and Larrain,
1997), but it has been missing from the recent debate. Recent research in Pasricha (2012)
documents that in 22 EMEs between 2004 and the onset of the 2008 financial crisis, outflow
controls were liberalized more frequently than inflow controls were tightened. The pre-2008
crisis period saw a surge in net capital inflows to EMEs of a magnitude comparable to the post-



2
  South Korea’s “President Lee Myung-Bak, in an interview with the Financial Times published on Oct. 29, said any
measures that a country may take to smooth cross-border capital flows should not be interpreted as capital controls
but 'macro-prudential policies'.” Factbox – South Korean Policymakers’ remarks on capital controls, Reuters, 12
November, 2010.
3
  Recent work by Fratzscher (2012) examines this question for overall capital account openness in a broad sample of
emerging and advanced economies over the period 1984-2009. He finds that foreign exchange policy objective and
overheating concerns have been the two main motives for capital controls, particularly since 2000.
4
  See, for example, Ostry et. al. (2011), Klein (2012), Hutchison et. al. (2012), Patnaik and Shah (2012) and
Warnock (2011).
5
  NKI are measured as the difference between inflows by non-residents and net outflows by residents. Therefore
both lower net inflows by non-residents and higher net outflows by residents would lead to a decline in NKI.

                                                        1
2008 crisis surge, yet inflow tightening measures became a primary tool of restricting NKI only
after the crisis.

The use of outflow liberalization in NKI management policy can be constrained by the fact that
outflow controls exist not only for reasons of managing capital flows but also to keep the
government’s borrowing costs low by keeping domestic savings at home. Sustained outflow
controls often form a part of a web of regulations on the domestic financial sector (for example,
interest rate ceilings, high reserve requirements, directed lending, etc.) that constitute “financial
repression”. These regulations seek to further reduce the cost of government borrowing and to
allocate savings to preferred sectors. Capital outflow controls help prevent capital flight in
response to domestic regulations, and therefore are a key ingredient of financial repression. The
revenues from financial repression can be substantial. Giovannini and de Melo (1993) showed
that for some 24 emerging and developing economies over the period 1972-87, revenues from
external repression averaged 1.4% of GDP. These considerations suggest that the decision to
liberalize outflow controls in response to surging inflows could involve weighing the benefits of
reduced NKI against the loss of revenues from financial repression.

In this paper, we provide evidence on EME motivations for capital outflow policy by examining
fiscal and macroeconomic factors at the time when outflow controls were liberalized. We address
the two gaps in literature identified above by focussing on capital outflow controls and by
providing a positive analysis of outflow policy changes. To accomplish this, we build two novel
datasets. First, we extend the dataset presented in Pasricha (2012) to cover the period 2001-2010.
This dataset comprises all changes in capital account regulations in 22 large EMEs and therefore
provides a de-jure assessment of capital controls.6 Second, we estimate the revenue from
external financial repression which, following Giovannini and de Melo (1993), is defined as the
fiscal revenue obtained by preventing residents from freely investing abroad. It is measured as
the difference between (effective or ex-post) external and domestic interest rate on government
debt, times the government’s domestic debt.

Our updated Giovannini and de Melo measure of external repression revenues is available for 15
countries.7 We find that in contrast to the 1980's, when many EMEs were found to be earning
significant revenues from external repression, EMEs in the most recent decade earned negative
(and statically insignificant) revenues from external repression on average. The negative
revenues mean that EME governments faced lower borrowing costs in foreign markets (even
after accounting for costs imposed by exchange rate fluctuations) than in the domestic market.
The decline in external repression revenues has occurred despite the fact that emerging


6
  A de-jure assessment of policy measures the actual regulations in place, whereas a de-facto assessment evaluates
the impact of these regulations, for examples the presence of price differentials across markets or the volume of
transactions.
7
  The 15 EMEs are Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico,
Philippines, Peru, South Africa, Thailand and Turkey.

                                                         2
economies continue to maintain significant restrictions on capital outflows (notwithstanding the
liberalizations over time).

There are several interpretations of the negative external repression revenues found in our study.
An EME government with positive revenues from repression may be reluctant to liberalize
outflows to manage the concerns posed by surging NKI for fear of losing these revenues, but
may find it easier to liberalize when there are no revenues to be lost. In fact, EMEs did liberalize
outflow policy substantially in the 2000's. Most of the outflow liberalizations took place in the
years of surging NKI (putting downward pressure on domestic interest rates) and rapid economic
growth (leading to increasing fiscal revenues from other sources), which suggests that fiscal
concerns did not pose a binding constraint for EMEs in this period. Another interpretation of the
negative external repression revenues is that, while many of these EMEs could have borrowed
even more in markets abroad in the last decade, they refrained from doing so. That they chose
not to borrow more abroad even at favorable interest rates may reflect concerns about greater
balance sheet exposure (as most can borrow only in hard currencies) and the fear of a sudden
stop. Finally, emerging markets may be willing to temporarily accept negative repression
revenues to preserve the future repression tax base.

The result that concerns related to net capital inflows took predominance over fiscal concerns in
the decision to liberalize capital outflow controls in the 2000’s finds further support in our
empirical exercise. EMEs liberalized outflow controls less when facing greater NKI volatility
and higher short term balance sheet exposure, while they eased more when NKI, real exchange
rate appreciation pressures, reserves accumulation were high – all pointing to concerns about
foreign exchange valuation and domestic overheating concerns. Unlike the 1980’s, we find very
limited importance of fiscal variables in explaining liberalization of capital outflow controls -
only in the samples of relatively closed and non-inflation targeting countries, do we see a
negative association of greater external repression revenues with easing of outflows. This lack of
association is consistent with the decline in repression revenues for EMEs in the 2000’s. This
decade saw the growth accelerations of emerging markets, which led to a decline in their risk
premia. The 2000’s were also a decade of few adverse external shocks, real exchange rate
appreciation pressures in EMEs and overall improved stances of their fiscal policies. 8 Revenues
from repression therefore became less important in the decision to liberalize outflows.

The paper is organized as follows: in the next section, we elaborate on the potential motivations
for imposing capital outflow controls. Section III describes the construction of and trends in one
of the main data series compiled in the paper – the changes in capital outflow controls. We
devote section IV to describing the measures used to capture fiscal concerns, including the
second main data series compiled in the paper - revenues from external repression. Section V

8
 Among the intriguing developments has been the relative decline in the role of ‘easy taxes to collect’ (like tariff
and inflation taxes), and the rise of the role of Value Added Taxes (Aizenman and Jinjarak, 2009 and Bird and
Gendron, 2011).

                                                           3
identifies testable hypotheses and outlines the econometric methodology. Section VI presents the
results and section VII concludes.


II.      Potential motivations for capital outflow controls


Many motivations have been advanced in the literature for imposing or liberalizing controls on
outflows.9 Capital outflow controls have often been imposed, at least temporarily, in response to
a run on the currency or inflation, sovereign debt and financial crises. However, outside of crisis
periods, one of the principal motivations for sustaining capital outflow controls is that these
controls allow governments to lower the domestic cost of borrowing for themselves and for their
preferred sectors by keeping domestic savings at home. Further, controls on outflows facilitate
the use of other measures constituting financial repression such as interest rate ceilings, high
reserves requirements etc., by preventing capital flight in response to these restrictions. This
allows governments to further depress their borrowing costs. Giovannini and de Melo (1993)
showed that when countries faced constraints on their ability to raise revenue through taxes,
financial repression could be the optimal choice. They also showed that for some 24 emerging
and developing economies over the period 1972-87, revenues from external repression averaged
about 9 percent of total government revenue from taxes. The large magnitude of the revenues
earned from maintaining outflow controls posed potentially a major constraint towards
liberalizations of the capital account. Outflow controls can also help governments maximize the
inflation tax by limiting the ability of residents to shift to foreign assets.10 Aizenman and
Guidotti (1994) also argued that capital controls may be desirable in developing countries when
collection costs associated with taxes (other than the inflation tax) are high.

Empirical work in the 1990’s underscored the importance of fiscal policy as a motivation for
imposing capital controls. Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti (1995) found that capital controls were
associated with a higher ratio of government consumption to GDP, higher government revenues
from seigniorage and lower real interest rates. Alesina et. al. (1994) found that maintaining
capital controls led to lower stock of government debt (presumably through lower debt service
costs) and that countries with weaker central banks (and therefore lower resistance to use of
inflation tax) were more likely to be using capital controls. Recent work by Reinhart et. al (2011)
also suggests that financial repression played an important role in the rapid reduction of public
debts in advanced economies in the Bretton Woods era.

For countries that have legacy capital outflow controls (as was true for many emerging
economies entering into the new millennium), the decision on whether and when to liberalize

9
  Capital controls include both controls on inflows by non-residents and controls on outflows by residents. Unless
otherwise specified, we focus the discussion in the paper on controls on outflows by residents, briefly called outflow
controls.
10
   See Dooley (1996) and Eichengreen (2001) for excellent surveys of the literature on these motivations.

                                                          4
these controls can be constrained by fiscal reasons discussed above or by exogenous political
factors, but can also be motivated by economic pressures. In particular, liberalization of capital
controls can be motivated by their use as tools for managing macroeconomic and financial
pressures arising from the size and volatility of net capital inflows. In periods of surges in net
capital inflows, policymakers may choose to either tighten controls on inflows or to liberalize
controls on outflows in order to reduce the size and volatility of net capital inflows. The various
concerns arising from rapid increases in NKI can be grouped into 4 main categories:

1.      Concerns about overheating: Net capital inflows to emerging markets are often
procyclical, increasing when the economies are booming and retreating when the economies are
slowing (Kaminsky et. al., 2005). Surging capital inflows in periods of high economic growth
can therefore lead to overheating concerns by further boosting growth, domestic credit
expansion, and inflationary pressures.
2.      Concerns about foreign exchange valuation: Net capital inflow surges can lead to
overvaluation of the exchange rate, thus hurting export competitiveness.
3.      Concerns about financial stability: NKI surges can exacerbate asset price booms in
real estate or financial markets and aggregate balance sheet exposures, thus giving rise to
financial stability concerns.
4.      Concerns about macroeconomic volatility: The booms and busts in non-resident’s
inflows can be an independent source of macroeconomic volatility and can exacerbate existing
cycles.

Liberalizing capital outflow controls can address these concerns by opening up a window for
greater outflows, thus reducing the net capital inflows during boom times. Analogously,
tightening of capital outflow controls can prevent capital flights in poor times. In addition,
having resident investments abroad that can be liquidated and brought home at times of slowing
economic growth can counter stops in inflows by non-residents, thus reducing overall volatility
of net capital inflows. This channel has been shown to be historically important in mitigating the
volatility of net capital inflows in high income economies in recent studies of gross capital flows
(Broner et. al. 2011; IMF 2011b).

In this paper, we test the relative importance of the concerns described above, for 18 large
emerging economies, over the period 2001-2010. The testable hypotheses associated with each
are described in section V. The next section describes the evolution of capital controls in the last
decade in these emerging markets.


III.   Evolution of capital controls policy in 2000’s

In order to analyze the motivation for liberalizing capital outflows, we use a unique dataset that
contains changes in capital account regulation for 22 major EMEs between 2001 and 2010. This

                                                 5
dataset is an expanded version of the data used in Pasricha (2012).The main source of data is
IMF Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER). The
AREAER provides information on member countries’ exchange arrangements, exchange and
trade restrictions and capital transactions. We focus on the capital transactions section which
includes relevant regulations applicable to the financial sector. AREAER information is
supplemented with information on similar measures from central banks’ and other country
regulators’ websites, news sources, as well as other research papers.11

The dataset provides information on the changes in capital controls, by date of effectiveness. We
classify each change as representing an inflow or outflow control, an easing or a tightening of
policy and then count the number of inflow easings, inflow tightenings, outflow easings and
outflow tightenings per quarter.

Our strategy of counting the number of measures is in line with the existing de-jure measures of
capital controls which measure tightness of capital controls by summing (or using the principal
components of) dummies that indicate the existence of regulations under broad categories of
transactions (Edwards, 2007; Chinn-Ito, 2008; Schindler, 2009). However, it goes further and
adds information in one or more dimensions to what is available in the existing indices: (i) the
changes taking place within the broad categories considered by the indices12 and (ii) the changes
in capital controls applicable to inflows or outflows. The existing indices miss one or both
dimensions. For example, of all the indices for which data is available for at least part of the
2000’s, Schindler (2009), Chinn-Ito (2008) do not take into account changes in restrictiveness of
controls. Further, the Chinn-Ito (2008) and Edwards (2007) indices do not distinguish between
restrictions on inflows and outflows.13 The dataset used in this paper provides information both
on the changes in controls under each category of transactions as well as on whether the
restrictions relate to inflows (by non-residents) or outflows (by residents).14

The main demerit of this method of analysis is that the number of measures per se does not allow
us to judge the impact of the measures (eg: in terms of volume of transactions it influences) or to
differentiate the changes by their magnitude, which varies between countries. However, most
measures in the database are of relatively homogeneous magnitude, and therefore we think our

11
   Further information on the dataset is provided in Appendix A.
12
   The dataset categorizes changes as belonging to restrictions under 8 the subcategories of capital transactions (for
example, controls on capital and money market instruments, controls on direct investment, etc.), as described in the
Appendix. If a major policy announcement includes several changes, each regarding a different category of
transaction, each of these changes is counted individually. For example, on 14 March 2005, Brazil introduced three
different changes - an elimination of the limit on investment in shares of the main company by employees of firms
belonging to foreign groups; an elimination of the limit on remittances for outward FDI by non-financial private
enterprises; and a removal of the authorization requirement for guarantees by non-financial judicial persons in credit
operations for their foreign subsidiaries. Each of these changes is counted individually in our database.
13
   Schindler (2009) index provides information on controls under different subcategories of transactions, for inflows
and outflows separately, but the dataset only covers the period 1995-2005.
14
   However, our dataset does not allow a cross-country comparison of the existing level of de-jure controls, unlike
the other indices.

                                                          6
approach does provide useful information about the overall direction of policy, and about the
attempts to liberalize or to close the capital account. 15

The countries in the database include the 21 emerging markets that are in the MSCI Emerging
Markets Index and Argentina. However, for the purpose of this paper, we drop the 3 eastern
European countries, Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland, as their capital account liberalizations
were determined by their EU accessions (rather than by any economic pressures). We also drop
changes in Argentina before 2003, in order to include in the sample only relatively homogeneous
or marginal changes in policy. We also drop Turkey before 202Q2, to exclude its currency and
inflation crisis period.

The emerging markets in the sample changed their capital controls 664 times between 2001 and
2010. Capital outflows controls saw 302 changes and of these the majority, or 274 changes were
easing of restrictions on outflows. There were 362 changes in inflow controls, out of which a
minority (135) were tightening of inflows. Outflow liberalizations were far more common than
inflow tightenings in the sample.

Since countries could be easing and tightening restrictions on outflows (inflows) in the same
quarter, to gauge the overall direction of policy, we computed the following measures:

     1. Net Easings of Outflows: This measure is the difference between the number of outflows
        easing measures and the number of outflows tightening measures in each quarter. We use
        this as our main dependent variable in this paper.
     2. Net Tightening of Inflows: This measure is the difference between the number of inflow
        tightening measures and the number of inflow easing measures in each quarter.

Further, since both outflows easings as well as inflows tightenings would tend to reduce the
pressure of net capital inflows, we group the measures into whether the measures would
encourage or discourage NKI, i.e. the difference between inflows and outflows, as in Pasricha
(2012). This gives us the following additional categories:

     3. NKI Reducing Measures: These are measures that represent tightening of inflows or
        easing of outflows.
     4. NKI Increasing Measures: These are measures that represent easing of inflows or
        tightening of outflows.
     5. Net NKI Restricting Measures = NKI Reducing Measures - NKI Increasing Measures
                                     = Net Easing of Outflows + Net Tightening of Inflows

Figure 1 shows that net NKI restricting measures peaked in 2007 and again in 2010, both peak
years for net capital inflows pressures to EMEs. It also shows that in 2007, EMEs as a whole
were liberalizing, rather than tightening controls on inflows, and that outflow liberalizations were

15
  Appendix Table A.2 in Pasricha (2012) provides a list of measures taken by EMEs in 2010, which attests to their
small magnitude.

                                                        7
the predominant tool for restricting NKI in the 2007 peak. Only in 2010 did EME stance on
inflows policy became a net tightening stance and complemented the NKI reducing stance of
outflows policy. 16

Figure 1: Net Outflows Easings Peaked in 2007, along with Net Capital Inflows
                              80                                                                                        4
     Number of new measures




                              60                                                                                        3

                              40                                                                                        2




                                                                                                                             % of GDP
                              20                                                                                        1

                               0                                                                                        0
                                    2001   2002    2003    2004     2005       2006   2007    2008    2009       2010
                              ‐20                                                                                       ‐1

                              ‐40                                                                                       ‐2
                                      No. of Net Outflows Easings                No. of Net Inflow Tightenings
                                      No. of Net NKI Restricting Measures        NKI (% of EME GDP) (right scale)
Note: Net capital inflows/GDP is the unweighted sum of NKI to the 18 EMEs in sample divided by the unweighted sum of their
nominal GDPs. Net outflows easings are the number of easings of outflows less number of tightening of outflows. Net NKI
restricting measures are the sum of net outflows easings and net inflows tightenings.

There were important differences between countries in terms of the degree of activism on the
capital account (Figure 2). India and Thailand were the most active, introducing more than 50
NKI reducing measures over the sample period, whereas Indonesia, Egypt and Morocco the least
active in changing capital account policy. There were also differences between countries in terms
of the extent to which they relied on tightening of inflow controls or easing of outflow controls
as NKI reducing measures. Malaysia, Morocco and Chile relied exclusively on easing of
outflows, whereas Indonesia, Peru, Brazil and Colombia used largely inflow tightening
measures.

The propensity to change capital outflow controls could be associated with the monetary policy
framework and by flexibility of the exchange rate regime of countries (Table 1). EMEs with
inflation targeting (IT) monetary policy and freely floating exchange rates on the whole took
fewer measures and changed policy less frequently. The last two columns of Table 1 show that a
regime with freely floating exchange rates introduced an average of 0.51 measures per quarter,

16
  The figure sums net inflow tightening measures over all EMEs so that net inflow tightening in one country could
be cancelled by net inflow easings in another. However, the conclusion that EMEs were liberalizing outflows more
than they were tightening inflows remains even if one looks only at NKI reducing measures, i.e. inflow tightenings
in all countries and outflows easings in all countries only. As noted above, there were far more outflow easings than
inflow tightenings in the sample period.

                                                                           8
out of which 0.38 measures were NKI reducing measures. This compares to non-freely floating
exchange rate regimes, a member of which on average introduced 1.16 measures per quarter, out
of which 0.68 measures were NKI reducing measures. The statistics for non-freely floating
regimes are very similar to those for non-inflation targeting monetary policy regimes. An IT
monetary policy regime introduced an average of 0.72 measures per quarter, out of which 0.53
measures were NKI reducing measures. For all country groups, outflow easings were the
majority of NKI reducing measures. However, in contrast to freely floating exchange rate
regimes, IT regimes relied relatively less on outflow easing measures and more on inflow
tightening measures: 38% of NKI reducing measures introduced by IT regimes were inflow
tightenings, compared to 16% of NKI reducing measures introduced by freely floating exchange
rate regimes.

Figure 2: Some EMEs were more active in introducing NKI reducing measures than others
                           70
  Number of new measures




                           60
                           50
                           40
                           30
                           20
                           10
                           0
                                IND THA PER MYS ZAF ARG KOR BRA MAR PHL CHN CHL RUS COL TUR IDN MEX EGY

                                Easing of Outflows   Tightening of Inflows   Total Number of NKI Reducing Measures

Note: NKI reducing measures are the sum of outflows easings and inflows tightenings. The number of measures is the total over
the period 2001-2010 (except Argentina and Turkey, as noted in text).


In the subsequent sections, we ask whether the frequency and timing of the net liberalizations of
outflows was contingent on fiscal, macroeconomic and financial pressures in the economy in
question, focussing in particular on the fiscal revenues that the governments were obtaining from
external financial repression.


IV.                         Measures of Fiscal Concerns


In order to capture the extent to which lost fiscal revenues would constrain the removal of capital
outflow controls, we deploy several measures of fiscal concerns. The first and the most direct
measure of contribution of outflow controls to fiscal revenues is the revenue from external
repression, which we describe in the next sub-section. The other measures of fiscal concerns,


                                                                       9
described in sub-section IV.B below seek to capture the fiscal space of the government as well as
the revenue from the use of internal repression that capital outflow controls facilitate.

          A.       External Repression Revenues in EMEs

The main purpose of capital outflow controls is to keep the domestic cost of borrowing for the
government below the rate that would prevail in a fully integrated economy. Therefore, external
repression revenue can be defined as the additional cost the government would have to bear to
service its domestic debt in the absence of outflow controls. Thus defined, external repression
revenue can be measured as the difference between the effective interest rate on the
government’s foreign borrowing less effective interest rate paid by the government on domestic
borrowing, times the repression tax base which is the government’s domestic debt (Giovannini
and de Melo, 1993).

The domestic interest rate is computed as:


                                                                                                         /2

where interest payments and debt outstanding are measured in local currency units (LCU).17

The effective external interest rate on government debt has two components: the nominal (US)
dollar interest rate on foreign debt and the foreign exchange component (i.e. the increase in
dollar interest payments due to depreciation of the domestic currency against the dollar). These
components are defined as follows:

Nominal dollar interest rate on external debt

This is computed as the nominal dollar interest payments, including increases in interest arrears,
divided by the average outstanding external debt measured in USD.

               ∗
                                                                                                    /2

The nominal dollar interest rate is computed on non-concessional public and publically
guaranteed (PPG) external debt from private creditors.18




17
   The formulas provided in the text are for annual data. For quarterly data, the interest rate is annualized by
multiplying the RHS of the above formula by 4. All interest rates are expressed as percent per annum. Full details on
the data and construction of external repression revenues are in Appendix B.
18
   However, interest arrears were available only for total debt from private creditors (including non-PPG debt) and
on total PPG debt (including bilateral and multilateral concessional debt). In all cases, the arrears on total PPG debt
were higher than arrears on total debt from private creditors. Therefore, as an approximation, we used the arrears
from total debt from private creditors. Arrears refer to interest accrued (and due) but not paid.

                                                          10
Foreign Exchange (FX) component

The foreign exchange component is computed as the percentage depreciation of average annual
exchange rate times the nominal dollar interest rate on external debt and captures the increase in
interest payments in dollars due to depreciation of the domestic currency against the USD.

                                   ∗
                                       .                                     /

The effective external interest rate is computed as the sum of the above two components.

In principle, there is a third component of effective interest rate on external debt, the “debt
revaluation cost”. This cost consists of two elements: (a) the change in local currency value of
the stock of external dollar denominated debt due to change in the value of local currency against
the dollar, and (b) the USD revaluation cost, defined as the increase in dollar value of debt
outstanding (repayable) due to appreciation of the dollar against the currencies of denomination
of external debt. Debt revaluation cost represents accrued costs and is amortized over the
duration of the loan, rather than over the course of a single year. In this paper, our base measure
of repression revenues includes only the nominal dollar interest rate and the FX component.
While we also compute the debt revaluation cost (and provide summary statistics on the
repression revenues including it), we do not include it in our base measure of external repression
revenues. The reason is that without knowing the maturity of the debt and the repayment
schedule, we would add a very large and volatile component to the repression revenues by
including debt revaluation cost.19

Another key area in which our measure differs from Giovannini and de Melo is that they use
only central government external and domestic interest commitments. Due to data constraints,
we use public and publicly guaranteed (PPG) debt for external interest rate, and the broadest
level of government for which data is available for domestic interest rate. Since central
government debt usually carries the lowest risk premium, the use of interest on PPG debt would
tend to inflate our estimates of repression revenues. However, as we will see below, even at these
inflated levels, for most EMEs in our sample period, the repression revenues were in fact
negative, in contrast to Giovannini and de Melo.

Trends in external repression revenues

The median external repression revenues in the 2000’s for 8 of the 15 countries for which we had
data, were negative (Figure 3). For another 3 countries, the median revenue as a percentage of
GDP was less than 0.5% of GDP. The mean repression revenues for all countries during the


19
   When Giovannini and de Melo (1993) computed repression revenues, the USD revaluation component was very
small, as most external debt of emerging markets was denominated in USD. In our sample, the USD revaluation
component turns out to be large and volatile. This may be due to changes in currency composition of external debt
of EMEs but also due to greater flexibility of their exchange rates.

                                                       11
2000’s were -0.19% of GDP (Figure 4). These represent significant declines from the 1980’s,
when Giovannini and de Melo estimated the average revenue to be about 1.4% of GDP.20


Figure 3: Median External Repression Revenues, 2000's (% of GDP)
                  6
                  4
     % of GDP




                  2
                  0
                       BRA IND ZAF COL EGY IDN MEX CHL MYS CHN PER ARG PHL THA TUR
                  ‐2
                  ‐4
                  ‐6
                            External Repression Revenues
                            External Repression Revenues (including debt revaluation costs)


Figure 4: Mean Repression Revenues, % of GDP
    2


                  1
       % of GDP




                  0
                           1970's‐1980's                       1990's                                2000's

                  ‐1
                           Including Debt Revaluation Cost          Excluding Debt Revaluation Cost
                                                                       95% Confidence Interval
Notes: The 1980's mean is from Giovannini and de Melo (1993) and covers the countries in their sample that overlap with ours.
The 1980's values are in fact over those years between 1974 and 1987 for which the Giovannini and de Melo estimates are
available. The 1990’s estimates are for the years 1995-1999, or the years for which data for each country is available.


20
  Note that the average revenues of 1.4% of GDP mentioned in the introduction are for all the EMEs in Giovannini
and de Melo’s sample. Figure 4 averages over the part of their sample that overlaps with ours. Repression revenues
including debt revaluation costs include the effect of exchange rate changes on the value of principal in the effective
external interest rate. Repression revenues excluding debt revaluation costs only incorporate the impact of exchange
rate changes on interest payable in computing the effective external interest rate. For more information, see our
working paper.

                                                             12
Why have external repression revenues declined?

Most of the difference between external effective and domestic interest rate in 2000’s is due to
the difference between the dollar external interest rate and the domestic interest rate (Figures 5
and 6). In contrast to the 1980’s, the FX component is a small part of effective interest rate
differentials for most EMEs. The decline in the external repression revenues therefore reflects
both the decline in the external dollar interest rate and the decline in the FX component.


Figure 5: Exchange rate component of external repression revenues is small for most
countries
   2

            1

            0
                 BRA ZAF IND COL IDN MEX CHL MYS CHN PER ARG PHL THA EGY TUR
 % of GDP




            ‐1

            ‐2

            ‐3

            ‐4
                 Interest Rate Differential          FX Component               External Repression Revenues

Notes: The plotted values are the means of the variables for the 2000’s for each country. Interest Rate differential refers to the
percentage difference in external dollar and domestic interest rates. FX component is the percentage exchange rate depreciation
against US dollar times the external dollar interest rate. All variables are expressed as percent per annum.



Several factors can explain the decline in the two components of external repression revenues,
many of them related to the growth accelerations of EMEs in 2000’s (in comparison to 1970-
1980s). The relatively strong growth performance of EMEs vis-à-vis the rest of the world in that
period in combination with the easing of monetary policy in the advanced economies led to an
overall decline in their external risk premia. Strong domestic demand growth and a shortage of
capital in EMEs drove up domestic interest rates and this effect could not fully be counteracted
by net capital inflows (given remaining restrictions on these inflows). It also led to a real
exchange rate appreciation trend, which contributed to the decline in FX component.




                                                               13
Figure 6: Components of Repression Revenues – BRICS
                         Brazil                                                                 India
                                                                                                                                  %
                                                            %
                                                            5                                                                     2


                                                            0                                                                     0
 2001q1          2004q1          2007q1         2010q1                2001q1        2004q1          2007q1          2010q1

                                                            ‐5                                                                    ‐2


                                                            ‐10                                                                   ‐4


                                                                                                                                  ‐6
                                                            ‐15



                                                           %                                South Africa
                          China                                                                                                   %
                                                            1
                                                                                                                                  5



                                                            0.5                                                                   0
                                                                      2001q1        2004q1          2007q1          2010q1


                                                            0                                                                     ‐5
 2001q1          2004q1          2007q1          2010q1


                                                            ‐0.5                                                                  ‐10

                       Repression Tax Rate                                                     Interest Diffl.

Note: Interest Diffl. refers to the percentage difference in external dollar and domestic interest rates. FX component is the
percentage exchange rate depreciation against US dollar times the external dollar interest rate. All variables are expressed as
percent per annum.



There are two other possible reasons for the low estimates of external repression revenues. First,
it is possible that in a period of strong EME growth, the external risk premia may have declined
too much. History suggests that just as the European periphery debt was overvalued in the years
after the launch of the Euro, it may be the case that EME external debt may seem overvalued in
the 2000’s in posterity. Second, our measure assumes that the external interest rate represents the
"market interest rate" for government debt that would prevail in absence of outflow controls.
This assumption ignores the fact that several EME governments, particularly India and China,
raise a very small share of their total debt (if any) in markets abroad. As a result of the pervasive


                                                                 14
internal financial repression measures, they are able to finance their borrowing needs largely
domestically, without pushing up interest rates on their debt and their debt burdens. Therefore,
the market interest rate they would face in the absence of external repression could be
substantially underestimated by the prevailing external interest rate as the governments' fiscal
positions would look less sustainable and risk premium on government debt would be higher in
the absence of these restrictions (the demand curves the governments face would be steeper).

Interpretation of negative repression revenues

There are several interpretations of the negative external repression revenues found in our study.
Liberalization of outflows by EMEs with negative external repression revenues (other things
being equal) could in theory lead to a further increase in their domestic interest rate over the
external rate. An EME government concerned about cost of servicing the domestic debt would
either not liberalize outflows or do so in tandem with liberalizing inflows or borrow more in
markets abroad (liberalizing inflows only for itself). In practice, the fiscal concerns did not
prevent outflow liberalizations - EMEs did liberalize outflow policy substantially in the
2000's. However, this was made possible by surging inflows, as most of the liberalizations took
place in the years of high NKI (putting downward pressure on domestic interest rates) and rapid
economic growth (leading to increasing fiscal revenues from other sources). This suggests fiscal
concerns did not pose a binding constraint to outflow liberalization in the 2000’s.

 A possible interpretation of the negative external repression revenues is that, while many of
these EMEs could have borrowed even more in markets abroad in the last decade, they refrained
from doing so. That they chose not to borrow more abroad even at favorable interest rates may
reflect concerns about greater balance sheet exposure (as most can borrow only in hard
currencies) and the fear of a sudden stop. In the event of a sudden stop and the associated sharp
exchange rate depreciation, EMEs with larger external debt denominated in foreign currencies
would experience a sharper increase in the cost of servicing the debt and more limited external
debt refinancing opportunities. The challenges faced by South Korea and Mexico during the
2008-9 crisis would reinforce the concerns about the risks of sudden stops in bad times even in
relatively developed EMEs. 21 Finally, emerging markets may be reluctant to open more widely
the door to capital outflows to preserve the future repression tax base.



          B.      Other measures of fiscal concerns in EMEs

Being a measure of external repression, our measure of financial repression does not take into
account the revenues that internal financial repression measures (interest rate controls, directed

21
  These considerations also suggests that a drawback of the Giovannini and de Melo (1993) financial repression
measure is focusing on the first moment (expected interest rate cum exchange rate depreciation), overlooking the
second moment (exposure to future volatility associated with costly external debt refinancing at times of crisis).

                                                         15
credit, high reserve requirements, etc. that would be ineffective without capital controls) generate
for the government. That is to say, our measure of repression does not measure the extent to
which the domestic interest rate is below the domestic rate that would prevail in absence of
internal repression (and in presence of capital controls). In addition, it does not take into account
the seignorage tax revenue, the savings to the government from sterilization and the costs
imposed on households that accrue to corporations or banks, rather than to the governments.
Recent literature suggests that the size of implicit taxes generated via the banking sector in
EMEs can be substantial. According to Lardy (2008),

"The People's Bank of China controls interest rates in a way that has led to significant financial
repression-low and now negative real return on deposits-as inflation has risen in recent years.
This distorted interest rate structure is a significant obstacle to further reform of the financial
system and to sustaining China's rapid economic growth. Financial repression costs Chinese
households about 255 billion renminbi (US$36 billion), 4.1 percent of China's GDP, and a fifth
of it goes to corporations, one-quarter to banks, and the government assumes the rest."

To capture some of the contribution to fiscal policy of internal repression revenues, we use
several measures of fiscal space and of internal repression. These include:
   1. Measures of fiscal space:
           a. Fiscal balance as a share of government tax revenues
           b. Gross government debt as a share of government tax revenues
   2. Measures of fiscal internal repression revenues:
           a. Liquidation tax (negative of the real interest rate on domestic government debt)
           b. Real deposit interest rate on domestic government debt
           c. Banking sector net lending to government as a share of banking sector
              assets*Inflation. This measure captures the extent to which the government is able
              to allocate banking savings to itself and tax it through inflation.

Consistent with the decline in external repression revenues, measures of fiscal space and of
internal repression revenues in EMEs have also improved over time. Government debt has
declined as a percentage of tax revenues and the fiscal balance has improved substantially,
potentially allowing the governments room to liberalize outflow controls (Figure 7). The
inflation tax the governments obtained from captive lending to it by the banking sectors has also
declined substantially between the 1990’s and 2000’s (Figure 8). The real deposit interest rate on
banking sector deposits has been positive on average during both 1990’s and 2000’s and
governments have been paying positive real interest rates on its domestic debt (implying
negative liquidation taxes.




                                                 16
The fact that EME growth was stronger and less volatile in 2000’s may have also led to a lesser
need for repression revenues. Indeed, the average tax-GDP ratios for EMEs increased by 2
percentage points to 15.2% of GDP in 2000’s from the 1990’s (Figure 9).22

Figure 7: Mean Gross Government Debt and Fiscal Balance, % of Tax Revenues

                     1200
                                                                                                                ‐5
 % of tax revenues




                                                                                                                      % of tax revenues
                     800

                                                                                                                ‐15
                     400


                         0                                                                                      ‐25
                                     1990's                              2000's
                             Gross Government Debt (left scale)      Fiscal Balance (right scale)
                                                        95% Confidence Interval
Note: The plotted values are mean for all EMEs in the decade and the 95% confidence interval around the mean.

Figure 8: Measures of Internal Financial Repression
   8

                     6

                     4

                     2
 %




                     0
                                    1990's                                            2000's
                ‐2

                ‐4
                                          Bank Lending to Government*Inflation, %
                                          Liquidation Tax, % pa
                                          Real Deposit Interest Rate, % pa
                                            95% Confidence Interval

Note: The plotted values are mean for all EMEs in the decade and the 95% confidence interval around the mean.

22
  Among the intriguing developments has been the relative decline in the role of ‘easy taxes to collect’ [like tariff
and inflation taxes], and the rise of the role of Value Added Taxes [see Aizenman and Jinjarak (2009) and Bird and
Gendron (2011)].

                                                            17
Figure 9: Mean Tax-GDP ratio for EMEs has improved over time
         20

         16

         12
     %




         8

         4

         0
                                   1990's                                              2000's
                     All countries for which data is available                   EMEs in our sample

Note: The plotted values are mean for the decade for each group of countries and the 95% confidence interval around the mean.
Source: World Bank WDI




V.       Methodology and Data


In this section, we describe the methodology used to assess the relative importance of NKI
versus fiscal concerns in determining the capital outflows policy. The main hypotheses is that the
larger the fiscal reliance on revenues from repression, the fewer the easings of outflows, and the
larger the overheating or exchange rate valuation pressures, the greater the incentive to liberalize.
The response to macroeconomic volatility or financial stability concerns arising from NKI could
be ambiguous – countries may want to liberalize outflows to build a buffer of foreign
investments or to close capital account to insulate them from external shocks. The dependent
variable is number of net easings of outflows in a quarter by each country. The main regression
equation is:



where         are the set of control variables, are the country fixed effects, are the time fixed
effects and     are the errors. All equations were estimated using OLS, with robust standard
errors reported.23 We tested a number of indicators for each of the hypotheses identified in
section II above, i.e. the fiscal, overheating concerns, concerns about macroeconomic stability,



23
  Since the number of net easings can be both positive and negative, models like tobit and probit are not appropriate
for use with our data.

                                                             18
foreign exchange valuation concerns and financial stability concerns. These variables and the
expected signs of their coefficients are listed below24:

 Fiscal Concerns: The main hypothesis is that the greater the fiscal concerns or revenues from
 repression, the lower the incentive to liberalize outflows.
      1. Measures of fiscal space: More fiscal space allows greater liberalization
              (i) Fiscal balance/tax revenues (+)
              (ii) Government debt/tax revenues (-)
      2. Revenue from external repression (-)
      3. Liquidation tax (-): This variable is the negative of the real interest rate on domestic
      government debt. Expected sign is negative as higher tax means more potential revenue
      that could be lost by liberalization and therefore lower incentive to liberalize
      4. Real deposit rate on bank deposits (+): Expected sign is positive as lower rate suggests
      greater internal repression and therefore lower incentive to liberalize
      5. Banking sector net lending to government (as a share of total bank assets)*inflation (-):
      Expected sign is negative as higher values of this variable imply greater revenues from
      internal repression

 NKI Concerns: The variables measuring NKI concerns are grouped by hypotheses:
 I. Concerns about "overheating": Greater overheating pressures would create incentive to
 liberalize, in order to reduce the size of NKI
      1. We use two variables that capture the size of the NKI:
               (i) NKI/GDP (+)
               (ii) NKI surge dummy (+)
      2. Credit growth (+)
      3. Credit gap (+): This variable is the ratio of domestic credit/GDP to its 3-year trend
      3. Inflation rate (+)
      4. GDP growth (+)

 II. Concerns about FX valuation:
      1. REER appreciation over the past year (+)
      2. Change in FX reserves/GDP (+)
      3. FX regime (-): This is a dummy variable which takes the value 1 for freely floating
      exchange rate regimes, and 0 otherwise
      4. IT monetary policy dummy (-)
      5. Exchange market pressure (EMP) (-): This variable is defined as the sum of exchange
      rate depreciation and reserve outflows (scaled by reserve money). Higher values of this

24
  The data appendix Table A.3 lists the data sources and granularity of each variable and Table A.4 provides their
summary statistics.



                                                        19
     variable indicate greater depreciation pressure, which would create incentive to tighten
     outflow controls.
     6. Undervaluation (PPP-based) (-)

III. Concerns about Macro-stability: These variables are defined as 3-year rolling standard
deviations of the underlying variables.
      1. NKI volatility (+/-)
      2. GDP growth volatility (+/-)
      3. FX volatility (+/-): The underlying variable is monthly REER change
      4. Equity return volatility (+/-): the underlying variable is monthly equity market return

IV. Concerns about Financial Stability:
    1. Balance sheet exposure (-): This variable is defined as (External Debt – Reserves)/GDP.
    The expected sign is negative as countries with higher balance sheet exposure may want to
    limit current and future outflows (in the event of a crisis).
    2. Short term balance sheet exposure (-): (Short Term External Debt – Reserves)/GDP
    3. Surge (in gross inflows) (+)
    4. Sudden stop (in gross inflows) (+)
    5. Flight (surge in gross outflows) (-)
    6. Increase in stock price index over past year (+)
    7. Inflation crisis (-)
    8. Banking crisis (-)

Other controls:
   1. Trade/GDP (+): Expected sign is positive as effectiveness of existing controls would
   decrease with greater trade openness.
   2. Chinn-Ito index of capital account openness (-): Expected sign is negative as more open
   countries are expected to have liberalized less as they had fewer controls left to remove.
   3. Quinn index of capital account openness (-)
   4. Net tightening of inflows (+/-): Both easing of outflows and tightening of inflows are net
   capital inflows reducing measures, and therefore may be substitutes. However, countries
   facing a large NKI surge may be tempted to try both.


All explanatory variables except the dummy variables are normalized by subtracting the inter-
country mean and dividing by the standard deviation, so that the regression coefficients can be
interpreted as the impact on net easings of a one standard deviation change in the explanatory
variables. To control for potential endogeneity, all the explanatory variables are lagged one
quarter. We also drop outliers, which are defined as observations that lie more than 5 standard
deviations from the mean of each variable for all explanatory variables. In addition, extreme
values of net easings of outflows and number of net tightening of inflows are also considered

                                                20
outliers (outside the range [-8,9] for net easing of outflows and [-8,8] for net tightening of
inflows) and excluded from the reported regression results.

Since each of the concerns has several available proxies, we ran the regressions sequentially. In
the first set of regressions, each variable for each hypothesis was first tested individually in
bivariate regressions and then all variables for the given hypothesis are added as a group in
multivariate regression for each hypothesis. From these regressions, all variables that were
significant at 20% level of significance or less in any of these regressions were used in the joint
test of the hypothesis. In the paper, we only report the results of the first stage for the fiscal
concerns and the multivariate regressions. The number of zeros in the left hand side variable is
large, as the dataset is quarterly and outflows policy does not change every quarter for most
countries. Using OLS on the dataset would tend to produce estimates of coefficients that are
biased towards zero and have inflated standard errors. As a robustness check, we also performed
the second stage regression after dropping all the zeros – results are consistent with those
described in the paper, and are available on request.


VI.    Results


The first stage results for the fiscal variables are in Table 2 below. In the full sample of countries
none of the fiscal variables are significant at conventional levels of significance suggesting that
(in contrast to the 1980’s) these variables were not important in the decision to change capital
outflow policy. In order to compare the fiscal and the NKI motivations, we report the second
stage regressions with both sets of indicators in Table 3. Due to concerns about correlation
between the explanatory variables, particularly those related through the dimensions of the
impossible trinity or the trilemma (size of net capital inflows, capital account openness,
exchange rate stability and reserves accumulation), we add each of these variables individually
first in columns (1)-(7) and then jointly in columns (8)-(11).

We find that among the two hypotheses, most of the significant variables are associated with
concerns related to NKI, confirming the use of outflows controls in NKI management policy
(Table 3). Countries liberalized more in response to overheating and appreciation pressures (as
evidenced by the sign and significance of variables stock price inflation and exchange market
pressure and REER volatility). They liberalized outflows less in the face of financial stability
concerns or macroeconomic volatility. The coefficients of short term balance sheet exposure and
NKI volatility are negative and significant. In fact, these two variables had the largest
coefficients suggesting that they posed an important constraint to the decision to be more open to
capital flows. Further, more open EMEs liberalized less frequently than less open EMEs.




                                                  21
Although fiscal balance variable has a positive sign and is significant in some regressions,
suggesting that countries with better fiscal positions liberalized more, the measures of internal or
external repression revenues are not significant.25

The results in Table 3 suggest not only that fiscal concerns did not post a binding constraint on
the liberalization of outflows, but also that any constraints on this liberalization came from the
perceived impact of greater openness on macroeconomic volatility and financial stability.

To test the robustness of our results, we divided the countries into groups according to their
degree of capital outflow openness at the beginning of sample period, their exchange rate regime
and whether or not they had a monetary policy with an explicit inflation target. Countries with
tighter capital outflows controls at the beginning of the sample period would have greater leeway
to use outflows policy changes to manage NKI pressures, but may also be more constrained by
fiscal concerns if their reliance on repression revenues is greater. In the closed economy sub-
sample, we therefore expect to see fiscal variable play a larger role than in the full sample.
Further, as Table 1 showed, non-flexible exchange rate regimes non-IT countries used net
outflows easings more frequently than others. Table 4 shows that these countries were also less
open on the capital account, had worse fiscal balances and higher repression revenues on average
than their counterparts. Therefore, we would expect to see fiscal policy constraints to be
stronger in the sub-samples of non-flexible exchange rate and non-IT monetary policy regimes.

We use Schindler’s index of outflow restrictions in the year 2000 to group countries into those
that had higher than median restrictions to begin with (more closed economies) and those with
lower than median restrictions (more open economies). We used IMF AREAER classification to
group countries as having freely floating and non-freely floating exchange rates and into
countries that had an explicit inflation targeting (IT) monetary policy, and those that did not.

The results for subgroups of countries that were less open, that had a non-flexible exchange rate
regime and for countries that had IT and non-IT monetary policy regimes are in Tables 5-8
respectively.26 The results of the sub-groups are very similar to those for the full sample. The
concerns about size and volatility of net capital inflows and the resulting overheating, balance
sheet exposures and appreciation pressures are still the most important explanatory variables.
Our expectation of a higher importance of fiscal variables in the decision to liberalize outflow
controls is confirmed only in the sample of closed economies, and to some extent for non-IT
countries. Closed economies were less likely to ease when external repression revenues and
inflation tax on bank lending to government were higher. The latter variable is also significant in
the sample of non-IT countries. Both IT and non-IT regimes were more likely to ease when fiscal

25
   The R-squares in the regressions are not very high and we do not explain more than 17% of the variation in the
full sample. Several factors could account for this, the foremost among them being the high frequency of 0’s in the
sample. There are 121 non-zero net easings of outflows in our sample of 456 observations used in the second to
fourth columns of Table 3.
26
   The number of non-zero observations of the dependent variable for country groups open economies, flexible
exchange rate regimes was very low – we therefore do not report these results.

                                                         22
balances are higher. The anomaly is the sign of the liquidation tax variable which suggests that in
the samples of closed economies and non-IT regimes, countries with higher liquidation tax
liberalized more. However, this may simply reflect the fact that liquidation tax was negative for
most countries in our sample. In the non-flexible exchange rate regimes sample, variable related
to NKI concerns were the only ones that showed strong associations with liberalizations.


VII. Conclusions and interpretations


This paper documents a steep decline in revenues from external repression in EMEs during
the 2000’s compared to the earlier decades. Further, our results indicate that most of the
significant associations of outflows liberalizations in the 2000’s were with concerns related to
net capital inflows. Emerging market economies (EMEs) facing high volatility in net capital
inflows and higher balance sheet exposures liberalized less. Countries eased more in response
to higher net capital inflows, and when these inflows translated into higher appreciation
pressure in the exchange market, higher real exchange rate volatility, and greater
accumulation of reserves. Unlike the 1980’s, we find very limited importance of fiscal
variables in explaining liberalization of capital outflow controls - only in the sample of
relatively closed and non-inflation targeting countries, do we see a negative association of
greater repression revenues with easing of outflows.

The remarkable decline in the fiscal reliance on external repression is good news given that it
was accompanied by the deeper tax collection from broader base. However, it begs the
question of the future of financial repression. History suggests that one should be cautious in
extrapolating from recent trends. The growth acceleration of China and India, and the illusive
great moderation prior to the global crisis of 2008-2009 probably contributed to the declining
reliance on repression revenues. Yet, a reversal of favorable trends frequently changes
attitudes towards financial repression (Reinhart, Kirkegaard and Sbrancia, 2011). History also
suggests that EMEs may rely on financial repression as a contingent tax in the wake of
realized bad tail events (as evidenced by the experience of Argentina in the early 2000s).




                                                23
                                          References

Aizenman, Joshua and Pablo E. Guiddotti (1994) “Capital Controls, Collection Costs and
Domestic Public Debt” Journal of International Money and Finance, 13, 1: 41-54.

Aizenman, Joshua and Yothin Jinjarak (2009) “Globalisation and Developing Countries – a
Shrinking Tax Base?” The Journal of Development Studies, 45, 5: 653-671.

Alesina, Alberto, Grilli, Vittorio and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (1994) “The Political Economy
of Capital Controls” in Leopnardo Leiderman and Assaf Razin, eds., Capital Mobility: The
Impact on Consumption, Investment and Growth, Cambrdge University Press.

Bird, Richard and Pierre-Pascal Gendron (2011) The VAT in Developing and Transitional
Countries, Cambridge University Press.

Broner, Fernando A., Didier, Tatiana, Erce, Aitor and Sergio Schmukler (2011) “Gross Capital
Flows: Dynamics and Crises” Banco de Espana Working Paper No. 1039. Available at SSRN:
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1825011

Chinn, Menzie D. and Hiro Ito (2008). “A New Measure of Financial Openness” Journal of
Comparative Policy Analysis, 10, 3: 309 – 322 (September).

Das, Udaibir, Papaioannou, Michael and Christoph Trebesch (2012), "Sovereign Debt
Restructurings 1950 - 2010: Literature Survey, Data, and Stylized Facts", IMF Working Paper
12/203, International Monetary Fund.

Dooley, Michael P. (1996) “A Survey of Academic Literature on Controls over International
Capital Transactions” IMF Staff Papers, 43, 4: 639-687.

Edwards, Sebastian (2007) “Capital Controls, Sudden Stops, and Current Account Reversals” in
Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Policies, Practices and
Consequences, University of Chicago Press

Eichengreen, Barry (2001) “Capital Account Liberalization: What do Cross-Country Studies Tell
us?” The World Bank Economic Review, 15, 3: 341-365.

Fratzscher, Marcel (2012) “Capital Controls and Foreign Exchange Policy” European Central
Bank Working Paper No. 1415, February.

Giovannini, Alberto and Martha de Melo (1993) “Government Revenue from Financial
Repression” The American Economic Review, 83, 4: 953-963.

Grilli, Vittorrio and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (1995) “Economic Effects and Structural
Determinants of Capital Controls” IMF Staff Papers, 42, 3: 517-551.



                                               24
Hutchison, Michael, Pasricha, Gurnain and Nirvikar Singh (2012) “Effectiveness of Capital
Controls in India: Evidence from the Offshore NDF Market” IMF Economic Review, 60, 3: 395-
438.

IMF (2011a) “Recent experiences in managing capital inflows: Cross-cutting themes and
possible framework” IMF Policy Paper, February.

IMF (2011b) “International Capital flows: Reliable or Fickle?” World Economic Outlook,
Chapter 4, April 2011.

Kaminsky, Graciela L., Reinhart, Carmen M. amd Carlos A. Végh (2005) “When It Rains, It
Pours: Procyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies” NBER Macroeconomics Annual
2004, Volume 19 (2005), MIT Press.

Klein, Michael W (2012) “Capital controls: Gates and walls”, Brookings Working Paper,
September.

Lardy, Nicolas R. (2008) “Financial Repression in China” Paterson Institute for International
Economics Policy Brief , PB08-8, September.

Pasricha, Gurnain Kaur (2012) “Measures to manage capital flows in emerging market
economies” North American Journal of Economics and Finance, special issue on “International
Finance in the aftermath of the 2008 Global Crisis” 23, 3: 286-309.

Patnaik, Ila and Ajay Shah (2012), “Did the Indian capital controls work as a tool of
macroeconomic policy?” IMF Economic Review, September.

Martin Schindler, 2009. “Measuring Financial Integration: A New Data Set” IMF Staff Papers,
Palgrave Macmillan, vol. 56(1), pages 222-238, April.

Quinn, Dennis P., 1997, “The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation”
American Political Science Review, 91, 531–551 (September).

Quinn, Dennis P. and A. Maria Toyoda. 2008. "Does Capital Account Liberalization Lead to
Economic Growth?." Review of Financial Studies 21(3): 1403-1449.

Reinhart, M. Carmen, Jacob F. Kirkegaard, and M. Belen Sbrancia (2011) “Financial Repression
Redux” Finance and Development, 48, 1: 22-26.

Reinhart, M. Carmen and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2011) “From Financial Crash to Debt Crisis”
American Economic Review, American Economic Association, 101(5), 1676-1706, August.

Warnock, Francis E (2011), “Doubts about capital controls”, report, Council on Foreign
Relations, April.



                                               25
Table 1: Capital Account Policy Changes by Monetary Policy Framework and Exchange Rate Regime

                                                                                                                                                                       Outflow
                                                                                                                                                                       Easings,
                                                                                                                      NKI                                NKI           % of NKI
                                 All            Outflow        Outflow         Net Outflow         Inflow           Reducing             All           Reducing        Reducing
                               Measures         Easings       Tightenings        Easings         Tightenings        Measures           Measures        Measures        measures
                                   (A)             (B)             (C)          (D)=((B)-(C)          (E)          (F)=(B)+(E)
                                                               (Total Number of Measures)                                                 (Measures Per Country-Quarter)
IMF Exchange Rate Classifications
Freely Floating            124                    76                6                70               15               91                 0.51            0.38             84
Non-Freely Floating        540                    198               22               176              120              318                1.16            0.68             62
IMF Monetary Policy Framework
Inflation Targeting (IT) 286                      130               9                121               79              209                0.72            0.53             62
non-IT                   378                      144               19               125               56              200                1.22            0.65             72


Total                              664            274               28              246              135              409                0.94             0.58              67
Note: All measures include outflow easings and tightenings and inflow easings and tightenings. Non-Freely Floating exchange rate classifications include soft pegs, floating and
other regimes, as classified by IMF.




                                                                                        26
 Table 2: Role of fiscal concerns in decisions to liberalize capital outflows;
 Dependent Variable: Number of Net Easings of Outflows
                             (1)      (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)         (9)

 IT Monetary Policy          -0.12    -0.12       0.07        0.06       0.03        -0.12       -0.11      0.09        0.07
                             (0.16)   (0.17)      (0.14)      (0.15)     (0.14)      (0.16)      (0.16)     (0.12)      (0.14)


 Free Floating Exchange      0.01     0.00        -0.22*      -0.19      -0.15       -0.08       -0.08      -0.10       -0.07
 Rate Regime                 (0.13)   (0.13)      (0.12)      (0.12)     (0.13)      (0.12)      (0.12)     (0.12)      (0.14)


 Capital Account Openness    -0.31*   -0.30*      -0.21       -0.23      -0.24       -0.33**     -0.31**    -0.18       -0.27
 (Chinn-Ito)                 (0.16)   (0.15)      (0.15)      (0.16)     (0.17)      (0.14)      (0.14)     (0.15)      (0.18)


 No. of Net Tightenings of   0.06     0.06        0.08        0.08       0.06        0.08        0.08       0.07        0.05
 Inflow Controls             (0.07)   (0.07)      (0.07)      (0.07)     (0.07)      (0.07)      (0.07)     (0.07)      (0.08)


 Fiscal Balance/Tax          0.05                                                                           0.07        0.11
 Revenues, %                 (0.06)                                                                         (0.10)      (0.10)

 Gross Govt. Debt/GDP, %              -0.02                                                                 -0.07       0.05
                                      (0.10)                                                                (0.10)      (0.16)

 Repression                                       -0.05                                                     -0.02
 Revenues/GDP, %                                  (0.07)                                                    (0.07)
 Repression Revenues
 (incl. debt revaluation                                      -0.03
 costs)/GDP, %                                                (0.03)

 Liquidation Tax                                                         0.04                               0.09        0.04
                                                                         (0.06)                             (0.12)      (0.12)
 Real Deposit Rate                                                                   -0.02                  -0.02       0.00
                                                                                     (0.04)                 (0.08)      (0.08)

 (Bank Lending to Govt/                                                                          0.04       -0.02       0.04
 Bank Assets)*Inflation                                                                          (0.04)     (0.15)      (0.10)

 Observations                623      623         470         470        497         667         667        461         488
 R-squared                   0.09     0.09        0.12        0.12       0.10        0.10        0.10       0.12        0.10

 Number of Countries         18       18          15          15         16          18          18         15          16
Notes: All regressions include time fixed effects; Clustered standard errors in parentheses; ***p<0.01, **p<0.05, *p<0.1.
All explanatory variables are lagged one quarter. All variables, except dummies and number of easings/tightenings have been
normalized and outliers have been removed.



                                                                                           27
Table 3: Full Sample. Dependent Variable: Number of Net Easings of Outflow Controls
                                  (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)             (6)              (7)             (8)              (9)             (10)             (11)
IT Monetary Policy                0.05             -0.11           -0.11            -0.10           -0.06           -0.10            0.04            0.12             0.09            0.05             0.03
                                  (0.12)           (0.16)          (0.16)           (0.16)          (0.13)          (0.16)           (0.13)          (0.12)           (0.12)          (0.12)           (0.13)
Free Floating Exchange            -0.19            -0.09           -0.05            -0.07           -0.12           -0.08            -0.11           -0.17            -0.15           -0.22            -0.24
Rate Regime                       (0.19)           (0.19)          (0.19)           (0.19)          (0.19)          (0.19)           (0.16)          (0.19)           (0.17)          (0.21)           (0.21)
No. of Net Tightenings of         0.08             0.06            0.06             0.06            0.07            0.06             0.09            0.10             0.10            0.11             0.11
Inflow Controls                   (0.07)           (0.07)          (0.07)           (0.07)          (0.09)          (0.07)           (0.07)          (0.09)           (0.09)          (0.09)           (0.10)
Capital Account Openness          -0.32*           -0.39**         -0.36**          -0.40**         -0.35**         -0.41**          -0.25*          -0.27*           -0.26*          -0.32*           -0.32*
(Chinn-Ito)                       (0.15)           (0.16)          (0.16)           (0.16)          (0.14)          (0.15)           (0.14)          (0.14)           (0.13)          (0.15)           (0.15)
Fiscal Concerns
Fiscal Balance/GDP, %             0.13*            0.15*           0.14*            0.14*           0.08            0.15*            0.12            0.03             0.03            0.04             0.04
                                  (0.07)           (0.08)          (0.08)           (0.07)          (0.14)          (0.08)           (0.08)          (0.14)           (0.15)          (0.14)           (0.15)
Liquidation Tax                   0.12             0.10            0.11             0.10            0.09            0.11             0.15            0.19             0.12            0.14             0.07
                                  (0.11)           (0.14)          (0.11)           (0.11)          (0.12)          (0.11)           (0.10)          (0.15)           (0.10)          (0.10)           (0.20)
Repression Revenues/GDP, %        -0.14                                                                                                              -0.11
                                  (0.16)                                                                                                             (0.14)
(Bank Lending to Govt./Bank                        0.00                                                                                              -0.15
Assets)*Inflation                                  (0.13)                                                                                            (0.16)
NKI Concerns
Change in Stock Prices, (%        0.13**           0.15***         0.15***          0.15***         0.14***         0.15***          0.15***         0.14***          0.15***         0.16**            0.16**
yoy)                              (0.05)           (0.03)          (0.03)           (0.03)          (0.04)          (0.03)           (0.03)          (0.04)           (0.04)          (0.05)            (0.05)
Gross Inflow Stop                 -0.21*           -0.23**         -0.19            -0.17           -0.20           -0.24**          -0.27**         -0.21            -0.20           -0.12             -0.12
                                  (0.11)           (0.10)          (0.11)           (0.11)          (0.12)          (0.10)           (0.10)          (0.12)           (0.12)          (0.14)            (0.15)
Flight                            -0.18            -0.13           -0.11            -0.13           -0.04           -0.14            -0.15           -0.09            -0.07           -0.03             -0.03
                                  (0.12)           (0.12)          (0.12)           (0.13)          (0.09)          (0.12)           (0.12)          (0.09)           (0.08)          (0.11)            (0.11)
REER Volatility                   0.10*            0.11*           0.12**           0.11*           0.11*           0.10             0.14***         0.13*            0.11**          0.09*             0.09*
                                  (0.05)           (0.06)          (0.05)           (0.06)          (0.05)          (0.06)           (0.04)          (0.07)           (0.05)          (0.04)            (0.05)
NKI Volatility                    -0.27**          -0.34**         -0.36**          -0.32**         -0.38**         -0.33**          -0.32***        -0.34***         -0.34***        -0.39***          -0.38***
                                  (0.11)           (0.13)          (0.13)           (0.13)          (0.13)          (0.12)           (0.09)          (0.10)           (0.09)          (0.10)            (0.10)
NKI/GDP, %                                                         0.10                                                                              -0.01            0.00            -0.03             -0.03
                                                                   (0.08)                                                                            (0.08)           (0.08)          (0.08)            (0.08)
EMP                                                                                   -0.11**                                                        -0.08**          -0.08**         -0.08**           -0.08**
                                                                                      (0.04)                                                         (0.03)           (0.03)          (0.03)            (0.03)
∆ (Reserves/GDP, %)                                                                                   0.05                                           0.03             0.02            0.06              0.06
                                                                                                      (0.08)                                         (0.08)           (0.08)          (0.08)            (0.08)
REER Appreciation                                                                                                     0.04                           0.03             0.03            0.06              0.06
                                                                                                                      (0.04)                         (0.04)           (0.04)          (0.04)            (0.04)
(Short Term External Debt-                                                                                                            -0.39***       -0.29***         -0.29***        -0.25***          -0.24***
Reserves)/GDP, %                                                                                                                      (0.08)         (0.07)           (0.06)          (0.07)            (0.06)
Real GDP Growth, (% yoy)                                                                                                                                                              0.14              0.14
                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.09)            (0.09)
Trade/GDP, %                                                                                                                                                                          0.18              0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.32)            (0.32)
Inflation, %                                                                                                                                                                                            0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                                        (0.19)
Observations                       429              456              456              456             440             456             432              413             416               408            408
R-squared                          0.14             0.13             0.13             0.13            0.13            0.13            0.15             0.16            0.16              0.17           0.17
Number of Countries                14               15               15               15              15              15              14               14              14                13             13
Notes: All regressions include time fixed effects; Clustered standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All explanatory variables are lagged one quarter. All variables, except dummies and
number of easings/tightenings have been normalized and outliers have been removed.

                                                                                                       28
Table 4: Countries with IT monetary policy and freely floating exchange rates were different than their counterparts in terms of openness and fiscal outcomes
                                              Capital Account Openness           Trade/GDP    Fiscal Balance/Tax            Repression
                                            Quinn Index Chinn-Ito Index              (%)         Revenues (%)            Revenues/GDP (%)
                                                                               (Mean over sample period)
Non-IT Countries                                50.6              -0.12             74.01            -19.52                      0.04
IT Countries                                    68.89             0.31              64.13             -8.93                     -0.32

non-Freely Floating Exchange Rate
Regimes                                         55.4               0.11             71.8                -15.89                   0.01
Freely Floating Exchange Rate Regimes           71.38              0.14             62.03                -8.82                  -0.51




                                                                             29
Table 5: Less Open Economies (Countries with higher than median capital outflow controls in 2000); Dependent Variable: Number of Net Easings of Outflows
                                  (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)              (8)             (9)             (10)             (11)
IT Monetary Policy                -0.17            -0.33           -0.26           -0.23            -0.13           -0.32           -0.08            0.13            0.13            0.35             0.35
                                  (0.24)           (0.26)          (0.29)          (0.29)           (0.27)          (0.26)          (0.18)           (0.21)          (0.30)          (0.33)           (0.31)
Free Floating Exchange            -0.68            -0.20           -0.17           -0.20            -0.21           -0.27           -0.19            -0.21           -0.08           -0.08            -0.13
Rate Regime                       (0.42)           (0.57)          (0.50)          (0.52)           (0.50)          (0.54)          (0.59)           (0.45)          (0.53)          (0.52)           (0.50)
No. of Net Tightenings of         0.14             0.11            0.11            0.12             0.13            0.11            0.16             0.18            0.19            0.22             0.23
Inflow Controls                   (0.12)           (0.13)          (0.13)          (0.13)           (0.17)          (0.13)          (0.13)           (0.16)          (0.17)          (0.19)           (0.20)
Capital Account Openness          -0.47*           -0.49**         -0.44*          -0.49**          -0.48*          -0.53**         -0.43*           -0.70**         -0.51**         -0.71**          -0.72**
(Chinn-Ito)                       (0.23)           (0.19)          (0.20)          (0.20)           (0.24)          (0.17)          (0.21)           (0.22)          (0.19)          (0.21)           (0.24)
Fiscal Concerns
Fiscal Balance/GDP, %             0.13             0.16            0.16            0.15             0.09            0.16            0.11             0.03            0.02            0.06             0.06
                                  (0.10)           (0.11)          (0.11)          (0.11)           (0.19)          (0.11)          (0.10)           (0.19)          (0.19)          (0.18)           (0.18)
Liquidation Tax                   0.32             0.49*           0.36*           0.38*            0.40            0.40*           0.29             0.84***         0.30            0.43**           0.31
                                  (0.18)           (0.22)          (0.19)          (0.19)           (0.25)          (0.19)          (0.18)           (0.20)          (0.22)          (0.16)           (0.31)
Repression Revenues/GDP, %        -0.38*                                                                                                             -0.47**
                                  (0.19)                                                                                                             (0.13)
(Bank Lending to Govt./Bank                        -0.22                                                                                             -0.94**
Assets)*Inflation                                  (0.30)                                                                                            (0.36)
NKI Concerns
Change in Stock Prices, (% yoy) 0.07               0.13**          0.13*           0.11*            0.11*           0.10            0.16*            0.07            0.12            0.12               0.12
                                (0.09)             (0.05)          (0.06)          (0.06)           (0.05)          (0.06)          (0.08)           (0.11)          (0.11)          (0.12)             (0.12)
Gross Inflow Stop               -0.53**            -0.58*          -0.54*          -0.50*           -0.53           -0.59*          -0.47**          -0.48           -0.40           -0.36              -0.37
                                (0.17)             (0.29)          (0.28)          (0.27)           (0.33)          (0.29)          (0.18)           (0.34)          (0.29)          (0.46)             (0.48)
Flight                          -0.11              -0.04           -0.05           -0.07            0.08            -0.05           -0.21            0.11            -0.01           0.04               0.04
                                (0.20)             (0.23)          (0.23)          (0.24)           (0.20)          (0.24)          (0.26)           (0.23)          (0.21)          (0.25)             (0.25)
REER Volatility                 0.01               0.18            0.17            0.15             0.18            0.09            0.18             -0.01           0.05            0.16               0.16
                                (0.07)             (0.12)          (0.12)          (0.12)           (0.17)          (0.16)          (0.13)           (0.17)          (0.22)          (0.25)             (0.26)
NKI Volatility                  -0.29              -0.49**         -0.50**         -0.45**          -0.47**         -0.43**         -0.41*           -0.37*          -0.43*          -0.56**            -0.55**
                                (0.17)             (0.18)          (0.16)          (0.18)           (0.18)          (0.17)          (0.20)           (0.19)          (0.19)          (0.16)             (0.15)
NKI/GDP, %                                                         0.09                                                                              -0.05           0.02            -0.07              -0.07
                                                                   (0.12)                                                                            (0.14)          (0.11)          (0.11)             (0.11)
EMP                                                                                  -0.11**                                                         -0.07*          -0.05           -0.06              -0.06
                                                                                     (0.03)                                                          (0.04)          (0.04)          (0.03)             (0.04)
∆ (Reserves/GDP, %)                                                                                  0.06                                            0.10            0.04            0.13               0.13
                                                                                                     (0.10)                                          (0.10)          (0.12)          (0.12)             (0.12)
REER Appreciation                                                                                                    0.08                            0.09            0.12*           0.17***            0.17***
                                                                                                                     (0.07)                          (0.07)          (0.05)          (0.03)             (0.03)
(Short Term External Debt-                                                                                                            -0.57*                         -0.47           -0.24              -0.25
Reserves)/GDP, %                                                                                                                      (0.27)                         (0.29)          (0.17)             (0.18)
Real GDP Growth, (% yoy)                                                                                                                                                             0.30*              0.31*
                                                                                                                                                                                     (0.13)             (0.14)
Trade/GDP, %                                                                                                                                                                         0.49               0.47
                                                                                                                                                                                     (0.40)             (0.35)
Inflation, %                                                                                                                                                                                            0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                                        (0.36)
Observations                       231              258             258              258             242             258              234             215             218               210             210
R-squared                          0.23             0.19            0.19             0.19            0.19            0.19             0.22            0.25            0.23              0.27            0.27
Number of Countries                8                9               9                9               9               9                8               8               8                 7               7
Notes: All regressions include time fixed effects; Clustered standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All explanatory variables are lagged one quarter. All variables, except dummies and
number of easings/tightenings have been normalized and outliers have been removed.

                                                                                                       30
Table 6: Non-Freely Floating Exchange Rate Regimes; Dependent Variable: Number of Net Easings of Outflows
                                    (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)           (11)           (12)
IT Monetary Policy                  0.04           -0.13          -0.12          -0.16          -0.14          -0.05          -0.12          0.17           0.30           0.19           0.04           0.07
                                    (0.17)         (0.23)         (0.24)         (0.18)         (0.24)         (0.19)         (0.23)         (0.36)         (0.22)         (0.30)         (0.27)         (0.27)
No. of Net Tightenings of           0.08           0.09           0.09           0.09           0.09           0.11           0.09           0.11           0.12           0.12           0.12           0.12
Inflow Controls                     (0.06)         (0.07)         (0.07)         (0.07)         (0.07)         (0.08)         (0.07)         (0.07)         (0.08)         (0.09)         (0.09)         (0.10)
Capital Account Openness            -0.28          -0.34          -0.34          -0.34          -0.38          -0.24          -0.34          -0.36          -0.25          -0.27          -0.18          -0.19
(Chinn-Ito)                         (0.32)         (0.34)         (0.33)         (0.35)         (0.32)         (0.28)         (0.32)         (0.34)         (0.36)         (0.30)         (0.29)         (0.32)

Fiscal Concerns
Fiscal Balance/GDP, %               0.01           0.03           0.03           0.01           0.02           -0.08          0.03           0.03           -0.14          -0.13          -0.13          -0.13
                                    (0.12)         (0.13)         (0.13)         (0.12)         (0.12)         (0.22)         (0.13)         (0.13)         (0.20)         (0.20)         (0.20)         (0.20)
Liquidation Tax                     0.23           0.25           0.23           0.23           0.23           0.21           0.23           0.22           0.23           0.18           0.22           0.32
                                    (0.15)         (0.22)         (0.16)         (0.15)         (0.16)         (0.15)         (0.16)         (0.16)         (0.25)         (0.15)         (0.13)         (0.39)
Repression Revenues/GDP, %          -0.32                                                                                                                   -0.25
                                    (0.26)                                                                                                                  (0.23)
(Bank Lending to Govt./Bank                        -0.03                                                                                                    -0.11
Assets)*Inflation                                  (0.16)                                                                                                   (0.28)

NKI Concerns
Change in Stock Prices, (% yoy)     0.11           0.14*          0.13**         0.14**         0.14**         0.14*          0.13**         0.17**         0.16*          0.17**         0.17            0.18
                                    (0.07)         (0.07)         (0.06)         (0.06)         (0.06)         (0.06)         (0.06)         (0.07)         (0.08)         (0.07)         (0.10)          (0.10)
Gross Inflow Stop                   -0.23**        -0.25*         -0.25*         -0.17          -0.18          -0.16          -0.25*         -0.38**        -0.26*         -0.24          -0.07           -0.07
                                    (0.10)         (0.12)         (0.11)         (0.10)         (0.11)         (0.12)         (0.12)         (0.17)         (0.13)         (0.14)         (0.19)          (0.19)
Flight                              -0.14          -0.10          -0.10          -0.04          -0.07          0.14           -0.10          -0.14          -0.04          0.06           0.07            0.07
                                    (0.14)         (0.19)         (0.19)         (0.20)         (0.19)         (0.19)         (0.19)         (0.17)         (0.11)         (0.17)         (0.12)          (0.12)
REER Volatility                     0.25*          0.18           0.18           0.22*          0.18           0.17*          0.18           0.19           0.28*          0.21*          0.12            0.12
                                    (0.13)         (0.11)         (0.11)         (0.10)         (0.11)         (0.09)         (0.11)         (0.11)         (0.15)         (0.11)         (0.11)          (0.10)
NKI Volatility                      -0.56**        -0.43*         -0.42*         -0.45*         -0.42*         -0.43*         -0.42*         -0.30          -0.50*         -0.40          -0.50*          -0.50*
                                    (0.24)         (0.22)         (0.22)         (0.23)         (0.21)         (0.22)         (0.22)         (0.25)         (0.25)         (0.23)         (0.25)          (0.25)
NKI/GDP, %                                                                       0.20**                                                                     0.18           0.19           0.09            0.08
                                                                                 (0.09)                                                                     (0.18)         (0.17)         (0.16)          (0.16)
EMP                                                                                               -0.09                                                     -0.06          -0.05          -0.06           -0.06
                                                                                                  (0.05)                                                    (0.05)         (0.05)         (0.04)          (0.04)
∆ (Reserves/GDP, %)                                                                                             0.11                                        -0.05          -0.03          0.01            0.01
                                                                                                                (0.10)                                      (0.14)         (0.13)         (0.13)          (0.13)
REER Appreciation                                                                                                              0.00                         -0.03          -0.04          0.00            0.01
                                                                                                                               (0.07)                       (0.07)         (0.08)         (0.08)          (0.08)
(Short Term External Debt-                                                                                                                    -0.52**       -0.44*         -0.41*         -0.21           -0.22
Reserves)/GDP, %                                                                                                                              (0.23)        (0.20)         (0.20)         (0.24)          (0.23)
Real GDP Growth, (% yoy)                                                                                                                                                                  0.18            0.18
                                                                                                                                                                                          (0.13)          (0.13)
Trade/GDP, %                                                                                                                                                                              0.60            0.65
                                                                                                                                                                                          (0.54)          (0.61)
Inflation, %                                                                                                                                                                                              -0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                          (0.33)
Observations                        251             254            254             254            254           238            254            254             235           238             230           230
R-squared                           0.21            0.19           0.19            0.20           0.19          0.19           0.19           0.20            0.22          0.21            0.24          0.24
Number of Countries                 13              13             13              13             13            13             13             13              13            13              12            12
Notes: All regressions include time fixed effects; Clustered standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All explanatory variables are lagged one quarter. All variables, except dummies and
number of easings/tightenings have been normalized and outliers have been removed.

                                                                                                         31
Table 7: IT Monetary Policy Regimes; Dependent Variable: Number of Net Easings of Outflows
                                    (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)             (7)             (8)             (9)              (10)            (11)
Free Floating Exchange Rate         -0.14           -0.07           -0.06           -0.07           -0.05            -0.07           -0.03           -0.13           -0.05            -0.07           -0.10
Regime                              (0.16)          (0.16)          (0.17)          (0.17)          (0.17)           (0.16)          (0.16)          (0.16)          (0.17)           (0.19)          (0.19)
No. of Net Tightenings of           -0.06           -0.07           -0.07           -0.07           -0.06            -0.08           -0.06           -0.08           -0.07            -0.08           -0.08
Inflow Controls                     (0.09)          (0.08)          (0.08)          (0.08)          (0.07)           (0.08)          (0.10)          (0.09)          (0.09)           (0.09)          (0.09)
Capital Account Openness            -0.38**         -0.40**         -0.41**         -0.42**         -0.49***         -0.47***        -0.26           -0.45**         -0.37**          -0.38**         -0.38**
(Chinn-Ito)                         (0.14)          (0.16)          (0.16)          (0.15)          (0.15)           (0.14)          (0.15)          (0.16)          (0.14)           (0.15)          (0.14)
Fiscal Concerns
Fiscal Balance/GDP, %               0.18*           0.19**          0.19**          0.19**          0.17**           0.19**          0.17*           0.16*           0.15             0.15            0.15
                                    (0.08)          (0.07)          (0.07)          (0.07)          (0.07)           (0.07)          (0.08)          (0.09)          (0.08)           (0.08)          (0.08)
Liquidation Tax                     0.05            0.01            0.05            0.05            0.06             0.05            0.10            0.02            0.08             0.10            -0.06
                                    (0.14)          (0.13)          (0.14)          (0.14)          (0.13)           (0.13)          (0.13)          (0.10)          (0.11)           (0.10)          (0.16)
Repression Revenues/GDP, %          -0.14                                                                                                            -0.06
                                    (0.10)                                                                                                           (0.13)
(Bank Lending to Govt./Bank                         0.13                                                                                             0.01
Assets)*Inflation                                   (0.17)                                                                                           (0.17)
NKI Concerns
Change in Stock Prices, (% yoy)     0.11*           0.11**          0.11**          0.11**          0.13***          0.11***         0.12**          0.12**          0.13***          0.14**          0.14**
                                    (0.06)          (0.04)          (0.04)          (0.04)          (0.04)           (0.03)          (0.04)          (0.05)          (0.04)           (0.05)          (0.05)
Gross Inflow Stop                   -0.19           -0.21           -0.19           -0.18           -0.25*           -0.23           -0.20*          -0.22           -0.25            -0.15           -0.16
                                    (0.11)          (0.11)          (0.12)          (0.13)          (0.12)           (0.14)          (0.11)          (0.15)          (0.14)           (0.15)          (0.15)
Flight                              -0.04           -0.01           -0.01           -0.02           -0.07            -0.01           -0.02           -0.05           -0.04            -0.01           0.00
                                    (0.10)          (0.11)          (0.10)          (0.11)          (0.12)           (0.12)          (0.10)          (0.12)          (0.11)           (0.13)          (0.14)
REER Volatility                     -0.11           -0.11           -0.10           -0.11           -0.08            -0.18**         -0.04           -0.19*          -0.13            -0.13           -0.12
                                    (0.11)          (0.12)          (0.12)          (0.11)          (0.14)           (0.08)          (0.09)          (0.09)          (0.08)           (0.08)          (0.08)
NKI Volatility                      -0.24           -0.43**         -0.45**         -0.45**         -0.43**          -0.43**         -0.40***        -0.29*          -0.39***         -0.42***        -0.35**
                                    (0.16)          (0.17)          (0.18)          (0.17)          (0.18)           (0.16)          (0.12)          (0.15)          (0.11)           (0.12)          (0.15)
NKI/GDP, %                                                          0.01                                                                             0.03            -0.01            -0.02           -0.02
                                                                    (0.09)                                                                           (0.09)          (0.09)           (0.09)          (0.08)
EMP                                                                                 -0.09                                                            -0.13**         -0.13**          -0.12**         -0.11**
                                                                                    (0.08)                                                           (0.05)          (0.04)           (0.04)          (0.04)
∆ (Reserves/GDP, %)                                                                                 -0.14                                            -0.08           -0.10            -0.08           -0.07
                                                                                                    (0.13)                                           (0.15)          (0.14)           (0.14)          (0.14)
REER Appreciation                                                                                                    0.10                            0.08            0.08             0.09            0.09
                                                                                                                     (0.06)                          (0.06)          (0.05)           (0.06)          (0.06)
(Short Term External Debt-                                                                                                           -0.40**                         -0.37***         -0.36***        -0.31**
Reserves)/GDP, %                                                                                                                     (0.14)                          (0.11)           (0.11)          (0.11)
Real GDP Growth, (% yoy)                                                                                                                                                              0.12            0.13
                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.12)          (0.12)
Trade/GDP, %                                                                                                                                                                          -0.13           -0.23
                                                                                                                                                                                      (0.22)          (0.23)
Inflation, %                                                                                                                                                                                          0.20
(External Debt-Reserves)/GDP,
%
Observations                        293              317             317              317             317             317             293              293             293              293             293
R-squared                           0.26             0.23            0.23             0.24            0.24            0.24            0.27             0.28            0.29             0.30            0.30
Number of Countries                 10               11              11               11              11              11              10               10              10               10              10
Notes: All regressions include time fixed effects; Clustered standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All explanatory variables are lagged one quarter. All variables, except dummies and
number of easings/tightenings have been normalized and outliers have been removed.


                                                                                                       32
Table 8: Non-IT Monetary Policy Regimes; Dependent Variable: Number of Net Easings of Outflows
                                     (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)            (9)            (10)           (11)           (12)
Free Floating Exchange Rate          -0.46          -0.32         -0.40          -0.30          -1.69          -1.01          -0.80          -0.43          -2.06          -1.67          -2.05          -2.65
Regime                               (0.34)         (0.47)        (0.28)         (0.53)         (1.07)         (0.77)         (0.43)         (0.52)         (1.41)         (1.27)         (1.37)         (1.53)
No. of Net Tightenings of            0.17           0.19          0.19           0.19           0.24           0.20           0.22           0.20           0.24           0.21           0.24           0.27
Inflow Controls                      (0.13)         (0.16)        (0.15)         (0.16)         (0.18)         (0.17)         (0.16)         (0.17)         (0.18)         (0.17)         (0.19)         (0.19)
Capital Account Openness             -0.76          -0.67         -0.65          -0.70          -0.39          -0.69          -0.87          -0.83          -0.79          -1.09*         -0.47          -0.35
(Chinn-Ito)                          (0.53)         (0.68)        (0.57)         (0.60)         (0.51)         (0.63)         (0.68)         (0.61)         (0.63)         (0.54)         (0.40)         (0.38)
Fiscal Concerns
Fiscal Balance/GDP, %                0.05*          0.13*         0.11           0.13           -0.06          0.16**         0.13*          0.12           -0.13          -0.17          -0.03          -0.07
                                     (0.03)         (0.07)        (0.07)         (0.07)         (0.24)         (0.05)         (0.06)         (0.07)         (0.19)         (0.18)         (0.22)         (0.20)
Liquidation Tax                      0.46***        0.35          0.38           0.39           0.02           0.47           0.35           0.34           0.70*          1.31**         0.11           1.09
                                     (0.10)         (0.34)        (0.29)         (0.31)         (0.19)         (0.29)         (0.28)         (0.26)         (0.29)         (0.46)         (0.24)         (0.96)
Repression Revenues/GDP, %           -0.41                                                                                                                  -0.22          -0.25
                                     (0.31)                                                                                                                 (0.26)         (0.23)
(Bank Lending to Govt./Bank                         0.07                                                                                                    -0.64          -1.51*
Assets)*Inflation                                   (0.25)                                                                                                  (0.34)         (0.65)
NKI Concerns
Change in Stock Prices, (% yoy)      0.04           0.16          0.14           0.17           0.14           0.19           0.18           0.22           0.04           0.10           0.16           0.01
                                     (0.22)         (0.23)        (0.20)         (0.25)         (0.18)         (0.21)         (0.26)         (0.24)         (0.24)         (0.21)         (0.22)         (0.35)
Gross Inflow Stop                    -0.11          -0.28         -0.27          -0.28          0.03           -0.31          -0.71*         -0.60*         -0.32          -0.47          -0.24          -0.38
                                     (0.32)         (0.26)        (0.19)         (0.35)         (0.21)         (0.24)         (0.36)         (0.28)         (0.85)         (0.41)         (0.37)         (0.85)
Flight                               -0.19          -0.02         0.01           -0.02          0.15           -0.05          -0.06          -0.11          -0.32          -0.57**        0.03           -0.04
                                     (0.17)         (0.28)        (0.27)         (0.27)         (0.40)         (0.28)         (0.27)         (0.29)         (0.18)         (0.20)         (0.45)         (0.18)
REER Volatility                      0.36*          0.22          0.30**         0.22           0.28*          0.27           0.26           0.51**         0.42           0.80**         0.48*          0.39
                                     (0.16)         (0.17)        (0.12)         (0.17)         (0.13)         (0.18)         (0.17)         (0.19)         (0.22)         (0.26)         (0.22)         (0.22)
NKI Volatility                       -0.70**        -0.44         -0.62          -0.45          -0.21          -0.49          -0.27          -0.24          -0.48          -0.42          -0.21          -0.67
                                     (0.27)         (0.45)        (0.41)         (0.47)         (0.40)         (0.45)         (0.53)         (0.49)         (0.43)         (0.40)         (0.49)         (0.65)
NKI/GDP, %                                                        0.25*                                                                                     -0.13          -0.37          0.04           -0.06
                                                                  (0.11)                                                                                    (0.28)         (0.30)         (0.20)         (0.33)
EMP                                                                              -0.02                                                                      -0.01          -0.05          0.05           -0.00
                                                                                 (0.14)                                                                     (0.20)         (0.19)         (0.16)         (0.16)
∆ (Reserves/GDP, %)                                                                             0.26***                                                     0.16           0.23*          0.21*          0.17
                                                                                                (0.07)                                                      (0.13)         (0.10)         (0.10)         (0.17)
REER Appreciation                                                                                              -0.20                                        -0.14          -0.11          -0.14          -0.09
                                                                                                               (0.13)                                       (0.14)         (0.13)         (0.09)         (0.12)
(Short Term External Debt-                                                                                                    -0.59                         -0.44
Reserves)/GDP, %                                                                                                              (0.33)                        (0.54)
Real GDP Growth, (% yoy)                                                                                                                                                                                 0.21
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (0.24)
Trade/GDP, %                                                                                                                                                                                             1.80
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (1.20)
Inflation, %                                                                                                                                                                                             -0.94
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (1.00)
(External Debt-Reserves)/GDP, %                                                                                                               -0.71*                        -0.95**         -0.39*       -0.35
                                                                                                                                              (0.32)                        (0.38)          (0.19)       (0.19)
Observations                          136            139            139             139           123           139            139            139             120           120             123          115
R-squared                             0.35           0.31           0.32            0.31          0.35          0.31           0.32           0.33            0.39          0.40            0.36         0.41
Number of Countries                   7              7              7               7             7             7              7              7               7             7               7            6
Notes: All regressions include time fixed effects; Clustered standard errors in parentheses; *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. All explanatory variables are lagged one quarter. All variables, except dummies and
number of easings/tightenings have been normalized and outliers have been removed.

                                                                                                         33
Appendix
          A.       Measures on the capital account and their classification
The database on capital controls measures is an extended version of the data collected in Pasricha
(2012).It includes information on the “capital transactions” category of the IMF AREAER,
supplemented by information on similar measures from central banks’ and other country regulators’
websites, news sources and other research papers. The IMF AREAER breaks down the broad
category, capital transactions, as follows:

1. Controls on capital and money market instruments:
        a. Controls on capital market securities: further classified into “controls on shares or other
        securities of a participating nature and “banks or other debt securities”
        b. Controls on money market instruments
        c. Controls on collective investment schemes
2. Controls on derivatives and other instruments
3. Controls on Credit Operations:
        a. Commercial Credits
        b. Financial Credits
        c. Guarantees, sureties and financial backup facilities
4. Controls on direct investment
5. Controls on liquidation of direct investment
6. Controls on real estate transactions
7. Controls on personal capital transactions
8. Provisions specific to the financial sector:
        a. Provisions specific to commercial banks and other credit institutions, which includes open
        foreign exchange position limits and other provisions
        b. Provisions specific to institutional investors

A change is counted as a change in policy affecting one of the above 8 categories. If a major policy
announcement takes place and includes measures related to several categories above, each measure is
classified in each category in which it belongs and is counted separately.
We classify the measures into the following categories:

     1. Whether the measure (or change) impacts capital inflows (I) or outflows (O) or cannot be
        clearly identified as affecting only one of these categories (other). 27,28 For the purpose of this
        paper, the ‘other’ measures are classified as both outflows and inflow controls.


27
   In this paper, capital inflow controls refer to controls on inflows by non-residents (including controls on
repatriation of non-residents’ inward investments) and controls on outflows refers to controls on outflows by
residents, including on repatriation of outward investments. An alternative way to define capital outflows controls
would group controls on outflows by residents and repatriation of non-residents’ investment together. In general,
tightening of repatriation restrictions for non-residents’ investments already brought in (retroactive restrictions) is
rare in non-crisis periods. Therefore, this distinction would be meaningful in our sample only for Argentina’s post-
2001 controls. For this reason, we dropped Argentina’s pre-2003 data in the analysis.
28
   Examples of the other measures that could not be classified as inflow or outflow measures include limits on net
open foreign exchange positions of financial institutions, ban on use of foreign currency in special economic zones,

                                                          34
    2. Whether the change represents an easing (E) or tightening (T) of policy or a neutral/
       institutional change.


          B.      Computation of External Repression Revenues

Table A.1: Repression Revenues computations and formulas
#       Variable                  Descriptions and Source                                                Frequency

1       Total interest on         Interest payments on external PPG debt from private                    Annual
        external public and       creditors + change in interest arrears to private creditors, in
        publicly guaranteed       USD amounts. Several adjustments are made, in addition:
        (PPG) debt from           1. WDI debt statistics on interest arrears are available only
        private creditors         for total interest arrears on PPG debt (i.e. not interest
                                  arrears on PPG debt from private creditors) and total interest
                                  arrears from official creditors. Under the assumption that all
                                  official creditor arrears are on PPG debt, we first compute
                                  interest arrears on PPG debt from private creditors as the
                                  difference between total interest arrears on PPG debt and
                                  interest arrears on debt from official creditors.
                                  2. The change in arrears are then adjusted for interest
                                  forgiveness as part of sovereign commercial restructurings.
                                  Now, again, interest rescheduled and forgiven is avaiable
                                  only for all external debt (not just PPG debt). Therefore, we
                                  took the dates of sovereign commercial restructurings from
                                  Das et. al. (2012) and added back to the change in interesst
                                  arrears, the interest rescheduled or forgiven only for years in
                                  which there was a sovereign restructuring with private
                                  creditors.
                                  3. For India, the external interest payments in 2003 and
                                  2005 jumped as they included the interest accrued over 5
                                  years but paid at maturity, for Resurgent India Bonds and
                                  Millenium India Deposits. The interest payments for RIB
                                  amounted to USD 1 billion in 2003 and for MID to USD 1.6
                                  billion in 2005 (Source: RBI report on India's external debt,
                                  various issues). These amounts were deleted from 2003 and
                                  2005 interest payments and re-allocated proportionately
                                  over the 5-year term of each of these borrowings. Source:
                                  World Bank WDI




restrictions on transactions that would constitute at once an inflow and outflow, for example use of external
borrowing to invest abroad, etc.

                                                         35
Table A.1 (contd.): Repression Revenues computations and formulas
#     Variable                 Descriptions and Source                                        Frequency

2     External PPG debt        In USD. Source: World Bank WDI                                 Annual
      outstanding and
      disbursed, from
      private creditors
3     Interest rate on         #1 divided by (#2(t)+#2(t-1))/2, expressed as % per annum.     Annual
      external debt
4     Exchange rate            Local Currency Units (LCU) per USD, period average             Annual
5     Depreciation of          (#4(t)-#4(t-1))*100/#4(t-1)                                    Annual
      exchange rate
6     Effective interest       #3(1+#5*.01)                                                   Annual
      rate on external debt
7     Net flow of PPG          These are also adjusted for debt forgiveness, as in #1.        Annual
      debt from private        Source: World Bank WDI
      creditors, in USD
8     USD revaluation          This variable captures the impact of change in value of debt   Annual
      costs                    denominated in non-domestic and non-USD currencies, due
                               to the revaluation of domestic currency against USD and the
                               revaluation of USD against these currencies. It is computed
                               as: (#2(t)-#2(t-1) - #7)*100/#2(t-1)
9     Effective interest                                                                      Annual
      rate on external debt,   This measure uses the Giovannini and de Melo formula
      including debt           exactly: #3 + #5 + #8
      revaluation costs
10    Domestic interest        in LCU. Country sources, see country sources in Table A.2      Annual/
      payments                                                                                Quarterly
11    Total domestic debt      in LCU. Country sources, see country sources in Table A.2      Annual/
      outstanding                                                                             Quarterly
12    Total domestic debt      #12 less debt held by monetary authorities, which is IFS       Annual/
      outstanding              series FASAG or 12A.                                           Quarterly
      (excluding debt held
      by monetary
      authorities)
13    Domestic interest        #10/(#11(t)+#11(t-1)/2), expressed as % pa                     Annual/
      rate                                                                                    Quarterly
14    Repression revenue       (Effective external interest rate -domestic interest           Annual/
      (or external             rate)*domestic debt outstanding (excluding debt held by        Quarterly
      repression revenue)      monetary authorities). i.e. (#6-#13)*12
15    Repression revenue       (#9-#13)*#12                                                   Annual/
      (including debt                                                                         Quarterly
      revaluation costs)




                                                    36
Table A.1 (contd.): Repression Revenues computations and formulas
#      Variable                    Descriptions and Source                                                Frequency

       Components of Repression Revenues:
16a    a. Interest                 External interest rate (in USD terms) - domestic interest              Annual/
       Differential                rate, i.e. #3-#12, expressed as % per annum. To compute as             Quarterly
                                   % of GDP, the interest differential is multiplied by #12 and
                                   divided by nominal GDP.
16b    b. FX Rate                  External interest rate*Depreciation of exchange rate, i.e.             Annual/
       Component                   #3*#5*.01, % pa. To compute as % of GDP, the FX rate                   Quarterly
                                   component is multiplied by #12 and divided by nominal
                                   GDP.


Table A.2: Country Sources for Domestic Interest and Domestic Debt
      Notes:
      Domestic interest at time t (it) is computed as (Series #1) interest paid on domestic debt of government t/(0.5*
      (Series #2)Gross domestic debt outstandingt+ 0.5*(Series #2)Gross domestic debt outstanding t -1)
      Variables, except interest rates, are in local currency units (LCU) unless otherwise specified.
      For quarterly data, the domestic interest is annualized by multiplying the above by 4.
      In some cases, where the data starts in 2001 or later, the first observation uses gross domestic debt
      outstanding at t, instead of the average of t and t-1, to avoid losing the observation.
      For Argentina, Peru and Turkey, quarterly, non-seasonally adjusted data on interest payments was available,
      and displayed seasonality. The interest rate computed was smoothed by taking the 4-quarter moving average
      of it (including time t).


      Series Name                                             Sources/Definitions                         Original
                                                                                                          Frequency
      Argentina
1     Current Outlays: Interest on Domestic Public            Haver                                       Quarterly
      Debt
2.a   Gross Public Debt (USD)                                 Haver                                       Quarterly
2.b   End of period exchange rate against USD                 IMF International Financial Statistics      Quarterly
                                                              (IFS)
2.c   Non-financial Public Sector and Central Bank            Haver
      External Debt (USD)
2     Domestic Public Debt Outstanding                        (#2a-#2c)*#2.b                              Quarterly

      Brazil
      Net public sector implicit interest rate on internal    Banco Central do Brasil. Quarterly data     Monthly
      debt                                                    are averages of monthly data available
                                                              from source. Due to data availability,
                                                              2001-October 202 include Perobras and
                                                              Electrobras, and the subsequent numbers
                                                              exclude these state owned enterprises.
      Gross Public Sector Domestic Debt                       Banco Central do Brasil.                    Monthly




                                                             37
      Series Name                                         Sources/Definitions                           Original
                                                                                                        Frequency

      Chile
1.a   Central government expenditure: interest on debt    Haver; IFS                                    Annual
1.b   General government (excluding Central Bank)         Banco Central de Chile                        Annual
      expenditure: interest on long term external debt
      (USD)
1.c   Exchange rate against USD (Period Average)          IMF IFS                                       Annual
1     Central Government Domestic Interest Rate           (#1.a - #1.b)*#1.c                            Annual
2     Central Government Gross Financial Debt             Haver                                         Annual

      Colombia
      Average coupon on central government domestic       Haver                                         Quarterly
      debt
2     Central government (medium and long term)           Haver                                         Quarterly
      domestic debt

      China
      National Government expenditure: Treasury           Haver/ Ministry of Finance                    Annual
      Securities Domestic Interest

      Central Government Gross Debt                       Haver/ CNBS                                   Annual

      Czech Republic
1     State Debt -domestic Debt                           Ministry of Finance                           Annual
2     State Debt - Interest Costs                         Ministry of Finance                           Annual

      Egypt
1     Consolidated General Government Expenditure         Haver/Ministry of Finance                     Annual

2     General Government Gross Domestic Debt              Haver/Ministry of Finance; Available          Annual
                                                          every June from 2001-March 2006.
                                                          Linearly interpolated for Q4 values.

      India
1.a   Central Government Total Interest Payments          Ministry of Finance                           Annual

1.b   Central Government External Interest Payments       Ministry of Finance                           Annual

1     Central Government Domestic Interest Payments       #1.a-#1.b

2     Central Government Total Internal Liabilities       Reserve Bank of India                         Annual

                                                          Note: all variables available for fiscal
                                                          year. Fiscal year values converted to
                                                          calendar year by taking 1/4 of previous
                                                          fiscal year and 3/4 of current fiscal year.

      Indonesia



                                                         38
      Series Name                                        Sources/Definitions                      Original
                                                                                                  Frequency
1     Central Government Current Expenditure: Interest   Haver/DK                                 Annual
      Payments
2     Central Government Domestic Debt                   Haver/Bank of Indonesia                  Monthly

      Malaysia
      Federal Government Operating Expenditure: Debt     Banka Negara Malaysia                    Annual
      Service charges, domestic
2     Federal Government Total Domestic Debt             Banka Negara Malaysia                    Annual

      Mexico
1     Public Sector domestic interest payments           Secretaria de Hacienda Credito Publico
2     Public Sector domestic debt                        Secretaria de Hacienda Credito Publico

      Peru
1     Central Government Interest on Domestic Debt       Haver/BCRP                               Quarterly
2.a   Federal Government Domestic Gross Debt (NSA)       Haver/BCRP                               Quarterly
      (USD)
2.b   Exchange rate against USD (End of Period)          IFS                                      Quarterly
2     Federal government Gross Domestic Debt             #2.a*#2.b                                Quarterly

      Philippines
1     National government Current Operating              Datastream                               Quarterly
      Expenditure: Interest Payments - domestic
2     Central Government Domestic Debt                   Oxford Economics                         Annual

      South Africa
1     National government Interest on Domestic Debt      South Africa Treasury                    Annual
2     National Government Gross Domestic Debt            Haver/ SARB                              Quarterly

      Turkey
1     Central Government Budget Expenses: Domestic       Central Bank of Turkey                   Monthly
      Interest
2     Domestic Debt Position (Treasury)                  Central Bank of Turkey                   Monthly




         C.     Data Appendix


                                    Table A3. Countries in Sample
              Argentina            Egypt           Mexico                      South Africa
              Brazil               India           Morocco                     Thailand
              Chile                Indonesia       Peru                        Turkey
              China                Korea           Philippines
              Colombia             Malaysia        Russia




                                                       39
Table A.4: Summary Statistics of Explanatory Variables
                                                                                            Standard
                                                N     Minimum   Maximum   Median   Mean
                                                                                            Deviation
Fiscal Concerns
Fiscal Balance/Tax Revenues, %                  656   -138.33   94.98     -10.86   -13.36   31.54
Gross Govt. Debt/Tax Revenues, %                656   69.25     2817.58   879.11   980.76   610.38
Repression Revenues/GDP, %                      501   -5.56     7.64      -0.14    -0.19    1.49
Repression Revenues (incl. debt revaluation
                                                501   -35.38    34.94     -0.23    -0.2     6.05
costs)/GDP, %
Liquidation Tax                                 528   -12.31    25.52     -2.68    -1.97    4.36
Real Deposit Rate                               707   -15.75    14.47     1.04     1.09     4.15
(Bank Lending to Govt./Bank Assets)*Inflation   707   -13.85    36.2      0.95     1.75     3.47
Overheating Concerns
Domestic Credit Gap                             679   -32.14    31.24     -0.49    -0.02    6.17
Domestic Credit/GDP Growth, (% yoy)             659   0.06      0.12      0.08     0.08     0.01
Inflation, %                                    707   -2.79     47.04     4.39     5.7      4.96
Real GDP Growth, (% yoy)                        695   -14.74    16.09     5.31     5.13     3.72
Current Account Balance/GDP, %                  596   -7.23     19.47     0.56     1.53     4.6
NKI/GDP, %                                      675   -26.12    12.62     1.54     1.06     3.98
FX Valuation Concerns
∆ (Reserves/GDP, %)                             679   -9.43     14.24     0.26     0.64     2.78
Exchange Market Pressure (EMP)                  707   -0.73     0.93      -0.05    -0.06    0.14
Change in REER, (% yoy)                         667   -31.35    37.33     1.01     1.53     9.23
REER Deviation from Trend, %                    667   -46.15    34.56     0.35     0.74     12.57
PPP based Undervaluation                        747   -0.52     0.86      0.16     0.18     0.27
Macroeconomic Stability
REAL GDP Growth Volatility                      697   0.01      10.64     1.94     2.52     1.9
REER Volatility                                 667   1.76      40.49     6.14     7.8      5.86
Equity Returns Volatility                       747   0.62      93.18     11.32    15.66    13.73
NKI Volatility                                  739   0         159.56    5.59     11.01    17.94
Gross Inflows Volatility                        707   0.44      127.08    6.88     13.02    18.46
Gross Outflows Volatility                       701   0.02      109.74    4.73     8.5      12.51
Financial Stability
Change in Stock Prices, (% yoy)                 747   -84.84    388.22    16.89    20.84    44.43
(External Debt-Reserves)/GDP, %                 665   -39.18    121.51    14.33    16.32    23.11

(Short Term External Debt-Reserves)/GDP, %      625   -44.89    7.41      -8.78    -11.55   11.45

Others
Capital Account Openness (Quinn Index)          707   12.5      100       50       60.87    23.58
Capital Account Openness (Chinn-Ito)            707   -1.86     2.46      -0.11    0.12     1.22
No. of Net Tightenings of Inflow Controls       747   -11       12        0        -0.12    1.19
Trade/GDP, %                                    669   19.94     348.34    56.89    72.82    45.71




                                                      40
Table A.5: Data Sources for Explanatory Variables.
Variable                                Definition/Source
Fiscal concerns:
Fiscal Balance (% of Tax Revenues)      Fiscal Balance (% of GDP)/(Tax Revenues (% of GDP)). Tax
                                        Revenues (% of GDP) are from World Bank WDI.
Govt. Debt (% of Tax Revenues)          (Government gross debt/GDP)*100/(Tax Revenues (% of
                                        GDP)). Government gross debt is from Oxford Economics, Tax
                                        Revenues (% of GDP) are from WDI and nominal GDP is from
                                        Haver.
Liquidation Tax, %                      Negative of the real interest rate on government domestic debt.
                                        See Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2 for details on computation of
                                        nominal interest rate on government domestic debt. Real interest
                                        rate is computed from nominal rates by subtracting (yoy) CPI
                                        inflation.
Repression Revenues/GDP, %              See appendix Tables A.1 and A.2
Repression Revenues (including debt     See appendix Tables A.1 and A.3, and explanations in the text.
Revaluation costs), as % of GDP

Real interest rate on deposits, %       Nominal interest rate on bank deposits, less Inflation. The
                                        interest rate data is from IFS. See "Inflation" entry below.

(Bank Lending to Govt./Bank Assets) *    (DomClaimsBanks-
Inflation                               ClaimsonPvtSecBanks)*100/DomClaimsBanks.
                                        DomClaimsBanks is Domestic Claims of Banking Sector, IFS
                                        series 32 or FDSAD. ClaimsonPvtSecBanks is Banking Sector's
                                        claims on private sector, IFS series 32D.
Overheating Concerns:
Domestic Credit/GDP Growth (yoy, %)     Year-on-year growth of Domestic Credit/GDP. Domestic Credit
                                        is Domestic Claims of Banking Sector, IFS series 32 or
                                        FDSAD. GDP is nominal GDP from Haver.
Domestic Credit Gap, %                  Domestic Credit/GDP divided by its 3-year lagged moving
                                        average
Inflation (% yoy)                       Year-on-year percentage change in CPI. Data is from IFS.
Real GDP Growth (% yoy)                 Year-on-year growth of real GDP. Real GDP is from Haver.
Current Account Balance/GDP, %          4-quarter moving average of current account/4-quarter moving
                                        average of nominal GDP, in percentage terms. Current account
                                        data is from IFS and nominal GDP from Haver.
NKI/GDP, %                              Net capital inflows are the financial account balance, n.i.e.
                                        (BPM6) series from IFS and are measured in USD. Nominal
                                        GDP data is from Haver and in LCU. It is converted into USD
                                        by using the period average exchange rate against USD from
                                        IFS. since NKI and GDP data are non-seasonally adjusted, 4-
                                        quarter moving average of NKI is divided by the 4-quarter
                                        moving average of GDP (and expressed as percentage) to get
                                        NKI/GDP.

NKI surge                               Dummy for surge in NKI. Defined according to methodology
                                        described in Forbes and Warnock (2012). 4-quarter moving sum
                                        of quarterly NKI are first computed and year-on-year changes
                                        in these 4-quarter sums are obtained. Surge episodes satisfy
                                        three criteria: (1) current year-over-year changes in four-quarter
                                        NKI is more than two standard deviations above the historic

                                                   41
Table A.5 (contd.): Data Sources for Explanatory Variables.
Variable                            Definition/Source
                                    average during at least one quarter of the episode; (2) the
                                    episode is defined as lasting for all consecutive quarters for
                                    which the year-over-year change in four-quarter NKI is more
                                    than one standard deviation above the historical average; and (3)
                                    the length of the episode is greater than one quarter. NKI data
                                    are from IFS.
FX Valuation Concerns:
∆ (Reserves/GDP, %) (or Change in   Year-on year change in total reserves excluding gold/annualized
Reserves/GDP (yoy))                 nominal GDP. Reserves excluding gold are in SDR, nominal
                                    GDP is in local currency units, and is converted into SDR by
                                    using end of period exchange rates. All series are from IFS.

Exchange Market Pressure (EMP)      Higher values indicate depreciation pressure. Computed as the
                                    sum of two components: (i) quarter on quarter change in log of
                                    average exchange rate against SDR (LCU per SDR) (ii)
                                    Negative of the change in Reserves less gold (in SDR)/Reserve
                                    Money (or Monetary Base). All series are from IFS.


REER Appreciation (% yoy)           Percentage year-on-year change in REER. Positive values
                                    indicate REER appreciation. REER data is from IFS
REER deviation from trend (%)       (REER- 5-year moving average of REER)*100/5-year moving
                                    average of REER.
PPP based undervaluation, %         Difference between the log of PPP real exchange rate and its
                                    predicted value. Following Rodrick (2008) a currency is
                                    classified as undervalued if its PPP real exchange rate is higher
                                    than 1 after taking into account the Balassa-Samuelson effect.
                                    Two series were used to compute this series. PPP real exchange
                                    rate is the Purchasing Power Parity over GDP in national
                                    currency units per US dollar. GDP per capita is PPP converted
                                    GDP per capita at 2005 constant prices (International dollar per
                                    person). Both series are obtained from Penn World Table 7.0.
                                    Data for all available countries and periods was used to compute
                                    PPP based undervaluation.
Macroeconomic Stability:
Volatility of Real GDP Growth       3-year rolling standard deviation of year-on-year growth of real
                                    GDP. The real GDP data is from Haver.
REER Volatility                     3-year rolling standard deviation of year-on-year change in Real
                                    Effective Exchange Rate (REER). The REER data is quarterly
                                    and sourced from IFS.
Volatility of Equity Returns        3-year rolling standard deviation of total returns of broad stock
                                    market equity index. Return indices are from Datastream.
NKI Volatility                      3-year rolling standard deviation of year-on-year change in 4-
                                    quarter sums of NKI. The NKI data is from IFS.
Gross Inflows Volatility            3-year rolling standard deviation of year-on-year change in 4-
                                    quarter sums of gross inflows (i.e. net inflows by non-residents).
                                    The gross inflows data is from IFS (See Gross Inflows/GDP).




                                               42
Table A.5 (contd.): Data Sources for Explanatory Variables.
Variable                               Definition/Source
Gross Outflows Volatility              3-year rolling standard deviation of year-on-year change in 4-
                                       quarter sums of gross outflows (i.e. net outflows by residents).
                                       The gross outflows data is from IFS (See Gross Outflows/GDP).
Financial Stability:
(External Debt – Reserves)/GDP, %      Gross external debt is from QEDS and WDI databases of World
                                       Bank. Reserves are foreign reserves less gold and are from IFS,
                                       as is nominal GDP.
(Short Term External Debt –            Short term external debt is from QEDS and WDI databases of
Reserves)/GDP, %                       World Bank. Reserves are foreign reserves less gold and are
                                       from IFS, as is nominal GDP.
Banking Crisis                         Reinhart and Rogoff (2011)
Inflation Crisis                       Annual inflation above 20 percent. Reinhart and Rogoff (2011)
Flight                                 A surge in residents' outflows abroad. Defined using gross
                                       outflows data from IFS, using methodology described in Forbes
                                       and Warnock (2012)
Change in Stock Prices (% yoy)         Year on year percentage change in series "LOCNSH: Share
                                       prices,Index, 2005=100" from IFS.
Other Variables:
Capital Account Openness (Quinn)       Higher values indicate greater de-jure capital account openness.
                                       Source: Quinn (1997) and Quinn and Toyoda (2008)
Capital Account Openness (Chinn-Ito)   Higher values indicate greater de-jure capital account openness.
                                       Source: Chinn and Ito (2010)
Floating Exchange Rate Regime          Dummy variable which takes the value 1 when the country had
                                       "Freely Floating" exchange rate policy for more than half the
                                       quarter. The exchange rate classification information and dates
                                       of change are from IMF AREAER.
IT Monetary Policy                     Dummy variable which takes the value 1 when the country had
                                       Inflation Targeting monetary policy framework in more than
                                       half the quarter. The IT frameworks information and dates of
                                       change are from IMF AREAER.
Net Easings of Inflows                 Number of net easings of inflow controls in the quarter by the
                                       country. See Appendix A for details on data.
Trade/GDP, %                           (imports + exports) /nominal GDP, expressed as percentage. All
                                       series are from Haver/National statistical databases.




                                                  43
