                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        MERGERS WHEN PRICES ARE NEGOTIATED:
                        EVIDENCE FROM THE HOSPITAL INDUSTRY

                                      Gautam Gowrisankaran
                                           Aviv Nevo
                                          Robert Town

                                        Working Paper 18875
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18875


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2013




We thank Cory Capps, Allan Collard-Wexler, Greg Crawford, Leemore Dafny, David Dranove, Chris
Garmon, Kate Ho, Robin Lee, Matt Lewis, Mike Riordan, Alan Sorensen, Ali Yurukoglu, especially
Keith Brand, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments. We thank the Federal Trade
Commission for providing us with access to the data. Gowrisankaran acknowledges funding from
the Center for Management Innovations in Health Care at the University of Arizona. The views expressed
here are the authors alone and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Federal Trade Commission,
any Commissioner, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18875.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Gautam Gowrisankaran, Aviv Nevo, and Robert Town. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Mergers When Prices are Negotiated: Evidence from the Hospital Industry
Gautam Gowrisankaran, Aviv Nevo, and Robert Town
NBER Working Paper No. 18875
March 2013, Revised June 2014
JEL No. I11,I18,L11,L13,L31,L38

                                           ABSTRACT

We estimate a bargaining model of competition between hospitals and managed care organizations
(MCOs) and use the estimates to evaluate the effects of hospital mergers. We find that MCO bargaining
restrains hospital prices significantly. The model demonstrates the potential impact of coinsurance
rates, which allow MCOs to partly steer patients towards cheaper hospitals. We show that increasing
patient coinsurance tenfold would reduce prices by 16%. We find that a proposed hospital acquisition
in Northern Virginia that was challenged by the Federal Trade Commission would have significantly
raised hospital prices. Remedies based on separate bargaining do not alleviate the price increases.


Gautam Gowrisankaran                              Robert Town
Department of Economics                           Health Care Management Department
University of Arizona                             The Wharton School
P.O. Box 210108                                   University of Pennsylvania
Tucson, AZ 85721-0108                             3641 Locust Walk
and HEC Montreal                                  Philadelphia, PA 19104
and also NBER                                     and NBER
gowrisankaran@eller.arizona.edu                   rtown@wharton.upenn.edu

Aviv Nevo
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
nevo@northwestern.edu
1          Introduction
In many markets prices are negotiated by the relevant parties rather than set by one of the
sides or determined by means of an auction. Price negotiation is commonplace and plays
an important role in transactions that span many economically important industries. For
example, retransmission rates between content providers and cable companies (Crawford
and Yurukoglu, 2012), the terms of trade between Amazon.com and book publishers,1 and
hospital prices in the health care markets that we study here are all determined by bilateral
negotiations between small numbers of firms. In a bargaining framework, an increase in a
party’s leverage improves its terms of trade. One of the ways that parties can achieve better
bargaining leverage is by merging.2
        In this paper we estimate a model of competition in which prices are negotiated between
managed care organizations (MCOs) and hospitals. We use the estimates to investigate the
extent to which hospital bargaining and patient coinsurance restrain prices and to analyze
the impact of counterfactual hospital mergers and policy remedies. It is both important
and policy relevant to analyze the impact of hospital competition. Over the last 25 years,
hospital markets have become significantly more concentrated due to mergers (Gaynor and
Town, 2012), with the hospital industry having the most federal horizontal merger litigation
of any industry.3 Our analysis builds on and brings together three different literatures that (i)
structurally estimate multi-party bargaining models; (ii) simulate the likely effect of mergers;
and (iii) study competition in health care markets. Our contribution is in modeling the effect
of final consumers paying some of the costs (through coinsurance); in our estimates of price-
cost margins and policy-relevant counterfactuals; and in the way we estimate the model,
which generalizes the equilibrium models commonly used in industrial organization that does
not require data on downstream market outcomes. The approach we follow in this paper can
be used more generally to understand mergers in industries where prices are determined by
    1
     See      http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/05/30/why-is-amazon-squeezing-hachette-maybe-it-really-
needs-the-money/
   2
     Theoretical results in the literature show that joint negotiation can lead to higher or lower prices, with
the effect depending on the curvature of the value of the bargaining partner (Horn and Wolinsky (1988a);
Chipty and Snyder (1999)). The empirical literature generally, but not unanimously, finds that larger firms
are able to negotiate lower prices, all else equal (see Chipty, 1995; Sorensen, 2003; Ho, 2009).
   3
     Since 1989, there have been thirteen federal hospital antitrust trials. Most recently, the Federal Trade
Commission successfully challenged mergers in Toledo, OH (In the Matter of ProMedica Health System Inc.
Docket No. 9346, 2011) and Rockford, IL (In the Matter of OSF Healthcare System and Rockford Health
System, Docket No. 9349, 2012).



                                                      1
negotiation between differentiated sellers and a small numbers of “gatekeeper” buyers who
act as intermediaries for end consumers.
      A standard way to model competition in differentiated product markets is with a Bertrand
pricing game. In this industry patient demand for hospitals is very inelastic because patients
pay little out of pocket for hospital stays, and therefore Bertrand competition between hospi-
tals implies negative marginal costs. In contrast, our estimated bargaining model generates
more reasonable marginal costs and (as we show empirically) merger impact.
      Our model of competition between MCOs and hospitals has two stages. In the first
stage, MCOs and hospital systems negotiate the base price that each hospital will be paid
by each MCO for hospital care. We model the outcome of these negotiations using the
Horn and Wolinsky (1988a) model. The solution of the model specifies that prices for an
MCO/hospital-system pair solve the Nash bargaining problem between the pair, conditioning
on the prices for all other MCO/hospital-system pairs. The Nash bargaining problem is a
function of the value to each party from agreement relative to the value without agreement,
and hence depends on the objective functions of the parties. We assume that hospitals,
which may be not-for-profit, seek to maximize a weighted sum of profits and quantity and
that MCOs act as agents for self-insured employers, seeking to maximize a weighted sum
of enrollee welfare and insurer costs. To evaluate the robustness of this relatively strong
assumption on the MCO objective function, we also report calibrated results from a model
where MCOs, whose objective is profit maximization, explicitly post premiums à la Bertrand
following the price negotiation stage.4
      In the second stage, each MCO enrollee receives a health draw. Enrollees who are ill decide
where to seek treatment, choosing a hospital to maximize utility. Utility is a function of out-
of-pocket expense, distance to the hospital, hospital-year indicators, the resource intensity of
the illness interacted with hospital indicators, and a random hospital-enrollee-specific shock.
The out-of-pocket expense is the negotiated base price – as determined in the first stage –
multiplied by the coinsurance rate and the resource intensity of the illness. The first-stage
Nash bargaining disagreement values are then determined by the utilities generated by the
expected patient choices.
      Solving the first-order conditions of the Nash bargaining problem, we show that equilib-
rium prices can be expressed by a formula that is analogous to the standard Lerner index
equation, but where actual patient price sensitivity is replaced by the effective price sensi-
  4
      We discuss the pros and cons of both approaches below.


                                                     2
tivity of the MCO. If hospitals have all the bargaining weight, the actual and effective price
sensitivities are equal and prices are the same as under Bertrand pricing by hospitals with
targeted prices to each MCO. In general, the two are not equal. While the difference between
actual and effective price elasticities depends on a number of factors, in the simple case of
identical single-firm hospitals, the effective price sensitivity will be higher than the actual
price sensitivity, and hence hospital markups will be lower than under Bertrand pricing.
   We estimate the model using discharge data from Virginia Health Information and ad-
ministrative claims data from payors, from Northern Virginia. The use of claims data is
novel and helps in two ways. First, the data allow us to construct prices for each hospital-
payor-year triple. Second, the data let us construct patient-specific coinsurance rates, which
we use to estimate patient behavior.
   We estimate the multinomial logit patient choice model by maximum likelihood, and the
parameters of the bargaining model by forming moment conditions based on orthogonality
restrictions on marginal costs. We calculate marginal costs by inverting the first-order condi-
tions as explained above. This is the analog for the bargaining model case of the “standard”
techniques used to incorporate equilibrium behavior in differentiated products estimation
(e.g., Bresnahan, 1987; Goldberg, 1995; Berry et al., 1995).
   We find that patients pay an average of 2-3% of the hospital bill as coinsurance amounts.
While patients significantly dislike high prices, the own-price elasticity for systems is rela-
tively low, ranging from 0.07 to 0.17, due to the low coinsurance rates. Without any health
insurance, these own-price elasticities would range from 3.10 to 7.34. Estimated Lerner in-
dices range from 0.22 to 0.58, which are equivalent to those implied by Bertrand pricing
by hospitals if own-price elasticities ranged from 4.56 to 1.74. This implies that bargaining
incentives make MCOs act more elastically than individual patients, but less elastically than
patients without insurance.
   Using the estimated parameters of the model, we examine the impact of a number of coun-
terfactual market structures, focusing on the proposed acquisition by Inova Health System
of Prince William Hospital, a transaction that was challenged by the Federal Trade Commis-
sion (FTC) and ultimately abandoned. We find that the proposed merger would have raised
the quantity-weighted average price of the merging hospitals by 3.1%, equivalent to a 30.5%
price increase at just Prince William. We also consider a remedy implemented by the FTC
in a different hospital merger case, where the newly acquired hospitals were forced to bargain
separately, in order to re-inject competition into the marketplace. We find that separate


                                              3
bargaining does not eliminate the anticompetitive effects of the Prince William acquisition
since it changed disagreement values for both hospitals and MCOs. Finally, we examine the
impact of different coinsurance rates on restraining prices. We find that mean prices would
rise by 3.7% if coinsurance rates were 0 but drop by 16% if coinsurance rates were 10 times as
high as at present (approximately the optimal coinsurance rate for hospitalizations calculated
by Manning and Marquis (1996)).
   To evaluate the robustness of our results, we also consider a model where MCOs simulta-
neously post premiums and compete for enrollees. Lacking data on premiums and premium
elasticities necessary to estimate this model, we instead calibrate it using estimates from
other studies and from our base model. We find a larger price increase of 7.2% from the
Prince William merger. Unlike our base model, with posted premium competition, a hospi-
tal system will recapture some of the patients from the MCO in the event of disagreement
through those patients choosing different MCOs. This increase in the disagreement value
gives the hospital system more leverage, relative to the base model. On the other hand, the
disagreement values of MCOs will also likely be higher in the posted premium competition
model as MCOs can optimally adjust premiums in response to disagreement. Our finding of
a larger price effect shows that the patient recapture story appears to play a bigger empirical
role when considering how these effects impact the implications of a merger.
   Given that we present results from two models, it is worth considering the relative advan-
tages of each approach. Models that are similar to our posted premium competition one have
been used in other bargaining contexts, such as Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012)’s model of
the cable industry. We believe that posted premium setting is the better model in industry
such as television where the downstream firms set posted prices and consumers select prod-
ucts based on those prices. However, for the hospital industry, there are several industry
features that are at odds with the assumptions of the posted premium setting model. These
include the fact that premiums for large employers are determined via negotiated long-run
contracts and allow for price discrimination (Dafny, 2010), and not by take-it-or-leave-it
premium offers that follow the price negotiation process (as in the posted premium setting
model); that self-insured employers negotiate administrative fees alone, and not premiums;
and that employer-MCO contracts are typically non-linear. For these reasons, we believe that
employers and MCOs align their incentives more than implied by posted premium setting.
This would result in there being less of a tradeoff between capturing employee surplus and
creating employee surplus than in the posted premium setting model, though admittedly


                                              4
more than the zero tradeoff that is allowed by the base model. Overall, our view is that the
real world is somewhere “in between” the two models in this sense, and that estimation using
the base model is the best way to proceed given our available data.
       This paper builds on three related literatures. First, our analysis builds on recent work
that structurally estimates multilateral bargaining models. Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012)
were the first to develop and estimate a full structural bargaining framework based on Horn
and Wolinsky (1988a); they examined bargaining between television content providers and
cable companies.5 The posted premium setting model is essentially their model (with a
slightly different demand model), with the addition of coinsurance and other features unique
to the healthcare sector. Our econometric approach is differentiated in that the estimation
does not require solving for equilibrium prices and the unobserved term reflects cost variation.
       Second, our paper relates to the literature that uses pre-merger data to simulate the likely
effects of mergers by using differentiated products models with price setting behavior.6 With
a few exceptions (Gaynor and Vogt, 2003), it has been difficult to credibly model the hospital
industry within this framework. For instance, as noted above, because consumers typically
pay only a small part of the cost of their hospital care, own-price elasticities are low implying
either negative marginal costs or infinite prices under Bertrand hospital pricing. We find that
the equilibrium incentives of an MCO will both be more elastic and also change in different
ways following a hospital merger than would the incentives of its patients. More generally,
the impact of a merger on prices in the bargaining context will be different in magnitude and
potentially even sign than with Bertrand hospital price setting.7
       Finally, an existing literature has focused on bargaining models in which hospitals nego-
tiate with MCOs for inclusion in their network of providers. Capps et al. (2003) and Town
and Vistnes (2001) estimate specifications that are consistent with an underlying bargaining
model but neither paper structurally estimates a bargaining model. We show that their speci-
fication corresponds to a special case of our model with zero coinsurance rates and lump-sum
payments from MCOs to hospitals. Our work also builds on Ho (2009, 2006), Lewis and
Pflum (2011), and Ho and Lee (2013). Ho (2009) is of particular interest. She estimates the
parameters of MCO choices of provider network focusing on the role of different networks on
downstream MCO competition. Our work, in contrast, focuses on the complementary price
   5
     Other papers that seek to estimate structural bargaining models include Grennan (2013), Allen et al.
(2013), Draganska and Villas-Boas (2011) and Meza and Sudhir (2010).
   6
     See, for example, Berry and Pakes (1993); Hausman et al. (1994); Werden and Froeb (1994); Nevo (2000).
   7
     Horn and Wolinsky (1988a,b), Chipty and Snyder (1999) and O’Brien and Shaffer (2005).


                                                    5
setting mechanism between MCOs and hospitals, taking as given the network structure.
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our model. Section
3 discusses econometrics. Section 4 provides our results. Section 5 provides counterfactu-
als. Section 6 examines the robustness of our results to modeling assumptions. Section 7
concludes.


2     Model

2.1     Overview
We model the interactions between MCOs, hospitals, and patients. The product we consider
for MCOs is health administration services sold to self-insured employers.8 Employers acquire
these services and insure their employees as part of a compensation package, so employee and
employer incentives are largely aligned.9 In self-insured plans, the employer pays the cost of
employee health care (less coinsurance, copays and deductibles) plus a management fee to the
MCO. In this market, the central role of the MCO is to construct provider networks, negotiate
prices, provide care and disease management services, and process medical care claims. Our
base model assumes that each employer has an ongoing contract with one MCO,10 under
which the MCO agrees to act in the incentives of the employers that it represents in its
negotiation with hospitals, in exchange for a fixed management fee that is determined by
some long-run market interaction between the MCO and the employer.11
    We model a two-stage game that takes as given these employer/MCO contracts. In the
first stage, MCOs, acting as agents of the employers, negotiate with hospital systems for the
terms of hospitals’ inclusion in MCOs’ networks.12 In the second stage, each patient receives
a health status draw. Some draws do not require inpatient hospital care, while others do. If
    8
      In the U.S., private health insurance is generally acquired through an employer and approximately 60%
of employers are self-insured with larger employers significantly more likely to self-insure (Kaiser Family
Foundation/Health Research and Educational Trust, 2011).
    9
      Baicker and Chandra (2006) find that increases in medical costs are incompletely passed through to
wages but that they also have broader labor market consequences.
   10
      58% of employees offered health insurance through their employer are only given one health insurance op-
tion (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Medical Expenditure Panel Survey Insurance Component
National-Level Summary Tables, 2012).
   11
      According to an industry expert, the most common fee structure that MCOs use for self-insured plans
are fixed fees based on the employer size. We thank Leemore Dafny for putting us in contact with this expert.
   12
      Section 6 considers a calibrated model where MCOs explicitly post premiums à la Bertrand to attract
enrollees following the hospital-MCO price negotiation process.


                                                      6
a patient needs to receive inpatient hospital care, she must pay a predetermined coinsurance
fraction of the negotiated price for each in-network hospital, with the MCO picking up the
remainder. Coinsurance rates can vary across patients and diseases. The patient selects a
hospital in the MCO’s network – or an outside alternative – to maximize her utility.


2.2    Patient healthcare choice
We now describe the second stage: patient choice of hospital. There is a set of hospitals j =
1, . . . , J, and a set of managed care companies m = 1, . . . , M . The hospitals are partitioned
into S ≤ J systems. Let Js denote the set of hospitals in system s.
   There is a set of enrollees i = 1, . . . , I. Each enrollee has health insurance issued by a
particular MCO. Let m(i) denote the MCO of enrollee i. In our base model, m(i) is fixed
having been chosen via the long-run employer/MCO contracts. Each MCO m has a subset
of the hospitals in its network; denote this subset Nm . For each m and each j ∈ Nm , there
is a base price pmj , which was negotiated in the first stage. Let p~m denote the vector of all
negotiated prices for MCO m.
   Prior to choosing the hospital, taking as given plan enrollment and the networks, each
patient receives a draw of her health status that determines if she has one of a number of
health conditions that require inpatient care. Let fid denote the probability that patient i
at MCO m is stricken by illness d = 0, 1, ...D, where d = 0 implies no illness, wd denotes
the relative intensity of resource use for illness d, and w0 = 0. In our empirical analysis, wd
is observed. We assume that the total price paid for treatment at hospital j by MCO m of
disease d is wd pmj , which is the base price multiplied by the disease weight. Therefore, the
base price, which will be negotiated by the MCO and the hospital, can be viewed as a price
per unit of wd . This is essentially how most hospitals are reimbursed by Medicare, and many
MCOs incorporate this payment structure into their hospital contracts.
   Each patient’s insurance specifies a coinsurance rate for each condition, which we denote
cid . The coinsurance rate indicates the fraction of the billed price wd pm(i)j that the patient
must pay out of pocket.
   For each realized illness d = 1, . . . , D, the patient seeks hospital care at the hospital which
gives her the highest utility, including an outside option. The utility that patient i receives
from care at hospital j ∈ Nm(i) is given by

                               uijd = βxijd − αcid wd pm(i)j + eij .                            (1)

                                                7
In equation (1), xijd is a vector of hospital and patient characteristics including travel time,
hospital indicators, and interactions between hospital and patient characteristics (e.g., hos-
pital indicators interacted with disease weight wd ), and β is the associated coefficient vector.
The out-of-pocket expense to the patient is cid wd pm(i)j . As we describe below, we observe
data that allow us to impute the base price, the disease weight, and coinsurance rate; hence
we treat out-of-pocket expense as observable. We let α denote the price sensitivity. Finally,
eij is an i.i.d. error term that is distributed type 1 extreme value.
       The outside choice, denoted as choice 0, is treatment at a hospital located outside the
market. The utility from this option is given by

                                        ui0d = −αcid wd pm(i)0 + ei0 .                                        (2)

We normalize the quality from the outside option, xi0d , to 0 but we allow for a non-zero base
price pm(i)0 .13 Finally, we assume that ei0 is also distributed type 1 extreme value.
       Consumers’ expected utilities play an important role in the bargaining game. To exposit
expected utility, define δijd = βxijd − αcid wd pm(i)j , j ∈ {0, Nm(i) }. The choice probability for
patient i with disease d as a function of prices and network structure is:

                                                               exp(δijd )
                                sijd (Nm(i) , pm(i)
                                               ~ )= P                            .                            (3)
                                                            k∈0,Nm(i) exp(δikd )


The ex-ante expected utility to patient i, as a function of prices and the network of hospitals
in the plan, is given by:14
                                                                                      
                                                 D
                                                 X                  X
                          Wi (Nm(i) , pm(i)
                                       ~ )=            fid ln                exp(δijd ) .                   (4)
                                                 d=1              j∈0,Nm(i)


                                          ~ )−Wi (Nm(i) \Js , pm(i)
Capps et al. (2003) refer to Wi (Nm(i) , pm(i)                 ~ ), as the “willingness-to-pay”
(WTP) as it represents the utility gain to enrollee i from the system s.
  13
     As the empirical analysis includes hospital fixed effects, attributes of the outside option will only rescale
the fixed effects and otherwise do not affect choice model coefficient estimates. However, because our bargain-
ing model specifies payments from MCOs, the price of the outside option has implications for the bargaining
model parameter estimates and counterfactual equilibrium behavior.
  14
     We exclude Euler’s constant from this expression.




                                                        8
2.3    MCO and hospital bargaining
We now exposit the bargaining stage. There are M × S potential contracts, each specifying
the negotiated base prices for one MCO/hospital system pair. We assume that each hospital
within a system has a separate base price, and that the price paid to a hospital for treatment
of disease d will be its base price multiplied by the disease weight wd . MCOs and hospitals
have complete information about MCO enrollee and hospital attributes, including xijd and
hospital costs.
   Following Horn and Wolinsky (1988a) we assume that prices for each contract solve the
Nash bargaining solution for that contract, conditional on all other prices. The Nash bar-
gaining solution is the price vector that maximizes the exponentiated product of the values
to both parties from agreement (as a function of that price) relative to the values without
agreement. It is necessary to condition on other prices because the different contracts may
be economically interdependent implying that the Nash bargaining solutions are interdepen-
dent. For instance, in our model the value to an MCO of reaching an agreement with one
hospital system may be lower if it already has an agreement with another geographically
proximate system. Our bargaining model makes the relatively strong assumption that each
contract remains the same even if negotiation for another contract fails.
   Essentially, the Horn and Wolinsky solution nests a Nash bargaining solution (an ax-
iomatic cooperative game theory concept) within a Nash equilibrium (of a non-cooperative
game) without a complete non-cooperative structure. The results of Rubinstein (1982) and
Binmore et al. (1986) show that the Nash bargaining solution in a bilateral setting corre-
sponds to the unique subgame perfect equilibrium of an alternating offers non-cooperative
game. Extending these results, Collard-Wexler et al. (2013) provide conditions such that
the Horn and Wolinsky solution is the same as the unique perfect Bayesian equilibrium with
passive beliefs of a specific simultaneous alternating offers game with multiple parties.
   Starting with MCOs, we now detail the payoff structures and use them to exposit the Nash
bargain for each contract. Each MCO, acting on behalf of its contracted employers, seeks
to maximize a weighted sum of the consumer surplus of its enrollees net of the payments to
hospitals, taking m(i) as fixed. Because m(i) is fixed, a hospital system that does not reach
agreement with MCO m will not capture back any of m’s patients through plan switches
by those patients. Define the ex-ante expected cost to the MCO and the employer that it
represents to be T Cm (Nm , p~m ). The MCO pays the part of the bill that is not paid by the


                                              9
patient, hence

                              I X
                              X D                                      X
         T Cm (Nm , p~m ) =             1{m(i) = m}(1 − cid )fid wd            pmj sijd (Nm , p~m ).   (5)
                              i=1 d=1                                 j∈0,Nm


Define the value in dollars for the MCO and the employer it represents to be:

                                        I
                                    τ X
                 Vm (Nm , p~m ) =         1{m(i) = m}Wi (Nm , p~m ) − T Cm (Nm , p~m ),                (6)
                                    α i=1

where τ is the relative weight on employee welfare. If employer/employee/MCO incentives
were perfectly aligned then τ = 1; τ < 1 implies that MCOs/employers value insurer costs
more than enrollee welfare; while τ > 1 implies that they value enrollee welfare more than
insurer costs. Assume that Nm , m = 1, . . . , M , are the equilibrium sets of network hospitals.
For any system s for which Js ⊆ Nm , the net value that MCO m receives from including
system s in its network is Vm (Nm , p~m ) − Vm (Nm \ Js , p~m ).
   Hospital systems can be either for-profit or not-for-profit (NFP). NFP systems may care
about some linear combination of profits and weighted quantity of patients served. Let mcmj
denote the “perceived” marginal cost of hospital j for treating a patient from MCO m with
disease weight wd = 1. We assume that the costs of treating an illness with weight wd is
wd mcmj . The perceived marginal costs implicitly allows for different NFP objective functions:
a NFP system which cares about the weighted quantity of patients it serves will equivalently
have a perceived marginal cost equal to its true marginal cost net of this utility amount
(Lakadawalla and Philipson, 2006; Gaynor and Vogt, 2003).
   We make three further assumptions regarding the cost structure. First, we assume that
marginal costs are constant in quantity (though proportional to the disease weight). Second,
we allow hospitals to have different marginal costs from treating patients at different MCOs,
because the approach to care management, the level of paperwork, and ease and promptness
of reimbursement may differ across MCOs. Finally, we specify that

                                            mcmj = γvmj + εmj ,                                        (7)

where mcmj is the marginal cost for an illness with disease weight wd = 1, vmj are a set of cost
fixed effects (notably hospital, year, and MCO fixed effects), γ are parameters to estimate,
and εmj is the component of cost that is not observable to the econometrician. Note that we

                                                    10
are assuming no capacity constraints, and hence in the event of a disagreement between a
hospital and an MCO, the patient will always go to her ex-post second choice.
   Define the normalized quantity to hospital j, j ∈ Nm as

                                            I X
                                            X D
                        qmj (Nm , p~m ) =             1{m(i) = m}fid wd sijd (Nm , p~m ).                      (8)
                                            i=1 d=1


Since prices and costs are per unit of wd , the returns that hospital system s expects to earn
from a given set of managed care contracts are
                                                          X X
                πs (Ms , {p~m }m∈Ms , {Nm }m∈Ms ) =                     qmj (Nm , p~m )[pmj − mcmj ]           (9)
                                                         m∈Ms j∈Js


where Ms is the set of MCOs that include system s in their network. The net value that
                                                        P
system s receives from including MCO m in its network is j∈Js qmj (Nm , p~m )[pmj − mcmj ].
   Having specified objective functions, we now define the Nash bargaining problem for MCO
m and system s as the exponentiated product of the net values from agreement:

                                  X                                   bs(m)
       m,s
  NB         (pmj j∈Js |pm,
                         ~ s) =          qmj (Nm , p~m )[pmj   − mcmj ]
                                  j∈Js
                                                                                                     bm(s)
                                                                  Vm (Nm , p~m ) − Vm (Nm \ Js , p~m )       , (10)

where bs(m) is the bargaining weight of system s when facing MCO m, bm(s) is the bargaining
weight of MCO m when facing system s, and pm,
                                           ~ s is the vector of prices for MCO m and
hospitals in systems other than s. Without loss of generality, we normalize bs(m) + bm(s) = 1.
   The Nash bargaining solution is the vector of prices pmj j∈J that maximizes (10). Let p~∗m
                                                                                s

denote the Horn and Wolinsky (1988a) price vector for MCO m. It must satisfy the Nash
bargain for each contract, conditioning on the outcomes of other contracts. Thus, p~∗m satisfies

                                                              ~ |p∗m,−s
                                  p∗mj = max N B m,s (pmj , p∗m,−j ~ ),                                       (11)
                                             pmj


        ~ is the equilibrium price vector for other hospitals in the same system as j.
where p∗m,−j




                                                         11
2.4     Equilibrium properties of the bargaining stage
To understand more about the equilibrium properties of our model, we solve the first order
conditions of the Nash bargaining problems, ∂ log N B m,s /∂pmj = 0. For brevity, we omit the
‘*’ from now on, even though all prices are evaluated at the optimum. We obtain:

                                                                         A
                                                                     z }| {
                                                                      ∂Vm
            qmj + k∈Js ∂q
                  P        mk
                              [p
                        ∂pmj mk
                                  − mc  mk ]                         ∂pmj
      bs(m)     P                            = −bm(s)                                      .          (12)
                 k∈Js qmk [pmk − mcmk ]               Vm (Nm , p~m ) − Vm (Nm \ Js , p~m )
                                                      |                {z               }
                                                                         B


The assumption of constant marginal costs implies that the FOCs (12) are separable across
MCOs.
   We rearrange the joint system of #(Js ) first order conditions from (12) to write

                                    ~q + Ω(~p − mc)
                                                ~ = −Λ(~p − mc)
                                                            ~                                         (13)

                                                                                               ∂qmk
where Ω and Λ are both #(Js ) × #(Js ) size matrices, with elements Ω(j, k) =                  ∂pmj
                                                                                                      and
            bm(s) A
Λ(j, k) =           q .
            bs(m) B mk
                          Solving for the equilibrium prices yields

                                             ~ − (Ω + Λ)−1 ~q,
                                        p~ = mc                                                       (14)

where p~, mc
          ~ and ~q denote the price, marginal cost and adjusted quantity vectors respectively
for hospital system s and MCO m. Equation (14), which characterizes the equilibrium prices,
would have a form identical to standard pricing games were it not for the inclusion of Λ. One
case where Λ = 0 – and hence there is differentiated products Bertrand pricing with individual
prices for each MCO – is where hospitals have all the bargaining weight, bm(s) = 0, ∀s.
   Importantly, (14) shows that, as with Bertrand competition models, we can back out
implied marginal costs for the bargaining model as a closed-form function of prices, quantities
and derivatives, given MCO and patient incentives. Using this insight, (7) and (14) together
form the basis of our estimation. We now show some intuition for the forces at work.

   The impact of price on MCO surplus. In order to understand how equilibrium
prices are impacted by various factors, we need to develop the A expression from equation
(12). We provide this derivation in Appendix A1. We focus here on the case where τ = 1

                                                  12
(so that MCOs value consumer surplus equally to insurer costs), in which case A is

                       I    D
                                                                                               !
   ∂Vm             XX
                                                     2
                                                                        X
        = −qmj − α         1{m(i) = m}(1 − cid )cid wid fid sijd              pmk sikd − pmj       .   (15)
   ∂pmj            i=1 d=1                                          k∈Nm


The first term, −qmj , captures the standard effect: higher prices reduce patients’ expected
utility. The second term accounts for the effect of consumer choices on payments from MCOs
to hospitals. As the price of hospital j rises, consumers will switch to cheaper hospitals. This
term can be either positive or negative, depending on whether hospital j is cheaper or more
expensive than the share-weighted price of other hospitals; the difference is reflected in the
expression in the large parentheses.
   In our model, as long as coinsurance rates are strictly between zero and one, MCOs use
prices to steer patients towards cheaper hospitals, and this will influence equilibrium pricing.
To see this, consider a hospital system with two hospitals, one low cost and one high cost,
that are otherwise equal. The MCO/hospital system pair will maximize joint surplus by
having a higher relative price on the high-cost hospital, as this will steer patients to the
low-cost hospital. At coinsurance rates near one, i.e., no insurance, this effect disappears,
because patients bear most of the cost and hence the MCO has no incentive to steer to
low-cost hospitals beyond patients’ preferences. Interestingly, at coinsurance rates near zero
(full insurance) this effect also disappears but for a different reason: since the patient bears
no expense, the MCO cannot use price to impact hospital choice.

   The effect of bargaining on equilibrium prices. Note from equation (14) that
price-cost margins from our model have an identical formula to those that would arise if
hospitals set prices to patients, and patients chose hospitals using our choice model, but with
Ω + Λ instead of Ω. Since Ω is the matrix of actual price sensitivities, we define the effective
price sensitivity to be Ω + Λ. For the special case of a single-hospital system, we can write
                                                                       −1
                                                   ∂qmj       bm(j) A
                           pmj − mcmj = −qmj            + qmj                                          (16)
                                                   ∂pmj       bj(m) B

                                        b    A
so that (the scalar) Λ is equal to qmj bm(j)
                                        j(m) B
                                               . The term B must be positive or the MCO
would not gain surplus from including j in its network. From (15), the first term in A is
the negative of quantity, which is negative. If the rest of A were 0, as would happen with


                                               13
identical hospitals, then Λ would be negative. In this case, MCO bargaining increases the
effective price sensitivity, and hence lowers prices relative to differentiated products hospital
Bertrand pricing.
   More generally, with asymmetric hospitals and multi-hospital systems, the incentives
are more complicated. There may be cases where MCO bargaining may not uniformly lower
prices, notably if cost differences across hospitals are large and hence where it is important to
steer patients to low-cost hospitals. However, we still generally expect that MCO bargaining
lowers prices relative to differentiated products Bertrand hospital pricing.

   The impact of mergers on prices. Similarly to Bertrand pricing by hospitals, merg-
ers here can also result in higher equilibrium hospital prices, although the mechanism is
slightly different. In bargaining models, the MCO holds down prices by playing hospitals
against each other. Post-merger, this competition is lost, causing prices to rise. Formalizing
this intuition, Chipty and Snyder (1999) find that a merger of upstream firms (i.e., hospi-
tals) will lead to higher prices if the value to the downstream firm (i.e., MCO) of reaching
agreement relative to disagreement is concave.15 In our model, if consumers view hospitals
as substitutes, then the WTPs generated from the patient choice model will tend to generate
a concave value function, resulting in a price rise from a hospital merger.
   Note that the magnitude of the merger effect may be different than under hospital
Bertrand pricing. With hospital Bertrand pricing, a merger only changes the cross-price
effects. With bargaining, the term B increases with a merger as B is the joint value of the
system. Moreover, since B enters into the effective own-price elasticity in (16), with bargain-
ing, the effective own- and cross-price sensitivities both change from a merger. However, the
cross-price terms change differently, and potentially less, than with Bertrand pricing. Since
these effects can be of opposite sign, the net effect of the merger under the bargaining model
relative to under the Bertrand pricing model is ambiguous.
   Note also that non-linearities of the value function can come from sources other than
consumer substitution between hospitals. As an example, a merger between hospitals in
two distinct markets could result in a price change, which would not happen with hospital
Bertrand pricing. To see this, consider an MCO serving two separate markets without overlap
and with one hospital in each market. If the two hospitals are identical except that the
  15
     Horn and Wolinsky (1988a) also study mergers by upstream firms in a bargaining framework. They
show that a merger between the upstream firms will increase negotiated prices if the downstream firms are
substitutes even when the upstream firms are not substitutes.


                                                   14
hospital in the first market is more expensive, then the MCO might be willing to trade off a
higher price in the first market for a lower price in the second, in order to steer patients to or
away from the outside option appropriately. A merger between the two hospitals would allow
the new system to make this tradeoff, and thus it would increase price in the first market
and decrease it in the second market. With competition between MCOs (as in our posted
premium competition model) there is an additional source of non-linearity: in the case of
disagreement some enrollees will switch their insurance plan, and will end up going to the
same hospital through a different plan. This additional source will tend to increase prices
more than in our base model.

   Zero coinsurance rates and the relation to Capps et al. (2003). Now consider
the special case of zero coinsurance rates. In this case, prices cannot be used to steer patients,
and hence the marginal value to the hospital of a price increase is qj , while the marginal value
to the MCO is −qj . Because a price increase here is effectively just a transfer from the MCO
to the hospital system, individual hospital prices within a system do not matter. The FOC
for any m and j, j ∈ Js then reduces to:

                  X                           bs(m)
                        qmk [pmk − mcmk ] =         [Vm (Nm , p~m ) − Vm (Nm \ Js , p~m )] .   (17)
                 k∈Js
                                              bm(s)

Hence, prices will adjust so that system revenues are proportional to the value that the
system brings to the MCO. Because the prices of systems other than s enter into the right
hand side of (17) through Vm , (17) still results in an interdependent system of equations.
However, these equations form a linear system and hence we can solve for the equilibrium
price vector for all systems in closed form with a matrix inverse (see Brand, 2013).
   There is also a large similarity between our model with zero coinsurance and Capps et al.
(2003)’s empirical specification of hospital system profits. Using our notation, Capps et al.
argue that hospital system profits from an MCO can be expressed as:

                                     I
   X                          bs(m) X              1
          qmk [pmk − mcmk ] =           1{m(i) = m} [Wi (Nm , p~m ) − Wi (Nm \ Js , p~m )] ,   (18)
   k∈Js
                              bm(s) i=1            α

which is similar to equation (17) except that the right side has willingness to pay rather than




                                                     15
the sum of willingness to pay and MCO costs.16 The Capps et al. formula in (18) would yield
the same price as our model with zero coinsurance if hospitals obtained a lump-sum payment
for treating patients, with the MCO then paying all the marginal costs of their treatment.


3       Econometrics

3.1       Data
We use data from Northern Virginia to simulate the effects of a merger that was proposed
in this area. Our primary data come from two sources: administrative claims data provided
by four large MCOs serving Northern Virginia (payor data) and inpatient discharge data
from Virginia Health Information. Both datasets span the years 2003 through 2006. These
data are supplemented with information on hospital characteristics provided by the American
Hospital Association (AHA) Guide.
      A longstanding challenge in the analysis of hospital markets is the difficulty of acquiring
actual transaction-level prices for each hospital-payor pair in the market. The administrative
claims data are at the transactions level and contain most of the information that the MCO
uses to process the appropriate payment to a hospital for a given patient encounter. In par-
ticular, the claims data contain demographic characteristics, diagnosis, procedure performed,
diagnosis related group (DRG), and the actual amount paid to the hospital for each claim.
There are often multiple claims per inpatient stay and thus the data must be aggregated
to the inpatient episode level. We group claims together into a single admission based on
the date of service, member ID, and hospital identifier. The claims often have missing DRG
information. To address this issue, we use DRG grouper software from 3M to assign the
appropriate DRG code to each admission.
      Using the claims data, we construct base prices, pmjt , for each hospital-payor-year triple.
We use the DRG weight, published by the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services each
year, as the disease weight wid . DRG weights are a measure of the mean resource usage by
diagnosis and are the primary basis for Medicare inpatient payments to hospitals. Our use
here is appropriate if the relative resource utilization for Medicare patients across DRGs is
similar to that of commercial patients. We regress the total amount paid divided by DRG
weight on gender, age and hospital dummies, separately for each payor and year. We then
 16
      See also Lewis and Pflum (2011) for a similar argument.


                                                     16
create the base price for each hospital as the mean of the fitted regression values using all
observations for the payor and year.17 Our price regressions explain a large part of the within
payor/year variation in prices: the R2 values across the 16 regressions have an (unweighted)
mean of 0.41. Our model also relies on the prices for the outside option, which is treatment
at a Virginia hospital outside our geographic area. For each MCO m, we let the outside
option price pm0 be the unweighted mean of the base price vector p~m .
       An alternative method of constructing prices is to directly use the contracts between
hospitals and MCOs. However, the complexity of these contracts resulted in difficulties in
constructing apples-to-apples prices across MCOs and hospitals.18 As consistently quan-
tifying the contract terms was impractical, we use the claims data to formulate the price
measures as described above.
       The claims data also contain information on the amount of the bill the patient paid out-
of-pocket. This information allows us to construct patient-specific out-of-pocket coinsurance
rates. Different insurers report coinsurance rates differently on the claims. In order to
provide a standardized coinsurance measure across patients and MCOs, we formulate an
expected coinsurance rate. We do this by first formulating a coinsurance amount which is
the out-of-pocket expenditure net of deductibles and co-payments divided by the allowed
amount. The allowed amount is the expected total payment the hospital is receiving for
providing services to a given MCO patient.19 The resulting coinsurance variable is censored
at zero. Then, separately for each MCO, we estimate a tobit model of coinsurance where the
explanatory variables are age, female indicator, age×female, DRG weight, age×DRG weight
and female×DRG weight.20 We then create the expected coinsurance rate for each patient
as the predicted values from this regression. In our coinsurance regressions, the percent of
observations censored at 0 ranges from 31% to 98% across payors, reflecting variations in
  17
      We have also explored alternative approaches to calculating prices including using amount paid as the
dependent variable with the addition of DRG dummy variables as regressors. The quantitative implications
of our estimates are robust to these different price construction methodologies.
   18
      As an example, we examined one hospital in our data, which had (1) contracts with a fixed payment
for each DRG; (2) per-diem contracts with fixed daily rates for medical, surgical and intensive care patients;
(3) contracts with a set discount off of charges; and (4) a hybrid of the above, with switching between
reimbursement regimes based on the total charges.
   19
      Some MCOs do not distinguish between deductibles and copayments. For these MCOs, we identify
copayments by treating expenditures of an even dollar amount (e.g., 25, 30, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100, 125, 135,
140, 150, etc.) as a deductible (implying no variation in out-of-pocket expenditure across the hospitals) and
coding the coinsurance amount in that case as 0.
   20
      We allow coinsurance rates to vary by DRG because insurance contracts may have different terms for
different inpatient conditions and patients may sort into different insurance contracts based on their condi-
tions.

                                                     17
coinsurance practices across MCOs. The parameters generally indicate that the coinsurance
rate is decreasing in age, higher for women, and decreasing in DRG weight.21
       The Virginia discharge data contain much of the same information as the claims data but,
in general, the demographic, patient ZIP code, and diagnosis fields are more accurate, and
an observation in these data is at the (appropriate) inpatient admission level. The discharge
data also contain more demographic information (e.g., race), and the identity of the payor,
and are a complete census of all discharges at the hospital.
       For these reasons, we use the discharge data to estimate the patient choice model. We
limit our sample to general acute care inpatients whose payor is one of the four MCOs in our
payor data and who reside in Northern Virginia, defined as Virginia Health Planning District
(HPD) 8 plus Fauquier County.22 We exclude patients transferred to another general acute
care hospital (to avoid double counting); patients over 64 years of age (to avoid Medicare
Advantage and supplemental insurance patients); and newborn discharges (treating instead
the mother and newborn as a single choice). We restrict our sample to patients discharged
at a hospital in Virginia. The outside choice, j = 0, consists of people in this area who were
treated at a hospital in Virginia other than one in our sample.23
       We obtain the following hospital characteristics from the AHA Guide of the relevant
year: staffed beds, residents and interns per bed, and indicators for FP ownership, teaching
hospital status, and the presence of a cardiac catheterization laboratory, MRI, and neonatal
intensive care unit. We compute the driving time from the patient’s zip code centroid to the
hospital using information from MapQuest.


3.2       Estimation and identification of patient choice stage
We estimate the patient choice model by maximum likelihood using the discharge data aug-
mented with price and coinsurance information from the payor data. The model includes
hospital-year fixed effects and interactions of hospital fixed effects with patient disease weight.
       Since we include hospital-year fixed effects, all identification comes from variation in
  21
     These parsimonious tobit regressions explain the data reasonably well. The mean of the absolute value
of the prediction errors normalized by the mean coinsurance rate range from 0.90 to 1.14.
  22
     HPD8 is defined as the counties of Arlington, Fairfax, Loudoun and Prince William; the cities of Alexan-
dria, Fairfax, Falls Church, Manassas and Manassas Park; and the towns of Dumfries, Herndon, Leesburg,
Purcellville and Vienna.
  23
     We do not have data from Virginia residents who sought treatment out-of-state, for instance in Maryland
or Washington, DC, but believe this number is small.



                                                     18
choices of a hospital within hospital-year groups. Thus, for instance, our coefficient on dis-
tance is identified by the extent to which patients who live nearer a given hospital choose
that hospital relative to patients who live further away in the same year choose that hospi-
tal. Note that different coinsurance rates across MCOs imply different out-of-pocket prices.
Thus, we identify α from the variation within a hospital-year in choices, based on different
coinsurance rates and different negotiated prices across payors.24


3.3       Estimation and identification of bargaining stage
We estimate the remaining parameters, namely b, the bargaining weights, γ, the cost fixed
effects, and τ , the weight MCOs put on the WTP measure, by imposing the bargaining model.
Our estimation conditions on the set of in-network hospitals and treats the negotiated prices
as the endogenous variable. Combining equations (14) and (7) we define the econometric
error as
                    ~ε(b, γ, τ ) = −γ~v + mc(b, τ ) = −γ~v + p~ + (Ω + Λ(b, τ ))−1 ~q,                    (19)

where (19) now makes explicit the points at which the structural parameters enter. We
estimate the remaining parameters with a GMM estimator based on the moment condition
that E[εmj (b, γ, τ )|Zmj ] = 0, where Zmj is a vector of (assumed) exogenous variables. Recall
that Ω and Λ are functions of equilibrium price (which depends on ε) and thus are endogenous.
       Our estimation depends on exogenous variables Zmj . We include all the cost fixed ef-
fects vmj in Zmj . In specifications that include variation in bargaining weights, we include
indicators for the entities covered by each bargaining parameter. Finally, we include four
other exogenous variables in the “instrument” set: predicted willingness-to-pay for the hos-
pital, predicted willingness-to-pay for the system, predicted willingness-to-pay per enrollee
for each MCO, and predicted total hospital quantity, where these values are predicted using
the overall mean price. From our model, price is endogenous in the first-stage bargaining
model because it is chosen as part of a bargaining process where the marginal cost shock ε
is observed. We assume that these four exogenous variables do not correlate with ε but do
correlate with price, implying that they will be helpful in identifying the effect of price.
       The moments based on (19) identify τ , b, and γ. The estimation of the γ parameters is
essentially a linear instrumental variables regression conditional on recovering marginal costs.
  24
    Ho and Pakes (2011) estimate fixed effects at a narrower level which they believe are important in avoiding
inconsistent estimates on price coefficients.



                                                      19
We believe that the bargaining weights have somewhat similar equilibrium implications to
fixed effects and hence it would be empirically difficult to identify the b and γ parameters at
the same level, e.g., MCO fixed effects for bargaining weight and for marginal costs. Hence,
when we include MCO fixed effects for bargaining weights we do not include these fixed
effects for marginal costs.
      Because we include MCO, hospital, and year fixed effects, it is variation across hospitals
for a given MCO and year that will serve to identify τ . As a concrete example, consider an
MCO whose enrollees have a high WTP for a certain hospital, due to their geographic and
illness characteristics. (Note that WTP is estimated in the patient choice stage.) That hos-
pital will be able to negotiate a relatively high price with that MCO. The relative importance
of WTP, and hence the extent of the price variation relative to other prices that involve the
same MCO or hospital, is determined by τ , thus serving to identify this parameter.


4       Results

4.1       Institutional setting: Inova/Prince William merger
We use the model to study the competitive interactions between hospitals and MCOs in
Northern Virginia. In late 2006, Inova Health System, a health care system with hospitals
solely in Northern Virginia, sought to acquire a not-for-profit institution that operated a
single general acute-care hospital, Prince William Hospital (PWH). Inova operated a large
tertiary hospital in Falls Church, Fairfax Hospital, with 884 licensed beds, which offered all
major treatments from low acuity ones to high-end ones such as transplants. Inova also
operated four, roughly similar community hospitals: Fair Oaks, Alexandria, Mount Vernon,
and Loudoun Hospitals. Inova’s previous acquisitions included Alexandria Hospital, in 1997
and Loudoun Hospital, in 2005. PWH had 180 licensed beds and was located in Manassas.
      The Federal Trade Commission, with the Virginia Office of the Attorney General as co-
plaintiff, challenged the acquisition in May, 2008. Subsequently, the parties abandoned the
transaction.25 The FTC alleged that the relevant geographic market consisted of all hospitals
in Virginia Health Planning District 8 (HPD8) and Fauquier County. This geographic area
included five other hospitals, although Northern Virginia Community Hospital closed in 2005.
Of the remaining four, Fauquier, Potomac, and the Virginia Hospital Center are independent
 25
      PWH was later acquired by the Novant Health, a multi-hospital system based in North Carolina.


                                                    20
while Reston Hospital Center was owned by the HCA chain. The closest competitor to the
Inova system was the Virginia Hospital Center.
   The product market alleged by the FTC was general acute care inpatient services sold to
MCOs. Given these market definitions, the market is highly concentrated. In its complaint
the FTC calculated a pre-merger HHI (based on MCO revenues) of 5,635 and the post-
merger HHI of 6,174. The pre-merger and change in the HHI are well above the thresholds
the antitrust agencies use for assessing the presumption of competitive harm from a merger.

                                     Figure 1: 2003 Northern Virginia hospital locations                                                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (




        Ü
                                                                     Washington
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              97
                          Berkeley
                                                                                                                                                                                     Howard
                                                                                                                                                                                                    §
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¨95


                                                     Jefferson

                                                                                                                                           §
                                                                                                                                           ¦
                                                                                                                                           ¨
                                                                                                                                           270                                                   Anne Arundel



                           §
                           ¦
                           ¨ 81
                      Frederick
                                                                                                                                       Montgomery

                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                    Shady Grove Adventist Hospital
                   Winchester Medical Center
                  !
                  (
                 Winchester
                                                                        Loudoun                               "
                                                                                                              )                                           §
                                                                                                                                                          ¦
                                                                                                                                                          ¨
                                                                                                                                                          270
                                                                                                                                                                               Holy Cross Hospital
                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                               (

                                                                                    Loudoun Hospital Center                                                        ( Suburban Hospital Association, Inc.
                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                 Clarke                                                                                          Sibley Memorial Hospital
                                                                                                                                                                        District of Columbia     Washington Hospital Center

                                                                                                      Reston Hospital Center
                                                                                                                             "
                                                                                                                             )                        §
                                                                                                                                                      ¦
                                                                                                                                                      ¨495            !
                                                                                                                                                                          !
                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                                      ( Children's National Medical Center §
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                           95

                                                                                                                                                                          ( Georgetown University Medical Center
                                                                                                                                                                Arlington     !
                                                                                                                                                                              (
                                                                                                                            Virginia Hospital Center               "
                                                                                                                                                                   )                 George Washington University Medical Center

                                                                                                                                                                   "
                                                                                                                                                                   )                      Northern Virginia
            §
            ¦
            ¨                                                                                        Inova Fair Oaks Hospital "
                                                                                                                              )                       "
                                                                                                                                                      )
                                                                                                                                       Fairfax City
            81                                                                                                                                                                           Community Hospital
                                                                                                                                                                          "
                                                                                                                                                                          )                Prince George's

                      Warren Memorial Hospital
                           !
                           (
                                                                                                                                Inova Fairfax Hospital            §
                                                                                                                                                                  ¦
                                                                                                                                                                  ¨
                                                                                                                                                                  395
                                                                                                                                                                        Alexandria
                                                                                                                                                                                        Inova Alexandria Hospital

                           Warren                                                                                                                     Fairfax
                                                                                                                                                                                   "
                                                                                                                                                                                   )
                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                        ¦
                                                                                                        ¨66     Manassas Park

                                                                                                                       "
                                                                                                                       )                                                             Inova Mount Vernon Hospital
                                                                                               Prince William Hospital
                                                                                                                     Manassas




                                                                       Fauquier
                                                                                                                               Potomac Hospital

                 Page
                                                                                  "
                                                                                  )                                        Prince William
                                                                                                                                                      "
                                                                                                                                                      )
                                                                                  Fauquier Hospital

                                  Rappahannock
                                                                                                                                                                                       Charles




                                                                 Culpeper                                                  Stafford


                        Madison
       0 2.5 5          10           15          20                                                                                                                                    King George
                                                                  Culpeper Regional Hospital
                                                  Miles          !
                                                                 (

            In-Sample Hospitals                                                                        Out-Of-Sample Hospitals
                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                       (
             "
             )    Independent             "
                                          )       HCA       "
                                                            )     Inova Health System                    !
                                                                                                         (    Independent          !
                                                                                                                                   (        MedStar Health                 !
                                                                                                                                                                           (       Valley Health System




   Figure 1 presents a map of the locations of the hospitals in Northern Virginia as of 2003,
the start of our sample. The heavy line defines the boundary of HPD8 and Fauquier County.
The two closest hospitals to PWH are members of the Inova system – Fair Oaks and Fairfax
– and, according to MapQuest, are 21 and 29 minutes drive times from PWH, respectively.
   All 11 hospitals in the market contracted with the four MCOs in our sample. The four

                                                                                                         21
MCOs in our sample represent 56% of private pay discharges in this market. None of these
MCOs pay on a capitated basis.


4.2    Summary Statistics
Table 1 presents the mean base prices for the set of hospitals used in the analysis. There is
significant variation in base prices across the hospitals prior to the merger. These differences
do not reflect variation in the severity of diagnoses across hospitals as our construction of
prices controls for disease complexity. The range between the highest and lowest hospital is
36% of the mean PWH price, which is in the middle of the price distribution.
   Table 1 also presents other characteristics of the hospitals in HPD8 and Fauquier County.
Hospitals are heterogeneous with respect to size, for-profit status, and the degree of advanced
services they provide. Seven of the eleven hospitals provided some level of neonatal intensive
care services by the end of our sample, and most hospitals have cardiac catheterization
laboratories that provide diagnostic and interventional cardiology services.

                                 Table 1: Hospital characteristics

         Hospital                 Mean             Mean       Mean      Mean          Mean
                                  beds             price $     FP       NICU         cath lab
         Prince William Hospital  170              10,273       0         1             0
         Alexandria Hospital      318               9,757       0         1             1
         Fair Oaks Hospital        182              9,799       0        0.5            1
         Fairfax Hospital         833              11,881       0         1             1
         Loudoun Hospital         155              11,565       0         0             1
         Mount Vernon Hospital    237              12,112       0         0             1
         Fauquier Hospital          86             13,270       0         0             0
         N. VA Community Hosp. 164                  9,545       1         0             1
         Potomac Hospital         153              11,420       0         1             1
         Reston Hospital Center    187              9,973       1         1             1
         Virginia Hospital Center 334               9,545       0        0.5            1
         Note: we report (unweighted) mean prices across year and payor. “FP” is an indicator
         for for-profit status, “Mean NICU” for the presence of a neonatal intensive care unit,
         and “Cath lab” for the presence of a cardiac catheterization lab that provides diagnostic
         and interventional cardiology services. The Mean NICU values of 0.5 reflect entry.
         Source: AHA and authors’ analysis of MCO claims data.



   Table 2 presents statistics by hospital for the sample of patients we use to estimate the


                                                    22
                                        Table 2: Patient sample

                                     Mean     Share        Mean     Mean     Mean      Discharges
        Hospital                      age     white        DRG      travel   coins.   Total Share
                                                           weight    time     rate
        Prince William Hospital       36.1     0.73         0.82    13.06    0.032    9,681    0.066
        Alexandria Hospital           39.3     0.62         0.92    12.78    0.025    15,622   0.107
        Fair Oaks Hospital            37.7     0.54         0.94    17.75    0.023    17,073   0.117
        Fairfax Hospital              35.8     0.58         1.20    18.97    0.023    46,428   0.319
        Loudoun Hospital              37.2     0.74         0.81    15.54    0.023    10,441   0.072
        Mount Vernon Hospital         50.3     0.66         1.38    16.18    0.022    3,749    0.026
        Fauquier Hospital             40.5     0.90         0.92    15.29    0.033    3,111    0.021
        N. VA Comm. Hosp.             47.2     0.48         1.43    16.02    0.016     531     0.004
        Potomac Hospital              37.5     0.60         0.93     9.62    0.024    8,737    0.060
        Reston Hospital Center        36.8     0.69         0.90    15.35    0.021    16,007   0.110
        Virginia Hospital Center      40.8     0.59         0.98    15.88    0.017    12,246   0.084
        Outside option                39.3     0.82         1.39     0.00    0.029    2,113    0.014
        All Inova                     37.5     0.59         1.09    17.37    0.024    85,540   0.641
        All others                    38.1     0.68         0.92    13.74    0.023    60,199   0.359
        Source: Authors’ analysis of VHI discharge data and MCO claims data.



hospital demand parameters. The patient sample is majority white at every hospital. Not
surprisingly, there is significant variation in the mean DRG weight across hospitals. PWH’s
mean DRG weight is 0.82, reflective of its role as a community hospital. The patient-weighted
mean DRG weight across all of Inova’s hospitals in 1.09 with its Fairfax and Mount Vernon
facilities treating patients with the highest resource intensity. About 1.4% of patients in our
sample choose care at a Virginia hospital that is not in our sample, a figure that ranges from
0.9% to 2.3% across the four MCOs in our sample. Patients choosing the outside option
had a high mean DRG weight of 1.39. Not reported in the table, the five most frequent
choices that constitute the outside good are two large tertiary care centers (Valley Health
Winchester Medical Center in Winchester and the University of Virginia Health System in
Charlottesville) and three psychiatric specialty hospitals.26
       Table 2 also reveals heterogeneity in travel times. Notably, patients travel the furthest
to be admitted at Inova Fairfax hospital, the largest hospital and only tertiary care hospital
in our sample. Interestingly, Inova Fairfax also has the lowest mean patient age reflecting
  26
    Our sample excludes discharges with a psychiatric major diagnostic category however a small number of
psychiatric patients have multiple diagnoses with the primary diagnosis not being psychiatric.


                                                      23
the popularity of its obstetrics program. Coinsurance rates potentially play an important
role in our model, and Table 2 presents mean coinsurance rates by hospital. The average
coinsurance rate is low but meaningfully larger than zero. Average coinsurance rates across
hospitals range from 1.7 to 3.3% with a mean of 2.4%, which aligns with national data from
three of the largest insurers.27 There is significant variation across payors in the use of
coinsurance which helps in our identification of α, as average coinsurance rates vary between
0.2% and 4.4% across MCOs in our data.
       Finally, Table 2 provides the shares by discharges among hospital systems in this area.
Within this market, Inova has a dominant share, attracting 64% of the patients. PWH is
the third largest hospital in the market with a 6.6% share. There is a large variation in
the mean price that the different MCOs pay hospitals which is a challenge for our model
to explain. The highest-paying MCO pays hospitals, on average, over 100% more than the
lowest-paying MCO. While this variation is high, large variations across hospitals and payors
are not uncommon (Ginsburg, 2010). In our framework, there are three possible reasons for
this variation, differences in bargaining weight, differential costs of treating patients across
MCOs, and differences in enrollee geographic distributions, characteristics, and preferences.


4.3       Patient choice estimates
Table 3 presents coefficient estimates from the model of hospital choice. In addition to
the negotiated price, the explanatory variables include hospital/year fixed effects, hospital
indicators interacted with the patient’s DRG weight, and a rich set of interactions that
capture dimensions of hospital and patient heterogeneity that affect hospital choice.
       Consistent with the large literature on hospital choice, we find that patients are very
sensitive to travel times. The willingness to travel is increasing in the DRG weight and
decreasing in age. An increase in travel time of 5 minutes reduces each hospital’s share
between 17 and 41%. The parameter estimates imply that increasing the travel time to all
hospitals by one minute reduces consumer surplus by approximately $167.28
  27
     According to analysis based on claims data for over 45 million covered lives from the Health Care
Cost Institute (HCCI), the average total out-of-pocket expenditures is approximately 4.8%. HCCI’s fig-
ure includes deductibles and co-payments which we have removed from our coinsurance variable and thus
the two estimates are well aligned. See HCCI 2012 Health Care Cost and Utilization Report available at
http://www.healthcostinstitute.org/2012report for details.
  28
     The patient’s price sensitivity to travel likely reflects the fact that they will be visited by members of
their social support network who may make several trips per day.



                                                      24
                    Table 3: Multinomial logit demand estimates

Variable                                        Coefficient                   Standard error
Base price × weight × coinsurance               −0.0008∗∗                        (0.0001)
Travel time                                     −0.1150∗∗                        (0.0026)
Travel time squared                             −0.0002∗∗                        (0.0000)
Closest                                          0.2845∗∗                        (0.0114)
Travel time × beds / 100                        −0.0118∗∗                        (0.0008)
Travel time × age / 100                         −0.0441∗∗                        (0.0023)
Travel time × FP                                 0.0157∗∗                        (0.0011)
Travel time × teach                              0.0280∗∗                        (0.0010)
Travel time × residents/beds                     0.0006∗∗                        (0.0000)
Travel time × income / 1000                      0.0002∗∗                        (0.0000)
Travel time × male                              −0.0151∗∗                        (0.0007)
Travel time × age 60+                            −0.0017                         (0.0013)
Travel time × weight / 1000                     11.4723∗∗                        (0.4125)
Cardiac major diagnostic class × cath lab        0.2036∗∗                        (0.0409)
Obstetric major diagnostic class × NICU          0.6187∗∗                        (0.0170)
Nerv, circ, musc major diagnostic classes × MRI −0.1409∗∗                        (0.0460)
Note: ∗∗ denotes significance at 1% level. Specification also includes hospital-year
interactions and hospital dummies interacted with disease weight. Pseudo R2 =0.445,
N=1,710,801.




    Table 4: Mean estimated 2006 demand elasticities for selected hospitals

   Hospital           (1)     (2)     (3)                        (4)             (5)
                      PW    Fairfax Reston                    Loudoun         Fauquier
   1. Prince William −0.125 0.052    0.012                      0.004          0.012
   2. Inova Fairfax  0.011 −0.141 0.018                         0.006          0.004
   3. HCA Reston     0.008   0.055 −0.149                      0.022            0.002
   4. Inova Loudoun 0.004    0.032   0.037                     −0.098           0.001
   5. Fauquier       0.026   0.041   0.006                     0.002           −0.153
   6. Outside option 0.025   0.090   0.022                     0.023           0.050
                         ∂sj pk
   Note: Elasticity is   ∂pk sj   where j denotes row and k denotes column)




                                                 25
    The parameter on out-of-pocket price is negative and significant indicating that, in fact,
inpatient prices do play a role in admissions decisions.29 However, in contrast to travel time,
patients are relatively insensitive to the gross price paid from the MCO to the hospital,
largely because of the low coinsurance rates that they face. Table 4 presents the estimated
price elasticities of demand for selected hospitals. Own-price elasticities range from −0.098
to −0.153 across the five reported hospitals. The fact that our elasticity estimates are
substantially less than 1 imply that under Bertrand competition the observed prices could
only be rationalized with negative marginal costs, even for stand-alone hospitals. Table A1
in Appendix A2 reports a version of Table 4 with bootstrapped standard errors, which we
find to be small.


4.4     Bargaining model estimates
Table 5 presents the coefficient estimates and standard errors from the GMM estimation
of the bargaining model. We estimate two specifications. In Specification 1, we fix the
bargaining weights to bm(s) = 0.5 (which implies that bs(m) = 0.5) and allow for marginal
cost fixed effects at the hospital, MCO, and year levels. In Specification 2, we allow the
bargaining parameters to vary across MCOs (lumping MCO 2 and 3 together) but omit the
MCO cost fixed effects.30 We bootstrap all standard errors at the payor/year/system level.
    Focusing first on Specification 1, the point estimate on τ indicates that MCOs place over
twice as much weight on enrollee welfare as on reimbursed costs. Though the coefficient
is not statistically significantly different from 0 or 1, 95 of the 100 bootstrapped draws of
τ are positive. A value of τ other than 1 may reflect employers placing a different weight
on welfare than enrollees but may also be due to errors in measuring coinsurance rates or
physician incentives to steer patients to low-price hospitals (Dickstein, 2011). We find an
increasing cost trend for hospitals over time. We also find large variation in the hospital
marginal costs across MCOs. This latter finding reflects the fact that there is large variation
across MCOs in the mean prices charged by hospitals.
    Turning to the results from Specification 2, here we estimate three different bargaining
weights bm(s) . We find significant variation in bargaining weights across MCOs, with all MCOs
  29
     Ho and Pakes (2011) using data from California, also find that the patient’s choice of hospital is influenced
by the prices paid by the MCOs.
  30
     We lump MCOs 2 and 3 together because they have similar characteristics and negotiated similar prices
with the hospitals.



                                                       26
having more leverage than hospitals. Only MCO 1’s bargaining parameter is not significantly
different than 0.5. This variation is driven by the same price variation that generated the
estimated cost heterogeneity in Specification 1. The estimates from Specification 2 imply that
MCOs 2 and 3 have a bargaining weight of essentially 1, so that hospitals have a bargaining
weight of 0. Thus, MCOs 2 and 3 drive hospital surpluses down to their reservation values.
Table A2 in Appendix A2 reports a specification where the bargaining weight differs across
each MCO/hospital-system pair. Very few of the parameters here are significantly different
than 0.5.

                           Table 5: Bargaining parameter estimates

                                    Specification 1                      Specification 2
    Parameter                     Estimate      S.E.              Estimate           S.E.
    MCO welfare weight (τ )          2.79      (2.87)               6.69            (5.53)
    MCO 1 bargaining weight           0.5        –                  0.52            (0.09)
    MCOs 2 & 3 bargaining weight      0.5        –                 1.00∗∗      (7.77 ×10−10 )
    MCO 4 bargaining weight           0.5        –                 0.76∗∗           (0.09)
                              Hospital cost parameters
    Prince William Hospital        8, 635∗∗ (3,009)                5, 971∗∗          (1,236)
    Inova Alexandria               10, 412∗ (4,415)                6, 487∗∗          (1,905)
    Inova Fairfax                 10, 786∗∗ (3,765)                6, 133∗∗          (1,211)
    Inova Fair Oaks               11, 192∗∗ (3,239)                6, 970∗∗          (2,352)
    Inova Loudoun                 12, 014∗∗ (3,188)                8, 167∗∗          (1,145)
    Inova Mount Vernon             10, 294∗ (5,170)                 4,658            (3,412)
    Fauquier Hospital             14, 553∗∗ (3,390)                9, 041∗∗          (1,905)
    No. VA Community Hosp.        10, 086∗∗ (2,413)                5, 754∗∗          (2,162)
    Potomac Hospital              11, 459∗∗ (2,703)                7, 653∗∗           (902)
    Reston Hospital Center         8, 249∗∗ (3,064)                5, 756∗∗          (1,607)
    Virginia Hospital Center       7, 993∗∗ (2,139)                5, 303∗∗          (1,226)
    Patients from MCO 2           −9, 043∗∗ (2,831)                    –                –
    Patients from MCO 3           −8, 910∗∗ (3,128)                    –                –
    Patients from MCO 4             -4,476    (2,707)                  –                –
    Year 2004                       1,130     (1,303)               1,414            (1,410)
    Year 2005                       1,808     (1,481)               1,737            (1,264)
    Year 2006                       1,908     (1,259)              2, 459∗           (1,077)
    Note: ∗∗ denotes significance at 1% level and ∗ at 5% level. Significance tests for bargaining
    parameters test the null of whether the parameter is different than 0.5. We report bootstrapped
    standard errors with data resampled at the payor/year/system level. “Patients from MCO 1” and
    “Year 2003” are both excluded indicators.




                                                  27
   Our estimation can explain the large cross-MCO price differences in three ways: (1) as
differences in hospital costs across MCOs; (2) as differences in the bargaining weights across
MCOs; or (3) as differences in WTP across MCOs. Specification 1 focuses on the first
explanation, while the Specification 2 focuses on the second. The third alternative could
occur if, for example, the geographic or illness severity distribution of enrollees varies across
MCOs. Both specifications allow for the third alternative but find that the cost or bargaining
weight explanations (respectively) fit the data better. Because we include MCO fixed effects,
our estimates of τ and b will be largely identified by within-MCO price differences. Despite
the large cross-MCO price variation, we believe that this variation allows us to perform
credible counterfactuals that reflect reasonable estimates of what would happen relative to
the baseline.
   We consider Specification 1 to be the most salient for three reasons: (1) given one partic-
ular interpretation of bargaining weights, which is as relative discount factors (Rubinstein,
1982; Collard-Wexler et al., 2013), it is most consistent with standard dynamic industrial or-
ganization models that treat discount factors as identical across agents; (2) the results from
Specification 2 that all hospital prices for two MCOs are equal to their reservation values
implies that hospital mergers (even to monopoly) will have little impact on prices, a finding
that is not consistent with the empirical hospital merger literature (Gaynor and Town, 2012);
and (3) It aligns with previous estimates from the literature – for example, Crawford and
Yurukoglu (2012) finds finds bargaining parameters that are closer to 0.5 than to 0 or 1.

                Table 6: Lerner indices and actual and effective price elasticities


 System                          Lerner     Actual        Effective own        Own price
 name                            index     own price          price        elasticity without
                                           elasticity       elasticity         insurance
 Prince William Hospital          0.52        0.13             1.94                5.16
 Inova Health System              0.39        0.07             2.55                3.10
 Fauquier Hospital                0.22        0.17             4.56                6.11
 HCA (Reston Hospital)            0.35        0.15             2.87                7.34
 Potomac Hospital                 0.37        0.15             2.74                6.77
 Virginia Hospital Center         0.58        0.13             1.74                6.43
 Note: reported elasticities and Lerner indices use quantity weights.



                                                                          P −mc
   Table 6 lists the estimated weighted mean 2006 Lerner index,             P
                                                                                ,   by hospital sys-

                                                    28
tem. The mean Lerner indices range from 0.22 to 0.58, and are relatively high for both
Inova and PWH. Importantly, Table 6 also presents the actual own-price elasticity, effective
price elasticities for both MCO objective functions, and own-price elasticity that would exist
without insurance. We calculate effective price elasticities using the inverse elasticity rule
elastmj = −( P −mc
               P
                   )−1 .
    For PWH, the actual price elasticity is 0.13 while the effective price elasticity is much
higher and, at 1.94, consistent with positive marginal costs. If patients faced the full cost of
their treatment instead of having insurance, our first stage estimates imply that PWH’s price
elasticity would rise to 5.16. For Inova, the own-price elasticity is even lower than for PWH,
at 0.07, because it is a large system, but the effective own-price elasticity is 2.55, slightly
higher than for PWH.
    Overall, Table 6 provides a clearer picture of the impact of MCO bargaining. In all cases,
the effective price elasticities are in between actual price elasticities and price elasticities with-
out insurance. It is well-understood that the risk-reduction component of insurance dampens
consumer price responsiveness relative to having no insurance. In a model of Bertrand com-
petition between hospitals, this will result in hospital prices far above marginal costs. We
find that MCO bargaining leverage serves to partially overcome the equilibrium effects of
insurance moral hazard, driving equilibrium prices closer to what they would be in a world
without health insurance.


5     Counterfactuals
We now use the estimates from both models to perform antitrust and health policy coun-
terfactual experiments. All experiments in this section use the estimated parameters from
Specification 1 in Table 5.


5.1    Industry structure and conduct remedies
This subsection evaluates the impact of counterfactual industry structures, focusing on the
proposed Inova/PWH merger that the FTC successfully blocked in 2008. In addition to ex-
amining the proposed Inova/PWH merger, we also examine the impact of imposing separate
bargaining in this merger; the de-merger of Loudoun Hospital from Inova; and breaking up




                                                 29
                       Table 7: Impact of counterfactual industry structures

  Counterfactual              System                         %∆ Price      %∆ Quantity         %∆ Profits
  1. Inova/PWH                Inova & PWH                      3.1            −0.5                9.3
  merger                      Rival hospitals                  3.6            1.2                12.0
                              Change at Inova+PW              30.5            −4.9               91.5
                              relative to PW base
  2. Inova/PWH                Inova & PWH                        3.3             −0.5              8.8
  merger with sepa-           Rival hospitals                    3.5             1.2               11.2
  rate bargaining
  3. Loudoun                  Inova & Loudoun                  −1.8              0.1              −4.7
  demerger                    Rival hospitals                  −1.6              −0.2             −4.7
                              Change at Inova rela-            −14.7              0.8             −38.5
                              tive to Loudoun base
  4. Breaking up              All hospitals                     −6.8             0.05             −18.9
  Inova
  Note: price changes are calculated using quantity weights. The price changes relative to PWH or
  Loudoun base reflect the total system revenue change divided by the base revenue of this hospital.



the Inova system.31
       Our results are in Table 7. Counterfactual 1 finds that the Inova/PWH merger leads to a
significant increase in prices and profits for the new Inova system. The net quantity-weighted
price increase is approximately 3.1% and the net increase in profits is 9.3%. Considering the
relative size of PWH to the Inova system, a 3.1% price increase across the joint systems from
this transaction is quite substantial, amounting to 30.5% of base PWH revenues. Patient
volume at the merged system goes down slightly, by 0.5%, reflecting both low coinsurance
rates (and hence that patient demand is inelastic) and the equilibrium price increase by rival
hospitals. Not reported in the table, managed care surplus, which is weighted consumer
surplus net of payments to hospitals, drops by approximately 27% from this merger.
       In the Evanston Northwestern hospital merger case, the FTC imposed a remedy requir-
ing the Evanston Northwestern system to negotiate separately with MCOs (with firewalls
in place) from the newly acquired hospital, Highland Park Hospital.32 We examine the im-
  31
     For payors with very low coinsurance rates, we compute the no-coinsurance solution from Brand (2013)
for this table, due to convergence difficulties. For other payors, we find prices that jointly set the vector of
FOCs to 0. We have no proof of uniqueness of equilibrium except for the no-coinsurance solution, but we
have not found any evidence of multiple equilibria.
  32
     In the Matter of Evanston Northwestern Healthcare Corporation, Docket No. 9315, Opinion of the
Commissioners, 2008.


                                                      30
plications of this type of policy by simulating a world where Inova acquires PWH and the
PWH negotiator bargains with a firewall from the other Inova hospitals. We simulate this
counterfactual by assuming that the disagreement values for PWH negotiations reflect the
case where only PWH is excluded from the network, and analogously for the ‘legacy-Inova’
disagreement values.33
      Even though the negotiations are separate, the PWH bargainer might internalize the
incentives of the system, namely that if a high price discouraged patients from seeking care
at PWH, some of them would still divert instead to other Inova hospitals which is beneficial
for the parent organization. Counterfactual 2 imposes the Evanston Northwestern remedy
and assumes that the negotiators recognize these true incentives faced by the system in their
bargaining. We find that the conduct remedy performs similarly to the base merger outcomes,
with a post-merger price increase of 3.3% and a managed care surplus loss of 27.8%.
      The FTC in its Evanston decision hoped that this conduct remedy would re-inject com-
petition into the market by reducing the leverage of the hospital that bargains separately;
e.g., PWH could only threaten a small harm to the MCO from disagreement. However, this
remedy also reduces the leverage of the MCO since if it offers an unacceptable contract to
PWH, some of its but-for PWH patients would certainly go to other Inova hospitals. The
increase in disagreement values on both sides implies that the impact of this remedy (relative
to the outcome under the merger absent the remedy) is theoretically ambiguous. Empirically,
separate negotiations do not appear to solve the problem of bargaining leverage by hospitals.
      Counterfactual 3 examines the impact of Inova divesting Loudoun Hospital, which it
acquired in 2005 without antitrust opposition. The counterfactual predictions tell a different
story for the Inova/Loudoun demerger than the Inova/PWH merger. A divesture of Loudoun
Hospital leads to a net reduction in price of 1.8% for the Inova system a reduction in profits of
4.7%, and an increase in managed care surplus of 13.5%. The price decrease translates into an
approximate 14.7% price decrease relative to Loudoun’s discharge share of the Inova system.
The smaller price impact is consistent with the FTC challenging Inova’s proposed Prince
William acquisition but not its Loudoun acquisition. Finally, Counterfactual 4 simulates the
impact of breaking up the entire Inova system into separately-owned hospitals. This breakup
leads to a 7% market-wide decline in prices and a 54.8% increase in consumer surplus. This
result is consistent with the evidence that points to the creation of large hospital systems
during the 1990s as important driver of higher hospital prices.
 33
      Appendix A3 provides the first order conditions for this case.


                                                      31
   We also examine the sensitivity of these results to the bargaining parameter estimates.
We first consider the impact of the Inova/PW merger using the estimates from Table 5,
Specification 2, instead of Specification 1. For the two MCOs with bargaining weights less
than one, we find that our base Specification 1 generates a price increase of 1.7% for Inova
and Prince William from the merger for these two payors, while Specification 2 generates a
price increase of 4.2% for the same payors.
   We also estimate our model and compute the effect of the Inova/PWH merger with differ-
ent fixed bargaining parameters, focusing on one MCO for ease of computation. The results,
which are in Appendix A2 Table A3, show that estimated marginal costs increase monoton-
ically in the bargaining weight b. For bm(s) = 0, ∀m, s (which, as we showed in Section 2.4,
corresponds to Bertrand competition) we estimate mean marginal costs of $−278,000, which
rises to $11,500 – very close to mean price – when bm(s) = 0.9. Given the increasing estimated
marginal costs, it follows that the effective own price elasticity also increases monotonically
in b. Finally, since higher price elasticities generally imply lower markups, it is not surprising
that we find that the effects of the predicted Inova/PWH merger are also monotonic in b,
ranging from a market-wide 18.3% price increase with bm(s) = 0 to 0.05% with bm(s) = 0.9.
We view the merger impacts at both extremes to be implausible also lending support to a
bargaining weight of bm(s) = 0.5.


5.2    Moral hazard and coinsurance in equilibrium
There is a long tradition in economics of evaluating how the moral hazard from health insur-
ance causes enrollees to overconsume medical care relative to the societal optimum (Pauly,
1968).x Less studied is the indirect impact of health insurance on equilibrium provider prices.
By covering out-of-pocket expenses, health insurance dampens the incentive of consumers
to respond to differential prices in selecting healthcare providers, which affects equilibrium
prices. We seek to evaluate the extent to which coinsurance serves as a solution to the
equilibrium pricing problems resulting from moral hazard.
   Table 8 examines the equilibrium impact of coinsurance on equilibrium hospital prices.
Counterfactual 1 examines the extreme case of insurance policies that cover all inpatient
care expenses at the margin. We find that quantity-weighted prices would be 3.7% higher
than in the base case if coinsurance rates were zero. The reason for the price increase is
straightforward. Patient demand would go from having a moderate elasticity to no elasticity


                                               32
                      Table 8: Impact of counterfactual coinsurance levels

  Counterfactual            System              %∆ Price          %∆ Quantity            %∆ Profits
  1. No coinsurance         All hospitals         3.7                0.01                  9.8
  2. Coinsurance 10         All hospitals        −16.1                0.9                  −0.4
  times current
  3. Inova/PWH              Inova & PWH             2.9                  0                    7.4
  merger, no coinsur-       Rival hospitals         1.3                  0                    3.9
  ance
  Note: price changes are calculated using quantity weights.



at all. Thus, these results indicate that both patient coinsurance and MCO bargaining
leverage play a role in constraining prices in this market.
       We also consider higher coinsurance rates in Counterfactual 2. Estimates of the optimal
health insurance design in the presence of moral hazard indicate that coinsurance rates should
be approximately 25% (see Manning and Marquis, 1996).34 In this counterfactual, we consider
the impact of a tenfold increase in the coinsurance rates on the equilibrium, which yields
roughly equivalent coinsurance rates to the Manning and Marquis ones. The increase in cost
sharing has a large impact, with quantity-weighted prices dropping by 16% and quantity
increasing slightly, relative to the base case. This counterfactual suggests that analyses
of the optimal benefit design of insurance contracts, which do not consider the additional
impact of increasing cost sharing on the price of health care, likely understate the gains from
increased coinsurance rates.
       Finally, Counterfactual 3 considers the interaction of no coinsurance and the Inova/PWH
merger. It is hypothesized that increasing patient cost sharing can partially undo the price
impact of hospital mergers. Theoretically, however, the steering effect of coinsurance can
either enhance or mitigate the increase in bargaining leverage from merger. We explore these
possibilities by calculating the predicted impact of the Inova/PWH merger when patient cost
sharing is zero. We find a lower increase from the merger at Inova/PWH, of 2.9% instead of
3.1%, than when we allow for positive coinsurance rates. In other words, the steering effect
from coinsurance increases the equilibrium pricing effect of the merger.
  34
    Manning and Marquis (1996) optimal insurance contract also includes a $25,000 (in 1995 dollars) total
out-of-pocket maximum.




                                                   33
6        Robustness to modeling assumptions
This section considers an alternate model of the bargaining stage.35 In this model, MCOs
maximize their expected profits when negotiating with hospital systems over the terms of
hospitals’ inclusions in MCO networks. After the networks are set, MCOs simultaneously
post premiums. Observing coinsurance rates, posted MCO premiums, and hospital prices,
each enrollee chooses an MCO, which determines the assignment of patients to MCOs, m(i).
Given this assignment, the second stage is the same as in the base model: patients receive
health status draws and then choose hospitals.
       The posted premium competition model differs from the base model in that (i) the MCO
objective function is to maximize profits, rather than the weighted difference between enrollee
surplus and costs; and (ii) enrollee plan choices in the case of disagreement are allowed to vary.
Note that both models account for consumer preferences in the formation of the network, they
just do it in different ways. The base model assumes that there is agency between employers
and MCOs, while in the posted premium competition model, this accounting occurs through
the competitive interactions of the health plan marketplace.
       We now detail the posted premium competition model, starting with the plan choice
decision which occurs at the end of Stage 1. At this point, each individual i is faced with
a premium Pm for each plan m. The enrollee does not know her disease realization or her
eij hospital-specific shocks. Each enrollee makes a discrete choice of MCO to maximize the
utility
                               Uim = α1 Wi (Nm , p~m ) − α2 Pm + ξm + Eim ,                           (20)

where α1 is the dollar transformation of measured welfare from (4), α2 is the disutility from
premiums, ξm is the utility from MCO m from attributes other than its patient care and
price (e.g., customer service), and Eim is an i.i.d. unobservable, distributed type 1 extreme
value. The enrollee may choose the outside option, Ui0 = Ei0 , in which case the enrollee will
not be able to use a hospital in the second stage. The market share of MCO m for patient i
is:
                                               α1 Wi (Nm , p~m ) − α2 Pm + ξm
                        Sim (Pm , P−m ) =      PM                                  ,
                                            1 + n=1 α1 Wi (Nn , p~n ) − α2 Pn + ξn
which conditions on the choice of hospital networks and prices.
       Moving back in time to the premium-setting phase, we assume that MCOs simultaneously
  35
       This model builds on Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012) and is most similar to Ho and Lee (2013)’s model.


                                                     34
choose premiums, Pm , to maximize expected profits, knowing all input costs pns , ∀n, s. Ex-
pected profits from a patient are the market share of the patient times the expected margin
from attracting her. Overall, then, we can write profits (gross of fixed costs) to MCO m as:
                                                                                                     
                                       Expected margin from i
                      z                            }|                               {
                 XI         XD                      X                                                
                                                                                                     
 Rm (Pm |P−m ) =     
                     (P m −     (1 − c id )f id wd        p ms(j) s ijd (Nm , p
                                                                               ~ m )) Sim (P m , P−m ),
                                                                                                      
                 i=1        d=1                    j=0,Nm                                            

                                                                                                     (21)
where we are again implicitly conditioning on hospital networks and prices.
   Moving now to the start of Stage 1, the bargaining process is similar to the base model,
but the threat points are different. In particular, when considering the disagreement point
an MCO takes into account that if it does not reach an agreement with a hospital system
it will lose some enrollees and adjust its premiums to reoptimize given its new network.
Similarly, when considering a disagreement with an MCO, a hospital system considers that
it will recapture some of the patients from that MCO because of the spill of patients to other
MCOs. Appendix A4 details the agreement and disagreement values for MCOs and hospital
systems.
   To compute the equilibrium of the posted premium competition model, we require data
on hospital costs, patient illness distributions, and plan quality, as well as values of the
parameters α1 and α2 . We do not use any data on plan premiums, as these are calculated
in equilibrium. We now outline the calibration of these data and parameters, with details in
Appendix A4.
   First, we calibrate the premium sensitivity parameter α2 , which is the disutility of spend-
ing an extra dollar on health insurance, using the equivalent parameter reported by Ericson
and Starc (2012)’s study of health insurance in Massachusetts. Second, we choose the coeffi-
cient on hospital welfare at the premium stage, α1 , that makes the marginal utilities of a dollar
equal at the plan choice and hospital choice stages. We use the estimated marginal costs es-
timates from our base model specification (Table 5, Specification 1) and set bs(m) = 0.5, ∀s, m
as in this specification. We calculate ξm based on plan market shares and let coinsurance
cid = 0, ∀i, d to ease the burden of computation. Finally, we assume that the ex-ante distri-
bution of illness for each patient at the point when the patient chooses a health plan takes
on exactly two potential values, no illness or illness.



                                                   35
       Note that we are in part using the estimates from our base model to calibrate this model.
While this does not provide us with independent estimates of the posted premium competition
model, it does provide us evidence on the difference between the equilibrium predictions of
the two models when starting with similar values. The results can also be seen (heuristically)
as indicating the first-order difference between the two models if we were able to estimate
both.

            Table 9: Base simulation results from posted premium competition model


                                        Mean value in posted
                                                                       Mean value in base
 Variable                               premium competition
                                                                            model
                                               model
 Hospital prices                              $11,088                         $13,618
 Hospital margin per patient                  $4,796                           $4,893
 MCO premiums                                 $1,706                             –
 MCO margin per enrollee                       $792                               –
 Consumer surplus                             $4,398                             –
 Health insurance take-up (%)                   84.5                              –
 Note: hospital prices are patient-weighted base prices excluding the outside good, hospital margins are
 patient-weighted, MCO premiums and margins are enrollee-weighted, and consumer surplus is per capita.




       Table 9 provides the calibrated baseline outcomes from the posted premium competition
model. Overall, the results are broadly similar to the base model, although hospital base
prices are somewhat lower while per-patient margins are slightly lower.36 MCO premiums are
estimated at $1,706 per year for hospitalization insurance, of which $792 represents a margin
over marginal cost. Ex-ante consumer surplus from having health insurance – and hence
being able to use hospitals – is an average of $4,398. The take-up rate of health insurance
is 84.5%. Appendix A2 Table A4 presents the Lerner indices and actual and effective price
elasticities from this model, analogous to Table 6 for the base model. They are similar to the
base model.
       Table 10 presents the implications of the proposed Inova/PWH merger for the posted
premium competition model and also displays the analogous results from the base model for
comparison purposes. The posted premium model generates larger price increases from the
  36
    The relatively high margins reflect differential insurance take-up, where more severely ill patients dispro-
portionately enroll with an MCO.



                                                      36
    Table 10: Mean Inova/PWH Merger effects from posted premium competition model


                                             Posted premium               Base model –
                                            competition model             Specification 1
 Inova/PWH prices                                 7.2%                         3.1%
 Other hospitals prices                           2.2%                         3.6%
 Inova/PWH margin per patient                     16.9%                        9.8%
 Other hospitals margin per patient               6.6%                        10.7%
 MCO premiums                                     3.4%                           –
 MCO margin per enrollee                          1.0%                           –
 Consumer surplus                                 -4.4%                          –
 Health insurance take-up                         -1.6%                          –
 Note: hospital prices are patient-weighted base prices excluding the outside good, hospital margins are
 patient-weighted, MCO premiums are enrollee-weighted, MCO margins are enrollee-weighted, and consumer
 surplus is per capita.



Inova/PWH merger for the merging parties than does the base model: 7.2% instead of 3.1%.
Premiums rise by 3.4% following the merger. The combined effect leads to significantly lower
consumer surplus (4.4%) and a decrease in insurance take-up of 1.6%. The increased price
implies that the fact that hospitals can recapture some patients in the case of disagreement
with an MCO in this model, which will increase the disagreement value of the hospital system
following a merger, appears to be the dominant difference between the models.


7     Conclusion
Many bilateral, business-to-business transactions are between oligopoly firms negotiating
prices over a bundle of imperfectly substitutable goods. In this paper we develop a model
of the price negotiations game between managed care organizations and hospitals. We show
that standard oligopoly models will generally not accurately capture the pricing behavior
under these bargaining scenarios. We then develop a GMM estimator of the negotiation
process and estimate the parameters of the model using detailed managed care claims and
patient discharge data from Northern Virginia.
    We find that patient demand is quite inelastic – with own-price elasticities of about 0.12
on average – as patients typically only pay out-of-pocket 2 to 3 percent of the cost of their
hospital care at the margin. Consistent with our theoretical model, prices are significantly

                                                 37
constrained by MCO bargaining leverage, though still much higher than they would be in
the absence of insurance. Moreover, they are similar across two different objective functions
for MCOs, one where they act as agents of employers through long-run contracts, and the
other where they post premiums and compete for enrollees à la Bertrand.
   The proposed merger between Inova hospital system and Prince William Hospital, which
the FTC challenged, would have significantly raised prices. The market we study is more
concentrated than the average market but not an outlier,37 implying that hospital mergers
in other MSAs may also cause price increases and hence be cause for antitrust concern.
Conduct remedies used by the FTC in other hospital merger cases, with separate, fire-walled
negotiating teams, would not help. Finally, we find that a large increase in the coinsurance
rate would significantly reduce hospital prices. Patient cost-sharing has recently trended
upwards and our model indicates that if this trend continues it could result in a significant
reduction in provider prices.
   While our focus is on negotiations between hospitals and MCOs, we believe our frame-
work can be applied in a number of alternative settings where there are a small number
of “gatekeeper” buyers. Our approach allows us to write the equilibrium pricing in a way
that is similar to the standard Lerner index inverse elasticity rule, by substituting effective
demand elasticities for the demand elasticities. This approach further allows us to construct
a simple GMM estimator for marginal costs, bargaining weights and underlying incentives.
An interesting extension to explore in future work is formal identification of the bargaining
weights. We conjecture that the identification of these weights might be similar to identifi-
cation of the nature of competition and that some of the results in Haile and Berry (2010)
would generalize to our case.



References
Allen, J., Clark, R., and Houde, J.-F. (2013). Price negotiation in differentiated product
  markets: The case of insured mortgages in Canada. Working Paper.
Baicker, K. and Chandra, A. (2006). The labor market effects of rising health insurance
  premiums. Journal of Labor Economics, (3):609 634.
  37
     In 2006, the average MSA concentration was approximately 3,250 with approximately 25% of MSAs
having an HHI greater than 5,000 (Gaynor and Town, 2012). The reported HHI of 5,635 for Northern
Virginia uses a market definition that is much smaller than the Washington, DC MSA.




                                               38
Berry, S. (1994). Estimating discrete choice models of product differentiation. RAND Journal
  of Economics, 25:242–262.
Berry, S., Levinsohn, J., and Pakes, A. (1995). Automobile prices in market equilibrium.
  Econometrica, 63(4).
Berry, S. and Pakes, A. (1993). Some applications and limitations of recent advances in
  empirical industrial organization: Merger analysis. American Economic Review, 83(2):247–
  252.
Binmore, K., Rubinstein, A., and Wolinsky, A. (1986). The Nash bargaining solution in
  economic modelling. The RAND Journal of Economics, pages 176–188.
Brand, K. (2013). Price equilibrium in empirical models of hospital competition. Working
  Paper, Federal Trade Commission.
Bresnahan, T. F. (1987). Competition and collusion in the American automobile industry:
  The 1955 price war. Journal of Industrial Economics, 35(4):457–482.
Capps, C., Dranove, D., and Satterthwaite, M. (2003). Competition and market power in
  option demand markets. RAND Journal of Economics, 34(4):737–763.
Chipty, T. (1995). Horizontal integration for bargaining power: Evidence from the cable
  television industry. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 4(2):375–397.
Chipty, T. and Snyder, C. (1999). The role of firm size in bilateral bargaining: A study of
  the cable television industry. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(2):326–340.
Collard-Wexler, A., Gowrisankaran, G., and Lee, R. S. (2013). Bargaining in bilateral
  oligopoly: An alternating offers representation of the “Nash-in-Nash” solution.
Crawford, G. and Yurukoglu, A. (2012). The welfare effects of bundlig in multichannel
  television Markets. American Economic Review, 102(2):643–685.
Dafny, L. (2010). Are health insurance markets competitive? American Economic Review,
  (4):1399 – 1431.
Dickstein, M. (2011). Physician vs. patient incentives in prescription drug choice. Working
  Paper.
Draganska, Michaela, D. K. and Villas-Boas, S. B. (2011). A larger slice or a larger pie? an
  empirical investigation of bargaining power in the distribution channel. Marketing Science,
  29:57–74.
Ericson, K. M. and Starc, A. (2012). Pricing regulation and imperfect competition on the
  massachusetts health insurance exchange.
Gaynor, M. and Town, R. (2012). Provider competition. In Pauly, M., McGuire, T., and
  Barros, P., editors, Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 2, pages 499–637. Elsevier.
Gaynor, M. and Vogt, W. B. (2003). Competition among hospitals. Rand Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 34(4):764–785.
Ginsburg, P. (2010). Wide variation in hospital and physician payment rates evidence of
  provider market power. HSC Research Brief No. 16, Center for Studying Health System
  Change.
Goldberg, P. K. (1995). Product differentiation and oligopoly in international markets: The
  case of the U.S. automobile industry. Econometrica, 63(4).
Grennan, M. (2013). Price Discrimination and Price Bargaining: Empirical Evidence from
  Medical Devices. American Economic Review.

                                             39
Haile, P. and Berry, S. (2010). Identification in differentiated products markets using market
  level data. Cowles Foundation Working Paper 1744.
Hausman, J., Leonard, G., and Zona, D. (1994). Competitive Analysis with Differentiated
  Products. Annales D’Economie et de Statistique, 34:159–180.
Ho, K. (2006). The welfare effects of restricted hospital choice in the US medical care market.
  Journal of Applied Econometrics, 21(7):1039–1079.
Ho, K. (2009). Insurer-Provider Networks in the Medical Care Market. American Economic
  Review, 99(1):393–430.
Ho, K. and Lee, R. S. (2013). Insurer competition and negotiated hospital prices.
Ho, K. and Pakes, A. (2011). Physician responses to financial incentives: evidence from
  hospital discharge records,. Working Paper.
Horn, H. and Wolinsky, A. (1988a). Bilateral monopolies and incentives for merger. RAND
  Journal of Economics, 19(3):408–419.
Horn, H. and Wolinsky, A. (1988b). Worker substitutability and patterns of unionisation.
  The Economic Journal, 98(391):484–497.
Kaiser Family Foundation/Health Research and Educational Trust (2011). Employer health
  benefits annual survey.
Lakadawalla, D. and Philipson, T. (2006). The nonprofit sector and industry performance.
  Journal of Public Economics, 90(8-9):1681–1698.
Lewis, M. and Pflum, K. (2011). Diagnosing hospital system bargaining power in managed
  care networks,. Working Paper.
Manning, W. and Marquis, M. (1996). Health insurance: The tradeoff between risk pooling
  and moral hazard. Journal of Health Economics, 15(5):609–639.
Meza, S. and Sudhir, K. (2010). Do private labels increase retailer bargaining power? Quan-
  tatative Marketing and Economics, 8(3):333–363.
Nevo, A. (2000). Mergers with differentiated products: The case of the ready-to-eat cereal
  industry. The RAND Journal of Economics, 31(3):395–421.
O’Brien, D. and Shaffer, G. (2005). Bargaining, bundling, and clout: The portfolio effects of
  horizontal mergers. RAND Journal of Economics, 36(3):573–595.
Pauly, M. (1968). The economics of moral hazard: Comment. American Economic Review,
  (58):531–537.
Rubinstein, A. (1982). Perfect equilibrium in a bargaining model. Econometrica, (50):97–109.
Sorensen, A. (2003). Insurer-hospital bargaining: Negotiated discounts in post-deregulation
  connecticut. The Journal of Industrial Economics, 51(4):469–490.
Town, R. and Vistnes, G. (2001). Hospital competition in HMO networks. Journal of Health
  Economics, 20(5):733–752.
Werden, G. and Froeb, L. (1994). The effects of mergers in differentiated products industries:
  Logit demand and merger policy. Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 10(2):407–
  426.




                                              40
Appendix A1: Derivation of the A term

For on-line publication

For ease of notation, define the welfare for all patients at MCO m from the choice stage to
be
                                         I
                                 τ X
                Wm (Nm , p~m ) =       1{m(i) = m}Wi (Nm , p~m ) − T Cm (Nm , p~m ).                            (22)
                                 α i=1
                                                  ∂Vm
In Section 2.4, we defined the A term as          ∂pmj
                                                       .   Note that

                                 ∂Vm    ∂Wm (Nm , p~m ) ∂T Cm (Nm , p~m )
                                      =                −                  .                                     (23)
                                 ∂pmj      ∂pmj             ∂pmj

Note that

                             I       D
  ∂Wm (Nm , p~m )      XX                               eδijd
                  = −τ         1{m(i) = m}cid wid fid P       δikd
     ∂pmj              i=1 d=1                         k∈Nm e
                                                                    I X
                                                                    X D
                                                             = −τ             1{m(i) = m}cid wid fid sijd (24)
                                                                    i=1 d=1


and that

                         I       D
  ∂T Cm (Nm , p~m ) X X
                   =         1{m(i) = m}(1 − cid )fid wid sijd
      ∂pmj           i=1 d=1
                                             I X
                                               D
                                             X                                            X            ∂sikd
                                         +             1{m(i) = m}(1 − cid )fid wid              pkm         . (25)
                                             i=1 d=1                                     k∈Nm
                                                                                                       ∂pmj

                     ∂sijd                                                              ∂sikd
Further, note that   ∂pmj
                             = −αcid wid sijd (1 − sijd ) if k = j and otherwise        ∂pmj
                                                                                                = αcid wid sikd sijd .
     Putting this all together gives:

                 I   D                             m X        I     D
  ∂Vm       XX                                    X
       = −τ         1{m(i) = m}cid wid fid sijd −         1{m(i) = m}(1 − cid )wid fid sijd
  ∂pmj      i=1 d=1                               i=1 d=1
                     I  D
                                                                                     !
                    XX                                            X
                                                        2
                −α         1{m(i) = m}(1 − cid )cid wid fid sijd     pkm sikd − pmj . (26)
                         i=1 d=1                                                 k∈Nm




                                                        41
Appendix A2: Extra tables
Table A1 replicates Table 4 from the paper and adds bootstrapped standard errors. The key
message from this table is that the own- and cross-price elasticity estimates are very precise.

Table A1: Mean and associated standard errors of estimated 2006 demand elasticities for
selected hospitals

         Hospital             (1)     (2)      (3)      (4)                           (5)
                              PW    Fairfax Reston Loudoun                        Fauquier
         1. Prince William −0.125    0.052    0.012    0.004                         0.012
                            (0.012) (0.005) (0.001) (0.0004)                        (0.001)
         2. Inova Fairfax    0.011  −0.141    0.018    0.006                         0.004
                           (0.0008) (0.013) (0.0014) (0.0006)                      (0.0003)
         3. HCA Reston       0.008   0.055   −0.149    0.022                         0.002
                           (0.0006) (0.004) (0.011)   (0.002)                      (0.0001)
         4. Inova Loudoun    0.004   0.032    0.037   −0.098                         0.001
                           (0.0003) (0.003) (0.003)    (0.01)                     (0.00008)
         5. Fauquier         0.026   0.041   0.006     0.002                        −0.153
                            (0.002) (0.004) (0.0006) (0.0002)                       (0.015)
         6. Outside option   0.025   0.090   0.022     0.023                         0.050
                            (0.002) (0.008) (0.0017) (0.002)                        (0.004)
                            ∂s
         Note: Elasticity is ∂pkj pskj where j denotes row and k denotes column. Standard error
         estimates in parentheses are calculated using 100 bootstrap draws.



   Table A2 presents the estimates from the bargaining model allowing the bargaining
weights to vary by MCO/hospital system pair. There is significant variation in the bar-
gaining parameter estimates across hospitals within a MCO but those estimates tend to be
imprecise.
   Table A3 presents an additional robustness specification. The table presents the param-
eter estimates fixing the MCO bargaining weights that span the possible support. Very low
bargaining weights generate implied marginal costs that are negative. Very high bargaining
weights imply that mergers have little impact on negotiated prices.
   Table A4 presents the analog of Table 6 for the alternative, posted premium competition
model. In general, the Lerner indices are similar to those in the base model. Consequently,
the implications of the posted premium model are very similar to our base model for the
counterfactuals we consider.


                                                  42
   Table A2: Bargaining parameter estimates with extra bargaining parameters

Parameter                                                    Estimate              S.E.
MCO welfare weight (τ )                                       2.75∗∗              (0.51)
MCO 1 bargaining weight       Inova Health System              0.33               (0.20)
MCO 1 bargaining weight       Loudoun Hospital                 0.30               (0.22)
MCO 1 bargaining weight       Prince William Hospital          0.29               (0.23)
MCO 1 bargaining weight       HCA                             0.04∗               (0.05)
MCO 1 bargaining weight       Potomac Hospital                 0.22               (0.20)
MCO 1 bargaining weight       Virginia Hospital Center         0.11               (0.13)
MCO 1 bargaining weight       Fauquier Hospital                0.23               (0.16)
MCO 2 bargaining weight       Inova Health System              0.35               (0.36)
MCO 2 bargaining weight       Loudoun Hospital                 0.72               (0.69)
MCO 2 bargaining weight       Prince William Hospital         1.00∗∗                (0)
MCO 2 bargaining weight       HCA                              0.04               (0.05)
MCO 2 bargaining weight       Potomac Hospital                 0.76               (0.75)
MCO 2 bargaining weight       Virginia Hospital Center         0.96               (1.03)
MCO 2 bargaining weight       Fauquier Hospital                0.57               (0.56)
MCO 3 bargaining weight       Inova Health System              0.67               (0.77)
MCO 3 bargaining weight       Loudoun Hospital                 0.35               (0.33)
MCO 3 bargaining weight       Prince William Hospital          0.89               (0.99)
MCO 3 bargaining weight       HCA                              0.73               (1.07)
MCO 3 bargaining weight       Potomac Hospital                 0.67               (0.80)
MCO 3 bargaining weight       Virginia Hospital Center         1.00               (1.39)
MCO 3 bargaining weight       Fauquier Hospital                0.26               (0.27)
MCO 4 bargaining weight       Inova Health System              0.51               (0.41)
MCO 4 bargaining weight       Loudoun Hospital                 0.04               (0.14)
MCO 4 bargaining weight       Prince William Hospital          0.08               (0.10)
MCO 4 bargaining weight       HCA                              0.75               (0.75)
MCO 4 bargaining weight       Potomac Hospital                 0.14               (0.11)
MCO 4 bargaining weight       Virginia Hospital Center         0.47               (0.44)
MCO 4 bargaining weight       Fauquier Hospital                0.03               (0.18)
Year 2003                                                     2,360              (9,585)
Year 2004                                                     5,850             (12,051)
Year 2005                                                     5,976              (7,484)
Year 2006                                                     6,409             (11,407)
Note: ∗∗ denotes significance at 1% level and ∗ at 5% level. This specification allows for dif-
ferent bargaining weight parameters for each MCO/hospital-system pair. Significance tests for
bargaining parameters test the null of whether the parameter is different than 0.5. We report
non-bootstrapped standard errors here.




                                              43
                Table A3: Variation in outcomes by bargaining weight
                                                      MCO bargaining weight
                                               0     0.1    0.25   0.5 0.75                             0.9
          Mean effective own price elasticity 0.04 0.22 0.91 2.52 7.34                                 23.55
               Mean estimated MC ($1,000) −278 −43 −1.26 7.2 10.3                                       11.5
         Estimated MCO welfare weight (τ )     –    5.17    2.7   2.79 2.9                              3.0
 Mean % ∆ price from PW merger for MCO 1 18.3 11.8           6.3   3.1 1.0                              0.05
 Note: the first three rows of each column reports the results of an estimation similar to Specification 1 from
 Table 5 but with the MCO bargaining weight fixed to alternate values. When the bargaining weight is set
 to 0, τ is not identified. The final row reports counterfactuals for each estimation.




Table A4: Lerner indices and actual and effective price elasticities for posted premium com-
petition model


 System                       Lerner      Actual       Effective own                  Own price
 name                         index      own price         price                  elasticity without
                                         elasticity      elasticity                   insurance
 Prince William Hosp.          0.48         0.13            2.10                          5.16
 Inova Health System           0.42         0.07            2.38                          3.10
 Fauquier Hospital             0.15         0.17            6.85                          6.11
 HCA (Reston Hosp.)            0.39         0.15            2.56                          7.34
 Potomac Hospital              0.12         0.15            8.26                          6.77
 Virginia Hospital Ctr.        0.59         0.13            1.71                          6.43
 Note: reported elasticities and Lerner indices use quantity weights. These results are from the calibrated
 posted premium competition model described in Section 6.




                                                      44
Appendix A3: Derivation of the FOCs for the Prince
William separate bargaining

We start by considering the (notationally simpler) case where each hospital and MCO pair
bargains with separate contracts, even if the hospital is part of a system. Consider a system
s and a hospital j ∈ Js . Define N B m,j (pmj |pm,
                                                ~ j , pm,
                                                       ~ s ) to be the Nash bargaining product
for this contract. Analogously to (10), we have:


  N B m,j (pmj |pm,
                  ~ j , pm,
                         ~ s) =
                                        X                                                                bs(m)
    qmj (Nm , p~m )[pmj − mcmj ] +                  (qmk (Nm , p~m ) − qmk (Nm \ j, p~m ))[pmk − mcmk ]
                                       k∈Js ,k6=j
                                                                     bm(s)
                                    Vm (Nm , p~m ) − Vm (Nm \ j, p~m )       .

                                                                                                               (27)

In words, the disagreement value of system s for this contract is now that it withdraws
hospital j. In this case, it will lose its profits from hospital j but will gain profits from
the additional diversion quantity λmjk ≡ (qmk (Nm \ j, p~m ) − qmk (Nm , p~m )) from each other
hospital k 6= j that it owns. The MCO’s disagreement value from failure for this contract is
now the difference in value from losing hospital j instead of from losing system s.
   Analogously to (12), the FOC for this problem is:

                               P        ∂qmk
                       qmj +       k∈Sj ∂pmj [pmk      − mcmk ]
  bs(m)                                    P
          qmj (Nm , p~m )[pmj − mcmj ] −       k∈Js ,k6=j   λmjk [pmk − mcmk ]
                                                                                      ∂Vm
                                                                                      ∂pmj
                                                             = −bm(s)                                        . (28)
                                                                        Vm (Nm , p~m ) − Vm (Nm \ j, p~m )

   We now consider the case where Inova acquires Prince William but where Prince William
bargains separately from the rest of the Inova system. In this case, the FOCs for the Prince
William contracts will be exactly as in (28). The FOCs for the other Inova hospitals will
now resemble (28) but the disagreement values will reflect removing all Inova legacy hospitals
from the network and having diversion quantities only for Prince William.




                                                            45
Appendix A4: Details of the alternative MCO objective
function model
This appendix provides more details on the bargaining problem, calibration and computation
of the model where MCOs simultaneously post premiums to compete for enrollees, à la
Bertrand. We start by expositing the Nash bargaining problem.
                ∗
    First, let Rm (Nm , N−m , p~m , p−m
                                     ~ ) denote the equilibrium profits to MCO m, given all
MCOs’ networks and prices. The disagreement value from MCO m and hospital system s
    ∗
is Rm                         ~ ), noting that the definition of R∗ accounts for the equilibrium
      (Nm \ Js , N−m , p~m , p−m
premium response and for the spill of patients in case of disagreement.
                          ∗
    Correspondingly, let Sim                    ~ ), ∀m = 1, . . . , M denote the equilibrium plan
                             (Nm , N−m , p~m , p−m
market shares to consumer i, given MCOs’ networks and prices. To account for the equi-
librium spill of patients following disagreement, we redefine normalized quantities (from its
earlier definition in the base model in (8)) as

                                                   I X
                                                   X D
                                                                ∗
           qmj (Nm , N−m , p~m , p−m
                                  ~ )=                         Sim (Nm , N−m , p~m , p−m
                                                                                      ~ )fid wd sijd (Nm , p~m ),   (29)
                                                    i=1 d=0


where (29) substitutes the endogenous plan choice S ∗ for the fixed plan assignment from (8).
Hospital system returns are now

                                                           M X
                                                           X
             πs (N1 , . . . , NM , p~1 , . . . , p~M ) =                                     ~ )[pmj − mcmj ].
                                                                      qmj (Nm , N−m , p~m , p−m                     (30)
                                                           m=1 j∈Js


The disagreement value from the hospital system is then πs (p~1 , . . . , p~M , N1 , . . . , Nm−1 , Nm \
Js , Nm+1 , . . . , NM ).
    Using these definitions, we rewrite the Nash bargaining problem (analogously to (10)) as:

                                      X
       m,s
  NB         (pmj j∈Js |pm,
                         ~ s) =                πs (N1 , . . . , NM , p~1 , . . . , p~M )
                                        j∈Js
                                                                                                   bs(m)
                       − πs (p~1 , . . . , p~M , N1 , . . . , Nm−1 , Nm \ Js , Nm+1 , . . . , NM )
                                                                                                            bm(s)
                                           ∗                                ∗
                                       Rm    (Nm , N−m , p~m , p−m ~ ) − Rm    (Nm \ Js , N−m , p~m , p−m ~ )       . (31)

The price vector that solves the posted premium competition model is the vector of prices

                                                                   46
that jointly maximizes the Nash bargaining problems in (31) for each m and s.
       We now turn to the details of the calibration of our model, starting with the calibration
of the premium sensitivity parameter. Ericson and Starc (2012) report a value of 2.271 for
40-year-olds from the Massachusetts Connector for 2008. We use this number as the mean
age in our data is approximately 38. Wee further divide the Ericson and Starc value by
1,200 to account for the fact that our model is at the annual level and measures premiums in
dollars (they use monthly coverage and measure premiums in hundreds of dollars), obtaining
α2 = 0.0019.
                                                                                                            τ α2
       Turning to the coefficient on hospital welfare at the premium stage, we use α1 =                       α
with the estimated τ (Table 5, Specification 1) and α (Table 3). Scaling the utility from
the second stage by τ /α expresses the consumer welfare from second stage utility in dollars.
The marginal utility of a dollar in equation (20) is α2 , as this is the coefficient on premiums.
Multiplying by α2 turns the welfare dollar value into utility at the plan choice stage. The
scaling of the utility functions differs across the different equations because the unobservables
are normalized to both be type 1 extreme value, which implicitly means that an equation
with more noise will have a smaller marginal utility of money.
       One other calibration is required because, unlike in the base model, we need to know the
ex-ante distribution of illness for each patient at the point when the patient chooses a health
plan.38 We assume that each patient in our sample would, ex-ante, have obtained either her
actual observed illness or illness 0. We take the ex-ante probability of obtaining her actual
observed illness as 10.9% per year, which is the weighted average hospital discharge rate for
individuals age 25-64.39                                                                  P           
                                                                                                Sim
       Next, we need to specify the ξm value for each MCO m. We use ξm = log                 Pi            . We
                                                                                               i Si0

take the total number of inpatient observations in our payor data to represent the relative
market share of each MCO. We calculate the outside good MCO share as 14.3% based on
a survey of employed Virginia residents who report not having health insurance coverage,40
which allows us to compute the actual (and not relative) share. The calibration of ξm here is
meant to capture the heterogeneity in enrollment numbers across plans. As in Berry (1994),
if the first two terms in (20) summed to 0, the values of ξm that we choose would match
  38
     In the base model, the estimating equations are unaffected by whether one patient has two illnesses or
the two illnesses occur to two different patients, and by the fraction of enrollees having illness 0.
  39
     Authors’ calculation based on the National Hospital Discharge Survey, 2005, available at
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr 13/sr13 168.pdf.
  40
     American Community Survey, 2005, available at https://www.census.gov/acs/www/.



                                                    47
observed market shares exactly. The first two terms in (20) will not sum to 0 exactly, so our
chosen value will approximate shares imperfectly. The most important effect that we aim to
capture with this parametrization is the relative attractiveness of different MCOs.
   Finally, we discuss the computation of the equilibrium of the posted premium competition
model. We solved for the first-order conditions for the price setting game using the implicit
function theorem. A full derivation of the equilibrium first-order conditions is available from
the authors upon request. Using these first-order conditions, we compute all counterfactual
equilibria in C using a Newton-Raphson method. This procedure is very computationally
intensive. In order to minimize the computational burden, we compute the equilibrium for 20
enrollee draws chosen at random from the discharge data rather than the full set of enrollees
from the discharge data.




                                              48
