                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         FISCAL LIMITS AND MONETARY POLICY

                                          Eric M. Leeper

                                       Working Paper 18877
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18877


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2013




Written for the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey. Huixin Bi, Chris Sims and Todd Walker gave
me useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Eric M. Leeper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Fiscal Limits and Monetary Policy
Eric M. Leeper
NBER Working Paper No. 18877
March 2013
JEL No. E31,E52,E62,E63

                                              ABSTRACT

Every economy faces a "fiscal limit" that delivers the maximum government debt-GDP ratio that can
be sustained without appreciable risk of default or higher inflation. But governments in advanced economies
issue substantial nominal debt and nominal debt is a commitment to repay in nominal units. When
such economies are approaching their fiscal limits, debt can be devalued through higher current and
future inflation rates. The paper develops a simple bond market supply-demand apparatus to explain
how fiscal policy can be a source of inflation, while monetary policy merely determines the timing
of inflation.


Eric M. Leeper
Department of Economics
304 Wylie Hall
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405
and Monash University, Australia
and also NBER
eleeper@indiana.edu
                 Fiscal Limits and Monetary Policy

                                          Eric M. Leeper∗



1 Introduction
Fiscal sustainability, once the exclusive concern of emerging economies, is now a prominent
worry in advanced economies, large and small. Japan tops the list with a debt-GDP ratio well
over 200 percent. Greece, whose sovereign debt troubles are well known, comes in with debt
over 150 percent of GDP. Countries with ratios between 100 and 150 percent include Italy,
Portugal, Ireland, and the United States. Major European countries are not immune: France
and the United Kingdom are in the 80-percent range, as is ﬁscally responsible Germany.1
These debt run ups are to a large extent understandable: the worldwide ﬁnancial crisis
and the prolonged and deep recession both generated automatic budget deﬁcits and induced
many countries to implement sizeable ﬁscal stimulus packages. But persistently sluggish
economic growth in these countries, exacerbated by premature ﬁscal austerity moves, has
prevented the normal cyclical improvement in ﬁscal balances.
    Every economy faces a fiscal limit that delivers the maximum government debt-GDP
ratio that can be sustained without appreciable risk of default or higher inﬂation. For
both economic and political reasons, governments’ ability to raise revenues is limited: tax
distortions discourage economic activity and encourage tax evasion to create Laﬀer-curve
eﬀects that place an upper bound on revenues. Political constraints further reduce the
maximum level of revenues as the electorate’s intolerance of taxation generally prevents
tax rates from rising to the peak of the Laﬀer curves.2 On the spending side, economies
require some minimum level of government expenditures to function, but most societies
have adopted social compacts that put a ﬂoor on spending that is well above that minimum.
Taken together, these considerations imply a maximum level of primary budget surpluses—
call it smax . The expected discounted present value of the stream of maximum primary
surpluses yields the maximum sustainable risk-free level of government debt.
    Of course, economies are subject to shocks that cause smax and discount rates to vary
over time and over states of the economy. Good productivity, for example, will increase
the revenues that a given tax rate generates while simultaneously raising GDP to reduce
the debt-GDP ratio. Policy itself may be a source of randomness: today’s government
might adopt ﬁscal reforms that restrict the growth of government transfers, while future
   ∗
     March 3, 2013. Written for the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey. Huixin Bi, Chris Sims and Todd
Walker gave me useful comments. Indiana University, Monash University and NBER; eleeper@indiana.edu.
   1
     Data are for gross government debt as a share of GDP, from International Monetary Fund (2012a).
   2
     Trabandt and Uhlig (2011) calculate that only very few countries—Denmark and Sweden, for example—
have labor tax rates that may exceed revenue-maximizing levels.
                        Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy


governments might reverse those reforms. The ﬁscal limit, then, is not a single point: it is
a probability distribution, a feature that carries important implications for thinking about
ﬁscal sustainability.3 Intrinsic randomness in the economy will shift and alter the shape
of the ﬁscal limit distribution, with resulting impacts on the economic decisions of private
agents.
    As a country’s level of government debt approaches its ﬁscal limit, the probability rises
that a country will devalue its debt in some fashion. Devaluation can occur in two ways.
The ﬁrst, “outright default,” connects to the situation in which southern European countries
now ﬁnd themselves. Outright default entails reneging on some portion of outstanding
debt obligations and is the only type of default available to countries who do not control
their own currency or who issue debt denominated in foreign currency. Members of the
European Monetary Union fall into this category, as their monetary policy is controlled by
the European Central Bank, which is dominated by countries not now experiencing sovereign
debt problems. A higher probability of outright default reduces the value of outstanding
government bonds and raises sovereign risk premia.
    A second type of devaluation is available to countries who issue nominal debt denom-
inated in their home currency and who retain control of monetary policy. Nominal debt
is a commitment to repay in nominal units, so its value depends both on expected future
surpluses and on current and future price levels. A country that is at its ﬁscal limit no
longer has the latitude to support nominal debt expansions with higher future surpluses,
the maintained assumption of conventional monetarist or new Keynesian perspectives on
inﬂation. With surpluses ﬁxed at their upper limit, smax , the real value of government debt
is also ﬁxed at its maximum value. Higher nominal debt must be devalued by higher current
and future price levels to ensure that its real value is consistent with the ﬁscal limit.4
    This alternative means of devaluing outstanding debt is not much discussed because of
a wide-spread misperception that so long as monetary policy has suﬃcient resolve to keep
inﬂation low and stable, then ﬁscal inﬂation cannot happen.5 This article explains inﬂation
as a means of devaluation and describes why the notion of a ﬁscal limit may grow increasingly
relevant in advanced economies in coming decades.

2 The Fiscal Problem
Advanced economies today face both short-run and long-run ﬁscal challenges. Although
these challenges are well known, brieﬂy reviewing the data helps to put the magnitudes of
the two in perspective.
   3
     Analyses like Ghosh, Kim, Mendoza, Ostry, and Qureshi (2012) treat the ﬁscal limit as a point, derived
by assuming governments continue to follow past behavior. But most public discussion of ﬁscal sustainability,
epitomized by America’s “Fix the Debt” movement, simply applies Goldilocks reasoning—“this debt is too
high”—with little supporting analysis.
   4
     Sims (2013) provides an insightful discussion of and contract between the two types of debt devaluation.
   5
     Most economists believe that ﬁscal inﬂations require that the central bank systematically monetize the
debt, as in Sargent and Wallace’s (1981) “unpleasant monetarist arithmetic” paper. Leeper and Walker
(2013) describe in detail the diﬀerence between a ﬁscal inﬂation from monetization of debt and a ﬁscal
inﬂation that devalues nominal government liabilities.




                                                     2
                       Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy


2.1 Fiscal Developments: Now and the Future Figure 1 reports ﬁscal data from
the International Monetary Fund, grouping “advanced” and “emerging” economies sepa-
rately. Although both sets of countries saw ﬁscal deﬁcits increase beginning in 2009, the
rise was far more pronounced for advanced economies. Public debt in advanced economies
rose sharply, and is projected to exceed 100 percent of GDP in coming years. Emerging
economies, in contrast, experienced declining levels of debt over the same period. Among
advanced economies, these cyclically-induced ﬁscal imbalances are certainly large by histor-
ical standards.
                  2 Fiscal Balance                           Public Debt                             120
                         Emerging and                                            Advanced
                  0   developing economies                                       economies           100

                 -2                                                                                  80
                                                                G7
                 -4                                                                                  60
                      Advanced                                                               World
                 -6   economies                                                                 40
                                       World                                  Emerging and
                 -8                                                        developing economies 20

                -10                                                                                  0
                  1980      90       2000      10   16   1950 60     70     80     90 2000 10 16


Figure 1: Fiscal deﬁcits and public debt in percentages of GDP: Actual and projected.
Source: International Monetary Fund (2012b)


    Many countries, particularly members of the European Monetary Union and the United
Kingdom, have reacted to these large imbalances by adopting sizeable ﬁscal consolidation
programs. Those consolidations began even when unemployment rates were elevated, or still
rising, from the 2009 recession.
    This immediate ﬁscal problem pales by comparison to the looming crisis that most coun-
tries face. World populations are projected to continue to age. Figure 2 reports dependency
ratios—the population 65 and older as a percentage of population aged 15–64—for a variety
of advanced and emerging economies. Without exception, dependency ratios are expected
to at least double in these countries between now and 2050. By that latter date, four
countries—Germany, Japan, Korea, and Spain—will see dependency ratios of 60 percent or
higher.
    The dependency ratio is a gauge of how many workers there are to support each retiree.
Germany, for example, will go from 3-1/3 workers per retiree today to 1-2/3 workers in
2050. For countries with pay-as-you-go pension systems or other old-age beneﬁts that are
not pre-funded, a higher dependency ratio translates fairly directly into the level of “unfunded
liabilities” that a country possesses. And the level of unfunded liabilities, in turn, measures
the long-run ﬁscal stress that a country faces: either these liabilities will have to be funded in
the future with higher taxes or the pension and beneﬁts systems must be reformed to imply
far lower liabilities. Either solution is politically diﬃcult in democratic societies because
they entail substantial redistributions of wealth among segments of the populace.
    The degree to which the aging populations create ﬁscal stress appears in the debt-GDP
ratio projections that ﬁgures 3 and 4 report for 12 advanced economies. Those projections,

                                                         3
                      Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy

              80


              70


              60
                   Blue:1960
                   Red:2005
              50
                   Green:2050

              40


              30


              20


              10


               0




Figure 2: Dependency ratios: Population 65 and older as a percentage of population aged
15–64. Source: World Bank (2012)



constructed by the Bank for International Settlements, show that with no ﬁscal reforms
or with ﬁscal reforms that do not hold age-related spending constant, debt-GDP grows
exponentially. These projections extend only to 2040, but populations in many countries
continue to age for decades after the projection period.6 These long-term projections place
in sharp relief the short-run ﬁscal worries that ﬁgure 1 depicts. Yes, advanced economies
face ﬁscal challenges today. But today’s challenges are tiny compared to the ﬁscal stress
that looms in the future.

2.2 How Will Policy Respond? Because the demographic shifts that lie in our futures
are unprecedented—at least since countries implemented extensive social safety nets—it is
diﬃcult to know how government policies will adjust to the unfunded liabilities when they
are realized. Some countries have been building sovereign wealth funds. Norway invests
oil revenues. Australia and New Zealand have forced savings funds. Other countries, like
Chile and Sweden, have adopted ﬁscal surplus targets with the aim of using the surpluses to
pre-fund future old-age beneﬁts.
    But many governments seem to be in denial about the impending long-term ﬁscal stress.
Should we look at how those governments are coping with their short-run ﬁscal challenges
to extrapolate into the future? Here are a few vignettes:

   • Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti, who has been credited with creating some stability
     in Italy’s ﬁscal ﬁnances, steps down after former prime minister Silvio Berlusconi’s
  6
    Comparable long-term projections by the Congressional Budget Oﬃce (2010), which extend to 2082,
report an “alternative policy scenario” in which debt exceeds 900 percent of GDP.


                                                4
                           Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy

                 Austria                                   France                                       Germany
                                                     300                                          500                                          400
                                                               Baseline
                                                     250       scenario
                                                                                                  400
                                                               Small gradual                                                                   300
                                                     200       adjustment
                                                               Small gradual                      300
                                                               adjustment
                                                     150       with age-related                                                                200
                                                               spending held                      200
                                                     100       constant
                                                                                                                                               100
                                                                                                  100
                                                     50

                                                      0                                            0                                            0
                     80    90   00   10   20   30   40         80    90   00      10   20   30   40             80   90   00   10   20   30   40

                 Greece                                    Ireland                                      Italy
                                                     500                                          400                                          300

                                                                                                                                               250
                                                     400
                                                                                                  300
                                                                                                                                               200
                                                     300
                                                                                                  200                                          150
                                                     200
                                                                                                                                               100
                                                                                                  100
                                                     100
                                                                                                                                               50

                                                      0                                            0                                            0
                     80    90   00   10   20   30   40         80    90   00      10   20   30   40             80   90   00   10   20   30   40




Figure 3: Debt-GDP projections: Alternative ﬁscal policy scenarios. Source: Cecchetti,
Mohanty, and Zampolli (2010)

                 Japan                                     Netherlands                                  Portugal
                                                     800                                          400                                           300

                                                                                                                                                250
                                                     600                                          300
                                                                                                                                                200

                                                     400                                          200                                           150

                                                                                                                                                100
                                                     200                                          100
                                                                                                                                                50

                                                      0                                            0                                            0
                     80    90   00   10   20   30   40         80    90   00      10   20   30   40             80   90   00   10   20   30   40

                 Spain                                     United Kingdom                               United States
                                                     400                                          600                                           500

                                                                                                  500
                                                                                                                                                400
                                                     300
                                                                                                  400
                                                                                                                                                300
                                                     200                                          300
                                                                                                                                                200
                                                                                                  200
                                                     100
                                                                                                                                                100
                                                                                                  100

                                                      0                                            0                                            0
                     80    90   00   10   20   30   40         80    90   00      10   20   30   40             80   90   00   10   20   30   40




Figure 4: Debt-GDP projections: Alternative ﬁscal policy scenarios. Legend appears in
ﬁgure 3. Source: Cecchetti, Mohanty, and Zampolli (2010)


     party withdrew its support of Monti’s government. Berlusconi and former comedian
     Beppe Grillo acquire enough votes to create political gridlock in Italy.

   • The Economist (2012) argues that France is slowly heading toward a crisis, with gov-
     ernment spending about 57 percent of GDP, high and rising public debt, a recent loss
     of its AAA rating for French sovereign debt, an unemployment rate above the Euro
     area average, and a steady erosion of its international competitiveness. A fragile France


                                                                               5
                     Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy


     implies deep troubles for the Euro area.

   • Former Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe returns to oﬃce after being turned away
     following a one-year stint in 2006–2007. The election outcome is, at least in part, a
     rebuke of Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda’s plans to double the consumption tax by
     2015 to help cope with Japan’s over-200-percent debt-GDP ratio.

   • With the recent marking down of economic growth forecasts in the United Kingdom
     came the government’s decision to postpone achieving the government debt target
     it had set for itself when Britain’s austerity measures were announced. This deci-
     sion triggered ﬁnger-wagging by credit-rating agencies, who accused the government
     of weakening the credibility of the new ﬁscal regime.

   • Greece’s sovereign debt crisis is in its third year and still no lasting resolution is in
     sight.

   • After the debt-ceiling debacle in 2011, political parties in the United States continue
     to be unable to ﬁnd common ground on even the most basic ﬁscal issues. Politicians
     “solved” the ﬁscal cliﬀ by postponing several contentious decisions, laying the ground-
     work for fresh artiﬁcial ﬁscal crises in the coming year, including mandated across-the-
     board spending cuts and a new debt-ceiling ﬁasco. America’s political morass and its
     implications were nicely summed up by U.S. Senator Joe Manchin III: “Something has
     gone terribly wrong when the biggest threat to our American economy is the American
     Congress” (Steinhauer (2012)).

These vignettes are not conclusive evidence that major economies will hit their ﬁscal limits
anytime soon. But they do give forward-looking economic decision makers reason to doubt
that their governments will smoothly implement the ﬁscal adjustments necessary to keep
their countries well away from their ﬁscal limits.

3 The Fiscal Limit
Recent work on sovereign debt default develops model-based ﬁscal limits, the simplest ex-
ample of which comes from Bi and Leeper (2012), which builds on Bi (2012). Those papers
consider closed-economy models with ﬁxed capital and a proportional tax levied against la-
bor income. Government buys goods and makes lump-sum transfers to private agents. For
given government purchase and transfers processes, an economic ﬁscal limit arises from the
peak of the dynamic Laﬀer curve. Because that peak depends on the state of the economy,
the joint distribution of the fundamental disturbances and private agents’ optimal decision
rules induce a distribution for the maximum sustainable government debt, equaling the dis-
counted present value of maximum primary surpluses, smax . In an environment subject to
random disturbances, “maximum debt” is a distribution, not a point.
    Let smax
         t   (zt ) denote the maximum primary surplus in period t as a function of all the
exogenous shocks to the economy, zt . Conditional on the shocks that hit the economy at t,
the ﬁscal limit is deﬁned as the distribution of the real value of government debt, B∗ (zt ),



                                              6
                                       Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy


given by
                                                                      
                                                                      ∞
                                                        ∗                     max
                                                       B (zt ) ∼             qt,T (zT )smax
                                                                                        T (zT )                                                           (1)
                                                                      T =t
         max
where qt,t+1 (zt+1 ) is the one-period real discount factor when the state of the economy is
zt and the discount factor is evaluated at the tax and spending policies that deliver the
maximum surplus in state zt .
    Research on sovereign debt defaults and observation of actual government policy behavior
make clear that the decision to default on debt is driven more by the government’s willingness,
than its ability, to honor its debt obligations. The political calculus behind the default
decision is not easily modeled, so we treat the eﬀective ﬁscal limit, b∗t , as a random draw
from the ﬁscal limit distribution in (1). If the value of outstanding debt exceeds b∗t , the
government defaults in some well-speciﬁed manner. Otherwise, the government raises taxes
to meet its debt obligations.
    Productivity and government transfers policies can be important sources of uncertainty.
Good productivity shocks raise taxable income and shift the revenue-maximizing level of tax
rates. Transfers programs may be stable or grow as a share of the economy, depending the
prevailing policy regime, and policy can shift between the two types of transfers policies.
Growing transfers capture the ﬁscal implication of aging populations that underlies the debt
projections in ﬁgures 3 and 4, while stable transfers reﬂect ﬁscal reforms. Because current
governments cannot commit future governments’ decisions, transfers ﬂuctuate between the
stable and unstable regimes. If transfers grow for an extended period, government debt
will increase, tax rates will rise toward the peak of the Laﬀer curve and the economy will
approach its ﬁscal limit. But the position and shape of the ﬁscal limit distribution also
change with the non-policy and policy shocks that hit the economy.
    Figure 5 reports the cumulative probability distributions for the ﬁscal limit from an
example economy. The left panel plots the distribution conditional on three alternative
values of productivity in period t: average, low and high. Productivity shocks are persistent,
so the current value portends future values of similar size and induces substantial shifts in
the ﬁscal limit. A debt-GDP ratio of 200 percent implies a probability of hitting the ﬁscal
limit of about 20 percent when productivity is average, 10 percent when productivity is high,
and 80 percent when productivity is low.
                         Fiscal Limit Distribution and Productivity                                   Fiscal Limit Distribution and Transfers Regime
                   1                                                                             1

                  0.8                                                                           0.8
                                             low                                                                   unstable                  stable
                                                                                                                   transfers
    Probability




                                                                                  Probability




                                                                                                                                          transfers
                  0.6                                                                           0.6
                                        average                   high
                  0.4                                                                           0.4

                  0.2                                                                           0.2

                   0                                                                             0
                   0.5        1        1.5         2        2.5          3                       0.5          1       1.5       2        2.5          3
                                        Debt−GDP                                                                       Debt−GDP


  Figure 5: Fiscal limit distribution for example economy. Source: Bi and Leeper (2012)



                                                                              7
                       Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy


    The right panel of the ﬁgure reports how the ﬁscal limit distribution shifts with the
prevailing transfers regime. When transfers are stable, the economy can support a much
higher level of debt without signiﬁcant probability of breaching the ﬁscal limit. Unstable
transfers growth, like that projected in many advanced economies, dramatically lowers the
present value of maximum surpluses, shifting the limit to the left: debt levels like those some
countries are now experiencing generate non-trivial probabilities of hitting the limit.
    In a complete economic model, the endogenous ﬁscal limit distribution triggers shifts in
agents’ expectations and decisions that depend on agents’ understandings about how policies
will change at the ﬁscal limit.7 Figure 5 merely illustrates the ﬁscal limit. Limits in actual
economies will vary across countries and across time, as they depend on many details of an
economy’s structure. In what follows, I show how an economy operates when it is at its ﬁscal
limit and opts to allow inﬂation to devalue outstanding government debt.

4 Inflation as a Means of Devaluation
The conventional perception among macroeconomists is that ﬁscal policy can aﬀect inﬂation
only if the central bank systematically prints money to buy government bonds or to ﬁnance
government purchases directly. Excessive money growth is Cagan’s (1956) explanation of
hyperinﬂations, which Sargent and Wallace (1981) connected directly to ﬁscal policy at the
ﬁscal limit, where it is unwilling or unable to stabilize debt by adjusting primary surpluses.
There is no dispute among economists that by monetizing government debt the central bank
creates a channel by which ﬁscal policy generates inﬂation.
    Missing from this conventional view is the fact that if government debt is denominated in
nominal terms, then there is a new channel for ﬁscal inﬂation that is unrelated to explicit debt
monetization. This new channel, called the “ﬁscal theory of the price level,” is frequently
treated as an object of derision by macroeconomists. Although the ﬁscal theory has been
around for over 20 years, it remains a bit mystical to non-specialists.8 Monetarist or new
Keynesian explanations of inﬂation, in contrast, are well understood, having been distilled
into basic supply and demand analyses that are taught to all economics students. Those
explanations typically sweep ﬁscal policy under the carpet by maintaining strong assumptions
about ﬁscal behavior that render it irrelevant. This conventional view is fully consistent with
Friedman’s aphorism that “inﬂation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon.”
    It turns out that the ﬁscal theory explanation of price-level determination can also be
presented in a form that is comprehensible to non-specialists. Understanding how ﬁscal
policy can determine the price level when government debt is nominal requires only a few
key economic relationships: budget constraints, asset-pricing relations, and market-clearing
conditions. Because these relationships are completely generic—they apply in any formal
economic model—the ﬁscal theory is ubiquitous and potentially obtains in any model.

4.1 A Simple Model To focus on how monetary and ﬁscal policies determine the price
level and the inﬂation rate, we abstract from production and employment and simply assume
  7
    Examples of complete models include Bi (2012), Bi and Leeper (2012), and the papers in footnote 17.
  8
    Early developments of the ﬁscal theory include Leeper (1991), Sims (1994), Woodford (1995), and
Cochrane (1998). Two examples of authors who ridicule the ﬁscal theory without oﬀering any coherent
arguments against it are Buiter (2002) and Galı́ (2013).


                                                  8
                       Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy


that the economy is endowed each period with a ﬁxed quantity of output goods, Y . We
further simplify by abstracting from money: instead, we treat the central bank as choosing
a short-term nominal interest rate, R.9
     Households make a consumption-savings decision each period. They have available three
assets: a real one-period bond, bt , that pays 1 unit of goods in period t + 1, sells at price
qt,t+1 in period t, and is in zero net supply; a one-period nominal government bond, Bst , that
pays 1 unit of currency in t + 1, sells at price Pst = Rt−1 in t, and is also in zero net supply;
long-term nominal government bonds, Bmt , that sell at price Pmt in t and are in non-zero net
supply. As in Woodford (2001), long bonds sold at t pay ρj dollars in each period t + j + 1
for each j ≥ 0 with 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1. We interpret these bonds as a portfolio of bonds at all
possible maturities with weights along the maturity structure given by ρT −(t+1) . Changing ρ
varies the average maturity of the portfolio: when ρ = 0 all bonds are one-period and when
ρ = 1 all bonds are consols that pay $1 every period. The duration of these long bonds is
(1 − βρ)−1 .
     Optimal choices by the households yield two asset-pricing relations
                                                                 
                                           1           Pt
                                    Pst =     = Et         qt,t+1                             (2)
                                          Rt          Pt+1
                                   Pmt = Pst Et (1 + ρPmt+1 )                                 (3)
Pt is the price level, so Pt /Pt+1 is the inverse of the gross inﬂation rate. The ﬁrst expression,
(2), is the usual Fisher relation connecting the short-term nominal interest rate to expected
inﬂation and the real interest rate; it ensures that there are no unexploited arbitrage oppor-
tunities between nominal and real bonds. The second expression, (3), is the term structure
relationship that links the price of long bonds to the entire expected path of short-bond
prices. This term structure relationship, which rules out arbitrage opportunities between
short- and long-term nominal bonds, implies that
                                                      j        
                                            ∞          1
                                    Pmt =       ρ Et
                                                 j
                                                                                               (4)
                                            j=0        i=0
                                                           Rt+i

making it clear that in its setting of an expected path of the short-term interest rate, the
central bank determines the price of long-term bonds.
    The ﬁscal authority chooses the current level of the primary (exclusive of interest pay-
ments) budget surplus, st , and new bond sales, Bmt . It also must cover the principal and
interest on outstanding debt. These choices must satisfy the government’s budget constraint
in period t
                              Pmt Bmt          (1 + ρPmt )Bmt−1
                                       + st =                                             (5)
                                 Pt                   Pt
Because this budget constraint also holds in every time period, an analogous constraint holds
in period t + 1
                           Pmt+1 Bmt+1            (1 + ρPmt+1 )Bmt
                                        + st+1 =                                          (6)
                               Pt+1                      Pt+1
  9
    Abstracting from money is consistent with the new Keynesian literature in, for example, Woodford
(2003) or Galı́ (2008), and with most formal models at central banks. Bringing money into the analysis
complicates things a bit, but does not alter the key messages, as Leeper and Walker (2013) show.


                                                  9
                       Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy


Notice that the new debt sold in period t, Bmt , enters the government’s constraint in period
t+1 because it must be serviced, so there is a necessary link between the debt the government
sells today and the surplus it runs tomorrow: Bmt and st+1 must be related to each other.
Extrapolating this logic into the indeﬁnite future leads to an expression that Cochrane (2011)
calls the “bond valuation equation”
                                  (1 + ρPmt )Bmt−1      ∞
                                                   = Et      qt,T sT                                  (7)
                                         Pt             T =t

where qt,T is the (T −t)-period discount factor with qt,t ≡ 1. The market value of outstanding
government bonds—the left side of (7)—must equal the expected discounted present value of
all future primary surpluses. This is nothing more than a conventional asset-pricing relation
applied to government bonds: the value of an asset depends on its expected discounted
cash ﬂows. A government bond’s “cash ﬂows” are future surpluses after meeting interest
payments on the debt. Because government debt derives its value from expected surpluses,
condition (7) is a critical step toward developing the demand for government bonds.
    Combining the bond valuation equation, (7), with the government’s budget constraint,
(5), yields an expression for the market value of bonds sold in period t
                            Pmt Bmt       ∞
                                    = Et        qt−1,T sT ≡ Et P V (St+1 )                            (8)
                              Pt         T =t+1

By this version of the bond valuation equation, the value of bonds sold at t, Pmt Bmt /Pt ,
depends on the expected discounted present value of primary surpluses from period t + 1
onward, abbreviated as Et P V (St+1 ). The higher is the present value of expected surpluses,
the greater is the value of outstanding bonds. Expressions (7) and (8) emerge after imposing
that private agents make optimal asset-demand decisions, which include (2) and (3) and the
restriction that government debt-GDP must grow at a rate less than the real interest rate.
    Because (8) embeds private agents’ optimal choices, it constitutes a demand function for
nominal government bonds
                                           Pt
                                    Bmt
                                      d
                                        =      Et P V (St+1 )                                (9)
                                           Pmt
Two determinants of the nominal demand for bonds are immediate. The higher the price level
today, Pt , or the higher the expected present value of surpluses, Et P V (St+1 ), the greater is
the nominal demand for bonds. Demand also rises when the price of bonds today, Pmt , falls.
A lower price of bonds, through the term structure relation, (4), and the Fisher relation, (2),
is associated with a higher path of the short-term nominal interest rate or of the inﬂation
rate.10 Because nominal government bonds promise to pay oﬀ in currency, rather than in
goods, bond demand depends positively on current and future price levels.
  10
    Three aspects of the demand for nominal bonds are distinguished from the typical demand for nominal
money. First, unlike ﬁat money, bonds are “backed” by future surpluses and, therefore, the demand for
bonds depends explicitly on expected ﬁscal policies. Second, unlike ﬁat money, bonds pay positive nominal
interest and, therefore, are protected from fully anticipated inﬂation. Higher anticipated inﬂation drives
up the nominal return to bonds and drives down the nominal price of bonds. Third, transactions demand
for money introduces a scale variable like income or wealth into money demand, which is absent in this
speciﬁcation of bond demand (but see Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba (2011) for a description of liquidity
demand for bonds).


                                                   10
                         Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy


   Bond supply is perfectly inelastic. Given policies, debt inherited from the past, and
equilibrium prices, the supply of bonds in period t is whatever it must be to satisfy the
government budget constraint (5).

4.2 Determining the Price Level Entire textbooks are written about how the price
level gets determined when there is no ﬁscal limit, so we focus on the opposite case: sup-
pose that for economic or political reasons, the ﬁscal authority cannot raise (lower) future
surpluses whenever the real value of outstanding debt rises (falls). It might still adjust sur-
pluses for reasons other than debt-stabilization: ﬂuctuations in real economic activity might
induce automatic or discretionary changes in surpluses or surpluses might change for reasons
that are exogenous to the model. For our purposes, we can treat the sequence of primary
surpluses, {st }, as an exogenous and possibly random process. Economic agents understand
the nature of the randomness, so are able to form expectations over future surpluses. This
assumption about ﬁscal behavior is consistent with an economy that has hit its ﬁscal limit,
just as in Sargent and Wallace (1981).
    When surpluses are unresponsive to the state of government indebtedness, if monetary
policy were to continue to pursue its objectives in an unconstrained fashion, government
debt would grow exponentially and become worthless. For government debt to retain value,
monetary policy must accommodate the exogenous surpluses by taking on the role of debt
stabilization. In terms of the debt valuation equation (8), Et P V (St+1 ) no longer adjusts
to stabilize debt, so some combination of Pt and Pmt must do the adjusting: current and
expected price levels change to ensure that the real value of debt is consistent with expected
surpluses. Because the central bank chooses the sequence of short-term nominal interest
rates, {Rt }, at the ﬁscal limit monetary policy is constrained to choose interest-rate paths
that are consistent with the expected surpluses that the ﬁscal authority determines.11
    We can now determine the equilibrium process for the price level. Algebraically, the
equilibrium gets determined recursively. At date t, monetary policy announces a path for
the policy instrument, {RT }∞    T =t , which, by the term structure relation, (3) or (4), determines
the price of bonds at t, Pmt . Fiscal policy announces a path for its policy instrument, the
primary surplus, {sT }∞  T =t . In this model, the real interest rate and, therefore, the price of
                       ∞
real bonds, {qT,T +1 }T =t , is exogenous. The real interest rate and surplus sequences imply the
expected present value of surpluses and, by expression (7), determines Pt . The government’s
ﬂow budget constraint at t, (5), determines Bmt . This solution method repeats every period.
    Graphically, interaction of supply and demand for nominal bonds determines the price
level at t. Figure 6 describes bond-market behavior. The government supplies bonds in-
elastically, B s , in order to satisfy its budget constraint. Demand for bonds comes from
behavioral relation (9) and slopes upward when the current price level is on the vertical axis.
For given paths of expected interest rates and surpluses, nominal bond demand is B1d and
the equilibrium price level is P1 .
    When bond supply and demand are drawn as in ﬁgure 6, a lower bond price, lower
  11
    Sargent and Wallace’s (1981) unpleasant arithmetic setup also constrains monetary policy choices, but
their emphasis is on generating suﬃcient inﬂation tax revenues—seigniorage—to “back” the outstanding
debt. In terms of debt valuation equation (8), Et P V (St+1 ) includes seigniorage revenues, so future surpluses
deﬁned broadly adjust to stabilize debt. Sargent and Wallace treat debt as real—perfectly indexed to
inﬂation—so price level changes cannot revalue debt.


                                                      11
                     Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy



                         P                         s
                            t                   B                       d
                                                                       B
                                                                        1


                                                                       Bd
                                                                           2



                        P
                          1
                        P2




                                                B                              B
                                                   m                           mt



Figure 6: Bond market equilibrium:         Supply, B s , is inelastic and demand is B d =
 Pt
    E P V (St+1 ), as in expression (9).
Pmt t




expected path of real interest rates, or higher expected path of primary surpluses pivots the
demand for bonds down to the demand function B2d : investors demand more nominal bonds
at any given price level. At the initial equilibrium price level, P1 , after the shift in demand
there is excess demand for bonds. Bond holders substitute from buying goods to buying
bonds; lower aggregate demand for goods drives down the price level. As the price level
falls, demanders slide down B2d , reducing the quantity of bonds demanded. The price level
falls until the market value of bonds rises to be consistent with the bond valuation equation
in (8).
    We now use supply and demand for nominal government bonds to examine some speciﬁc
economic events.

4.3 Some Examples To make the analysis more concrete, we can separate dynamics into
“today” (period t) and the “future” (all periods after t). We consider the economy today
and we hold output and government purchases constant, making the real discount factor
constant also: qt,T = q for all T > t. Monetary and ﬁscal policies take simple forms
     Monetary Policy : sets a constant short interest rate, RT = R for T ≥ t
        Fiscal Policy : chooses a constant surplus, sT = s for T ≥ t + 1, but st = s
Monetary policy just pegs the short-term nominal interest rate at R. Fiscal policy holds
future surpluses ﬁxed at s, but allows the current surplus to diﬀer from that ﬁxed value.
    By pegging the nominal interest rate, monetary policy pegs future inﬂation, πF , and the
price of long bonds
                                 πT = πF = qR          for T ≥ t + 1                       (10)
                                        1
                                PmT =                  for T ≥ t                           (11)
                                      R−ρ

                                              12
                       Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy


Constant discount factors and constant future surpluses reduce the expected present value
of surpluses in (8) to
                                                   q
                                 Et P V (St+1 ) =     s                              (12)
                                                  1−q
and the bond valuation equation, (7), to

                                  (1 + ρPmt )Bmt−1         q
                                                   = st +     s                                    (13)
                                         Pt               1−q

We can use (11) and (13) to solve for the equilibrium price level
                                              
                                           R       Bmt−1
                                 Pt =                                                              (14)
                                         R − ρ st + 1−q
                                                      q
                                                         s

Collecting the model’s implications, based on the expression for the equilibrium price level,
(14), a higher current price level (and current inﬂation rate) arises from

   1. a lower path for short-term nominal interest rates (though future inﬂation will be lower)

   2. a longer average maturity of government bonds

   3. a higher initial debt level

   4. a lower path for real discount factors (or a higher path for real interest rates)

   5. lower current or future primary surpluses

4.3.1 Bond-Financed Tax Cut Suppose that to respond to an economic downturn,
the government cuts taxes today and ﬁnances the resulting deﬁcit with new bond sales. In
ﬁgure 7, this shifts bond supply to the right (from B1s to B2s ). With the economy at its ﬁscal
limit, future surpluses do not change, so Et P V (St+1 ) remains at its initial value in equation
(12). Private agents who receive the tax cut and do not expect any subsequent tax increases,
feel wealthier and try to convert their tax cut into higher consumption of goods and services.
In this model economy, higher aggregate demand does not bring forth greater production,
so the prices of goods begin to rise. A higher price level induces bond holders to increase
their nominal bond holdings, a process that continues until all the new bond issuances have
been absorbed and the price level rises to P2 in ﬁgure 7, where the real value of outstanding
debt has not changed: B1 /P1 = B2 /P2 .12
    But this analysis is not complete without specifying how monetary policy behaves. The
outcome in ﬁgure 7 assumes that the central bank maintains the interest-rate peg at the
initial R, so that the price of bonds does not change from the value in equation (11) and
future inﬂation is unchanged from the value in (10). The ﬁxed bond price together with
an unchanged present value of surpluses ensure bond demand does not shift and the full
increase in prices occurs today.
  12
    Conventional new Keynesian analyses posit Ricardian ﬁscal behavior, so a tax cut today engenders an
exactly oﬀsetting increase in the present value of future taxes. This pivots bond demand down by exactly
the amount of the the increase in bond supply, ensuring that the equilibrium price level remains at P1 .


                                                  13
                       Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy



                        Pt                                   s
                                                    Bs      B
                                                             2
                                                     1
                                                                           Bd




                        P
                         2


                        P1




                                                     B1     B2               Bmt



Figure 7: Bond-ﬁnanced tax cut today. Bond supply shifts to the right. If central bank keeps
nominal interest rate and, therefore, bond prices unchanged, there is no shift in bond demand,
the price level rises to P2 and the real quantity of bonds is unchanged: B1 /P1 = B2 /P2 .


    But an inﬂation-targeting central bank is likely to react to the ﬁscally-induced increase in
current inﬂation by raising the nominal policy interest rate. A higher path for R reduces bond
prices today and raises expected inﬂation. Lower Pmt increases nominal bond demand, so
demand pivots down to B2d , as in ﬁgure 8. Higher bond demand attenuates the rise in current
inﬂation. Although monetary policy cannot eliminate the ﬁscal inﬂation, by adjusting the
nominal interest rate it can determine the timing of ﬁscal inﬂation.
    At the ﬁscal limit, ﬁscal policy determines the total inﬂation in the economy, while
monetary policy determines its timing. To see this, combine expressions (10) and (14) to
reveal the tradeoﬀ between current and future inﬂation
                                           
                                         ρq       Bmt−1 /Pt−1
                                 πt 1 −        =                                           (15)
                                         πF         st + 1−q
                                                          q
                                                             s

For a given value of the right side of (15), it is clear that higher current inﬂation (Pt ) is
associated with lower future inﬂation (πF ). This tradeoﬀ appears graphically in ﬁgure 9.13

4.3.2 Low Real Interest Rates Demand for bonds will also shift with changes in
investors’ beliefs about the future backing of bonds. That backing depends on ﬁscal policy
behavior through future primary surpluses, but it also depends on the expected path of
real interest rates that serve to discount surpluses. Short-term real interest rates have been
negative in the United States for more than four years, as they were for the decade of the
  13
    Figure 9 is drawn using the following parameter choices: q = .9804 (2% real rate), Bmt−1 /Pt−1 = 0.5,
and baseline current and future inﬂation of 2%.


                                                   14
                                            Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy



                                            P
                                             t                                  Bs         Bs
                                                                                  1         2             Bd
                                                                                                           1

                                                                                                           d
                                                                                                          B
                                                                                                           2

                                            P
                                             2
                                            P3
                                            P
                                             1




                                                                                 B         B               Bmt
                                                                                   1        2



Figure 8: Bond-ﬁnanced tax cut today. Bond supply shifts to the right. If central bank raises
nominal interest rate in response to higher inﬂation today, bond prices fall and demand for
nominal bonds shifts down, attenuating some of the increase in inﬂation today. Instead,
inﬂation is pushed into the future.


                                      10

                                                      6−year maturity
                                      8
        Current Inflation (percent)




                                                                                   2−year maturity

                                      6


                                      4


                                      2

                                                                                                              10−year maturity
                                      0

                                      −30       −20               −10                  0             10             20           30
                                                                        Future Inflation (percent)


Figure 9: Tradeoﬀ between current and future inﬂation: Given a level of real debt and present
value of surpluses in (15), the higher is inﬂation today, Pt , the lower is future inﬂation, πF ,
a tradeoﬀ that varies with the average maturity of government debt.


1970s and the ﬁrst half of the 2000s. In terms of the model, negative real interest rates make
the discount factors, qt,t+1 , that discount surpluses in (7) temporarily greater than unity,



                                                                              15
                         Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy


substantially raising the present value of any given stream of future surpluses.14 This raises
the value of government debt and pivots down the demand from B1d to B2d in ﬁgure 10 to
reduce the current price level.
    Persistently low real rates may explain why the United States is not experiencing a pick-
up in inﬂation despite the massive expansion in nominal government debt of recent years. If
the ﬁscal inﬂation mechanism that this paper highlights is at work in the United States, then
inﬂation is not likely to begin to rise until real interest rates have returned to more normal
levels. But a return to normalcy in the world economy remains elusive and is intrinsically
diﬃcult to predict. In the face of a ﬁscal limit, normalcy may signal a move by investors out
of treasuries, with the resulting increases in aggregate demand and inﬂation.

                          Pt                              s
                                                       B
                                                                             Bd
                                                                               1

                                                                              Bd
                                                                               2




                          P
                           1
                          P2




                                                       B                       Bmt



Figure 10: Lower real interest rates. Expected present value of any given stream of surpluses
increases, pivoting demand for bonds down to B2d and reducing current inﬂation.



4.3.3 Subtle Inflation Effects Fiscally-induced inﬂation can be tricky to detect in
data. The bond-ﬁnanced tax cut shows that whether inﬂation occurs coincident with the tax
cut or occurs for many years after the tax cut depends on how monetary policy responds to
ﬁscal policy. It also depends on the maturity structure of government debt, which in actual
economies varies over time.
    Changes in real interest rates can also produce inﬂation in an economy at its ﬁscal limit.
But both the mechanism and the direction of the eﬀects diﬀer sharply from in conventional
new Keynesian analyses. Conventional analyses posit that higher real rates choke oﬀ aggre-
gate demand and reduce inﬂation. At the ﬁscal limit, higher real rates lower the present value
of surpluses, which reduces the value of debt and raises aggregate demand and inﬂation.
    Inﬂation can even occur before the ﬁscal changes that cause the inﬂation. News of lower
future taxes or higher future government transfer payments reduces the expected present
 14
      Discount factors cannot exceed unity forever in a dynamically eﬃcient equilibrium.

                                                     16
                        Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy


value of surpluses and induces agents to move today from holding bonds into buying goods.
Higher aggregate demand can raise inﬂation well before the ﬁscal changes take eﬀect. Em-
pirical work that presumes ﬁscal actions precede inﬂation will fail to uncover evidence of
ﬁscal inﬂation.

5 Speculation About the American Fiscal Limit
U.S. government debt continues to serve as a safe haven for investors and the U.S. dollar
still plays the role of a reserve currency in the world economy. But in recent years the
United States has also experienced one of the largest expansions in government debt and
that expansion has been accompanied by severe political paralysis. These developments
raise the question of whether America faces the prospect of hitting a ﬁscal limit, making
debt-stabilizing adjustments in surpluses less than assured. I believe that devaluation via
inﬂation is far more likely in the United States and possibly even other advanced economies
than is outright default.
     Framers of the U.S. Constitution understood the importance of adopting credible future
ﬁnancing for government debt and some key players in the country’s early history expounded
on the disastrous consequences of outright default.15 Here are some selected quotations:

       “. . . No pecuniary consideration is more urgent than the regular redemption and
       discharge of the public debt: on none can delay be more injurious, or an economy
       of the time more valuable.”
       George Washington, 1793

       “. . . proper funding of. . . debt [is]. . . a national blessing . . . .”
       “. . . public debts are public beneﬁts . . . .”
       “. . . creation of debt should always be accompanied with the means of extinguish-
       ment.”
       “. . . arguments for [honoring debt] rest on the immutable principles of moral obli-
       gation.”
       Alexander Hamilton, 1790

To the extent that American political leaders continue to regard debt repayment as a “moral
obligation,” it seems unlikely that the United States will follow in the footsteps of countries
that have reneged on their debt obligations.
    On the other hand, U.S. political developments over the past few decades do not make
me sanguine about the prospects for orderly ﬁscal reforms going forward. Political scientists
have noted that for the past 30 years, the major American political parties have become
increasingly polarized, a trend that has accelerated recently.16 Figure 11 summarizes the
distance between political parties in the U.S. Congress based on roll call votes.
    Two aspects of the ﬁgure are striking. First, political polarization is at an all-time high
and has been rising steadily since about 1980. Second, past times of national crisis—the
  15
     Sargent (2012) provides a thoughtful historical account and ties the U.S. experience to current issues
that Europe faces.
  16
     See, for example, Mann and Ornstein (2006, 2012), McCarty, Poole, and Rosenthal (2006), Theriault
(2008), Lofgren (2012), and Silver (2012).

                                                    17
                                                             Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy


                                                      1.05


                                                                                                                                 House
                                                      0.95



                VotingDistanceBetweentheParties
                                                      0.85


                                                      0.75


                                                      0.65


                                                      0.55


                                                      0.45

                                                                                                           Senate
                                                      0.35


                                                      0.25
                                                          1879 1887 1895 1903 1911 1919 1927 1935 1943 1951 1959 1967 1975 1983 1991 1999 2007



Figure 11: U.S. political party polarization 1879–2012. Measured as the diﬀerence in party
means of roll call votes. Source: Poole and Rosenthal (2012)


Great Depression, the two world wars—brought the political parties together, while the
latest ﬁnancial crisis and large recession drove them farther apart. Political scientists oﬀer
alternative theories to explain the increase in polarization, with some ascribing the rise
to particular political personalities, while others attribute it to gradual demographic shifts
among the electorate. Whatever the source of rising political polarization, it does not bode
well for how the United States will resolve its long-run ﬁscal stress. For thinking about
ﬁscal inﬂation, what matters is that Americans believe it is possible that extended political
paralysis will push the economy closer to its ﬁscal limit, where ﬁscal policy cannot be relied
upon to adjust surpluses to stabilize debt.
    To keep the theory simple, section 4 adopts the stark assumption that the economy is
at its ﬁscal limit and people expect it to remain there forever. But recent papers show,
more realistically, that so long as there is some probability of hitting the ﬁscal limit, even
temporarily, the broad implications of the stark theory carry through.17 More realistic
settings moderate ﬁscal eﬀects on inﬂation, but it continues to be true that monetary policy
can do nothing to oﬀset the ﬁscal impacts.
    The presence of a ﬁscal limit dramatically changes how the price level and inﬂation
rate get determined. Of course, the political process that determines ﬁscal choices and the
distance of the economy from its ﬁscal limit are beyond the control of independent central
bankers, aside from eﬀorts to jawbone elected oﬃcials into adopting debt-stabilizing ﬁscal
policies. Prudent central bankers, though, might wish to think through what the appropriate
  17
    Papers that explore the more general policy setting include Chung, Davig, and Leeper (2007), Davig
and Leeper (2006, 2011), Davig, Leeper, and Walker (2010, 2011), Bianchi (2011), Bianchi and Ilut (2012),
Sims (2011), and Eusepi and Preston (2011, 2012).


                                                                                               18
                     Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy


monetary policy is for a country that is staring at its ﬁscal limit.




                                              19
                    Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy


References
Bi, H. (2012): “Sovereign Risk Premia, Fiscal Limits and Fiscal Policy,” European Economic
  Review, 56(3), 389–410.

Bi, H., and E. M. Leeper (2012): “Analyzing Fiscal Sustainability,” Manuscript, Indiana
  University, October.

Bianchi, F. (2011): “Regime Switches, Agents’ Beliefs, and Post-World War II U.S.
  Macroeconomic Dynamics,” Manuscript, Duke University, April.

Bianchi, F., and C. Ilut (2012): “Monetary/Fiscal Policy Mix and Agents’ Beliefs,”
  Manuscript, Duke University, April.

Buiter, W. H. (2002): “The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level: A Critique,” Economic
 Journal, 112(481), 459–480.

Cagan, P. (1956): “The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinﬂation,” in Studies in the Quantity
 Theory of Money, ed. by M. Friedman, pp. 25–117. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Canzoneri, M. B., R. E. Cumby, and B. T. Diba (2011): “The Interaction Between
 Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” in Handbook of Monetary Economics, ed. by B. M. Friedman,
 and M. Woodford, vol. 3B, pp. 935–1000. Elsevier, Amsterdam.

Cecchetti, S. G., M. S. Mohanty, and F. Zampolli (2010): “The Future of Public
 Debt: Prospects and Implications,” BIS Working Papers No. 300, Monetary and Economic
 Department, March.

Chung, H., T. Davig, and E. M. Leeper (2007): “Monetary and Fiscal Policy Switch-
 ing,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39(4), 809–842.

Cochrane, J. H. (1998): “A Frictionless View of U.S. Inﬂation,” in NBER Macroeconomics
 Annual 1998, ed. by B. S. Bernanke, and J. J. Rotemberg, vol. 14, pp. 323–384. MIT Press,
 Cambridge, MA.

        (2011): “Determinacy and Identiﬁcation with Taylor Rules,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 119(3), 565–615.

Congressional Budget Office (2010): The Long-Term Budget Outlook. U.S. Congress,
 Washington, D.C., June.

Davig, T., and E. M. Leeper (2006): “Fluctuating Macro Policies and the Fiscal Theory,”
 in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2006, ed. by D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoﬀ, and M. Woodford,
 vol. 21, pp. 247–298. MIT Press, Cambridge.

         (2011): “Temporarily Unstable Government Debt and Inﬂation,” IMF Economic
  Review, 59(2), 233–270.

Davig, T., E. M. Leeper, and T. B. Walker (2010): “‘Unfunded Liabilities’ and
 Uncertain Fiscal Financing,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(5), 600–619.

                                           20
                     Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy


         (2011): “Inﬂation and the Fiscal Limit,” European Economic Review, 55(1), 31–47.

Eusepi, S., and B. Preston (2011): “Learning the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level: Some
 Consequences of Debt-Management Policy,” Journal of the Japanese and International
 Economies, 25(4), 358–379.

        (2012): “Fiscal Foundations of Inﬂation: Imperfect Knowledge,” Manuscript,
  Monash University, October.

Galı́, J. (2008): Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle. Princeton University
 Press, Princeton.

         (2013): “Comment,” in Fiscal Policy After the Financial Crisis, ed. by A. Alesina,
  and F. Giavazzi, pp. 299–310. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Ghosh, A., J. I. Kim, E. G. Mendoza, J. D. Ostry, and M. S. Qureshi (2012): “Fis-
 cal Fatigue, Fiscal Space and Debt Sustainability in Advanced Economies,” The Economic
 Journal, 123(566), F4–F30.

International Monetary Fund (2012a): World Economic Outlook. IMF, Washington,
  D.C., October.

         (2012b): World Economic Outlook. IMF, Washington, D.C., April.

Leeper, E. M. (1991): “Equilibria Under ‘Active’ and ‘Passive’ Monetary and Fiscal Poli-
  cies,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 27(1), 129–147.

Leeper, E. M., and T. B. Walker (2013): “Perceptions and Misperceptions of Fiscal
  Inﬂation,” in Fiscal Policy After the Financial Crisis, ed. by A. Alesina, and F. Giavazzi,
  pp. 255–299. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Lofgren, M. (2012): The Party Is Over: How Republicans Went Crazy, Democrats Became
 Useless, and the Middle Class Got Shafted. Viking, New York.

Mann, T. E., and N. J. Ornstein (2006): The Broken Branch: How Congress is Failing
 American and How to Get It Back on Track. Oxford University Press, New York.

         (2012): It’s Even Worse Than It Looks: How the American Constitutional System
  Collided with the New Politics of Extremism. Basic Books, New York.

McCarty, N., K. T. Poole, and H. Rosenthal (2006): Polarized America: The Dance
 of Ideology and Unequal Riches. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Poole, K., and H. Rosenthal (2012): “Party Polarization: 1879–2011,” May 10,
 http://voteview.com/political_polarization.asp.

Sargent, T. J. (2012): “United States Then, Europe Now,” Nobel Lecture, Manuscript,
  New York University, February.



                                             21
                    Leeper: Fiscal Limits & Monetary Policy


Sargent, T. J., and N. Wallace (1981): “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic,”
  Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 5(Fall), 1–17.

Silver,   N. (2012):      “As Swing Districts Dwindle,      Can a Divided
  House Stand?,” FiveThirtyEight, New York Times Blog, December 27,
  http://fivethirtyeight.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/12/27/as-swing-districts
  -dwindle-can-a-divided-house-stand.

Sims, C. A. (1994): “A Simple Model for Study of the Determination of the Price Level
  and the Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” Economic Theory, 4(3), 381–399.

          (2011): “Stepping on a Rake: The Role of Fiscal Policy in the Inﬂation of the
  1970’s,” European Economic Review, 55(1), 48–56.

        (2013): “Paper Money,” forthcoming in American Economic Review, Presidential
  Address, January.

Steinhauer, J. (2012): “A Wall Built Long and Tall,” The New York Times, December
  31, p. A1.

The Economist (2012): “So Much to Do, So Little Time,” November 17.

Theriault, S. M. (2008): Party Polarization in Congress. Cambridge University Press,
 New York.

Trabandt, M., and H. Uhlig (2011): “The Laﬀer Curve Revisited,” Journal of Monetary
 Economics, 58(4), 305–327.

Woodford, M. (1995): “Price-Level Determinacy Without Control of a Monetary Aggre-
 gate,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 43, 1–46.

        (2001): “Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability,” Journal of Money, Credit, and
  Banking, 33(3), 669–728.

        (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton
  University Press, Princeton, N.J.

World Bank (2012): “Age Dependency Ratio (% of Working-Age Population),”
 http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.DPND.




                                           22
