                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE IMPACT OF CITY CONTRACTING SET-ASIDES ON BLACK SELF-EMPLOYMENT
                         AND EMPLOYMENT

                                          Aaron K. Chatterji
                                          Kenneth Y. Chay
                                          Robert W. Fairlie

                                         Working Paper 18884
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18884


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2013




We thank Tim Bates, Danny Boston, William Darity, Bart Hamilton, Mark Killingsworth, George
La Noue, Michael Lechner, Steve Lewis, Mike Long, Justin Marion, Margaret Simms, John Sullivan,
Jon Wainwright, Doug Wissoker, and seminar participants the NBER Working Group on Entrepreneurship
Meetings, American Economic Association Meetings, Association for Public Policy Analysis and
Management Meetings, the Symposium on Race and Economic Progress at Rutgers University, the
United States Association for Small Business and Entrepreneurship Annual Meeting, the IZA Social
Policy Evaluation Annual Conference, the Society for Labor Economists Meetings, and the Conference
on Affirmative Action at the University of Minnesota for helpful comments and suggestions. We are
indebted to William Johnson and two anonymous referees for suggestions that significantly improved
the paper. Steve Anderson provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Aaron K. Chatterji, Kenneth Y. Chay, and Robert W. Fairlie. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of City Contracting Set-Asides on Black Self-Employment and Employment
Aaron K. Chatterji, Kenneth Y. Chay, and Robert W. Fairlie
NBER Working Paper No. 18884
March 2013
JEL No. H76,J15,L26

                                             ABSTRACT

In the 1980s, many U.S. cities initiated programs reserving a proportion of government contracts for
minority-owned businesses. The staggered introduction of these set-aside programs is used to estimate
their impacts on the self-employment and employment rates of African-American men. Black business
ownership rates increased significantly after program initiation, with the black-white gap falling three
percentage points. The evidence that the racial gap in employment also fell is less clear as it is depends
on assumptions about the continuation of pre-existing trends. The black gains were concentrated in
industries heavily affected by set-asides and mostly benefited the better educated.


Aaron K. Chatterji                                  Robert W. Fairlie
Duke University                                     Department of Economics
Fuqua School of Business                            University of California, Santa Cruz
1 Towerview Drive, Durham, NC                       Santa Cruz, CA 95064
United States                                       rfairlie@ucsc.edu
ronnie@duke.edu

Kenneth Y. Chay
Department of Economics
Brown University
Box B
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
Kenneth_Chay@brown.edu
I. Introduction

        Since the early 1970s hundreds of billions of dollars have been spent on programs that set aside

or set percentage goals for government contracts for minority-owned firms and subcontractors. In 2008

alone, $28.2 billion of federal procurement contracts were awarded to disadvantaged business enterprises,

representing 6.3 percent of the total value of all federal contract awards (SBA 2008). The amount spent

on affirmative action contracting programs for minority-owned firms dwarfs the total amount spent by the

federal government on enforcement of statutes legislating antidiscrimination and affirmative action in

employment, such as Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act and Executive Order 11246.1 The 1980s, in

particular, witnessed substantial growth in the value of city government contracts reserved for minority-

owned business. The stated purpose of these set-aside programs was to develop minority enterprise,

counter the effects of past discrimination, and reduce the high unemployment rates among urban

minorities during the 1980s.

        Over the last two decades, the city programs established in the 1980s have been judicially and

legislatively challenged and dismantled. The City of Richmond v Croson Co. Supreme Court decision in

January 1989 invalidated the use of such programs unless they were used as narrowly tailored remedies

for identified discrimination. The 1995 Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Peña Supreme Court decision, and

voter referenda passed in California (1996), Washington (1998) and other states, further brought into

question the future of government-sponsored set-asides.

        Given the legal and political controversy surrounding these programs, there is surprisingly little

quantitative evidence on their effects, especially on the formation of minority-owned businesses. We

evaluate the impact of the numerous affirmative action contracting programs passed in large cities during

the 1980s on business ownership and employment of African-American men. The impact on black self-

employment is of special interest since blacks continue to have substantially lower rates of business


1
  For example, in fiscal year 2001, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) obtained $247.8
million for charges filed and resolved under all statutes enforced by the EEOC (Title VII, ADA, ADEA, and EPA);
while the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) – charged with enforcing Executive Order
11246, Section 503 of the 1973 Rehabilitation Act, and the 1974 Vietnam Era Veterans’ Readjustment Assistance
Act – obtained $29.0 million in financial remedies. Procurement of city government contracts to minority-owned
firms located just in Washington D.C. was $170 million in 1985 alone.
ownership than whites even in light of the major gains made in education, earnings, civil rights and

political representation (Fairlie and Robb 2008). As the main alternative to wage and salary employment,

business ownership has important implications for earnings and wealth inequality. Prior work suggests

that the self-employed accumulate more wealth than wage and salary workers and have higher savings

rates (Borjas 1999, Bradford 2003). 2 While business owners represent roughly one-tenth of the

workforce, they hold nearly 40 percent of total U.S. wealth (Bucks, Kennickell, and Moore 2006).

Further, since black-owned firms are more likely to hire minorities, it has been argued that promoting

black business growth is a more effective approach to reducing black unemployment than overall

economic development (Bates 1993, Boston 1999, 2006, and U.S. Census Bureau 1997).

        A growing number of studies indicate that limited financial and social capital and discrimination

are partly responsible for low rates of business formation among blacks. 3 Blacks have been found to face

discrimination in credit markets, which will constrain business formation even when the return of the

business exceeds the market borrowing rate. Low levels of personal wealth and liquidity constraints may

also reduce opportunities to start and operate successful black businesses. Previous research further finds

that black firms face consumer discrimination and have limited opportunities to penetrate networks, such

as those in construction. Each of these barriers to black business creation suggests a potential for

affirmative action contracting programs to address an efficiency loss.

        With Current Population Survey data on black and white men from 1979 to 1989, we use the

staggered timing of set-aside programs across U.S. cities to estimate their impacts on the self-employment

and employment rates of African-Americans. We use “difference-in-differences-in-differences” (DDD)

and an “event study” methodology, based on the exact dates of program implementation, to estimate the

program effects. The latter approach allows us to examine trends in black and white rates, before and

after program initiation, and test for non-randomness in the timing and location of the programs.


2
  Hamilton (2000) finds that earnings differentials between the self-employed and wage and salary workers cannot
be explained by negative selection into self-employment and concludes that the nonpecuniary benefits of self-
employment are large.
3
  For example, see Bates (1997), Fairlie (1999), Hout and Rosen (2000), Cavalluzzo, Cavalluzzo, and Wolken
(2002), Blanchflower, Levine and Zimmerman (2003), and Fairlie and Robb (2008). There is little evidence that
blacks have less preference for business ownership (Koellinger and Minniti 2006, Walstad and Kourilsky 1998).

                                                        2
        Remarkably, there is little consensus in the literature on the exact start dates of city programs.

We construct a new database of affirmative action program dates from four sources – in addition to two

existing sources that often disagree, we conducted an extensive search of federal and state court cases and

interviewed numerous government employees and officials involved with city programs. The resulting

information allows us to cross-validate the program dates and investigate the impact of set-asides more

comprehensively and reliably than previous studies.

        Black business ownership rates increased significantly after program initiation, with the black-

white self-employment gap falling by three percentage points (35-40 percent). The evidence is clear, as

the self-employment gap is stable in the years preceding set-asides, and the magnitudes correspond with

information from other sources on the growth in, and the set-aside amounts awarded to, black-owned

businesses. The racial gap in employment fell by roughly four percentage points after program initiation,

but these results are sensitive to assumptions about the continuation of pre-existing trends. City programs

were preceded by several years of declining black employment in the industries that did not benefit from

the programs (e.g., manufacturing and government). Black employment rates in the sectors most affected

by set-asides, however, are more stable in the pre-program period.

        The black gains are concentrated in industries heavily affected by set-asides and accrued mostly

to the better educated. It appears that city programs led to a reallocation of self-employment from white

to black men, as there is little change in the aggregate rates. This finding is sensible as overall spending

by city governments did not change – that is, set-asides appear to have impacted the share of contracts

awarded to minority firms but not the total amount of awards. The employment effects in the most

affected sector imply that set-aside programs increased black employment more than affirmative action

programs that explicitly set goals for minority hiring in firms that receive federal contracts.

        The next section describes the set-aside programs and discusses the few studies exploring their

impacts. Section III details the data on set-aside program dates. Section IV discusses the CPS data and

presents black self-employment and employment trends during the 1980s. Section V presents the

econometric framework, and Section VI contains the empirical results. Section VII concludes.



                                                      3
II. City Set-Aside Programs

Background

        There are two types of set-aside programs. In one variant, a specified percentage of the number

or total dollar value of government contracts is allotted to minority-owned businesses. In the other, prime

contractors are required to allot a specified percentage of the total amount of government contracts to

minority-owned subcontractors and/or suppliers (Rice 1991 and Myers 1997). 4 The percentage goals

vary across programs and sometimes within programs for different purchases, such as construction

contracts, procurement of goods and services, and professional services. Data on local set-aside programs

listed in MBELDEF (1988) indicate that these goals range from 1 to 50 percent, with most programs

having goals of 5 to 15 percent. Set-aside programs are often complemented with procurement officials

who provide more general assistance to minority-owned businesses (Bates and Williams 1993).

        Set-aside programs exist at the federal, state, city, county, and special district (e.g., airport, water,

sanitary, park, and school) levels. At the federal level, the Small Business Administration’s (SBA) 8(a)

program – established in 1968 as an amendment to section 8 of the Small Business Administration Act of

1953 – is the best-known. In 8(a), the SBA serves as the prime contractor for goods and services to

various federal agencies and provides subcontracts to firms that are owned by socially and economically

disadvantaged individuals. 5 In 1983, 8(a) contracts totaled $2.3 billion (Bates 1985). Another federal

program is the 1977 Public Works Employment Act, which required that 10 percent of all federal public

works contracts be given to minority-owned businesses (Bates 1985). This program’s constitutionality

was soon challenged leading to the U.S. Supreme Court’s ruling in Fullilove v. Klutznick, which upheld

the federal government’s use of these programs. The federal government reported $4.4 billion in total

contract awards to minority and disadvantaged firms in FY 1986 (Rice 1991).

        Fullilove v. Klutznick sparked the creation of set-aside provisions among other federal agencies,

and state and local governments. Most states created set-aside programs for minority-owned businesses




4
 The constitutionality of this type of set-aside was challenged in the 1995 Adarand v. Peña Supreme Court case.
5
 The SBA considers blacks, Hispanics, Native Americans, and Asian Pacific Americans as socially disadvantaged.
In 1978, 96 percent of 8(a) firms were owned by minorities (Bates 1985).

                                                       4
as a direct response to requirements that state departments of transportation administering federal

highway grants and contracts oversee implementation of the federal set-aside provisions (Myers 1997). 6

Over 200 local governments created minority business set-aside programs in response to the Fullilove v.

Klutznick ruling (Myers 1997). Most of these programs were created in the early to mid-1980s, and many

were quite substantial, especially in large central cities (Bates 1985, MBELDEF 1988). For example,

Atlanta’s set-aside program provided minority- and white female-owned businesses with $191 million

between 1979 and 1989 (Boston 1999), and procurement to minority-owned firms in Washington, D.C.

was $170 million in 1985 alone (Rice, 1991).


Potential Effects of Programs

         The primary justification for affirmative action in government contracting is that it addresses

discrimination against black firms. Set-aside programs may counteract the effects of consumer

discrimination against black-owned businesses (Borjas and Bronars 1989, Meyer 1990 and Kawaguchi

2005) and alleviate impediments to penetrating networks, such as those found in construction (Bates

1993, Feagin and Imani 1994, Bates and Howell 1997). Discrimination among potential suppliers, prime

contractors, bonding firms and governments can also create barriers to black business entry and growth.

         Set-aside programs may reduce the well-documented liquidity constraints faced by black

business-owners. Blacks have substantially lower levels of wealth than whites – the median net worth of

black households ($5,500) is fourteen times lower than that of white households (U.S. Census Bureau

2008). Previous research finds that low levels of black wealth are associated with lower levels of

business ownership, and less startup capital and worse outcomes for black-owned businesses (Fairlie

1999, Bates 1997, Fairlie and Robb 2008, Bates and Lofstrom 2008). 7 Recent work also shows that

black-owned businesses experience higher loan denial probabilities and pay higher interest rates than


6
  Rice (1991) reports that 36 states had set-aside programs in place by the late 1980s. As an example of their size,
Myers and Chan (1996) report that the state of New Jersey awarded $93 million (or 3.2 percent of the total amount
awarded) of public procurement and construction prime contracts to minority-owned firms in 1988.
7
  Low levels of black wealth may limit entrepreneurship due to the importance of personal and family equity
invested in the business and the common use of personal assets for collateral for business liabilities and guarantees
(Avery, Bostic and Samolyk 1998, U.S. Census Bureau 2006). Cavalluzzo and Wolken (2005) find that personal
wealth, primarily through home ownership, reduces the probability of loan denial among business owners.

                                                          5
white-owned businesses, even after controlling for differences in size and credit history (Blanchflower,

Levine and Zimmerman 2003; Cavalluzzo, Cavalluzzo, and Wolken 2002; Blanchard, Zhao and Yinger

2008). After adjusting for credit scores, wealth and owner and firm characteristics, a loan application

filed by a black business owner is twice as likely to be denied as an application from a white owner. Set-

aside programs may have an especially large effect on liquidity constraints in industries, such as

construction, in which working capital is difficult to obtain and the posting of bonds is required

(Blanchflower and Wainright 2005).

        These constraints can lead to a suboptimal level of black business formation, growth and

employment. Set-aside programs may mitigate these barriers to entry for black entrepreneurs, allowing

them to launch new ventures and grow to a sustainable size. They may also circumvent some of the

barriers to raising capital by providing a steady expected revenue source that allows black firms to

expand. The creation of new black businesses and the growth of existing businesses due to set-aside

programs may also create a disproportionate number of jobs for blacks (U.S. Census Bureau 1997, Boston

1999, 2006). For example, to the extent that black-owned businesses tend to locate in predominantly

black neighborhoods, these programs can reduce the contribution of spatial mismatch to black

unemployment. If barriers for minority entrepreneurs are nonexistent, however, then affirmative action in

the award of government contracts can result in inefficient (self-) employment and growth.


Previous Literature

        Minority business set-asides represent a multi-billion dollar, annual expenditure by governments

and are controversial politically (e.g., Proposition 209 in California) and judicially (e.g., the 1995

Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Peña Supreme Court decision). Little is known, however, about their

actual effectiveness in promoting growth in the number of minority-owned businesses and in alleviating

unemployment among blacks. Only a handful of studies have attempted to analyze whether these

individual programs have met their goals.

        The first substantive question is whether set-aside programs actually increase the number and

total dollar amount of government contracts received by minority-owned businesses. In a study of federal


                                                      6
and state transportation contracting, Blanchflower and Wainwright (2005) find that set-aside programs

increase the value of contracts awarded to minority-owned businesses. After a program in Minnesota was

eliminated in 1999, contract awards to minority men fell from $6.5 million to less than $1 million. After

the cessation of the Chicago Water Department set aside program in 1989, contracts awarded to minority

businesses fell from $19.6 million to $6.9 million. Blanchflower and Wainwright conclude that set-aside

program removal reduces minority business participation by 80-99 percent, on average.

         Myers and Chan (1996) examine the award of public procurement and construction contracts to

minority- and non-minority-owned firms before, during, and after the implementation of the state of New

Jersey’s set-aside program. They find that the total number of minority-owned firms receiving contracts

increased, as did the volume of contracts and the number of minority-owned firms bidding for contracts.

Boston (1999) finds that minority participation in government contracts in Atlanta grew from 0.13 percent

in 1973 to over 38 percent in 1978 after the enactment of set-asides in 1975. During the 1980s, minority-

owned firms received 15 percent ($191 million) of the total value of all contracts awarded in Atlanta.

Black-owned firms also obtained $72 million of the $163 million in subcontracts awarded in Atlanta

between 1992 and 1995. 8

         The existing literature provides little evidence on the next, natural question of whether set-aside

programs impacted the number of minority-owned firms. Boston (1998) uses published data from the

Survey of Minority-Owned Business Enterprises (SMOBE) to contrast the growth rate in the number of

black-owned businesses in cities that implemented affirmative action programs in the 1980s relative to

cities that did not. The information on the cities and dates in which affirmative action programs were

initiated comes from MBELDEF (1988). He finds that from 1982 to 1992 the number of black-owned

businesses grew 65 percent in cities with programs and 61 percent in cities without programs, and that

this difference is not statistically significant. Unfortunately, the SMOBE data provide no information on

the growth rates of white-owned firms in either group of cities.

8
 Additional evidence on the relationship between set-aside programs and contract awards comes from a review of
58 disparity studies conducted in response to the Richmond v. Croson decision (Enchautegui, et al., 1996). It finds
greater disparity in contract awards (relative to predicted levels) in jurisdictions without affirmative action programs,
implying that such programs increased the amount of government contracts received by minority-owned firms.

                                                           7
         Bates and Williams (1993) find that between 1982 and 1987 the number of black firms and total

sales by black businesses increased more in cities with black mayors than in cities without. They argue

that the black mayor effects are partly due to their support of minority business set-aside programs. Using

data collected by the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies (JCPES) on set-aside programs in

28 cities (JCPES 1994), Bates and Williams (1995) explore whether the characteristics of preferential

procurement programs affect the survival of minority-owned businesses. 9 They find higher survival rates

for minority businesses that derive 1-24 percent of their sales from state and local governments in cities

with programs with specific characteristics.10 The results are mixed for minority firms that derive at least

25 percent of their sales from state and local governments.

         The evidence on whether set-aside programs have increased the number of minority-owned

businesses is inconclusive. Also, there is no research on the effects of these programs on black

employment rates. To address these gaps in the literature, we examine whether the set-aside programs

initiated in many of the largest U.S. cities during the 1980s affected business ownership among black men

and employment rates. 11



III. Data on City-Level Set-Aside Programs

         A major limitation for previous research on set-aside programs has been finding accurate data on

program implementation dates. Because these programs are administered at the city level, there is no

centralized source of information. Further, the focus of the programs and offices running them have

changed over time, especially due to Croson (1989), making it difficult to determine when programs were

originally created. We conducted an extensive analysis of information from several sources to create a

novel dataset of city program initiation dates.


9
  JCPES collected information on program dates, program assistance staffing, provision of capital assistance,
bonding, downsizing of large procurement contracts, certification of minority business enterprises, penalties for
violation of certification or program regulations, and treatment of brokers.
10
   Survival increases with programs that have a rigorous certification process; have a staff assigned to assist minority
firms; routinely wave bonding requirements or provide bonding; or provide working capital assistance to minority
firms receiving contracts.
11
   State-run programs are much smaller than city programs and most county programs follow city programs since
targeted minorities live primarily in central cities (from discussions with Thomas Boston and Timothy Bates).

                                                           8
         Our data on the years in which city programs were enacted come from two previously used

sources and two new sources. The first is the 1988 Report on the Minority Business Enterprise Programs

of State and Local Governments by the Minority Business Enterprise Legal Defense and Education Fund

(MBELDEF). Intended to represent a complete list of local affirmative action programs in existence as of

1988, the report had great difficulty finding information for all cities. 12 It contains program initiation

dates, authority, coverage, and percentage goals for most programs. These data were previously used in

Boston (1998). A second source is the report to the U.S. Department of Commerce Minority Business

Development Agency, Assessment of Minority Business Development Programs, by the Joint Center for

Political and Economic Studies (JCPES) in 1994. It contains detailed profiles on minority-business set-

aside programs in 28 large cities, including program initiation dates.13

         Table A1 in the Appendix shows the program dates provided in MBELDEF (1988) and JCPES

(1994) for the 44 cities identifiable in the Current Population Survey (CPS) during our period of analysis.

Combined, these two sources provide program start dates for 33 of the 44 MSAs. For the eleven cities

without listed dates, we cannot rule out the presence of set-aside programs since these two sources are

incomplete. According to both sources, most city-level programs were created in the early to mid-1980s.

Fourteen of the twenty-one dates from MBELDEF are in the 1983-1985 period. Though more dispersed

throughout the 1980s, the JCPES dates are similarly concentrated.

         The MBELDEF and JCPES program dates correspond for only four of the thirteen cities for

which both sources provide information, and in some cases there is a difference of several years. Due to

concerns over the reliability of these dates, we conducted an exhaustive search for additional information

on when set-aside programs were initiated in major U.S. cities. 14 First, we used Westlaw to search all


12
   Data from other sources reveal that some cities with programs existing in 1988 are not listed in the MBELDEF
report and that the listed starting dates for several programs are incorrect. A personal communication with Franklin
M. Lee, Chief Counsel of MBELDEF, confirmed that the report is not a complete list of programs.
13
   Timothy Bates informed us that the original goal of JCPES (1994) was to get data for 50 cities, but some cities
refused to answer, whereas others did not have programs.
14
   Additional complications exist with respect to the timing of the programs listed in the two sources. For the
MBELDEF data, the date of the administrative order or resolution can often be an inaccurate measure of the date
that the program started. In some cases, the actual program did not start for several years after the order/resolution.
Thomas Boston found that the MBELDEF dates were wrong for Atlanta. Timothy Bates suggested similar problems
with the JCPES data.

                                                          9
federal and state court cases that involved minority business programs in the 44 cities in our sample.

From the court cases, which typically involved a lawsuit by a white-owned construction firm against the

city’s minority contracting program following Croson, we found program start dates for 14 cities.

Information on other program aspects was limited and not consistent across cities.

        Our final source came from personal correspondence with city officials who were involved in the

set-aside programs or worked in the successor agencies to promote small business. We attempted to

contact every city in our sample, and, over a two-year period, we discussed the programs with key

administrators in more than 30 different cities either by phone or email. In each case, we spoke with

current city employees or affiliates of a related business outreach program and conducted semi-structured

interviews. During these conversations, the program dates from the other sources were cross-checked and

additional documentation was requested when applicable.

        Given the disagreement on program initiation dates between the two sources used in previous

studies, these new data are essential to conducting a comprehensive and reliable study of city set-asides.

With four sources of data, we can verify the dates with greater confidence, and the personal interviews

provided valuable institutional detail on the programs. This allows us to conduct the first rigorous

empirical investigation into the impact of contracting set-asides.

        Table A1 also reports the program dates from these two new sources. While for the majority of

cities there is agreement in the program dates across more than one source, there is disagreement for

several others. Overall, most cities are reported as implementing set-aside programs in the early-to-mid-

1980s. In the analysis that follows, we focus on two different estimation samples – the 17 MSAs with

cross-validated dates and the 25 MSAs with either cross-validated dates or dates from only one source.

We drop the cities that we could not obtain program dates for or that had conflicting dates in multiple

sources. The 17 cities with non-conflicting dates comprise the majority of the population in the 25-city

sample. In some analyses, we include the three additional MSAs in which city records indicate that no

program was ever initiated and no other source suggests otherwise.




                                                     10
IV. The Current Population Survey and Trends in Self-Employment

        The primary data source on self-employment and employment comes from the 1979 to 1989

Current Population Survey (CPS) Merged Outgoing Rotation Group (ORG) files. The CPS is conducted

monthly by the U.S. Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and represents the entire U.S.

population with observations on over 130,000 people each month. The ORG files contain annual samples

that are roughly three times larger than those from a monthly CPS. The large sample sizes are important

since the group of interest, self-employed black men, is small relative to the population, and our analyses

are disaggregated to the MSA-level. From these data we construct annual information on patterns of

minority and non-minority self-employed business ownership rates from 1979 to 1989.

        The main limitation of the ORG files is that they do not contain information on the performance

of the business – for example, they contain information on workers’ weekly wages, but not for the self-

employed. The only alternative data source on minority businesses, the Survey of Minority-Owned

Business Enterprises (SMOBE), contains information on annual sales, but it is only available every five

years (1977, 1982, 1987), underwent major changes in sample definitions over time, and does not include

a comparison group of white-owned firms.

        The self-employment rate is defined as the ratio of the number of self-employed to the adult

population. Self-employed workers are individuals who identify themselves as self-employed in their

own not incorporated or incorporated business on the class of worker question, which refers to the job

with the most hours during the reference week in the ORG files. This definition of self-employment

includes all business owners, both employers and non-employers. We focus on the years 1979 to 1989

since they encompass the period when most major cities in the United States created set-aside programs.

The period after 1989 is not studied since the 1989 Croson decision led to the suspension or dismantling

of set-aside programs in several cities. We focus on the impact of the creation of the original set-aside

programs prior to the numerous changes that occurred to programs after Croson. We also do not examine

the more recent state initiatives, such as those in California and Washington, due to their potentially

confounding effects on government employment (Fairlie and Marion 2010).

        Our sample is restricted to non-Hispanic white and black men aged 20 to 64. We do not study

                                                     11
women since they have substantially lower business ownership rates, and female business owners are less

concentrated in the industries that are affected the most by contracting set-aside programs, such as

construction. 15 Our reliance on self-reported business ownership status lessens concerns over the

potential inclusion of “fronts” in which white, male-owned businesses include minority owners in name

only to secure government contracts.

        Since we analyze city-level changes, it is important to consistently match cities over time. In the

ORG files, the 44 largest Metropolitan Statistical Areas (SMSAs) can be identified from 1979 to

September 1985 based on their 1970 Census population size ranking (MSA identifiers). After 1985 the

city coding scheme changed to include 252 Consolidated MSA (CMSA) ranking identifiers, some

subdivided into as many as 12 Primary MSA (PMSA) ranking codes. The match of the 1986-1989 and

1979-1985 city codes were based on making the CMSA and PMSA rankings compatible with the MSA

rankings. While the codes for later years represent smaller geographical units, they capture the same

general areas, and we examined population totals to gauge the quality of the match. The resulting sample

includes the 44 MSAs that can be consistently matched over the entire decade.

        Table 1 presents summary information on the characteristics of all black and white men (Panel A)

and self-employed men (Panel B) in the 1979 to 1989 ORG data. In the United States as a whole

(columns 1a and b) and in the 44-MSA sample (columns 2a and 2b), black men (relative to white men)

are much less likely to be self-employed, more likely to be unemployed or out of the labor force, and

much more likely to reside in the central city. Relative to the full population, the self-employed are older,

slightly better educated, and less likely to be central city residents. These patterns hold for the 25- and

17-MSA samples that are used in the analysis below. The 44-MSA sample captures about 50 percent of

the total black population and 30 percent of the white population in the United States. The 17- and 25-

MSA samples contain 60 and 70 percent of all black men in the 44-MSA sample.

        Table 2 shows the distribution of self-employment across industries, by race. We categorize




15
 For example, only 1.8 percent of black women are self-employed, and only 1.1 percent of self-employed black
women are in the construction industry.

                                                      12
industries into two groups – those heavily affected (Panel A) and less affected (Panel B) by city

government contracts, which is an important distinction in the analysis. To classify industries into most-

and least-affected, we used three sources of information: Bates (1993, 1997) and MBELDEF (1988).

Bates uses confidential Census business-level data to tabulate the fraction of firms in each industry selling

goods and services to the government. He also details the industries targeted by minority city contracting

according to his own surveys of programs and other sources. The MBELDEF report provides

information on the targeted sectors for many cities. 16 Complemented by our conversations with program

officers, we identified construction, professional services, transportation-communications-utilities,

business services, repair services, and retail trade as the “most-affected” industries.

           In Panels A and B, the industries are roughly ordered from top to bottom by how impacted by

minority business set-asides they are likely to be. For both races, pluralities of self-employed business

owners are in construction (18-20 percent). The industries containing the next most self-employed are

professional services for whites and retail trade for blacks. Relative to blacks, the white self-employed

are much more likely to be in professional services, finance-insurance-real estate, wholesale trade, and

manufacturing. The black self-employed are more likely to be in transportation-communications-utilities,

repair services, personal services, and entertainment-household services.

           While fewer of the self-employed are in the “less affected” sector for both races, the black-white

gaps in self-employment rates are large in both sectors, as are the employment rate gaps. For both races,

the self-employed in the “less affected” sector are better educated than their counterparts in the “more

affected” sector, and the employed are less likely to be in their twenties. In the more affected sector, the

employed tend to be better educated than business owners (especially among blacks), while this pattern is

reversed in less affected industries. Black business owners and employees in both sectors are much more

likely to reside in the central city, and all of these patterns hold across the three MSA samples.

           Before proceeding, we discuss self-employment and employment trends between 1979 and 1989.

Panel A of Figure 1 plots the self-employment rates of white and black men in the entire United States


16
     In the report, a large percentage of program coverage appears to target the construction sector.

                                                            13
and in the 44-MSA sample. While black self-employment rates in MSAs were stable from 1979 to 1983,

they increased from 4.5 percent to over 5 percent in 1984 and remained at this higher level for the rest of

the decade. The black self-employment gains in the mid-1980s in the country as a whole were driven

entirely by the gains in the 44 MSAs. In the MSA-sample white self-employment rates also rose during

the 1980s, but most of the increase had occurred by 1983.

        Panel B presents employment-population rates by race. The employment rates of black and white

men declined sharply between 1979 and 1983 in response to the two recessions and rebounded over the

rest of the 1980s. The fall and rebound are much sharper for blacks, implying larger business cycle

effects on black men, and most of the black rebound in the 44 MSAs occurred between 1985 and 1988,

while the white rebound was largest from 1983 to 1984 in both samples. In the MSA-sample, white men

experience both employment declines and self-employment growth between 1979 and 1983, suggesting

that some of the self-employment increase was driven by worsening job prospects. This pattern does not

hold for black men in the MSA sample, as their self-employment growth occurs after the employment

losses and just precedes the largest employment gains.

        The increase in black self-employment rates in MSAs roughly corresponds with when many cities

initiated set-aside programs, while the white rate changes little after the early 1980s. Further, between

1984 and 1987 there is a significant narrowing of the black-white employment gap in U.S. cities, though

this may be partially due to racial differences in cyclical sensitivity. Next, we rigorously analyze the

correspondence in the location and timing of the black, relative self-employment (and employment)

changes and the implementation of city-level minority business set-aside programs.



V. Econometric Framework

        We use two approaches to estimate the impact of the city set-aside programs. First, we contrast

before-and-after changes in the black-white gaps in self-employment and employment rates between

MSAs that initiate a program and those that do not. This is commonly referred to as difference-in-

differences-in-differences (DDD) and requires the assumption that changes in the racial gaps in the cities

without programs provide a valid counterfactual for what would have occurred in the program cities in the

                                                     14
program’s absence. The second approach uses the staggered timing of set-asides across cities in greater

detail to implement an “event study” analysis, which estimates the precise timing of the changes in black

relative outcomes. On one hand, this framework also allows us to examine pre-program trends in relative

outcomes and test for potential endogeneity in the programs’ timing, which is assumed away in the DDD

framework. On the other hand, it does not allow for comparisons to cities that did not initiate a program.

        For the DDD analysis, we estimate the following equation:
        y ijt = λtr + α rj + X ijt ′ β r + π 1 Black ijt + π 2Treat ijt + π 3 Black ijt ⋅ Treat ijt + π 4 Post ijt
(1)
         + π 5 Black ijt ⋅ Post ijt + π 6Treat ijt ⋅ Post ijt + θ ⋅ Black ijt ⋅ Treat ijt ⋅ Post ijt + u ijt

where yijt is an indicator variable equal to one if person i in city j is self-employed (or employed) in
survey year t; λtr are race-specific (r) year fixed effects that capture racial differences in sensitivity to the
cycle; α rj are MSA-level fixed effects that vary by race; Xijt is a vector of unrestricted dummy variables

for age and education whose effects can vary by race ( β r ); and uijt is an error term that is allowed to be

heteroskedastic and clustered over time at the MSA-level. Black, Treat and Post are indicators equal to

one if the observation is respectively black, located in an MSA with a set-aside program, and surveyed in

a year after set-aside initiation. OLS and probit estimation of equation (1) lead to similar marginal

probability effects, and the analyses use the CPS sampling weights.

        The DDD parameter of interest in (1) is θ, which measures the difference in changes in black-

white gaps between MSAs with and without set-aside programs, before-and-after program initiation. It

provides a valid estimate of the set-asides’ impact if there are no unmeasured factors that affected black

men differently than whites, in the program cities relative to those without programs, before-and-after set-

asides. The parameters π4 and π5 measure the before-and-after changes for white levels and black-white

differences in the cities without programs, and the parameter π6 measures the before-and-after change for

white men in program cities relative to their counterparts in MSAs without programs. We examine the

sensitivity of the estimates to the inclusion of the covariates (Xijt) as an indirect test of the underlying

identification assumption for DDD.

        The key assumption of DDD is that there were no race-specific changes that differed between

cities with and without programs after program initiation. One test of this assumption is to examine

                                                                 15
black-white trends in the outcomes preceding program initiation. The existence of systematic, pre-

program patterns could indicate that the programs’ timing was endogenous to factors affecting post-

program outcomes. Since the programs were staggered across cities instead of starting in the same year, a

natural way to examine this type of non-randomness is to use an “event study” framework.

         Here, we begin by estimating equations of the form:

                                                 ∑ γ t − s ⋅ 1(t ij             )        ∑ θ t − s ⋅ Black ijt ⋅ 1(t ij                )
                                                 12                                      12
(2)       y ijt = λtr + α j + X ijt ′ β r +                           − sj =t − s +                                       − s j = t − s + u ijt
                                              t − s = −13                             t − s = −13


where the indicator variables, 1(tij − sj = t − s), equal one if the survey year for an individual in city j (tij)

minus the year of program initiation in city j (sj) equals a value between −13 and 12, which is the full

support of survey years relative to program initiation years in our sample. For example, 1989 is 12 years

after Washington, D.C. began its program, and 1979 is 13 years before New York City started its

program. 17 The event study year (t − s) is zero when the survey year equals the program initiation year

for the MSA that the person lives in. The race-by-year effects adjust for the fact that cities initiated

programs at different points in the business cycle and that cyclical effects may vary by race, while the

MSA effects adjusts for the composition of cities in the event study year.

         Estimation of equation (2) provides an unrestricted description of the racial gaps in self-
employment (and employment), θ t − s , in relation to the timing of city-specific set-aside programs. While

the estimates of θ t − s will be based on a greater number of MSAs in event years near zero, they give

precise pictures of: i) the exact timing of any changes in black-white outcomes in relation to the year of

program initiation; and ii) whether there are systematic trends in racial gaps preceding program initiation.

The former uses the specific timing of changes to test for program causality; the latter provides a test of

endogeneity in the timing of the set-aside programs.

         By estimating equation (2) we can plot a response function of program effects. This motivates

fitting a more restrictive model that provides simple summaries of the magnitudes and statistical

significance of the set-asides’ impacts:


17
  Dropping New York City and Washington, D.C. from the analyses has little effect on the results. An MSA with
set-asides initiation in 1985 contributes to the periods -6 to +4; an MSA with initiation in 1982 contributes to -3 to
+7. The three MSAs that never had programs are not included in the primary event-study samples.

                                                                         16
                                                                                               ∑ γ t − s ⋅ 1(t ij             )
                                                                                                 7
            y ijt = λtr + α j + X ijt ′ β r + δ 1 ⋅ (t − s ) + δ 2 ⋅ Black ijt ⋅ (t − s ) +                         − sj =t − s +
                                                                                              t − s =0
(3)
             ∑ θ t − s ⋅ Black ijt ⋅ 1(t ij                )
               7
                                              − s j = t − s + u ijt
            t − s =0


where (t − s) is a trend variable in the event study years, and the “program effects” begin in event year

zero. When we estimate (3) below, we restrict the sample of event years to be between −8 and +7, and

instead of using unrestricted dummies for the post-program years, we use indicators for event periods of

0, (1, 2), (3, 4) and (5, 6, 7). 18 The error term (uijt) is allowed to be heteroskedastic and correlated over

time at the MSA-level.

           The parameter δ1 measures the pre-program trend in white outcomes, while δ2 measures the

black-white difference in pre-program trends and provides a test for systematic changes in racial gaps
before set-asides implementation. The program parameters θ t − s measure the deviation of post-program

racial gaps from their pre-program trends. The pre-program trends allow us to analyze whether the

stationarity assumption implied by difference-in-differences (DD) holds. For example, if the racial gap is

systematically narrowing before program initiation, then DD could estimate a positive program effect

when the gap would have continued narrowing even in the program’s absence. Similarly, if the gap is

widening before program initiation, then DD could provide negative program effects simply due to a

continuation of the pre-program trend toward greater racial inequality.

           At the same time, the estimated program effects are based on the assumption that the pre-program

trend in the racial gap would continue through the entire post-program period associated with the

indicator variables. While this may be reasonable for the years soon after set-asides initiation, this is less

likely to hold the further the period is from event year zero – for example, event years (5, 6, 7). These
issues are discussed in detail when we present the results. The θ t − s parameters provide “detrended” DD

estimates of the program impacts – before-and-after comparisons of the black-white gap deviated from

pre-program trends in the gap. Here, causality is assigned based on the exact timing of set-asides

initiation and by using white men as the control group. Since cities that never had a program have



18
     These restrictions allow for a simpler summary of the results and do not affect the conclusions.

                                                                      17
unknown “event years”, they cannot be used as control groups, which is a disadvantage of the event study

approach relative to the DDD framework.



VI. Empirical Results on the Impact of Set-Asides

        To start, we examine trends between 1979 and 1989 in the black-white gap in self-employment

for three types of MSAs: i) those that initiated a set-aside program in 1985, a common start year; ii) those

that never had a program or did not start one until after 1989; and iii) those that started a program by

1980. The last two groups are MSAs that were, respectively, never and always “treated” during the

1980s. Panel A of Figure 2 presents differences in the black-white self-employment gap for the three

potential contrasts of these groups. The dashed line shows that MSAs with a program throughout the

1980s had black relative self-employment rates that were consistently 4-6 percentage points higher than

MSAs without a program. Compared to cities that were “always treated”, MSAs that started a program in

1985 had relative self-employment rates that were 4-6 points lower between 1979 and 1985 (bottom line).

After 1985 there is a striking improvement in their relative rates, with no difference in the racial gaps

between the two groups by 1988. The comparison of the 1985 initiators to the “never treated” cities

yields similar findings – while the differences between the two groups are relatively small before 1985,

the 1985 initiators experience a large narrowing of their gap after 1985.

        The patterns strongly imply that set-asides initiation in 1985 resulted in significant gains in black

self-employment. Panel B tests this further by analyzing these gains by industrial sector. The MSAs that

started a program in 1985 are contrasted with those that always or never had a program during the 1980s.

The middle line, for example, is roughly the population-weighted average of the bottom two lines in Panel

A. The plots are from regressions that adjust for race-by-MSA fixed effects, race-by-year fixed effects,

year effects interacted with a 1985 program dummy, and unrestricted education and age indicators. The

other lines decompose the overall self-employment DDs into the two industry groups discussed in Table 2

– industries likely to be most affected and least affected by city contracting set-asides (outcomes are

indicators for self-employment in the respective sector). The estimated standard error bands are also

shown and are corrected for heteroskedasticity and over-time clustering.

                                                     18
        Nearly all of the black self-employment gains after 1985 occurred in the more affected sector.

The gains are significant in magnitude and statistically and are consistent with the hypothesis that set-

aside programs were the cause. 19 While the DDs exhibit a downward trend between 1979 and 1982, they

are relatively stable in the three years preceding set-asides initiation. At least for self-employment, the

DDD framework in equation (1) may be appropriate for estimating the impact of set-asides.


Difference-in-Differences-in-Differences (DDD) Results

        Table 3A presents the results of fitting equation (1) to the combination of two sets of DDD

contrasts for self-employment: i) MSAs starting a program in 1982 compared to cities with no program

change between 1979 and 1985 (never had a program or started one before 1979 or after 1985); and ii)

MSAs initiating set-asides in 1985 compared to cities with no program change between 1982 and 1988

(never had one or started one before 1982 or after 1988). The sample pools three years each of before-

and-after program data – 1979-1981 and 1983-1985 for the 1982 program contrasts and 1982-1984 and

1986-1988 for the 1985 program contrasts – with data from the program year excluded. Thus, the DDD

estimates are based on before-and-after comparisons of three-year periods, and the inference is corrected

for over-time clustering at the MSA-level. The pooled 1982 and 1985 set-asides sample provides before-

and-after windows that span the 1980s, with the program cities never serving as control cities. The results

are similar when we include likewise constructed 1983 and 1984 program samples, and the subsequent

event-study analysis uses all of the set-aside program dates.

        Panels A and B of the table correspond to the 17-MSA and 25-MSA samples, and the three sets

of columns present the results for all industries and the more and less affected sectors. For both samples,

the DDD estimates (“B-W, treat-c” rows) show that the black self-employment rate rose three percentage

points more in cities that initiated a program than in the control cities. These effects are highly significant

statistically and imply that set-asides reduced the black-white self-employment gap by roughly one-third.




19
  We fit a DDD model to the 1982-1984 and 1986-1988 DDs using the same regression specification as in Panel B.
The DDD estimates [t-ratios] for self-employment (per 100 men) are: 3.71 [2.55] for all industries; 3.00 [2.66] for
the more affected sector; 0.40 [0.58] for the less affected sector.

                                                        19
White self-employment fell by 1.7 percentage points after program initiation (“White, treat-c”),

suggesting that much of the black gain coincided with white losses – e.g., the before-and-after change in

the overall self-employment rate is similar in the treatment and control cities. This seems plausible since,

as we discuss below, set-aside programs did not change the total amount of city contract awards, but

instead shifted a fixed proportion of them to black entrepreneurs and sub-contractors.

         In the control cities, there are no before-and-after changes in white self-employment (“White,

control”) or in the black-white gap (“B-W, control”). Thus, the DDD effects are driven entirely by what

is occurring in cities that initiated set-asides. Columns 2a-2d and 3a-3d show that nearly all of the black

self-employment gains, and white losses, occurred in the most affected industries, with no changes

occurring in the control cities. 20 The estimated effects are insensitive to controls for race-by-MSA fixed

effects and unrestricted education and age indicators interacted with race.

         The effect sizes are plausible. While data on contracts awarded to minority firms are unavailable

for our full sample of MSAs, program information for Atlanta (Boston 1999) and Washington, D.C. (Rice

1991) is. Minority-owned businesses received $191 million between 1979 and 1989 from Atlanta’s set-

aside program, while procurement to minority-owned firms in Washington, D.C. was $170 million in

1985 alone. We apply these numbers to the DDD estimates to calculate an average contract amount for

each new black business – the Atlanta and Washington, D.C. figures imply annual amounts between

$4,000 and $24,000, respectively. Average revenue for black-owned firms was $31,204 in 1982, with the

majority coming from non-governmental sources (U.S. Census Bureau 1985, Bates and Williams 1995).

Our approximate set-asides amounts per each new firm are within a range to provide black-owned

businesses with a foothold in the market.

         Growth in the number of black-owned businesses in the 1980s measured by the U.S. Census

Bureau is also consistent with our estimated magnitudes from the CPS. The Survey of Minority Owned



20
  The outcome is an indicator for being self-employed in the respective sector. The DDD effects in columns 2 and
3 will not add up to those in the first set of columns since this approach allows the effects of the additional controls
to vary by sector. Another approach is to run the regressions in columns 1a-1d and include interactions of all of the
effects of interest with sector dummies, which constrains the effects of the controls to be the same by sector. This
leads to similar results.

                                                           20
Businesses (SMOBE) indicates that the number of black-owned firms grew by 38 percent between 1982

and 1987 (from 308,260 to 424,165), and that the number of black-owned construction firms increased by

64 percent.

        Table 3B is identical to Table 3A, except the outcome of interest is an employment indicator.

The DDD estimates are similar in the two MSA-samples and insensitive to the set of controls included in

the analysis. In columns 1a-1d, there is no relative employment gain for blacks in program cities relative

to the control cities, implying that set-aside programs did not increase black employment rates even as

their self-employment increased. This could happen if, for example, all of the newly self-employed black

men were employed before program initiation and either hired blacks who were already employed or

hired unemployed and out-of-the-labor-force blacks and whites at rates similar to their representation

among the employed.

        The other columns show, however, that this masks large differences in black employment

changes between the industries most and least affected by set-asides. There is a significant, three

percentage point gain in black relative employment in the more affected sector and a similar sized loss in

the less affected sector. There are no before-and-after changes in either sector among whites in program

or control cities or for blacks in the control cities – that is, the DDD employment estimates are driven

entirely by changes among black men in program cities.

        The new black businesses created in the more affected sector apparently increased the

employment rate of blacks in more affected industries, but there was a corresponding decline in black

employment in less affected industries. This could happen if, for example, the black employment gain in

more affected industries came from hiring black men who were already employed in other industries.

Evidence suggests, though, that this is not the case. In particular, the relative employment of black men

was declining before these programs were initiated, and this decline was driven mostly by a growing

racial gap in the least affected sector.

        While the event study framework allows us to examine this in detail, DDD contrasts for the 1985

program cities are illustrative. In addition to constructing 1982-1984 and 1986-1988 before-and-after

comparisons, we constructed 1979-1981 and 1983-1985 DDD contrasts. The latter tests whether

                                                     21
outcomes were changing differently between the 1985 program and control cities before set-asides were

adopted by shifting the DDD backwards – DDD models imply that there will be no pre-program effects.

        We applied the regression specification in columns 1c, 2c, and 3c of Table 3 to the 1985 program

sample and estimated both post-program and pre-program DDD effects. For self-employment, the post-

program DDD effect is positive and significant (see footnote 19), and the pre-program DDD is small,

negative and insignificant at the 10-percent level. For employment, the post-program DDD effects are

zero, significant positive and significant negative for all industries, the more affected sector, and less

affected sector, respectively (estimates similar to Table 3B). However, the pre-program DDD for all

employment is negative (-3.31 percentage points) and significant (t-ratio of 2.32), and 70 percent of this

decline occurred in the least affected sector (-2.36 points).

        In the 1985 program cities, black relative employment fell in the less affected sector before the

programs were initiated. This implies: i) the program timing was not exogenous with respect to the black

employment changes occurring in less affected industries; and ii) using DDD models to estimate the

employment effects in the less affected sector (and across all industries) may be inappropriate. We next

implement an event study analysis that incorporates all of the set-aside program dates and estimates

program effects that adjust for the race-specific trends that preceded program adoption.


Event Study Results
        Figure 3 plots the black-white gaps ( θ t − s ) in self-employment and employment from estimation

of equation (2), along with their standard error bands. Panels A and B are based on the 17- and 25-MSA

samples, respectively, and the estimates are from regressions that include race-by-year effects, MSA

effects and unrestricted indicators for education and age. The patterns are insensitive to excluding the

education and age indictors or allowing their effects to vary by race. Recall that the x-axis (event year) is

zero in the year the set-aside program started, with negative (positive) event years occurring before (after)

program initiation. Also, the MSAs that never had a program are excluded from the sample since we

cannot construct their event years.




                                                      22
         In both samples, the self-employment gap is stable in the six years preceding program initiation

(at about 6 percentage points), which suggests that the timing of the programs was exogenous with

respect to racial trends in self-employment. The gap immediately falls by three percentage points after

program adoption, and remains smaller in the years afterward. These patterns imply that set-asides

caused a sharp increase in black-owned businesses and that a difference-in-differences (DD) framework is

appropriate for estimating the self-employment program effects.

         The employment gap, by contrast, systematically widened in the eight years preceding the

programs; more so in the 17-MSA sample and in the four years before program adoption. Thus, the

program dates are not exogenous vis-à-vis racial trends in employment – cities initiated programs after

years of declining black employment. This makes sense as city set-asides were partly a response to the

growing problem of black unemployment. However, this trend is immediately reversed after set-asides

initiation, with the black-white employment gap narrowing over the rest of the post-program period. The

timing of the trend reversal suggests that set-aside programs were the cause.

         If the trend toward greater employment inequality would have continued in the absence of set-

asides, then the estimated employment effects should be adjusted for the pre-program trends. This is not

appropriate if one does not believe that the pre-program trends would have continued. In any case, the

magnitude of the estimated employment effects will depend on how one deals with the relative black

trend before program initiation.

         We use equation (3) to estimate the magnitude and statistical significance of the program effects

while adjusting for racial differences in the pre-program trends. Table 4 presents the results separately for

self-employment and employment (first and second set of columns) and for the 17- and 25-MSA samples

(Panels A and B). Recall that the sample contains the event period from eight years before to seven years

after program implementation, and therefore the pre-program trend is based on the eight years preceding

the program. 21 There are highly significant gains in black self-employment after set-asides adoption of




21
   The results are not sensitive to basing the pre-program trends on the six or four years preceding the program
(instead of eight). We show this explicitly in Table A5.

                                                         23
2.5 to 3.5 percentage points, depending on the sample and post-program period. This implies that set-

asides caused a 40-percent decline in the black-white gap. There is no racial difference in the pre-

program trends, confirming the visual impression left by Figure 3, and the estimates are insensitive to

controlling for education and age indicators or allowing their effects to differ by race. The programs’

timing does not appear to be a response to changing conditions for black business ownership.

         For employment, there are significant racial differences in the pre-program trend in both samples,

with black men systematically losing ground relative to whites before program adoption. The estimated

effects imply that, deviated from the race-specific trends, the employment gap narrowed by 3.5 and 6.5

percentage points in the periods 1-2 and 3-4 years after adoption in the 17-MSA sample. These figures

are 3 and 4.5 points in the 25-MSA sample. As the qualitative findings are similar, we focus mostly on

the larger 25-MSA sample from this point forward. 22

         It seems plausible that the trend toward greater employment inequality would not have

immediately reversed itself in the absence of set-asides. Indeed, we show below that the racial difference

in pre-program trends was driven primarily by an employment decline in the least affected industries and

that this decline continued after program adoption. It is more dubious to expect that the pre-program

trends would have continued for many years after adoption. In this case the employment estimates for 5-7

(and possibly 3-4) years after initiation could exaggerate the black employment gains from set-asides. 23

         Table A3 shows the robustness of the results across different samples of MSAs. We estimate

equation (3) – controlling for race-by-year and MSA effects and race-specific education and age effects –

but allow for unrestricted post-program effects instead of grouping them. Panel A shows the self-


22
   Table A2 shows the results for Table 4 when the regressions do not use the CPS sample weights. While the effect
magnitudes change slightly, their statistical significance and the qualitative conclusions are nearly identical to those
in Table 4, particularly after the education and age controls are included. Based on personal conversations with BLS
staff, the use of CPS sample weights is preferred to make the results representative of the U.S. population (e.g.,
adjusts for oversampling of smaller states). The unweighted results for Table 5 are also very similar in statistical
significance and implications (available from authors).
23
   Not adjusting for pre-program trends has no impact on the self-employment results, but, unsurprisingly, a large
effect on the employment results. For example, we fit DD specifications to the event study data using the periods
one to four years before and after program initiation. In the 25-MSA sample, the DD estimates [t-ratio] for self-
employment were 3.03 [4.20], 3.02 [3.73], 3.01 [3.49] in the three specifications. For employment, they were 0.73
[0.49], 0.73 [0.49], 0.55 [0.43]. If the year just before adoption is used as the baseline year, the employment effects
increase to roughly 3 percentage points in the period 2-to-4 years after set-asides adoption.

                                                          24
employment results for only the adoption year and the year after since the effect magnitudes are similar in

the later years and for brevity. Panel B shows the employment effects for each post-program year.

Column 1 contains the results from our primary sample of 25 MSAs, which can be compared to column

2c in Table 4. To this sample we cumulatively added: three MSAs that we are confident did not have

programs (column 2); four MSAs with no evidence of a program, though this could not be confirmed

(column 3); five MSAs with conflicting program dates across sources, so we assigned the dates from

court cases or city records (column 4). The largest sample contains 38 out of the 44 MSAs identified in

the CPS. 24 In column 5, we drop the four cities that initiated programs either before or after the 1979 to

1989 sample period (e.g., Washington, D.C., New York City) from the original 25-MSA sample.

         In four of the five samples, the self-employment effect ranges from 3 to 3.5 percentage points. It

falls to 2.2 points in the sample that includes MSAs with disagreement in their program dates, which is

perhaps to be expected given the potential error in these dates. The employment effects are also similar

across the samples. In four of the five samples, the black-white employment gap narrows by 3.9 to 5.5

points in years 2-to-4 after program initiation. The effects in the sample that includes the most MSAs are

again smaller in magnitude (2.8-3.2 points). 25

         As noted above, the self-employment effects are plausible in magnitude and insensitive to

controlling for pre-program trends. The employment effects fall in magnitude if pre-program trends are

ignored (see footnote 23). To gauge the plausibility of the employment effect sizes, we presume that

while the downward trend in black employment would have continued in the absence of set-asides, it

would have stopped within three to four years. In Tables 4 and A3, this puts the black employment gain

at roughly 4 to 4.5 percentage points, while the self-employment gain is 3 to 3.3 points. This implies that




24
   The remaining six cities either have several conflicting dates or conflicting dates and no information from a court
case or city record. For the MSAs without programs, we assigned 1979 to be most negative event year (-13).
25
   We also examined the sensitivity of the results to central city representation within MSAs. The results are
unchanged in specifications that include only central city observations and in specifications where observations are
weighted by the percentage of the MSA sample residing in the central city area.

                                                          25
in aggregate the new black employers hired four black men for every white who otherwise would not

have been employed. 26

         These magnitudes seem plausible as: i) the non-employment rate of black men in the 25-MSA

sample was 32 percent before the programs; and ii) we find below that the aggregate employment effects

are small – i.e., since the 25-MSA sample is 15-percent black, the gain in the black employment rate

coincided with a small decrease in the white rate. Also, the Characteristics of Business Owners (CBO)

survey shows that new black business owners were vastly more likely to hire blacks than whites (U.S.

Census Bureau 1997). For example, two-thirds of black-owned businesses with employees had

workforces that were over 90 percent minority. Finally, from the information on set-aside amounts in

Atlanta and Washington, D.C., we can calculate the contract dollars awarded for each new job created

using an employment effect of 4.5 percentage points. These figures are $2,500 and $15,700 in city

contracts per new job created in Atlanta and Washington, D.C., respectively. In 1982, the average payroll

per employee in black-owned firms was $7,812 (U.S. Census Bureau 1985).


Industry Results

         We next apply the event study framework to examine how the estimated effects differ by

industrial sector. If the programs are the cause, there should be greater gains in black self-employment

and employment in the industries that are most affected by city government contracts. Figure 4 displays
the racial gaps ( θ t − s ) in self-employment (Panel A) and employment (Panel B) from estimating equation

(2) separately for the least and most affected industries. The analysis is based on the 25-MSA sample and

includes the entire range of event years, though the plotted effects are for the period eight years before

and after program initiation. 27 The regressions include race-by-year effects, MSA effects and unrestricted

education and age indicators. Recall that the most affected industries are dominated by construction,

professional services, transportation, business services, repair services and retail trade.

26
   This calculation assumes that 25 percent of the newly self-employed blacks were unemployed before. This would
be true if, for example, the estimated black employment gain in the year of program initiation was driven by men
who were not employed and became self-employed in response to the program.
27
   Eight years before (after) initiation is 1979 (1989) for set-asides started in 1987 (1981). Outcomes are indicators
equal to one if the person is self-employed (or employed) in more affected (or less affected) industries.

                                                         26
        In Panel A, nearly all of the post-program gains in black self-employment are in the most affected

industries. In this sector, there is no trend in the racial gap before adoption and an immediate decrease in

the gap of 2-2.5 percentage points after. In the less affected sector, there is little trend in the gap before

adoption and a small reduction after. After set-asides initiation, the self-employment gap in the more

affected sector converges to the smaller gap in the less affected sector.

        In Panel B, the majority of post-program gains in black employment also are in the most affected

sector. The employment gap widened in both sectors preceding program initiation, but the black losses

are noticeably larger in the less affected sector. If set-asides were an endogenous response to declining

black employment, these losses were mostly occurring in the industries least affected by city contracts. In

the less affected sector, the black losses continue for two years after program adoption. By contrast, in

the most affected industries black employment rises by three or more percentage points in the period 1-to-

4 years after set-asides. At the same time the racial gap in less affected industries stabilizes and even

narrows somewhat. This suggests that the black gains in the more affected sector are driven by those who

would have been unemployed in the programs’ absence and not simply by a reallocation of employed

blacks from the least to most affected sectors. On net, the employment gap in the more affected sector

converges to the smaller gap in the less affected sector after set-asides.

        The patterns suggest: i) the finding of a black employment loss in less affected industries in Table

3B is due to trends that preceded set-asides; ii) it is appropriate to control for pre-program trends since

they are driven mostly by employment changes in the least affected sector; and iii) set-asides allowed

blacks who lost jobs in the less affected sector to find employment in the more affected sector, where

there was significant growth in black-owned businesses.

        Table 5 presents the “detrended” DD results from estimating equation (3) for self-employment

(Panel A) and employment (Panel B) in the more affected (columns 1a-1e) and less affected (columns 2a-

2e) sectors. We focus on the 25-MSA sample, and, as in Table 4, we include the event period from eight

years before to seven years after program initiation. The post-program effect is based on grouping years




                                                       27
1-to-4 after program adoption – an appropriate simplification given the patterns in Figure 4 – and the pre-

program trend is again based on the eight years preceding the program. 28

           For self-employment, the post-program black gains occur entirely in the most affected sector,

with the racial gap narrowing by 50 percent (2.5-2.7 percentage points). The estimates are insensitive to

the controls, including the addition of race-specific MSA effects and race-specific time trends that vary

across MSAs (columns c and e). There is little change in white self-employment rates in either sector, so

the relative within-sector change is driven by black gains and not white losses. The evidence that set-

asides increased the relative self-employment of black men is decisive, and these estimates are very

similar to the DDD estimates in Table 3A.

           The evidence on employment in the most affected sector is similarly robust. The black-white gap

narrowed by four percentage points after set-asides, and this effect is insensitive to including race-specific

time trends that vary by MSA, as well as the other controls. These gains coincided with white losses, as

the white employment effects are negative, though not statistically significant. In the less affected sector,

the employment effects depend on the specification. In columns 2a, b and d there are no employment

losses for blacks once one adjusts for the pre-program trends. However, if race-by-MSA fixed effects and

race-by-MSA time trends are included, the estimated black employment losses become significant and

similar in magnitude to the DDD estimates in Table 3B.

           It appears that there are complex, city-specific employment changes for blacks in less affected

industries (e.g., manufacturing and government) that coincide with set-asides’ adoption. Some of the

black gains in the more affected sector may have come from those who were previously in less affected

industries. In estimating the overall black employment effects, it is valid to control for pre-program

trends if the blacks previously in the less affected sector would have been unemployed without set-asides,

but instead found jobs in the more affected sector due to the increase in black-owned enterprises.

           We probed the robustness of these results to ignoring pre-program trends (Table A4) and

reducing the number of years used to estimate the pre-program trends (Table A5). Table A4 presents


28
     Separate indicators and interactions are included for event years 0, +5, +6, +7.

                                                             28
estimates based on contrasting the periods 1-to-4 years before and after program initiation without

adjusting for pre-existing trends (i.e., DD estimates), but using the event study data. In the more affected

sector the estimates are similar to those in Table 5, with black self-employment (employment) increasing

by 2.8 (3.5-3.9) percentage points. Thus, controlling for pre-program trends has little effect on the

estimates in the most affected sector. In the less affected sector, the black self-employment effects are

also similar to those in Table 5. The black employment effects, however, are negative and economically

large, though not statistically significant; adjusting for pre-program trends impacts the black employment

results in the less affected sector. 29

         In Table A5 the pre-program trend begins four years before set-asides to examine the sensitivity

of the length of the pre-program period, and the post-program effect is for years 1 to 3 after set-asides to

examine sensitivity to the grouping of post-program years. 30 The results are similar to those in Table 5 for

both industrial sectors. In summary, the estimates in Tables 4 and 5 (and A3 and A4) are similar to those

in Table 3 with the exception that controlling for pre-program trends leads to net positive employment

gains for blacks. This is because the black employment losses in the least affected industries after set-

asides were just a continuation of pre-existing trends.


Black Gains by Skill Group and Central City Residence

         Black youth unemployment reached crisis levels in the 1980s, especially in urban neighborhoods

(Freeman and Holzer 1986). One goal of set-aside programs was to increase the number of black

employers in central city areas in order to reduce joblessness among urban black men. We examine how

the black gains from set-asides vary by skill group and central city residence using the DDD equations

and samples underlying Table 3 – as we have shown, DDD seems appropriate for each outcome except

for employment in the least affected sector. The outcome variables are indicators equal to one if the

person is self-employed (or employed) and in the group of interest.




29
   The DD estimates [t-ratio] of the employment effects across all industries (first two specifications in Table A4)
are: i) 1.68 [1.59], 1.36 [1.15] in the 25-MSA sample; and ii) 2.31 [1.64], 1.90 [1.14] in the 17-MSA sample.
30
   In the main specifications, the pre-program trend is estimated with 8 years prior to program implementation.

                                                          29
        Tables 6A and B respectively show the DDD estimates for self-employment and employment in

the most affected sector, for the 17- and 25-MSA samples. Each set of columns relates to different “skill”

categories: i) at least 12 years of completed education and at least 30 years of age (older-skilled); ii) 12-

or-more years of education and 20-to-29 years-old (young-skilled); iii) less than 12 years of education and

20-to-29 years-old (young-unskilled); and iv) below 12 years of education and 30-or-older (older-

unskilled). The specifications are the same as those in columns c and d of Table 3.

        In Table 6A the vast majority of the black self-employment gains in more affected industries are

for the older-skilled, with the remainder accruing to the young-skilled. Among white men, there are

significant self-employment losses for the older-skilled and no changes for any other group. The self-

employment gains among better-educated black men (young and older) apparently came at the expense of

losses for older, well-educated whites. In the control cities, there are no before-and-after changes in self-

employment for either white or black men in any skill group. This supports the interpretation that set-

asides caused a reallocation of self-employment between better-educated whites and blacks.

        Table 6B presents the employment results in the most affected sector by skill group. Virtually all

of the black employment gains are for the young-skilled. This evidence seems decisive since, in this skill

group, there are no before-and-after changes for whites in the program cities or for either race in the

control cities – i.e., the entire, highly significant, DDD effect is driven by increased hiring of young-

skilled blacks in program cities. However, the gains among less-educated blacks in their twenties – an

important focus of the interventions – are small; the changes in program cities are statistically similar to

the marginally significant gains in the control cities. There is no evidence of a reallocation of

employment between whites and blacks within the most affected sector.

        Table 7 contains the DDD estimates in the most affected industries disaggregated by whether the

person resides in the MSA’s central city area or not. We show the results for the skill groups that

dominate the black gains in Table 6 (for the specification in the b columns). For self-employment

(columns 1a to 2b), the majority of the black gains among the older-skilled are for men who live outside

of the central city, while most of the gains for the young-skilled are for central city residents. The white

self-employment losses for the older-skilled are driven by those residing outside of the central city. Keep

                                                      30
in mind, though, that the residence of the self-employed may not match where the business is located,

particularly for the older self-employed.

        For young-skilled employment (columns 3a, b), most of the gains are for black men who reside in

the central city. For self-employment and employment, there are no differences in the estimated effects

by central city status in any other skill group (results available from the authors). Set-asides appear to

have mostly benefitted the self-employment of older-skilled black men living outside the central city and

the (self-employment and) employment prospects of better-educated blacks in their twenties living in the

central city. The implication is that the new black-owned businesses in the most affected industries hired

young, educated blacks residing in the central city.

        To better understand the black employment losses occurring in the least affected industries, Table

8 presents the DDD employment estimates by skill group and central city residence in this sector. For the

most part, the black employment losses are evenly distributed by age and education (columns 1a-1d) and

largest in magnitude for the older-skilled. Columns 2a and 2b show, however, that there were large

employment losses for blacks living in the central city area, and columns 3a-3d show that these losses

were concentrated among the better-educated, both young and older.

        One interpretation of these results is that set-asides simply shifted the employment of young-

skilled blacks from the least affected to the most affected industries, as the gains and losses involve

central city residents. Two patterns, though, imply that this is not the case: i) in the less affected sector

there were large employment losses for older-skilled blacks in the central city, but no corresponding gains

for this group in the more affected sector; and ii) in the less affected sector, there were large losses for

better-educated, central-city blacks in the years before set-asides’ adoption. We estimated DDD models

of the “pre-program” changes (between 1979-1981 and 1983-1985) for the 1985 program cities and the

MSAs that never had a program or did not adopt one until after the 1980s. Black employment in the least

affected sector declined by four percentage points more in the program cities; and the entire loss occurred

among the better-educated, with two-thirds of it going to black men in their twenties.

        Set-asides were adopted during a period of falling, local labor demand in manufacturing and the

public sector. These shocks disproportionately affected black men with at least a high school degree or its

                                                       31
equivalent. 31 A question we cannot answer is what set-asides’ impacts would have been if government

and manufacturing employment had not fallen. Another key question is whether the better-educated,

young blacks in the central city would have found employment in the absence of set-asides (and the

resulting growth of black-owned businesses in the most affected sector) or whether their job losses in the

least affected sector would have continued. If one believes the latter counterfactual, then it is appropriate

to control for pre-program trends in estimating the effects on overall black employment. If not, then, at a

minimum, set-asides led to an across-industry shift in the employment of young, better-educated blacks

toward sectors in which black self-employment rates increased.


Aggregate Self-Employment and Employment

         The evidence suggests that city set-asides led to a reallocation of self-employment from white to

black men. Black self-employment gains coincided with white losses, particularly in the most affected

industries (Table 3A) and among the older-skilled (Table 6A). The evidence on employment reallocation

is much weaker, though there may have been small losses for whites in the more affected sector (Tables 5

and A4). Set-asides may have caused a substitution of black-owned for white-owned businesses that were

previously awarded city contracts. Conversely, if the black firms winning contracts were less efficient

than the previous awardees, then the total number of businesses could increase as more would be needed

to complete the government-financed projects. We provide suggestive evidence on these questions of

substitution and efficiency by examining the city-wide impacts of set-asides.

         We estimate the aggregate effects on self-employment and employment using equations similar

to (2) and (3), but without race interactions and adjusted only for MSA fixed effects. Figure 5 plots the

MSA-level, event-year effects for self-employment and employment and their standard error bands.

Panel A shows that self-employment is modestly higher one-year after program adoption but then reverts

to pre-program levels in event years 2-to-4. Panel B shows the self-employment effects for the most and

31
  Figure A1 presents event-study plots of the racial gaps in employment in the least affected industries and in
manufacturing and government, which account for 44 and 22 percent of all black employment in the least affected
sector. As was discussed, there were large black employment losses in the least affected sector before program
adoption, and these losses continued for two years after adoption. Nearly all of this is driven by black losses in the
public sector and manufacturing, with government employment staying permanently lower.

                                                          32
least affected industries. Self-employment rates in the most affected sector increased slightly in the post-

program period (relative to the pre-program trend), but the magnitudes are small and statistically

insignificant.

        In Panel A, MSA-wide employment increased after program initiation; employment rates are

significantly higher 2-to-4 years after set-asides. However, since the reversal in the pre-program trend

begins a year before the programs, it is unclear whether the post-program aggregate gains are strictly due

to set-asides. Panel C shows overall employment separately for the most and least affected industries. In

the least affected sector, employment fell sharply in the years preceding set-asides and continued to fall

after, though at a slightly slower rate. By contrast, employment is significantly higher in the most

affected sector after set-asides, consistent with the possibility that the programs increased aggregate

employment. But again the gains appear to start a year before program initiation, making it difficult to

attribute them solely, or even primarily, to set-asides.

        Set-asides seemed to have had no impact on city-wide self-employment and instead affected the

racial composition of business owners. This is sensible as city records indicate that set-asides changed

the share of city contracts awarded to minorities but not the total amount of procurement outlays

(MBELDEF 1988). The evidence is inconsistent with the view that set-asides were grossly inefficient – if

contracts went to less-productive black-owned businesses, cities would need to compensate by hiring

more firms to complete the projects. Further contradicting this view, data from the Statistical Abstracts of

the United States show that total city expenditures did not increase after set-asides (results available from

authors). 32 The fact that overall employment increased also suggests that the new black business owners

were no less productive than the whites they replaced, and that the (self-reported) black self-employment

gains were not driven by “fronts” created to attract set-aside dollars (e.g., firms fraudulently changing the

owner’s identity).




32
  We used the annual publications of the Statistical Abstracts of the United States (1978, …, 1981, 1982-83, …,
1992-93) to examine city-level, general expenditures per-capita between the 1976 and 1990 fiscal years.

                                                        33
        Before concluding, we note that we found no evidence of other policy changes that coincided

with the staggered timing of city set-aside programs. There were no conflating changes in important

federal programs, such as unemployment insurance and welfare, and a detailed analysis of U.S. Census

Bureau (2008) annual budget data for each city in our sample showed no significant changes in city

expenditures. Kerr and Nanda (2009) find that the deregulation of branch banking led to significant

growth in both entrepreneurship and business failures among new ventures. However, the timing of these

state-level deregulations do not match that of city-level set asides. 33 We also examined whether

nonrandom movement of blacks to the cities that created set-aside programs potentially contaminate our

results. However, we found no program effects when we estimated equations (2) and (3) using the total

black population as the dependent variable. The large and significant estimated effects of set-aside

programs on black self-employment do not appear to be driven by confounding factors such as migration,

other policy changes, or economic trends.



VII. Conclusion

        This study quantified the impact of city set-aside programs – affirmative action policies that are

among the most significant, racially-based interventions since the 1960s. We construct a new database of

program dates that enables a more comprehensive and reliable analysis than previously possible. We find

that set-asides had a large and significant impact on African-American business ownership during the

1980s, with the black-white self-employment gap falling by three percentage points. These gains were

realized entirely in the industries targeted by set-asides and correspond with other information on the

growth in, and the set-aside amounts awarded to, black-owned businesses. The better-educated were the

primary beneficiaries, and the programs appear to have reallocated self-employment from white to black

men. There is no evidence that the new, black businesses were less productive than the white-owned

businesses that were replaced.



33
  For example, intrastate branch deregulation in Washington, D.C. and California occurred before 1970 and in 1976
for New York. Interstate deregulation occurred in 1985, 1987 and 1982, respectively. None of these years are close
to the set-asides dates for any of the cities in these states.

                                                       34
        Consistent with black-owned firms hiring a disproportionate number of blacks, the racial gap in

employment fell roughly four percentage points after set-asides. These results, however, are sensitive to

beliefs about the continuation of pre-existing trends, as the programs were preceded by several years of

declining employment in the industries that did not benefit from the programs (e.g., manufacturing and

the public sector). Black employment rates in the sector most affected by set-asides are more stable in the

pre-program period. The effects in the most affected sector imply that set-aside programs had larger

impacts on black employment than affirmative action programs that explicitly set goals for minority

hiring in firms receiving federal contracts (as summarized in Leonard 1990).

        Nationally, the relative self-employment rate of blacks declined in the 1970s but rebounded in the

1980s (Fairlie and Meyer 2000). Our estimates imply that in the absence of city set-aside programs, the

black self-employment rate would have continued to decline relative to the white rate during the 1980s.

The finding of increased black employment provides support for the view that growth in black businesses

may reduce black unemployment more than general economic development.

        The results are also consistent with the existence of entry constraints that suppress black self-

employment. If liquidity constraints are especially binding for blacks – perhaps due to low levels of

wealth and lending discrimination – then set-aside programs can lead to a large increase in the number of

black-owned businesses. Black entrepreneurs facing financing constraints may have been able to more

easily borrow against the accounts receivable from government contracts or use the initial receipt of city

contracts to grow to a sustainable size. City set-asides may have also diminished other barriers arising

from consumer, supplier, and prime contractor discrimination.

        There are several caveats to our conclusions and areas that merit further research. First, more

evidence is needed on the “first-stage” of set-aside programs – e.g., number and amounts of contract

awards. Similarly, an ideal analysis would exploit the variation across programs in goals, enforcement,

and contract amounts reserved for minority-owned businesses. This study implicitly treated the city

programs as being homogeneous. Also, we only estimated the programs’ benefits (in terms of black self-

employment and employment) and provided no new evidence on their costs. While we found suggestive

evidence of minimal efficiency loss, future work should investigate the actual costs of projects. For

                                                     35
California highway contracts, Marion (2009) finds that minority entrepreneurs were no less productive

than white counterparts in the same location, but that those located in high minority areas faced higher

costs. Future analysis should also document the characteristics of the black businesses that city set-asides

facilitated – for example, revenue, size, survival rates, and employee information.

        As with the recessions of the late 1970s and early 1980s, the “Great Recession” has highlighted

questions over government spending, small business development and unemployment. Our findings

imply that government contracts can have real impacts on the number of business owners and

employment. Of great policy interest is the relative effectiveness of such demand-side stimulus compared

to supply-side policies, such as lower tax and interest rates, in increasing employment during a downturn.

With specific respect to black employment, the impact of different policies further depends on the relative

importance of place (urban “enterprise zones”) and race (set-asides) in business formation and hiring

decisions (e.g., Hellerstein, Neumark and McInerney 2008). Finally, as underscored in some recent

contexts (rebuilding after Hurricane Katrina, Iraq reconstruction), the ex-ante award of government

contracts may be neither competitive nor efficient. Our study indicates that how these contracts are

allocated could have significant consequences for both equity and local economic development.




                                                    36
                                              References

Avery, Robert B., Raphael W. Bostic, and Katherine A. Samolyk. 1998. “The Role of Personal Wealth in
   Small Business Finance,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 22: 1019-1061.

Bates, Timothy. 1993. Banking on Black Enterprise. Washington, D.C.: Joint Center for Political and
    Economic Studies.

Bates, Timothy. 1997. Race, Self-Employment & Upward Mobility: An Illusive American Dream,
    Washington, D.C.: Woodrow Wilson Center Press and Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press.

Bates, Timothy. 1985. “Impact of Preferential Procurement Policies on Minority-Owned Businesses,”
    Review of Black Political Economy, Summer: 51-65.

Bates, Timothy, and Magnus Lofstrom. 2008. “African Americans’ Pursuit of Self-Employment,” Public
    Policy Institute of California Working Paper.

Bates, Timothy, and Darrell Williams. 1996. “Do Preferential Procurement Programs Benefit Minority
    Business?” American Economic Review, 86(2): 294-97.

Bates, Timothy, and Darrell Williams. 1995. “Preferential Procurement Programs and Minority-Owned
    Businesses,” Journal of Urban Affairs, 17(1): 1-17.

Bates, Timothy, and Darrell L. Williams. 1993. “Racial Politics: Does It Pay?” Social Science Quarterly,
    74(3): 507-22.

Bates, Timothy and David Howell. 1997. “The Declining Status of African American Males in the New
    York City Construction Market,” in Race, Markets, and Social Outcomes, eds. Patrick Mason and
    Rhonda Williams (Boston: Kluwer).

Blanchard, Lloyd A., Bo Zhao, and John Yinger. 2008. “Do Lenders Discriminate Against Minority and
   Woman Entrepreneurs?” Journal of Urban Economics, 63 (2): 467-497.

Blanchflower, David, Phillip Levine and David Zimmerman. 2003. “Discrimination in the Small Business
   Credit Market,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4): 930-943.

Blanchflower, D.G. and J. Wainwright (2005), “An analysis of the impact of affirmative action programs
   on self-employment in the construction industry,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
   Paper # 11793.

Borjas, George J. 1999. “The Wage Structure and Self-Selection into Self-Employment,” Harvard
   University working paper.

Borjas, George, and Steven Bronars. 1989. “Consumer Discrimination and Self-Employment,” Journal of
   Political Economy, 97: 581-605.

Boston, Thomas D. 1998. “Trends in Minority-Owned Businesses,” prepared for the National Research
   Council Conference on Racial Trends in the United States, Georgia Tech Working Paper.

Boston, Thomas D. 1999. Affirmative Action and Black Entrepreneurship, New York: Routeldge.


                                                   37
Boston, Thomas D. 2006. “The Role of Black-owned Businesses in Black Community Development” ed.
   Paul Ong, Jobs and Economic Development in Minority Communities: Realities, Challenges, and
   Innovation. Temple University Press

Boston, Thomas D., and Linje R. Boston. 2006. “Secrets of Gazelles: The Differences between High
   Growth and Low Growth Business Owned by African American Entrepreneurs,” Annals of the
   American Academy of Political and Social Science, forthcoming.

Bradford, William D. 2003. “The Wealth Dynamics of Entrepreneurship for Black and White Families in
   the U.S.,” Review of Income and Wealth, 49(1): 89-116.

Bucks, Brian K., Arthur B. Kennickell, and Kevin B.Moore. 2006. “Recent Changes in U.S. Family
   Finances: Evidence from the 2001 and 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances,” Federal Reserve
   Bulletin, Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Cavalluzzo, Ken and John Wolken. 2005. “Small Business Loan Turndowns, Personal Wealth and
   Discrimination.” Journal of Business, 78(6): 2153-2177.

Cavalluzzo, K., L. Cavalluzzo, and J. Wolken. 2002. “Competition, small business financing, and
   discrimination: Evidence from a new survey.” Journal of Business. 75 (October): 641-680.

Enchautegui, Maria E., Michael Fix, Pamela Loprest, Sarah von der Lippe, and Douglas Wissoker. 1996.
   Do Minority-Owned Businesses Get a Fair Share of Government Contracts. Washington, D.C.: Urban
   Institute.

Fairlie, Robert W. 1999. “The Absence of the African-American Owned Business: An Analysis of the
    Dynamics of Self-Employment,” Journal of Labor Economics, 17(1): 80-108.

Fairlie, R. and J. Marion. 2008. “Affirmative Action Programs and Business Ownership among
    Minorities and Women,” UCSC Working Paper.

Fairlie, Robert W., and Bruce D. Meyer. 2000. “Trends in Self-Employment among White and Black
    Men during the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Human Resources, 35(4): 643-669.

Fairlie, Robert W., and Alicia M. Robb. 2007. “Why are Black-Owned Businesses Less Successful than
    White-Owned Businesses: The Role of Families, Inheritances, and Business Human Capital,” Journal
    of Labor Economics, 25(2): 289-323.

Fairlie, Robert W., and Alicia M. Robb. 2008. Race and Entrepreneurial Success: Black, Asian, and
    White-Owned Businesses in the United States. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Feagin, J.R. and N. Imani. 1994. “Racial Barriers to African American Entrepreneurship: An Exploratory
   Study,” Social Problems, 41 (November): 562-584.

Freeman, Richard B and Harry J. Holzer, eds. 1986. The Black Youth Employment Crisis. Chicago, IL:
    The University of Chicago Press.

Hamilton B. 2000. “Does Entrepreneurship Pay? An Empirical Analysis of the Returns to Self-
   Employment.” Journal of Political Economy, 108(3): 604-631.



                                                  38
Hellerstein, Judith, David Neumark, and Melissa McInerney. 2008. “Spatial Mismatch or Racial
    Mismatch?” Journal of Urban Economics, 64(2): 464-479.

Hout, Michael, and Harvey S. Rosen. 2000. “Self-Employment, Family Background, and Race,” Journal
   of Human Resources, 35(4): 670-692.

Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies. 1994. Assessment of Minority Business Development
    Programs, Report to the U.S. Department of Commerce Minority Business Development Agency,
    Washington, D.C.

Kawaguchi, Daiji. 2005. “Negative Self Selection into Self-Employment among African Americans,”
   B.E. Journals in Economic Analysis & Policy, Topics, 5(1): Article 9, 1-25.

Kerr, William R. and Ramana Nanda. 2009. “Democratizing Entry: Banking Deregulations, Financing
   Constraints, and Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Financial Economics, 94: 124-149.

Koellinger, P., and M. Minniti. 2006. “Not for Lack of Trying: American Entrepreneurship in Black and
   White,” Small Business Economics, 27: 59–79.

Leonard, Jonathan S. 1990. “The Impact of Affirmative Action Regulation and Equal Employment Law
   on Black Employment,” Journal of Economics Perspectives, 4(4): 47-63.

Marion, Justin. 2009. “How Costly is Affirmative Action? Government Contracting and California's
   Proposition 209,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(3): 503–522.

Meyer, B.D. 1990. “Why are there So Few Black Entrepreneurs?” NBER Working Paper #3537

Minority Business Enterprise Legal Defense and Education Fund. 1988. Report on the Minority Business
   Enterprise Programs of State and Local Governments.

Myers, Samuel L., Jr. 1997. “Minority Business Set-Asides,” Entry in Encyclopedia of African-
   American Business History. Greenwood Press.

Myers, Samuel L. Jr., and Tsze Chan. 1996. “Who Benefits from Minority Business Set-Asides? The
   Case of New Jersey,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 15(2): 202-26.

Parker, Simon C. 2004. The Economics of Self-Employment and Entrepreneurship. Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press.

Rice, Mitchell F. 1991. “Government Set-Asides, Minority Business Enterprises, and the Supreme
    Court,” Public Administration Review, 51(2): 114-22.

U.S. Census Bureau. 1997. 1992 Economic Census: Characteristics of Business Owners. Washington,
   D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. Census Bureau. 1985. Survey of Minority-Owned Business Enterprises: Black, 1982. U.S.
   Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.

U.S. Census Bureau. 2006. Characteristics of Businesses: 2002: 2002 Economic Census, Survey of
   Business Owners Company Statistics Series, Washington, D.C.: USGPO.


                                                  39
U.S. Census Bureau 2008. City Government Finances.

Walstad, William B. and Marilyn L. Kourilsky. 1998. “Entrepreneurial Attitudes and Knowledge of Black
   Youth,” Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 23(2): 5-18.




                                                 40
                             Table 1: Summary statistics for black and white men aged 20-64 in 1979 to 1989 CPS-ORG data

                                      Entire United States                MSA identified in CPS                   25-MSA sample                        17-MSA sample
                                      Black         White                 Black          White                 Black        White                   Black        White
                                       (1a)          (1b)                  (2a)           (2b)                  (3a)        (3b)                     (4a)        (4b)
A. All men
 Age                                   37.4             39.3                37.4            39.3                37.5             39.3                37.6             39.4
 Under 30 years old (%)                33.9             27.8                33.7            28.0                33.7             28.0                33.5             27.6
 Education                             11.7             13.0                12.1            13.5                12.0             13.5                12.1             13.6
 HS grad or more (%)                   67.4             83.0                71.9            86.9                71.4             87.0                71.4             87.1
 Unemployed (%)                       10.91             4.66               11.11            4.24               11.25             4.24               11.57             4.25
 Out of the labor force (%)           16.46             9.88               16.76            9.06               17.43             9.35               18.20             9.51
 Self-employed (%)                     4.64            14.98                4.83           13.56                4.69            13.17                4.67            13.02
 Central city resident (%)             51.2             19.6                70.5            28.4                73.1             29.4                74.2             29.5

  Number of observations             111,142        1,115,886             56,433          341,808              39,520          214,342             33,689          171,455


B. Self-employed men
 Age                                   42.9            43.1                42.3             42.9                42.1             42.8                42.2            42.9
 Under 30 years old (%)                13.1            13.6                13.7             13.6                14.5             13.7                13.8            13.5
 Education                             12.0            13.4                12.5             14.1                12.5             14.1                12.6            14.1
 HS grad or more (%)                   67.1            84.3                74.3             88.9                74.1             88.7                75.0            89.0
 Incorporated (%)                      13.2            27.0                16.1             34.9                16.0             34.7                16.8            35.0
 Central city resident (%)             48.3            16.5                65.6             26.8                67.5             27.9                68.0            27.9

  Number of observations              5,321          177,348               2,805           46,277              1,927           28,295               1,653           22,392

Notes: Data come from the 1979 to 1989 Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups files of the Current Population Survey, and are limited to observations that are aged 20-64; are black
or non-Hispanic white men; and have one or more years of potential experience (age – education – 6). The statistics are weighted by the CPS sample weights. The samples
underlying each set of columns are explained in the text and in the Appendix table.
             Table 2: Distribution of self-employment across industries and other characteristics,
                               men aged 20-64 in 1979 to 1989 CPS-ORG data

                                MSA identified in CPS                 25-MSA sample                      17-MSA sample
                                 Black        White                 Black      White                   Black      White
                                  (1a)          (1b)                 (2a)       (2b)                    (3a)       (3b)
A. More affected industries
Percent of all self-employment
 Construction                     20.33          18.35              18.49           18.08              18.33          17.11
 Professional services             8.73          16.40               8.55           16.88               9.02          17.40
 Transport, communicat,           11.37           3.92              12.61            4.02              12.41           3.91
   and utilities
 Business services                 7.77           6.81               8.61            6.88               7.79           7.11
 Repair services                   9.88           5.51               9.87            5.43              10.09           5.39
 Retail trade                     13.14          14.30              14.06           14.55              14.74          14.96

Self-employed traits
  Ratio to population (%)          3.44           8.85               3.38            8.67              3.38            8.58
  Under 30 years old (%)           13.3           14.3               14.2            14.4              13.5            13.8
  HS grad or more (%)              73.4           88.0               73.8            87.9              73.8            88.2
  Central city reside (%)          66.8           27.1               69.6            28.4              70.3            28.5

Employed traits
 Ratio to population (%)           40.0           44.8               40.0            45.1              39.4            44.7
 Under 30 years old (%)            33.3           30.1               32.7            30.0              32.3            29.3
 HS grad or more (%)               77.8           88.5               77.6            88.7              78.1            89.0
 Central city reside (%)           67.8           28.7               70.4            30.1              70.6            30.1


B. Less affected industries
Percent of all self-employment
 Finance, insurance, and           4.27           7.49               3.50            7.38              3.67            7.43
    real estate
 Wholesale trade                   3.14           6.91               2.88            6.80              2.78            6.81
 Personal services                 5.04           2.88               5.17            2.92              5.18            2.99
 Entertainment and HH              5.23           3.08               5.30            3.16              5.80            3.20
    services
 Manufacturing                     2.29           7.18               2.42            6.86              2.56            6.99
 Agriculture                       4.10           3.64               3.68            3.56              2.72            3.29
 Mining, forest, fishery           0.18           0.55               0.18            0.45              0.22            0.34
 Public administration             0.00           0.03               0.00            0.04              0.00            0.06

Self-employed traits
  Ratio to population (%)          1.17           4.31               1.08            4.10              1.07            4.05
  Under 30 years old (%)           14.9           12.2               15.7            12.4              15.1            12.6
  HS grad or more (%)              80.0           92.0               78.7            91.6              82.5            91.7
  Central city reside (%)          61.1           25.8               60.7            26.5              59.9            26.2

Employed traits
 Ratio to population (%)           32.1           41.9               31.3            41.4              30.8            41.5
 Under 30 years old (%)            28.4           24.9               28.2            24.8              26.8            24.4
 HS grad or more (%)               77.3           89.5               76.5            89.5              76.7            89.5
 Central city reside (%)           66.8           26.2               69.5            26.7              70.9            26.7


Percent of self-employ             4.52           2.95               4.66            2.99              4.70            3.01
  w/ missing ind codes
Notes: See notes to Table 1. Data come from the 1979 to 1989 Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups files of the Current Population
Survey, and are limited to observations that are aged 20-64; are black or non-Hispanic white men; and have one or more years of
potential experience (age – education – 6). The statistics are weighted by the CPS sample weights.
                                        Table 3A: Change in self-employment rates before-and-after set-aside program initiation
                                                                     [absolute value of t-ratios]

                                          All industries                                     More affected industries                                 Less affected industries
                            (1a)         (1b)        (1c)          (1d)             (2a)        (2b)         (2c)           (2d)             (3a)        (3b)         (3c)           (3d)
A. 17-MSA sample
 Post-program effects
    B-W, treat-c      2.78***          3.06***       2.75***      2.84***          2.71***      2.93***      2.76***       2.80***           -0.05        0.01         -0.13         -0.07
                      [2.87]           [3.37]        [2.97]       [3.11]           [3.56]       [4.04]       [3.73]        [3.87]           [0.13]       [0.04]       [0.31]        [0.16]

    White, treat-c        -1.58***     -1.79***     -1.72***      -1.73***        -1.38***     -1.48***      -1.41***     -1.41***           -0.08        -0.17        -0.16         -0.16
                           [3.51]       [4.48]       [4.74]        [4.71]          [3.60]       [4.10]        [4.04]       [4.00]           [0.24]       [0.59]       [0.59]        [0.57]

    B-W, control           0.07         -0.12         -0.07       -0.08             0.11         0.06          0.07         0.06             -0.05       -0.19*        -0.15        -0.16*
                          [0.09]        [0.54]       [0.31]       [0.36]           [0.22]       [0.29]        [0.36]       [0.32]           [0.16]       [1.97]       [1.73]        [1.93]
    White, control         0.04          0.27          0.26        0.26             0.15         0.11          0.12         0.12             -0.08        0.20*        0.18*         0.17*
                          [0.05]        [1.11]       [1.07]       [1.05]           [0.31]       [0.64]        [0.70]       [0.69]           [0.27]       [1.94]       [1.89]        [1.88]

B. 25-MSA sample
 Post-program effects
    B-W, treat-c      3.32***          3.39***       3.13***      3.25***          2.82***      2.93***      2.82***       2.87***           0.36         0.33         0.19          0.27
                      [3.36]           [3.80]        [3.33]       [3.50]           [3.75]       [4.31]       [4.00]        [4.21]           [0.77]       [0.74]       [0.39]        [0.58]

    White, treat-c        -1.67***     -1.75***     -1.76***      -1.77***        -1.28***     -1.29***      -1.28***     -1.29***           -0.28        -0.34        -0.35         -0.35
                           [3.19]       [4.38]       [4.68]        [4.64]          [2.86]       [3.59]        [3.93]       [3.93]           [0.90]       [1.14]       [1.16]        [1.15]

    B-W, control           -0.17        -0.08         -0.04       -0.05             -0.09        0.04          0.03         0.02             -0.09        -0.13        -0.09         -0.11
                          [0.22]        [0.36]       [0.19]       [0.26]           [0.15]       [0.20]        [0.14]       [0.13]           [0.33]       [1.38]       [0.99]        [1.22]
    White, control          0.15         0.15          0.16        0.16              0.24        0.04          0.07         0.07             -0.08         0.15         0.13          0.12
                          [0.19]        [0.62]       [0.65]       [0.64]           [0.48]       [0.25]        [0.39]       [0.39]           [0.28]       [1.49]       [1.39]        [1.38]


Race-year FE’s               Y            Y            Y             Y               Y             Y            Y            Y                Y            Y             Y            Y
Race-MSA FE’s                             Y            Y             Y                             Y            Y            Y                             Y             Y            Y
Educ, age FE’s                                         Y             Y                                          Y            Y                                           Y            Y
Race-educ, race-                                                     Y                                                       Y                                                        Y
  age FE’s

Notes: Dependent variable is equal to one if person reports being self-employed and zero otherwise. Estimated effects are from a linear probability model. Probability effects derived from a
probit model are similar. There are two sets of before-and-after comparisons in the sample: i) cities with a set-aside program begun in 1982 compared to control cities who either had no
program, a program before 1979, or a program after 1985; and ii) cities with a set-aside program begun in 1985 compared to control cities who either had no program, a program before
1982, or a program after 1988. The sample is further limited to three years before and after program initiation – 1979 to 1985 (1982 to 1988) for the 1982 (1985) set-aside sample – and
excludes data from the program year. Estimated sampling errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and over-time clustering at the MSA level. Education and age controls are unrestricted
indicator variables. Results including unrestricted interactions between education and age are similar. Regressions are weighted by the CPS sample weights. The 17-MSA and 25-MSA
samples contain 141,286 and 154,454 observations, respectively. See Table 2 for the listing of industries in the “more affected” and “less affected” industry groups.
*** **
   , , and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
                                          Table 3B: Change in employment rates before-and-after set-aside program initiation
                                                                    [absolute value of t-ratios]

                                         All industries                                     More affected industries                           Less affected industries
                           (1a)         (1b)        (1c)           (1d)            (2a)        (2b)         (2c)            (2d)      (3a)        (3b)         (3c)        (3d)
A. 17-MSA sample
 Post-program effects
    B-W, treat-c       -0.12            0.13         -0.70        -1.00           3.28**       3.36***      3.28**          3.03**   -3.40**     -3.23**     -3.98***     -4.03***
                      [0.08]           [0.11]       [0.75]        [1.18]          [2.66]       [2.81]       [2.61]          [2.43]   [2.17]      [2.31]       [2.85]       [2.82]

    White, treat-c         0.04         0.29         0.64          0.64            0.18         0.30         0.48            0.46     -0.14       -0.01        0.16        0.18
                          [0.06]       [0.55]       [1.10]        [1.11]          [0.28]       [0.53]       [0.82]          [0.76]   [0.20]      [0.01]       [0.22]      [0.24]

    B-W, control           -1.68       -0.81         -0.62        -0.59            -0.70        -0.48       -0.49            -0.47    -0.99       -0.33        -0.13       -0.12
                          [1.22]       [1.29]       [1.37]        [1.35]          [0.93]       [0.88]       [0.91]          [0.89]   [0.99]      [0.58]       [0.26]      [0.25]
    White, control          1.42        0.17          0.16         0.17             0.62         0.06        0.13             0.14     0.80        0.12         0.03        0.03
                          [1.00]       [0.53]       [0.52]        [0.54]          [0.63]       [0.29]       [0.66]          [0.68]   [0.90]      [0.40]       [0.12]      [0.11]

B. 25-MSA sample
 Post-program effects
    B-W, treat-c       -0.10           -0.01         -0.60        -0.96           3.01**       2.92***      2.97**          2.63**    -3.11      -2.93**     -3.57**      -3.58**
                      [0.06]           [0.01]       [0.66]        [1.16]          [2.60]       [2.68]       [2.63]          [2.32]   [1.70]      [2.13]      [2.59]       [2.54]

    White, treat-c         0.24         0.45         0.69          0.69            -0.25        -0.15       -0.02            -0.04    0.50        0.61         0.71        0.73
                          [0.36]       [0.75]       [1.13]        [1.14]          [0.36]       [0.25]       [0.03]          [0.06]   [0.54]      [0.69]       [0.84]      [0.85]

    B-W, control           -1.73       -0.81         -0.66        -0.62            -0.86        -0.54       -0.59            -0.54    -0.87       -0.27        -0.07       -0.07
                          [1.34]       [1.41]       [1.51]        [1.49]          [1.14]       [0.99]       [1.04]          [1.00]   [0.68]      [0.48]       [0.12]      [0.14]
    White, control          1.25        0.22          0.18         0.18             0.76         0.11        0.18             0.19     0.49        0.11         0.00       -0.01
                          [1.01]       [0.69]       [0.62]        [0.63]          [0.77]       [0.53]       [0.83]          [0.85]   [0.42]      [0.42]       [0.00]      [0.03]


Race-year FE’s              Y             Y            Y            Y               Y            Y             Y              Y        Y           Y            Y            Y
Race-MSA FE’s                             Y            Y            Y                            Y             Y              Y                    Y            Y            Y
Educ, age FE’s                                         Y            Y                                          Y              Y                                 Y            Y
Race-educ, race-                                                    Y                                                         Y                                              Y
  age FE’s

Notes: See notes to Table 3A. Dependent variable is equal to one if the person reports being employed and zero otherwise.
*** **
   , , and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
  Table 4: Changes in black-white self-employment and employment rate gaps after set-aside initiation,
                                     relative to pre-program trends
                                       [absolute value of t-ratios]

                                            Self-employment                                          Employment
                                  (1a)            (1b)               (1c)                (2a)           (2b)                (2c)
A. 17-MSA sample
 Post-program B-W diffs
    Year 0                       2.62***          2.69***          2.58***               1.70             1.33              1.26
                                 [3.58]           [3.74]           [3.44]               [0.91]           [0.67]            [0.72]
     Years 1-2                   2.47**           2.72***          2.56**               3.83**           3.63**            3.45**
                                 [2.50]           [3.01]           [2.62]               [2.49]           [2.09]            [2.09]
     Years 3-4                   2.36**           2.76**           2.66**               6.62**           6.62**            6.33**
                                 [2.04]           [2.37]           [2.11]               [2.63]           [2.52]            [2.69]
     Years 5-7                   2.94**           3.55**           3.44**               8.37**           8.89**            8.40**
                                 [2.12]           [2.50]           [2.25]               [2.46]           [2.63]            [2.69]
  Pre-program
    B-W trend diff                0.077            -0.002           0.022              -0.889***        -0.863***        -0.855***
                                 [0.57]            [0.01]          [0.15]                [4.13]           [3.42]           [3.74]
     White trend                 -0.165            -0.120          -0.122                0.113            0.131            0.125
                                 [1.53]            [0.97]          [0.97]                [0.82]           [0.97]           [0.92]
    B-W difference              -6.94***          -5.54***                             -17.17***        -13.94***
                                 [7.63]            [6.60]                               [10.48]           [8.59]


B. 25-MSA sample
 Post-program B-W diffs
    Year 0                       3.14***          3.22***          3.19***               0.68             0.29              0.19
                                 [4.59]           [4.68]           [4.55]               [0.44]           [0.18]            [0.13]
     Years 1-2                   2.26**           2.53***          2.48***              2.94**           2.81**            2.61**
                                 [2.39]           [2.90]           [2.69]               [2.38]           [2.04]            [2.00]
     Years 3-4                   2.93***          3.33***          3.29***              4.70**           4.57**            4.32**
                                 [2.65]           [2.95]           [2.76]               [2.26]           [2.07]            [2.19]
     Years 5-7                   2.85**           3.46***          3.41**               5.89**           6.32**            5.97**
                                 [2.34]           [2.68]           [2.47]               [2.00]           [2.18]            [2.23]
  Pre-program
    B-W trend diff               0.081              0.006           0.018               -0.587**         -0.558**        -0.543**
                                 [0.64]            [0.04]          [0.14]                [2.32]           [2.08]          [2.17]
     White trend                -0.174*            -0.125          -0.127                0.110            0.130           0.125
                                 [1.79]            [1.14]          [1.13]                [0.91]           [1.08]          [1.03]
    B-W difference              -7.14***          -5.82***                             -15.57***        -12.42***
                                 [8.16]            [6.81]                                [8.90]           [7.24]


Race-year FE’s                      Y                Y                Y                    Y                Y                Y
MSA FE’s                            Y                Y                Y                    Y                Y                Y
Educ, age FE’s                                       Y                Y                                     Y                Y
Race-educ, race-age                                                   Y                                                      Y
  FE’s

Notes: Sample is limited to observations that are no more than eight years before and seven years after the initiation year of a
city’s set-aside program. Pre-program trend based on data one-to-eight years before program initiation. Estimated sampling
errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and over-time clustering at the MSA level. Regressions are weighted by the CPS
sample weights. The 17-MSA and 25-MSA samples contain 175,660 and 223,765 observations, respectively.
*** **
   , , and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
                       Table 5: Average change in self-employment and employment rates one-to-four years after program initiation,
                                                             relative to pre-program trends
                                                               [absolute value of t-ratios]

                                                    More affected industries                                                 Less affected industries
                                  (1a)           (1b)        (1c)          (1d)                    (1e)      (2a)        (2b)          (2c)          (2d)      (2e)
A. Self-employment
 Post-program effect (yrs 1-4)
    Black-white            2.47***             2.70***         2.72***         2.70***        2.68***        0.14        0.17         -0.30         0.13       -0.33
                           [3.06]              [3.62]          [2.78]          [3.50]         [2.69]        [0.28]      [0.34]       [0.55]        [0.26]     [0.61]

     White                       -0.51           -0.48          0.02            -0.49              0.02      -0.10       -0.09        -0.16         -0.09      -0.16
                                [1.02]          [0.97]         [0.04]          [0.97]             [0.04]    [0.47]      [0.40]       [0.68]        [0.41]     [0.67]
  Pre-program
    B-W trend diff              -0.048          -0.099                         -0.093                        0.113*      0.104                     0.111*
                                [0.45]          [0.95]                         [0.87]                        [1.69]      [1.58]                     [1.73]
     White trend               -0.129*          -0.100                         -0.103                      -0.101***   -0.090***                  -0.091***
                                [1.74]          [1.28]                         [1.30]                        [4.75]      [4.19]                     [4.14]
     B-W difference            -4.80***        -4.16***                                                     -2.16***    -1.43***
                                [6.04]          [5.48]                                                       [4.75]      [3.23]

B. Employment
 Post-program effect (yrs 1-4)
    Black-white            4.15**               4.27**         3.96**          4.02**             3.87**     -0.63       -0.86       -3.22**        -0.86     -3.20**
                           [2.27]               [2.13]         [2.19]          [2.12]             [2.15]    [0.41]      [0.57]       [2.21]        [0.57]     [2.24]

     White                       -1.31           -1.17          -1.06           -1.16              -1.08     0.46        0.71         0.98          0.72       0.99
                                [1.42]          [1.28]         [1.43]          [1.28]             [1.48]    [0.58]      [0.88]       [1.42]        [0.89]     [1.44]
  Pre-program
    B-W trend diff             -0.403*          -0.403                         -0.390                       -0.137      -0.110                     -0.104
                                [1.76]          [1.65]                         [1.54]                       [0.57]      [0.49]                     [0.45]
     White trend                -0.209          -0.173                         -0.171                        0.232       0.226                      0.222
                                [1.45]          [1.15]                         [1.17]                       [1.67]      [1.60]                     [1.55]
     B-W difference            -9.40***        -8.77***                                                    -6.08***     -3.58**
                                [5.49]          [5.63]                                                      [3.89]      [2.30]


Race-year FE’s                     Y              Y               Y               Y                 Y         Y           Y             Y            Y          Y
MSA FE’s                           Y              Y               Y               Y                 Y         Y           Y             Y            Y          Y
Educ, age FE’s                                    Y               Y               Y                 Y                     Y             Y            Y          Y
Race-educ, race-age                                                               Y                 Y                                                Y          Y
Race-MSA FE’s                                                     Y                                 Y                                   Y                       Y
Race-MSA trends                                                   Y                                 Y                                   Y                       Y
Notes: See notes to Table 4. Based on 25-MSA sample and contains 223,765 observations.
*** **
   , , and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
          Table 6A: Change in self-employment rates before-and-after set-aside program initiation, in more affected industries by skill group
                                                            [absolute value of t-ratios]

                                      Older, skilled                        Young, skilled           Young, unskilled    Older, unskilled
                                    Age 30+, Educ 12+                    Age 20-29, Educ 12+       Age 20-29, Educ<12   Age 30+, Educ<12
                                    (1a)           (1b)                   (2a)          (2b)        (3a)         (3b)   (4a)          (4b)
A. 17-MSA sample
 Post-program effects
    B-W, treat-control             2.06***          2.15***              0.47**           0.42**    -0.02       -0.03    0.25        0.26
                                   [4.50]           [4.84]               [2.28]           [2.24]   [0.22]      [0.27]   [1.09]      [1.20]

     White, treat-control          -1.32***         -1.31***              -0.01            -0.01    0.02        0.02     -0.10       -0.11
                                    [4.58]           [4.64]              [0.07]           [0.06]   [0.20]      [0.18]   [1.23]      [1.51]

     B-W, control                    -0.09            -0.09               0.07             0.07     -0.01       -0.01     0.10        0.09
                                    [0.55]           [0.54]              [0.74]           [0.84]   [0.32]      [0.45]   [1.40]      [1.29]
     White, control                   0.11             0.11               0.01             0.01      0.01        0.01    -0.01       -0.01
                                    [0.74]           [0.72]              [0.26]           [0.26]   [0.57]      [0.59]   [0.35]      [0.28]

B. 25-MSA sample
 Post-program effects
    B-W, treat-control             1.93***          2.02***              0.62**           0.58**    -0.05       -0.05    0.31        0.32
                                   [4.33]           [4.76]               [2.60]           [2.56]   [0.56]      [0.58]   [1.43]      [1.62]

     White, treat-control          -1.08***         -1.08***              -0.14            -0.13    0.03        0.03     -0.09       -0.11
                                    [3.70]           [3.76]              [0.80]           [0.79]   [0.31]      [0.29]   [1.01]      [1.27]

     B-W, control                    -0.09            -0.08               0.02             0.03     -0.01       -0.01     0.11        0.09
                                    [0.60]           [0.54]              [0.26]           [0.29]   [0.31]      [0.44]   [1.37]      [1.18]
     White, control                   0.04             0.04               0.04             0.04      0.02        0.02    -0.04       -0.03
                                    [0.28]           [0.25]              [0.81]           [0.82]   [1.00]      [1.01]   [0.99]      [0.91]


Race-year FE’s                        Y                Y                    Y                Y       Y           Y        Y           Y
Race-MSA FE’s                         Y                Y                    Y                Y       Y           Y        Y           Y
Educ, age FE’s                        Y                Y                    Y                Y       Y           Y        Y           Y
Race-educ, race-age                                    Y                                     Y                   Y                    Y

Notes: See notes to Table 3A.
*** **
   , , and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
             Table 6B: Change in employment rates before-and-after set-aside program initiation, in more affected industries by skill group
                                                            [absolute value of t-ratios]

                                      Older, skilled                        Young, skilled            Young, unskilled    Older, unskilled
                                    Age 30+, Educ 12+                    Age 20-29, Educ 12+        Age 20-29, Educ<12   Age 30+, Educ<12
                                    (1a)           (1b)                   (2a)          (2b)         (3a)         (3b)   (4a)          (4b)
A. 17-MSA sample
 Post-program effects
    B-W, treat-control               0.30             0.29               2.75***          2.50***    0.25        0.28     -0.01       -0.04
                                    [0.31]           [0.28]              [4.80]           [4.91]    [0.84]      [0.96]   [0.01]      [0.06]

     White, treat-control            -0.02            -0.01               0.24             0.24      0.05        0.05     0.21        0.18
                                    [0.03]           [0.02]              [0.68]           [0.69]    [0.27]      [0.28]   [1.16]      [1.02]

     B-W, control                    -0.06            -0.07               -0.15            -0.10    0.25**      0.23**    -0.53       -0.52
                                    [0.21]           [0.24]              [1.01]           [0.71]    [2.24]      [2.25]   [1.40]      [1.39]
     White, control                   0.08             0.08                0.05             0.05     -0.05       -0.05     0.05        0.05
                                    [0.32]           [0.32]              [0.36]           [0.40]    [1.09]      [1.08]   [0.57]      [0.61]

B. 25-MSA sample
 Post-program effects
    B-W, treat-control               0.08             0.06               2.89***          2.59***    0.13        0.16     -0.13       -0.17
                                    [0.09]           [0.06]              [5.45]           [5.45]    [0.42]      [0.54]   [0.17]      [0.24]

     White, treat-control            -0.42            -0.42               0.09             0.09      0.03        0.02     0.29        0.27
                                    [0.66]           [0.66]              [0.23]           [0.26]    [0.15]      [0.14]   [1.57]      [1.45]

     B-W, control                    -0.29            -0.28               -0.13            -0.08     0.21*       0.20*    -0.39       -0.39
                                    [0.85]           [0.85]              [0.74]           [0.47]    [1.90]      [1.87]   [1.10]      [1.09]
     White, control                   0.33             0.33               -0.09            -0.08     0.01        0.01     -0.08       -0.07
                                    [1.18]           [1.18]              [0.63]           [0.58]    [0.25]      [0.26]   [0.74]      [0.68]


Race-year FE’s                        Y                Y                    Y                Y        Y           Y        Y           Y
Race-MSA FE’s                         Y                Y                    Y                Y        Y           Y        Y           Y
Educ, age FE’s                        Y                Y                    Y                Y        Y           Y        Y           Y
Race-educ, race-age                                    Y                                     Y                    Y                    Y

Notes: See notes to Table 3B.
*** **
   , , and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
Table 7: Change in self-employment and employment rates before-and-after set-aside program initiation,
                          in more affected industries by central city residence
                                      [absolute value of t-ratios]

                                                                                                    Employment in more
                                       Self-employment in more affected industries                   affected industries
                                       Older, skilled               Young, skilled                      Young, skilled
                                    Age 30+, Educ 12+           Age 20-29, Educ 12+                Age 20-29, Educ 12+
                                   Central       Outside        Central       Outside               Central      Outside
                                 city reside central city     city reside central city            city reside central city
                                     (1a)          (1b)           (2a)          (2b)                  (3a)          (3b)
A. 17-MSA sample
 Post-program effects
    B-W, treat-control               0.45           1.70***             0.34***           0.08     1.84***        0.67
                                    [1.31]          [3.77]              [3.63]           [0.69]    [3.68]        [0.93]

     White, treat-control            -0.11         -1.20***               0.02            -0.03      0.53         -0.29
                                    [0.42]          [3.86]               [0.24]          [0.30]     [1.17]       [0.81]

     B-W, control                    -0.06           -0.03                 0.04           0.03       -0.25         0.16
                                    [0.42]          [0.28]               [0.85]          [0.45]     [1.12]       [0.72]
     White, control                  -0.01            0.11                -0.00           0.01        0.15        -0.09
                                    [0.06]          [1.19]               [0.03]          [0.31]     [1.27]       [0.91]

B. 25-MSA sample
 Post-program effects
    B-W, treat-control               0.65*          1.38***             0.42***           0.15     1.85***        0.73
                                    [1.71]          [2.70]              [3.80]           [1.13]    [4.05]        [1.03]

     White, treat-control            -0.16          -0.92**               -0.05           -0.09      0.43         -0.34
                                    [0.65]          [2.59]               [0.51]          [0.87]     [1.10]       [0.99]

     B-W, control                    -0.05           -0.03                 0.01           0.01       -0.28        0.21
                                    [0.41]          [0.25]               [0.24]          [0.16]     [1.14]       [0.97]
     White, control                  -0.04            0.08                -0.00           0.04        0.15       -0.23*
                                    [0.41]          [0.73]               [0.06]          [0.93]     [1.20]       [1.77]


Race-year FE’s                        Y                Y                   Y                Y         Y            Y
Race-MSA FE’s                         Y                Y                   Y                Y         Y            Y
Educ, age FE’s                        Y                Y                   Y                Y         Y            Y
Race-educ, race-age                   Y                Y                   Y                Y         Y            Y

Notes: See notes to Tables 3A and 3B.
*** **
   , , and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
                              Table 8: Change in employment rates before-and-after set-aside program initiation, in less affected industries
                                                                     [absolute value of t-ratios]

                                                                                              Employment in less affected industries
                                                    By age and education                            Central city vs. outside          By age and education for central city residents
                                   Older,           Young,       Young,              Older,          Central       Outside           Older,      Young,         Young,          Older,
                                   skilled          skilled     unskilled           unskilled      city reside central city          skilled      skilled      unskilled      unskilled
                                    (1a)             (1b)         (1c)                (1d)             (2a)           (2b)            (3a)         (3b)          (3c)            (3d)
A. 17-MSA sample
 Post-program effects
    B-W, treat-control               -1.87            -1.13          -0.52**           -0.51         -4.64***        0.62           -1.82***       -1.82**        -0.32         -0.69
                                    [1.59]           [1.20]          [2.51]           [0.99]          [2.91]        [0.48]           [2.85]        [2.70]        [1.52]        [1.18]

     White, treat-control            0.54             -0.37          0.29**            -0.29           0.71          -0.53            0.49          -0.06        0.10***        0.18
                                    [0.92]           [0.83]          [2.29]           [0.95]          [0.80]        [0.51]           [0.77]        [0.24]        [2.95]        [0.57]

     B-W, control                     0.54            -0.52           -0.10            -0.04           0.12          -0.24            0.60          -0.30         -0.15         -0.04
                                    [1.26]           [1.42]          [0.93]           [0.17]          [0.33]        [0.49]           [1.50]        [1.36]        [1.61]        [0.21]
     White, control                  -0.08             0.09            0.05            -0.03           0.13          -0.10            0.01           0.05          0.02          0.06
                                    [0.36]           [0.43]          [1.10]           [0.26]          [0.69]        [0.27]           [0.04]        [0.64]        [1.54]        [0.83]

B. 25-MSA sample
 Post-program effects
    B-W, treat-control               -1.61            -1.07           -0.31            -0.60          -4.10**        0.51            -1.42*       -1.85***        -0.19         -0.63
                                    [1.50]           [1.28]          [0.85]           [1.20]          [2.29]        [0.44]           [1.72]        [3.07]        [0.64]        [1.09]

     White, treat-control            0.75             -0.02           0.21             -0.21           0.58          0.15             0.24          0.10          0.10          0.13
                                    [1.30]           [0.05]          [1.30]           [0.76]          [0.71]        [0.13]           [0.38]        [0.36]        [1.52]        [0.47]

     B-W, control                     0.66            -0.61           -0.06            -0.05           0.36          -0.44            0.75          -0.29         -0.10         0.00
                                    [1.48]           [1.69]          [0.57]           [0.23]          [0.70]        [0.82]           [1.61]        [1.29]        [1.13]        [0.00]
     White, control                  -0.18             0.16            0.03            -0.02           0.14          -0.15            0.03           0.05          0.00         0.05
                                    [0.80]           [0.86]          [0.74]           [0.16]          [0.68]        [0.43]           [0.17]        [0.64]        [0.21]        [0.77]


Race-year FE’s                        Y                Y                Y                Y              Y             Y                Y             Y             Y             Y
Race-MSA FE’s                         Y                Y                Y                Y              Y             Y                Y             Y             Y             Y
Educ, age FE’s                        Y                Y                Y                Y              Y             Y                Y             Y             Y             Y
Race-educ, race-age                   Y                Y                Y                Y              Y             Y                Y             Y             Y             Y

Notes: See notes to Table 3B.
*** **
   , , and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
                                 Table A1: Dates of Set-Aside programs in United States cities from four different sources
                                                                  Year of initiation of city set-aside program from various sources
                                   CPS                                           JCPES (1993)                                                      Assigned year of
Name of MSA                   Rank of MSA        MBELDEF (1988)       Ordinance                  Enacted           City record        Court case   Set-aside program
Akron, OH                           49               1984                  ---                     ---                  ---              ---             1984b
Albany, NY                          46               1984                  ---                     ---                 1984              ---             1984a
Anaheim, CA                         19               1985                  ---                     ---             No program            ---               ---
Atlanta, GA                         21               1982                1970s                    1991                 1975             1982               ---
Baltimore, MD                       12               1982                1987                     1988                  ---             1986               ---
Birmingham, AL                      45               1980                  ---                     ---                  ---             1977             1977a
Boston, MA                           8               1987                1987                     1987                 1987              ---             1987a
Buffalo, NY                         25                ---                  ---                     ---                  ---              ---               ---
Chicago, IL                          3                ---                1985                     1985                 1985             1985             1985a
Cincinnati, OH                      22               1983                1978                     1978                  ---              ---               ---
Cleveland, OH                       13               1984                1982                     1982                 1994              ---               ---
Columbus, OH                        36               1983                1980                     1981                  ---             1981               ---
Dallas, TX                          17                ---                1984                     1984                  ---              ---             1984b
Denver, CO                          28                ---                1983                     1983                 1983             1983             1983a
Detroit, MI                          5                ---                1983                     1983                  ---             1983             1983a
Fort Worth, TX                      44                ---                1986                     1986                 1988              ---               ---
Gary, IN                            53                ---                  ---                     ---                  ---              ---               ---
Greensboro, NC                      57                ---                  ---                     ---                 1985              ---             1985a
Houston, TX                         14                ---                1981                     1981                 1984              ---               ---
Indianapolis, IN                    30                ---                1984                     1984                  ---             1987               ---
Kansas City, MO                     27                ---                1981                     1981                  ---              ---             1981b
Los Angeles, CA                      2               1983                1983                     1983                 1987             1983               ---
Miami, FL                           26               1985                  ---                     ---                 1985              ---             1985a
Milwaukee, WI                       20               1987                1989                     1989                  ---              ---               ---
Minneapolis, MN                     16                ---                1980                     1980                  ---              ---             1980b
Nassau, NY                           9                ---                  ---                     ---             No program            ---          No program
New Orleans, LA                     32                ---                1984                     1984                  ---              ---             1984b
New York, NY                         1                ---                1991                     1992                 1992             1992             1992a
Newark, NJ                          15               1984                  ---                     ---                  ---              ---             1984b
Norfolk, VA                         48                ---                  ---                     ---             No program            ---          No program
Passaic, NJ                         23                ---                  ---                     ---             No program            ---          No program
Philadelphia, PA                     4               1984                1982                     1983                 1982             1982             1982a
Pittsburgh, PA                      10                ---                  ---                     ---                 1980              ---             1980a
Portland, OR                        34                ---                  ---                     ---                 1977              ---             1977a
Rochester, NY                       38                ---                  ---                     ---                 1980              ---             1980a
Sacramento, CA                      42               1985                  ---                     ---                  ---              ---             1985b
Saint Louis, MO                     11                ---                  ---                     ---                  ---              ---               ---
San Bernardino, CA                  29                ---                  ---                     ---                  ---              ---               ---
San Diego, CA                       24                ---                1986                     1986                 1985              ---             1985a
San Francisco, CA                    6               1984                1984                     1984                 1984             1984             1984a
San Jose, CA                        31               1983                1983                     1983                 1984             1983             1983a
Seattle, WA                         18               1986                1980                     1980             Before 1984           ---               ---
Tampa, FL                           33               1985                  ---                     ---                  ---              ---             1985b
Washington DC                        7               1980                1975                     1975                  ---             1977             1977a
Notes: See text for details on the data sources.
a
  Included in the “17-MSA” and “25-MSA” samples.
b
  Included in only the “25-MSA” sample.
 Table A2: Changes in black-white self-employment and employment rate gaps after set-aside initiation,
                             relative to pre-program trends (unweighted)
                                       [absolute value of t-ratios]

                                           Self-employment                                        Employment
                                 (1a)            (1b)             (1c)                (2a)           (2b)              (2c)
A. 17-MSA sample
 Post-program B-W diffs
    Year 0                      2.36***         2.44***          2.34***              1.41            1.23             1.17
                                [3.75]          [3.84]           [3.57]              [0.85]          [0.67]           [0.72]
    Years 1-2                   1.78**          2.17***          2.04**              3.86***         4.30***          4.13***
                                [2.02]          [2.71]           [2.35]              [3.46]          [2.92]           [3.02]
    Years 3-4                    1.63*          2.38**           2.33**              5.23**          6.59***          6.25***
                                [1.73]          [2.59]           [2.33]              [2.66]          [2.79]           [2.99]
    Years 5-7                    2.13           3.14**           3.12**              5.78**          7.99***          7.44***
                                [1.58]          [2.39]           [2.20]              [2.07]          [2.72]           [2.78]
  Pre-program
    B-W trend diff              0.174            0.101           0.120              -0.774***       -0.803***        -0.790***
                                [1.50]           [0.83]          [0.93]               [3.33]          [3.16]           [3.53]
    B-W difference             -6.54***         -5.13***                            -16.92***       -13.72***
                                [7.81]           [6.48]                              [10.02]          [8.30]


B. 25-MSA sample

    Year 0                      2.86***         2.95***          2.91***              0.65             0.27            0.19
                                [4.72]          [4.83]           [4.65]              [0.48]           [0.18]          [0.14]
    Years 1-2                    1.53*          1.94**           1.90**              2.93***          3.26**          3.08**
                                [1.81]          [2.47]           [2.31]              [2.63]           [2.45]          [2.46]
    Years 3-4                   1.90**          2.62***          2.62***              3.48*           4.50**          4.20**
                                [2.03]          [2.78]           [2.63]              [1.77]           [2.00]          [2.07]
    Years 5-7                    2.07*          3.06***          3.10**               3.70            5.52**          5.06**
                                [1.89]          [2.69]           [2.54]              [1.41]           [2.05]          [2.04]
  Pre-program
    B-W trend diff              0.188*           0.120           0.128               -0.561**        -0.557**        -0.540**
                                [1.75]           [1.05]          [1.07]               [2.13]          [2.06]          [2.16]
    B-W difference             -6.56***         -5.24***                            -15.55***       -12.32***
                                [8.22]           [6.66]                               [8.61]          [6.95]


Race-year FE’s                    Y                Y                Y                  Y                Y                Y
MSA FE’s                          Y                Y                Y                  Y                Y                Y
Educ, age FE’s                                     Y                Y                                   Y                Y
Race-educ, race-age                                                 Y                                                    Y
  FE’s

Notes: Sample is limited to observations that are no more than eight years before and seven years after the initiation year of a
city’s set-aside program. Pre-program trend based on data one-to-eight years before program initiation. Estimated sampling
errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and over-time clustering at the MSA level. The 17-MSA and 25-MSA samples contain
175,660 and 223,765 observations, respectively.
*** **
   , , and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
       Table A3: Changes in black-white gaps after set-aside initiation, relative to pre-program trend
                                      [absolute value of t-ratios]

                                                   Effects for different samples of MSAs
                                     (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)
Number of MSAs                       25              28               32             38               21

A. Self-employment
  Post-program B-W diffs
      Year 0                       3.31***         3.54***          3.22***         2.15***         3.01***
                                   [4.68]          [5.31]           [4.78]          [2.99]          [4.84]
      Year 1                       2.97***         3.35***          2.93***         2.20**          2.53***
                                   [3.02]          [3.75]           [3.38]          [2.54]          [2.67]

  Pre-program
      B-W trend diff               0.003           -0.099           -0.126          -0.131          0.741**
                                   [0.02]          [0.69]           [1.10]          [1.07]          [2.48]


B. Employment
  Post-program B-W diffs
     Year 0                          0.76            0.20            0.68            0.22             0.92
                                   [0.47]          [0.13]           [0.49]          [0.18]          [0.64]
      Year 1                         2.04            1.22            1.53            0.96             1.46
                                   [1.17]          [0.73]           [0.88]          [0.77]          [1.13]
      Year 2                        4.68**          3.88**          3.92***         2.85**           3.64**
                                   [2.29]          [2.11]           [2.67]          [2.17]          [2.52]
      Year 3                        5.55**          4.81**          4.83***          3.19*           4.61**
                                   [2.10]          [2.09]           [2.86]          [1.94]          [2.34]
      Year 4                        5.42*           4.68*           4.45**           2.80            5.14**
                                   [1.92]          [1.91]           [2.49]          [1.51]          [2.08]
      Year 5                        7.55**          6.79**          6.46***         6.40***          6.76**
                                   [2.42]          [2.37]           [3.11]          [3.75]          [2.06]
      Year 6                         4.72            4.08            3.64            3.80*            5.30
                                   [1.36]          [1.26]           [1.42]          [1.77]          [1.21]
      Year 7                       11.16**         10.70**         10.04***         8.28**          11.87**
                                   [2.21]          [2.38]           [2.85]          [2.56]          [2.55]

  Pre-program
      B-W trend diff              -0.703**         -0.780**        -0.588**         -0.485*         -1.304
                                   [2.08]           [2.24]          [2.18]           [1.94]         [1.41]


Race-year FE’s                        Y               Y               Y               Y                Y
MSA FE’s                              Y               Y               Y               Y                Y
Educ, age FE’s                        Y               Y               Y               Y                Y
Race-educ, race-age FE’s              Y               Y               Y               Y                Y

Number of observations            223,765          239,242         253,783         300,233         191,286

Notes: See notes to Table 4. Column (1) is based on the 25-MSA sample; column (2) adds MSAs with no programs (Nassau,
Norfolk, Passaic); column (3) also adds MSAs where no program was found (Buffalo, Gary, Saint Louis, San Bernardino);
column (4) further adds MSAs with conflicting program dates and uses court case or city records for dates (Los Angeles,
Houston, Indianapolis, Columbus, Fort Worth). Column (5) excludes MSAs with program dates either before or after the 1979 to
1989 period (Washington, D.C., Portland, Birmingham, New York City). Estimated sampling errors are corrected for
heteroskedasticity and over-time clustering at the MSA level, and regressions are weighted by the CPS sample weights.
*** **
   , , and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
               Table A4: Change in self-employment and employment rates from one-to-four years before-and-after program initiation,
                                                      in more and less affected industries
                                                          [absolute value of t-ratios]

                                                 More affected industries                                                     Less affected industries
                               (1a)           (1b)        (1c)          (1d)              (1e)              (2a)          (2b)          (2c)          (2d)            (2e)
A. Self-employment
 Post-program effect
    Black-white               2.78***       2.80***        2.88***        2.79***       2.85***            -0.22          -0.27          -0.26         -0.28          -0.29
                              [2.67]        [2.80]         [2.74]         [2.76]        [2.70]            [0.41]         [0.48]         [0.49]        [0.53]         [0.55]

    White                      0.06           0.11          0.15           0.11           0.15             -0.21          -0.20          -0.21         -0.20          -0.21
                              [0.10]         [0.20]        [0.26]         [0.20]         [0.27]           [0.80]         [0.77]         [0.76]        [0.77]         [0.75]


B. Employment
 Post-program effect
    Black-white               3.94**         3.85**         3.53*         3.72**          3.44*            -2.26          -2.49          -2.57         -2.43          -2.53
                              [2.13]         [2.08]        [1.93]         [2.00]         [1.90]           [1.27]         [1.47]         [1.54]        [1.45]         [1.53]

    White                      -1.05          -0.91         -1.02          -0.92          -1.04            0.78           0.90           0.94          0.91           0.95
                              [1.17]         [1.04]        [1.16]         [1.06]         [1.19]           [0.85]         [1.00]         [1.04]        [1.01]         [1.06]


Race-year FE’s                   Y             Y              Y             Y              Y                 Y             Y              Y              Y             Y
Race-MSA FE’s                    Y             Y              Y             Y              Y                 Y             Y              Y              Y             Y
Educ, age FE’s                                 Y              Y             Y              Y                               Y              Y              Y             Y
Race-educ, race-age                                                         Y              Y                                                             Y             Y
Race-MSA trends                                               Y                            Y                                              Y                            Y

Notes: See notes to Tables 4 and 5. Pre-program trends not included; comparing one-to-four years after program initiation to one-to-four years before program. Based on 25-MSA
sample and contains 223,765 observations. Estimated sampling errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and over-time clustering at the MSA level. Regressions are weighted by
the CPS sample weights.
*** **
   , , and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
                         Table A5: Change in self-employment and employment rates one-to-three years after program initiation,
                                                           relative to pre-program trends
                                                             [absolute value of t-ratios]

                                                More affected industries                                                     Less affected industries
                               (1a)          (1b)        (1c)          (1d)              (1e)             (2a)           (2b)          (2c)          (2d)           (2e)
A. Self-employment
 Post-program effect (yrs 1-3)
    Black-white            3.01***          3.16***       2.91***        3.18***       2.86***            0.06           0.04          -0.46         0.05           -0.47
                           [2.97]           [3.31]        [2.71]         [3.31]        [2.67]            [0.12]         [0.08]        [1.04]        [0.10]         [1.10]

    White                      0.07          0.11           0.33          0.11           0.34             -0.23          -0.23         -0.05         -0.24          -0.05
                              [0.13]        [0.21]         [0.68]        [0.21]         [0.68]           [0.73]         [0.74]        [0.14]        [0.75]         [0.15]
  Pre-program
    B-W trend diff            -0.196         -0.228                      -0.232                           0.123          0.125                       0.120
                              [1.06]         [1.21]                       [1.24]                         [0.98]         [1.02]                      [1.00]
    White trend             -0.268***      -0.242***                    -0.245***                        -0.072         -0.058                      -0.058
                              [2.93]         [2.81]                       [2.85]                         [0.96]         [0.79]                      [0.78]
    B-W difference           -5.01***       -4.37***                                                    -2.11***       -1.38***
                              [5.88]         [5.32]                                                      [4.02]         [2.66]

B. Employment
 Post-program effect (yrs 1-3)
    Black-white             4.52*            4.84*         4.47**         4.50*          4.31*            -1.51          -1.67        -3.76*         -1.63         -3.76*
                           [1.90]           [1.94]         [2.08]        [1.76]         [1.99]           [0.60]         [0.75]        [1.80]        [0.72]         [1.81]

    White                      -0.39         -0.21          -0.23         -0.18          -0.22            -0.11          0.01          0.67          0.01           0.68
                              [0.34]        [0.18]         [0.20]        [0.16]         [0.19]           [0.10]         [0.00]        [0.62]        [0.01]         [0.63]
  Pre-program
    B-W trend diff            -0.502        -0.570                       -0.545                           0.045         0.047                       0.052
                              [1.01]        [1.07]                        [0.99]                         [0.08]         [0.10]                      [0.10]
    White trend              -0.457*       -0.436*                       -0.437*                          0.398         0.425                       0.420
                              [1.90]        [1.78]                        [1.79]                         [1.49]         [1.63]                      [1.61]
    B-W difference           -9.56***      -8.99***                                                      -5.35**         -2.98
                              [4.72]        [4.50]                                                       [2.31]         [1.36]


Race-year FE’s                  Y              Y             Y             Y              Y                Y              Y             Y              Y             Y
MSA FE’s                        Y              Y             Y             Y              Y                Y              Y             Y              Y             Y
Educ, age FE’s                                 Y             Y             Y              Y                               Y             Y              Y             Y
Race-educ, race-age                                                        Y              Y                                                            Y             Y
Race-MSA FE’s                                                Y                            Y                                             Y                            Y
Race-MSA trends                                              Y                            Y                                             Y                            Y
Notes: See notes to Tables 4 and 5. Pre-program trend based on data one-to-four years before program initiation. Based on 25-MSA sample and contains 223,765 observations.
*** **
   , , and * indicate statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively.
                                                Figure 1: Black and white self-employment and employment rates from 1979 to 1989
                                                       A. Self-employment rates (in percent) in entire United States and in U.S. cities
                                          8.5                                                                                                                            15.5


                                           8                                                                                                                             15


                                          7.5                                                                                                                            14.5




                                                                                                                                                                                White self-employment rate (in percent)
Black self-employment rate (in percent)




                                           7                                                                                                                             14


                                          6.5                                                                                                                            13.5


                                           6                                                                                                                             13


                                          5.5                                                                                                                            12.5


                                           5                                                                                                                             12


                                          4.5                                                                                                                            11.5


                                           4                                                                                                                             11


                                          3.5                                                                                                                            10.5
                                                1979       1980         1981           1982      1983         1984     1985        1986    1987       1988       1989
                                                                                                              Year

                                                                  Black, entire U.S.          Black, U.S. cities      White, entire U.S.   White, U.S. cities




                                                         B. Employment rates (in percent) in entire United States and in U.S. cities
                                          84                                                                                                                              90


                                          82                                                                                                                              88


                                          80                                                                                                                              86

                                                                                                                                                                                White employment rate (in percent)
Black employment rate (in percent)




                                          78                                                                                                                              84


                                          76                                                                                                                              82


                                          74                                                                                                                              80


                                          72                                                                                                                              78


                                          70                                                                                                                              76


                                          68                                                                                                                              74


                                          66                                                                                                                              72


                                          64                                                                                                                              70
                                                1979      1980          1981           1982       1983         1984     1985        1986    1987       1988       1989
                                                                                                              Year

                                                                  Black, entire U.S.          Black, U.S. cities      White, entire U.S.    White, U.S. cities
                                                                                Figure 2: Difference in black-white differences in self-employment rates between
                                                                                            cities initiating set-asides program in 1985 and those not
                                                                                                  A. Self-employment difference-in-differences
                                                                           8
          Between city diff in black-white diffs in self-employment rate


                                                                           6



                                                                           4



                                                                           2



                                                                           0
                                                                                  1979    1980    1981         1982         1983           1984          1985          1986       1987        1988   1989


                                                                           -2



                                                                           -4



                                                                           -6



                                                                           -8
                                                                                                                                          Year

                                                                                                 1985 vs. 1980 or before            1985 vs. No program            1980 or before vs. No program



                                                                                         B. Self-employment difference-in-differences, by industry group
                                                                           6
          Difference in black-white self-employment rate diffs




                                                                           4




                                                                           2




                                                                           0
                                                                                  1979    1980    1981         1982         1983           1984          1985          1986       1987        1988   1989




                                                                           -2




                                                                           -4




                                                                           -6
                                                                                                                                          Year

                                                                                                                   All industries        More affected          Less affected

Notes: Panel A plots differences between MSAs that: i) do not have a set-aside program during the period (New York, Nassau, Passaic, Norfolk –
48,946 observations); ii) started a program in 1980 or before (Washington DC, Pittsburgh, Minneapolis, Portland, Rochester, Birmingham –
52,988 obs); iii) began one in 1985 (Chicago, San Diego, Miami, Tampa, Sacramento, Greensboro – 53,210 obs). In Panel B, contrasts are
between MSAs that began a program in 1985 and the other two groups of MSAs. “More affected” and “less affected” industries are defined in
Table 2. Panel B results are from regressions that include education and age dummies, race-specific MSA effects, race-specific year effects, and
a 1985 program dummy interacted with year effects. The ± 1 standard error bands shown are corrected for heteroskedasticity and over-time,
MSA-level clustering.
    Figure 3: Event study results for black-white differences in self-employment and employment rates
                                                                                               A. Event study for 17-MSA sample
                                                         6                                                                                                                          12



                                                         4                                                                                                                          9



                                                         2                                                                                                                          6
       Black-white difference in self-employment rate




                                                                                                                                                                                          Black-white difference in employment rate
                                                         0                                                                                                                          3
                                                              -13 -12 -11 -10   -9   -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12

                                                         -2                                                                                                                         0

                                                                  Self-employment
                                                         -4                                                                                                                         -3



                                                         -6                                                                                                                         -6



                                                         -8                                                                                                                         -9
                                                                                                                                                             Employment

                                                        -10                                                                                                                         -12



                                                        -12                                                                                                                         -15



                                                        -14                                                                                                                         -18
                                                                                                    Year relative to program initiation date



                                                                                                B. Event study for 25-MSA sample
                                                         6                                                                                                                          12



                                                         4                                                                                                                          9



                                                         2                                                                                                                          6
       Black-white difference in self-employment rate




                                                                                                                                                                                          Black-white difference in employment rate
                                                         0                                                                                                                          3
                                                              -13 -12 -11 -10   -9   -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12

                                                         -2                                                                                                                         0

                                                                  Self-employment
                                                         -4                                                                                                                         -3



                                                         -6                                                                                                                         -6



                                                         -8                                                                                                                         -9

                                                                                                                                                             Employment
                                                        -10                                                                                                                         -12



                                                        -12                                                                                                                         -15



                                                        -14                                                                                                                         -18
                                                                                                    Year relative to program initiation date

Notes: Series come from linear probability models that include MSA fixed-effects, race-specific year effects, unrestricted indicators for education
and age, and program time fixed-effects. Regressions are weighted by CPS sampling weights. The ± 1 standard error bands are shown and are
corrected for heteroskedasticity and over-time clustering at the MSA level.
  Figure 4: Black-white differences in self-employment and employment rates for more and less affected
                                     industry groups, 25-MSA sample
                                                                                           A. Self-employment, adjusted
                                                         3


                                                         2
        Black-white difference in self-employment rate




                                                         1


                                                         0
                                                               -8    -7    -6    -5   -4    -3       -2     -1      0       1       2       3          4   5   6   7   8

                                                         -1


                                                         -2


                                                         -3


                                                         -4


                                                         -5


                                                         -6


                                                         -7
                                                                                                 Year relative to program initiation date

                                                                                             More affected industries       Less affected industries



                                                                                             B. Employment, adjusted
                                                          6


                                                          4


                                                          2
        Black-white difference in employment rate




                                                          0
                                                                -8    -7    -6   -5   -4    -3        -2     -1         0   1       2       3          4   5   6   7   8

                                                          -2


                                                          -4


                                                          -6


                                                          -8


                                                         -10


                                                         -12


                                                         -14
                                                                                                 Year relative to program initiation date

                                                                                             More affected industries       Less affected industries


Notes: Series come from linear probability models that include MSA fixed-effects, race-specific year effects, unrestricted indicators for education
and age, and program time fixed-effects. Dependent variables are indicators equal to one if person is self-employed (or employed) in more
affected (or less affected) industries. Regressions are weighted by CPS sampling weights.
                                                   Figure 5: Aggregate self-employment and employment rates for the 25-MSA sample

                                                                       A. Overall self-employment and employment
                                              17                                                                                                   87



                                              16                                                                                                   86



                                              15                                                                                                   85
                                                           Self-employment

                                              14                                                                                                   84
Self-employment rate




                                                                                                                                                        Employment rate
                                              13                                                                                                   83


                                                                                                                          Employment
                                              12                                                                                                   82



                                              11                                                                                                   81



                                              10                                                                                                   80



                                              9                                                                                                    79



                                              8                                                                                                    78
                                                     -6    -5     -4     -3        -2       -1       0        1       2        3       4   5   6
                                                                                  Year relative to program initiation date




                                                                         B. Self-employment by industrial sector
                                              12                                                                                                   8




                                              11                                                                                                   7
Self-employment in more affected industries




                                                                                                                                                        Self-employment in less affected industries
                                                           More Affected Sector

                                              10                                                                                                   6




                                              9                                                                                                    5

                                                                                                                    Less Affected Sector


                                              8                                                                                                    4




                                              7                                                                                                    3




                                              6                                                                                                    2
                                                     -6    -5     -4     -3        -2       -1        0       1        2       3       4   5   6
                                                                                  Year relative to program initiation date
                                                                          C. Employment by industrial sector
                                            60                                                                                               45



                                            57                                                                                               42
   Employment in more affected industries




                                                                                                                                                  Employment in less affected industries
                                            54                                                                                               39


                                                      More Affected Sector
                                            51                                                                                               36



                                            48                                                                                               33



                                            45                                                                                               30
                                                                                                              Less Affected Sector


                                            42                                                                                               27



                                            39                                                                                               24



                                            36                                                                                               21
                                                 -6   -5     -4      -3       -2       -1       0        1       2      3      4     5   6
                                                                             Year relative to program initiation date



Notes: Series come from linear probability models that include MSA fixed-effects and program time fixed-effects, which are
plotted. Dependent variables are indicators equal to one if person is self-employed (or employed) in more affected (or less
affected) industries. Regressions weighted by CPS sampling weights. The ± 1 standard error bands are shown and are corrected
for heteroskedasticity.
                                                              Figure A1: Black-white employment differences in less affected industries,
                                                                                         25-MSA sample

                                                    4




                                                    2
                                                                                                     Government
   Black-white difference in the employment rate




                                                    0
                                                         -4         -3          -2           -1          0           1           2     3   4   5



                                                    -2
                                                                                     Manufacturing


                                                    -4




                                                    -6
                                                               Least affected sector


                                                    -8




                                                   -10
                                                                                            Year relative to program initiation date



Notes: Series come from linear probability models that include MSA fixed-effects, race-specific year effects and program time
fixed-effects. Dependent variables are indicators equal to one if person is employed in the sector or industry. Regressions are
weighted by CPS sampling weights.
