                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MIGRATION AND WAGE EFFECTS OF TAXING TOP EARNERS:
           EVIDENCE FROM THE FOREIGNERS' TAX SCHEME IN DENMARK

                                       Henrik Jacobsen Kleven
                                          Camille Landais
                                          Emmanuel Saez
                                        Esben Anton Schultz

                                        Working Paper 18885
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18885


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2013




We would like to thank Raj Chetty, Michael Devereux, Amy Finkelstein, Rick Hornbeck, Caroline
Hoxby, Wojciech Kopczuk, Claus Kreiner, Ilyana Kuziemko, Bentley MacLeod, Alan Manning, James
Poterba, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments and discussions. Financial support
from NSF Grant SES-1156240, the Center for Equitable Growth at UC Berkeley, and the European
Tax Policy Forum is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Henrik Jacobsen Kleven, Camille Landais, Emmanuel Saez, and Esben Anton Schultz.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Migration and Wage Effects of Taxing Top Earners: Evidence from the Foreigners' Tax Scheme
in Denmark
Henrik Jacobsen Kleven, Camille Landais, Emmanuel Saez, and Esben Anton Schultz
NBER Working Paper No. 18885
March 2013
JEL No. H24,J61

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the effects of income taxation on the international migration and earnings of top
earners using a Danish preferential foreigner tax scheme and population-wide Danish administrative
data. This scheme, introduced in 1991, allows new immigrants with high earnings to be taxed at a
preferential flat rate for a duration of three years. We obtain three main results. First, the scheme has
doubled the number of highly paid foreigners in Denmark relative to slightly less paid ineligible foreigners,
which translates into a very large elasticity of migration with respect to the net-of-tax rate on foreigners,
between 1.5 and 2. Hence, preferential tax schemes for highly paid foreign workers could create severe
tax competition between countries. Second, we find compelling evidence of a negative effect of scheme-induced
increases in the net-of-tax rate on pre-tax earnings at the individual level. This finding cannot be explained
by the standard labor supply model where pay equals marginal productivity, but it can be rationalized
by a matching frictions model with wage bargaining where there is a gap between pay and marginal
productivity. Third, we find no evidence of positive or negative spillovers of the scheme-induced influx
of high-skilled foreigners on the earnings of highly paid natives.


Henrik Jacobsen Kleven                                Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics & STICERD                     Department of Economics
LSE                                                   University of California, Berkeley
Houghton Street                                       530 Evans Hall #3880
London WC2A 2AE                                       Berkeley, CA 94720
United Kingdom                                        and NBER
H.J.kleven@lse.ac.uk                                  saez@econ.berkeley.edu

Camille Landais                                       Esben Anton Schultz
Department of Economics                               Kraka
London School of Economics                            Kompagnistraede 20A
Houghton Street                                       1208 Copenhagen K
London WC2A 2AE                                       Denmark
United Kingdom                                        ess@kraka.org
c.landais@lse.ac.uk
1         Introduction
Tax-induced international mobility of talent is a controversial public policy issue, especially when
tax rates differ substantially across countries and migration barriers are low as in the case of the
European Union. High top tax rates may induce top earners to migrate to countries where the
tax burden is lower, thereby limiting the redistributive power of governments and potentially
creating tax competition. The introduction in many European countries of preferential tax
schemes to high-skilled foreigners represents prima facie evidence of such tax competition.1
This debate raises two important questions. First, how responsive is international migration by
high-skilled workers to tax differentials across countries? Second, what is the effect of lowering
top tax rates on the wages of top earners? In particular, do preferential foreigner tax schemes
only benefit highly compensated foreigners or do local employers obtain part of the benefit? Both
questions are crucial for evaluating international tax design for top earners, while the second
question is also key for understanding the functioning of the labor market for top earners. This
paper breaks new ground on these questions using sharp quasi-experimental variation created
by a Danish preferential tax scheme for high-earning immigrants.
        While an enormous empirical literature has studied labor supply and taxable income re-
sponses to taxation (as surveyed by Blundell and MaCurdy 1999 and Saez, Slemrod, and Giertz
2012), there is very little empirical work on the effect of taxation on the spatial mobility of
individuals,2 and especially international mobility among high-skilled workers.3 Furthermore,
there is also very little work trying to exploit tax variation to cast light on the wage setting
process, particularly among top earners. Most studies assume that taxes do not affect individual
wage rates directly.4 The wage effects we obtain cast new light on the wage setting process and
    1
     For example, preferential tax schemes for high-skilled foreign workers have been introduced in Belgium,
Denmark, Finland, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. A summary of all such existing
schemes in OECD countries is provided by OECD (2011), Table 4.1, p. 138.
   2
     A small literature has considered the mobility of people across local jurisdictions within countries. See
Kirchgassner and Pommerehne (1996) and Liebig et al. (2007) on mobility across Swiss Cantons in response
to Canton taxes, Young and Varner (2011) and Bakija and Slemrod (2004) on mobility across U.S. states in
response to state income and inheritance taxes.
   3
     A recent exception is Kleven, Landais, and Saez (2013), who analyze the labor market for professional football
players across 14 European Union countries and find compelling evidence of tax-induced mobility responses.
However, a concern is that football players might be substantially more mobile than other high-skilled workers,
because football players earn most of their lifetime income over a short period and their profession involves little
country-specific capital.
   4
     A few studies have tried to estimate standard demand-driven wage incidence effects (see Fullerton and
Metcalf 2002 for a survey). The empirical identification is very difficult, because such incidence effects represent
market-level changes in wages. By contrast, the incidence effects we uncover represent individual-level or match-


                                                         1
provide strong empirical evidence in favor of the widely used labor market model with matching
frictions and wage bargaining.5
    In 1992, Denmark enacted a preferential tax regime for high-earning foreigners, who sign
contracts for work in Denmark after June 1, 1991. Under this scheme, the tax rate on labor
earnings is reduced to a flat rate of about 30% for a total period of up to 3 years. Eligibility for
the scheme requires annualized earnings above a threshold (indexed to average earnings growth
and equal to about 100,000 Euros in 2009), corresponding roughly to the 99th percentile of the
distribution of individual earnings in Denmark.6 This scheme is much more generous than the
regular tax system, which imposes a top marginal tax rate of about 62% above 47,000 Euros
(as of 2009). Absent the special tax scheme, workers with earnings above the scheme threshold
would face average income tax rates of around 55%, about twice as high as the scheme rate.
When the 3 years of preferential tax treatment have been used up, the taxpayer becomes subject
to the ordinary tax schedule on subsequent earnings.
    This unusual piece of tax policy creates large discontinuities in tax liability depending on the
contract start date (before and after June 1, 1991), duration of stay in Denmark (3-year rule),
and earnings level (earnings eligibility threshold). Hence, the reform generates sharp quasi-
experimental variation along several different dimensions, and provides a very powerful way of
identifying the effect of taxation on migration and earnings. In this paper, we exploit the differ-
ent aspects of the tax scheme using quasi-experimental techniques such as bunching approaches
and differences-in-differences methods. For this analysis, we have gained access to matched
employer-employee administrative data for the full population of Danish residents (Danish citi-
zens and foreigners) since 1980. The data includes detailed information on citizenship, immigra-
tion history, income and tax variables, labor market variables, and socio-demographic variables.
It also contains specific information for all scheme beneficiaries.7
    Our analysis of the foreigners’ tax scheme in Denmark yields three main empirical results.
level changes in wages, which are interesting in their own right and can be identify non-parametrically.
    5
      Another recent example of using sharp tax variation to uncover non-standard wage determination effects
is Saez, Matsaganis, Tsakloglou (2012). Using cohort-based payroll tax variation in Greece, they show that
employers bear the incidence of employer-side payroll taxes while employees bear the incidence of employee-side
payroll taxes even in the long run. This suggests that wage determination is anchored to the posted wage, which
is not consistent with the standard model of tax incidence.
    6
      The scheme also applies to Danish citizens, who have been abroad with tax residence outside Denmark for
a period of at least 3 years.
    7
      The data were specifically prepared by Statistics Denmark for our research project and securely accessed
through a server at the Centre for Economic and Business Research (CEBR).



                                                      2
       First and foremost, we obtain compelling evidence that the scheme had a very large effect
on the number of highly paid foreigners in Denmark. The number of foreigners paid above
the eligibility threshold doubles relative to the number of foreigners paid slightly below the
threshold after the scheme is introduced. This effect builds up in the first five years of the
scheme and remains stable afterwards. As a result, the fraction of foreigners in the top one-half
percent of the earnings distribution is 7.5% in recent years compared to a 4% counterfactual
absent the scheme. This is consistent with a very large elasticity of migration with respect
to the net-of-tax rate among foreigners, between 1.5 and 2. The resulting revenue-maximizing
tax rate for a scheme targeting highly paid foreigners is therefore relatively small (about 35%),
and corresponds roughly to the current tax rate on foreigners in Denmark once we account for
other relevant taxes (VAT and excises).8 It can therefore be desirable from a single-country
revenue perspective to adopt such preferential schemes for highly paid foreigners. At the same
time, those schemes impose negative fiscal externalities by potentially reducing revenue in other
countries. This tension between country welfare and global welfare in the design of individual
income tax policy has loomed large in the public debate for a long time, but our paper provides
the first compelling evidence that this is indeed a major empirical issue. Absent coordination,
it is conceivable that such schemes could unravel tax progressivity in Europe.
       Second, we find compelling evidence of a negative effect of scheme-induced increases in
the net-of-tax rate on pre-tax earnings at the individual level. We show in a differences-in-
differences setting that eligible foreigners experience a 5 to 10% decline in their pre-tax earnings
relative to non-eligible foreigners after the introduction of the scheme, even after controlling for
individual characteristics and differential time trends. Most importantly, we find that migrants
who stay in Denmark beyond the 3-year scheme duration experience a sharp increase in their
earnings when the scheme elapses. By focusing on a panel of stayers on each side of the 3-
year discontinuity, we ensure that this result is not driven by selection into Denmark or by
non-tax aspects of wage-tenure profiles. In the standard labor supply model where pay equals
productivity, we would expect a decrease in labor supply and therefore in earnings when the
individual is faced with the much higher regular tax rate. Related, we find evidence of bunching
in the earnings distribution of immigrants just above the scheme eligibility threshold, but no
   8
    Importantly, the revenue-maximizing tax rate on natives is much higher, because the elasticity of migration
with respect to the net-of-tax rate among natives is much lower. We can partly measure the elasticity for natives
by estimating how many expatriate Danish natives come back because of the scheme.



                                                       3
evidence of a hole below the threshold. This suggests that bunchers are coming from the low-tax
side of threshold, which is inconsistent with the standard labor supply model where bunching is
driven by individuals on the high-tax side increasing their labor supply to qualify for the scheme.
While those two empirical findings contradict the standard labor supply model where pay equals
marginal productivity, they can be rationalized by a simple matching frictions model with wage
bargaining where there is a gap between pay and marginal productivity. To our knowledge, this
is the first time that tax variation has been used to provide evidence of a wedge between pay
and productivity and therefore potential for wage bargaining effects, as in the widely influential
theory of job search.9
       Third, we find no evidence of positive or negative spillovers of the scheme-induced influx of
high-skilled foreigners on the earnings of natives either at the industry or firm level. The absence
of spillover effects might be due to the relatively short stays of the highly paid foreigners and/or
to the relatively small share of high-skilled foreigners in the total labor force of high-skilled
workers in Denmark, even after the tax scheme was put in place. It should be noted, however,
that identifying such spillover effects is intrinsically difficult even with our tax variation, and so
the absence of spillover effects is only suggestive.
       Finally, while our study is based on a single country characterized by a certain size, culture,
quality of life, immigration tradition, etc., we argue that the empirical insights have broader
relevance. In particular, because Denmark is a small and homogeneous country starting from
a small base of highly paid foreigners, the migration elasticity with respect to the net-of-tax
rate on foreigners is likely to be larger in Denmark than in countries starting from larger bases
of highly paid foreigners. Indeed, an important insight from the theory of tax competition
(Kanbur and Keen 1993) is that tax havens tend to be small countries, because they have
small tax bases relative to the global economy and therefore feature larger tax base elasticities.
Our findings are consistent with this theoretical mechanism. Furthermore, even if such large
migration elasticities do not carry over to larger countries, the combined efforts of many small
countries in attracting high-skilled labor can have non-trivial welfare costs for large countries
(Keen and Konrad, 2013 provide a recent survey of the tax competition literature).
       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the Danish foreigners’ tax scheme
   9
    There is an enormous structural empirical literature in labor economics using the search framework, but
there is much less work that directly tests the validity of the search model against the standard frictionless model
(see Mortensen and Pissarides 1999 for a survey).



                                                         4
and the administrative data we use. Section 3 lays out a simple theoretical framework with
matching fractions and wage bargaining and contrasts its implications with the standard labor
supply model. Section 4 presents the empirical analysis. Section 5 concludes by discussing
policy implications.


2     Institutional Background and Data
2.1     The Foreigners’ Tax Scheme in Denmark

In 1992, Denmark enacted a preferential tax scheme for foreign researchers and high-earning
foreigners in all other professions, who sign contracts for employment in Denmark after June
1, 1991. The scheme is commonly known in Denmark as the Researchers’ Tax Scheme. In this
paper, we focus solely on top earners and exclude foreign researchers in the scheme from our
analysis. When the scheme was first introduced, it offered a flat income tax rate of 30% in lieu
of the regular progressive income tax with a top marginal tax rate of 68% and an average tax
rate on high-income workers of around 55%. The scheme rate was reduced to 25% in 1995, but
at the same time a payroll tax of 8% was gradually phased in between 1994-1997, leaving the
total scheme rate roughly unchanged around 30%.10
    The scheme can be used for a total period of up to 36 months after which the taxpayer
becomes subject to the ordinary income tax schedule. The 36 months do not have to be taken
together, but can be divided into any number of spells over an unlimited period of time.11 As
we discuss in more detail in the next section, this form of duration dependence creates a discrete
jump in marginal lifetime tax liability with respect to duration of stay in Denmark at the 3-year
cutoff and hence a kink in the lifetime budget set as a function of duration.
    There are two key requirements to become eligible for the preferential tax scheme. The first
requirement is that the taxpayer has been recruited abroad and not been tax liable in Denmark
in the 3 years prior to going on the scheme.12 In our data period, citizenship plays no formal role
  10
     Because the payroll tax is deductible in the base for the regular income tax, the total scheme rate from 1997
onwards can be calculated as 8% + 0.92 · 25% = 31%.
  11
     After 2008 (outside our data period), an additional scheme option was introduced whereby eligible workers
can choose between the standard scheme rate of 25% for 36 months and a higher scheme rate of 33% for 60
months (the payroll tax contribution comes in addition to both of those rates). Reports suggest that the take-up
of the newly introduced 60-month scheme option has been very low.
  12
     For taxpayers who split scheme take-up into several spells, the 3-year eligibility requirement applies to each
spell separately. But in assessing whether a taxpayer has been tax liable in Denmark prior to a given scheme
spell, time spent in Denmark under prior scheme spells is not counted.



                                                        5
in determining eligibility, and therefore Danish citizens who have been living and paying taxes
abroad (i.e., were not residents of Denmark for tax purposes) for at least 3 years can also apply
for the scheme.13 The second requirement is that, unless the worker qualifies as a researcher,
annual wage earnings must be above an eligibility threshold. The threshold grows roughly at
the rate of average earnings,14 and it always lies between the 99.2th and 99.4th percentile of the
Danish wage earnings distribution. It is equal to 765,600 Danish kroner (about 103,000 Euros)
in 2009. As the preferential scheme rate applies to all earnings conditional on eligibility, the
earnings requirement creates a discrete jump in total annual tax liability at the threshold—a
notch in the annual budget set as a function of earnings.
       In terms of administration, the scheme treatment has to be requested by the employer.
Hence, the employer has to show the tax authorities that the level of earnings is above the
eligibility threshold and that other qualifying requirements are met. Importantly, the threshold
for eligibility applies only to earnings with the specific employer requesting the scheme. Having
other sources of income or earnings do not help qualify. The threshold of eligibility must be
met on an annualized basis. Hence for a contract of 6 months, the eligibility threshold is that
the 6 months of pay must be at least half of the annual threshold. Perquisites such as free cars
or housing allowances are included in earnings eligible for the scheme and are also taxed at the
same flat rate.
       If the scheme beneficiary has other income besides scheme-qualifying earnings, that income
is taxed according to the standard progressive income tax schedule independently of scheme
earnings. In other words, scheme earnings are effectively taxed at a flat rate completely in-
dependently of the other circumstances of the individual. In particular, when the 36-months
scheme duration ends during a given calendar year, and the individual stays in Denmark, any
post-scheme earnings will be taxed according to the regular schedule. There is no pro-rating
for non-scheme earnings (or unearned income) taxed according to the regular tax schedule. As
the personal income tax in Denmark is individually based (and not family based), spouses of
scheme recipients are taxed according to the regular tax (except if they themselves qualify for
  13
     This rule was changed in 2011 such that Danish citizens must now be foreign tax residents for at least 10
years to become eligible for the scheme, but this reform lies outside our data period.
  14
     As we shall see, in our empirical analysis, we need to impute a scheme threshold for years before the scheme
enactment. We do so by assuming that the threshold to average earnings ratio in years before enactment is the
same as 1991, the first year the scheme is in place. Average earnings are estimated on the full population sample,
including all workers with any positive earnings. Because of the great stability of the earnings distribution in
Denmark, virtually all other methods for imputing the threshold before 1990 deliver identical results.


                                                        6
the scheme). Scheme earners residents of Denmark have access to the same public goods as
other residents, including public health insurance and schooling for children.15
       To summarize, the special Danish tax scheme creates the following quasi-experimental vari-
ation. First, the scheme introduced much lower tax rates on a specific sample of workers
(high-earning immigrants; not tax liable in Denmark 3 years prior) arriving in Denmark after
June 1, 1991. This variation provides an ideal setting for a differences-in-differences analysis of
migration effects. Second, the scheme introduced a notch in the individual budget constraint
creating very strong incentives for foreigners to have earnings above the eligibility threshold.
Third, the scheme introduced a 3-year duration kink among those who migrate to Denmark,
providing sharp quasi-experimental variation that can be used to study the effects of taxation
on duration of stay and on the tax incidence on individual earnings for workers who stay beyond
the 3-year scheme duration.

2.2       Data and Summary Statistics

Administrative tax data. The data we use in this paper come from an administrative dataset
including the universe of tax and payroll records for all resident individuals in Denmark, in-
cluding both Danish citizens and foreigners since 1980. The data includes detailed information
about earnings, tax variables, labor market variables, and socio-demographic variables at an
annual frequency. Most importantly, the data contains detailed citizenship and migration in-
formation such as daily dates of entry and exit. Each individual working in Denmark must
receive a personal identification number (CPR) in order to pay withholding taxes, rent an
apartment, register with health insurance, etc. The application for a CPR number contains de-
tailed questions about citizenship, country of origin, and date of entry in Denmark. The registry
administration updates this information in case an individual leaves the country16 . The data
also contain detailed information specifically for scheme beneficiaries on for example the start
and end dates of labor contracts. Unfortunately, because this information was not computerized
for the first years of the scheme, we do not have individual earnings information available for
scheme beneficiaries from 1991-1994. The data have been linked to employers both at the firm
level and the establishment level, with information on the 2-digit level industrial sector of the
  15
     Scheme earners do not qualify for unemployment and disability insurance and scheme earnings do not count
for retirement benefits computation purposes. Scheme earners typically receive additional private and employer
provided health insurance.
  16
     This update can nevertheless take a few years.

                                                      7
employer.

Summary statistics. Table 1 presents summary statistics. First, among all scheme beneficia-
ries, 95% have registered for a CPR number implying that they have become actual residents
of Denmark. This shows that only a tiny minority of scheme recipients take advantage of the
scheme without actually becoming residents. We exclude such non-resident scheme beneficia-
ries throughout the analysis. Second, the total duration of stay (including both time under
the scheme and time after the scheme elapses) for people who ever benefitted from the scheme
averages 2.35 years with about a quarter of scheme beneficiaries staying in Denmark more than
36 months, the maximum duration of the scheme. Third, scheme earnings average 153% of the
threshold, or about 150,000 Euros as of 2009. The average tax rate of scheme earners (including
the scheme flat rate and the payroll tax contribution starting in 1994) is around 30%. Fourth,
scheme earners are relatively young (40 years on average). Finally, scheme beneficiaries work
in large firms (440 employees on average) that pay relatively well—on average 59,000 Euros per
employee in 2009 compared to average earnings of 36,500 Euros for all employees in Denmark.
Those firms employ relatively few scheme workers (1.8 on average) even though they employ on
average 14 workers paid above the threshold.
   Figure 1 reports the composition of beneficiaries of the tax scheme (excluding researchers) by
country of citizenship (Panel A) and industrial sector (Panel B) from 1991-2006. Unsurprisingly,
the vast majority of scheme workers come from advanced economies: 25% come from Nordic
countries (except Denmark), 10% are Danish citizens (who qualify by not being Danish tax
residents for at least 3 years as explained above), 19% come from the United Kingdom or
Ireland, 10% come from North America, and about 20% come from Germany, France, and
Benelux (Belgium, Netherlands, Luxembourg) combined. The number coming from emerging
countries or Eastern Europe and Russia is modest. The composition of beneficiaries of the tax
scheme (excluding researchers) by industrial sector (panel B) reveals that all sectors made use
of the scheme, but with a clear overrepresentation of industries such as the financial sector and
the sports and entertainment industry.
   We can compute a take-up rate for the scheme as the fraction of foreigners arriving in
Denmark with (annualized) earnings above the eligibility threshold, who have not paid taxes
in Denmark over the last 3 years, and who take advantage of the scheme. The take-up rate is
high at 81%, but still significantly below 100% for a variety of reasons. First, companies have

                                               8
to file an application for each employee eligible for the scheme, and it is conceivable that not all
companies knew about the scheme or were willing to bear the administrative burden. Second,
it is possible that the non-scheme foreigners were not truly eligible, because they did have one
labor contract specifying earnings above the threshold ex ante even if they ended up having
total earnings above the threshold ex post (hence, the take-up rate of 80% is a lower bound).
Third, some individuals may not have been willing to take up the scheme (perhaps because of
the original claw-back rule after 7 years), or they may not have been fully aware of the existence
of the scheme.


3     Conceptual Framework
In this section, we contrast two labor market models that yield different predictions of the effects
of the scheme on migration and earnings. We start with the standard labor supply model
conventionally used in empirical labor supply and tax studies. Since some of our empirical
results cannot be rationalized within the standard labor supply model, we set out an alternative
simple model with matching frictions and wage bargaining that can account for all our empirical
findings. In both models, we simplify the exposition by abstracting from standard wage incidence
effects whereby an influx of high-skilled workers creates a labor market wide reduction in the
wages of substitutable workers. We assume away such incidence effects because our empirical
analysis always compares high-skilled foreign workers in the same labor market and is therefore
not affected by market-wide wage changes. In section 4.3 however we investigate whether we
can detect the presence of such incidence effects on high-skilled native workers.

3.1    Standard Labor Supply Model

In the standard frictionless labor supply model, workers receive a wage equal to their marginal
product and choose location and labor supply in order to maximize a utility function that
depends on net-of-tax earnings, labor supply, and location. The scheme affects behavior along
three dimensions: (1) the migration decision, (2) the duration of stay conditional on migrating,
and (3) labor supply and earnings among migrants. Let us review each dimension in turn.

Migration. The scheme reduces the average tax rate on high-earning immigrants to Denmark
and therefore makes Denmark more attractive to such workers. Hence, the scheme should


                                                 9
increase immigration of high-earning foreigners into Denmark. Note also that, in principle,
their could be a tax avoidance response whereby multinational companies with presence in
Denmark try to re-characterize some of their workers abroad with some presence in Denmark
as Danish tax residents. As discussed in Table 1, our data show that 95% of scheme eligible
workers have real presence in Denmark showing that such tax avoidance responses are small.
Furthermore, we exclude non-resident scheme earners from our analysis to concentrate on real
migration effects.

Duration. When scheme eligibility elapses after 3 years, marginal migrant workers may no
longer find it attractive to stay in Denmark and thus move back to their home country. As
illustrated in Figure 2, Panel A, the discrete jump in the tax rate at the 3-year duration threshold
D∗ produces a kink in the life-time budget constraint of duration of stay (x-axis) vs. disposable
life-time income (y-axis). This should create excess bunching around 36 months in the density
of duration of highly paid foreigners in Denmark.17 Importantly, in the standard model, the
wage rate of highly paid immigrants should not change when the scheme elapses because their
marginal productivity does not change.18

Labor supply. The scheme reduces sharply the average tax rate for immigrants with earnings
above the eligibility threshold. This creates an upward notch in the annual budget constraint
of pre-tax earnings (x-axis) vs. disposable post-tax earnings (y-axis) at the scheme eligibility
threshold z̄ as depicted in Figure 2, Panel B. According to the standard labor supply model,
such a notch induces foreign workers just below the threshold to increase earnings to a point
just above the threshold, thereby producing a hole in the earnings distribution on the high-tax
side and excess bunching in the earnings distribution on the low-tax side of the notch point.
As analyzed by Kleven and Waseem (2013), this hole may not be very sharp in the presence of
optimization frictions such as imperfect information and adjustment costs, but it remains the
case that any excess bunching on the low-tax side should be accompanied by an equal amount
of missing mass on the high-tax side. Furthermore, for foreign workers above the threshold, the
  17
      If the cost of being in Denmark (relative to one’s own country) is a constant flow cost, then all scheme-
induced migrants will leave after 3 years. More realistically, if the cost of being in Denmark declines as a function
of time spent in the country—as for example when part of the cost is an up-front moving cost—then only a
fraction of scheme-induced migrants will leave Denmark when scheme eligibility elapses.
   18
      Note also that the standard wage incidence channel should affect workers just below and just above the
3-year duration threshold in the same way (as such workers are perfect substitutes). Hence, there should be no
discontinuity in the wage rate due to standard wage incidence effects when the scheme elapses.


                                                         10
scheme creates an uncompensated net-of-tax wage increase, which should increase labor supply
and therefore earnings under the reasonable assumption that the uncompensated labor supply
elasticity is positive. Conversely, when the scheme elapses after the 3-year maximum duration,
the net-of-tax wage rate decreases and we should observe a symmetric decrease in labor supply
and earnings of immigrants who stay in Denmark beyond 3 years. Bunching at the eligibility
threshold z̄ should also disappear when the scheme elapses.
       It is possible that some of those responses could take place through tax avoidance rather
than pure labor supply without affecting the theory and predictions (as in Feldstein, 1999).
For example, employees can give up some non-taxable benefits or on-the-job amenities (such as
better offices, flexibility in the work schedule, etc.) to get higher taxable pay and qualify for
the scheme.19 Such avoidance effects simply magnify the behavioral responses of the standard
labor supply model we have described above.
       Related to tax avoidance, there might also be intertemporal substitution in earnings to take
advantage of the scheme before it expires. If the employee and employer agree to continue the
work contract after the 3-year scheme duration, it will be advantageous for them to increase
pay while the worker is still in the scheme and reduce pay when the worker is no longer in the
scheme and faces the regular income tax. Hence, we should observe excess pay during the last
year a worker is on the scheme and depressed pay during the first year off the scheme. Naturally,
as employees can always choose to leave a job, such agreements cannot be formally enforced and
this may limit the scope for such intertemporal substitution.20 Nevertheless, such intertemporal
substitution in earnings is in fact observed in the data.

3.2       Matching Frictions and Wage Bargaining Model

As we shall see, our empirical findings contradict some of the predictions of the standard labor
supply model presented above. We therefore consider an alternative simple model with matching
frictions and wage bargaining that can rationalize all of our empirical findings and which nests
the standard competitive model. To simplify, we focus on the case of inelastic labor supply
  19
     As mentioned above, most perquisites such as company cars, mobile phone bills, or company provided
lodging are by law included in taxable earnings for the scheme purposes. It is very unlikely that the large and
sophisticated firms hiring those highly skilled employees would engage in outright tax evasion, e.g., colluding
with the employee to fake earnings to meet the eligibility threshold.
  20
     Such inter-temporal substitution could also be due to real labor supply changes, e.g., workers doing over-
time at the end of the scheme and reducing hours after the scheme elapses, in which case no commitment or
enforcement is required.


                                                      11
(conditional on migration).
       A worker contemplating migration to Denmark has marginal product y for a prospective
employer in this country. In the standard competitive model used above, the pay offered by
the employer is equal to y, and in the absence of labor supply responses this level of pay is
not affected by the scheme tax rate (abstracting from general equilibrium effects on wages
as discussed earlier). In a model with matching frictions, prospective immigrant workers and
employers in Denmark need to expend resources to create a match as in the search-and-matching
framework of Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides (see e.g., Pissarides, 2000). The worker has a pre-
tax reservation wage equal to y0 such that, conditional on a match, the worker is willing to
migrate to Denmark and work for the employer if she is paid at least y0 . Conditional on a
match, the employer values the worker at her marginal product y and is therefore willing to pay
up to y. If y0 ≤ y, any wage z ∈ [y0 , y] will be acceptable to both the worker and the firm.21
In such search models, the wage z is therefore not determined and can be set anywhere in the
acceptable band [y0 , y] (Howitt and McAfee, 1987, Hall, 2005).

Migration. A worker migrates if and only if y0 ≤ y, i.e. when there exists a band of wages for
which the move is mutually beneficial to the worker and the prospective employer. The width
of this acceptable wage band depends on the tax system in Denmark and in the home country.
Denoting by zh the earnings of the worker in her home country, by τh the average tax rate in her
home country, and by ν the net cost of migration (the moving cost plus the differential value of
living in her home country vs. Denmark), the worker needs to be paid net-of-tax earnings of at
least zh · (1 − τh ) + ν to be willing to make the move to Denmark. Denoting by τ the average
tax rate in Denmark, the pre-tax reservation wage y0 must satisfy y0 · (1 − τ ) = zh · (1 − τh ) + ν,
i.e.
                                            zh · (1 − τh ) + ν   y0τ =0
                                       y0 =                    =        ,
                                                  1−τ            1−τ
where y0τ =0 ≡ zh · (1 − τh ) + ν is the reservation wage if there were zero taxes on earnings in
Denmark.
       The scheme lowers the tax rate in Denmark from the regular rate τ D to the scheme rate
τ S for migrants paid above the eligibility threshold z̄. Hence, there are two reservation wages
  21
       If y0 > y, then no wage can satisfy both the employee and the employer and the match cannot proceed.




                                                       12
y0S , y0D based on whether the worker is eligible for the scheme or not:

                                    zh · (1 − τh ) + ν   zh · (1 − τh ) + ν
                            y0S =              S
                                                       <                    = y0D .
                                          1−τ                  1 − τD

Workers who can use the scheme have a lower pre-tax reservation wage. Hence, the scheme
widens the band [y0 , y] of acceptable wages and induces migration when y0S ≤ y < y0D .

Duration. The effect of the scheme on duration of stay is qualitatively similar to the standard
labor supply model. The 3-year duration of the scheme creates an incentive for stays lasting at
most 3 years, thereby producing excess mass in the duration density below 3 years as well as
sharp bunching at the 3-year threshold. If the net cost of living in Denmark ν and potential net-
of-tax earnings at home zh (1 − τh ) were constant over time, then all scheme-induced migrants
would leave exactly at the 3-year threshold. With idiosyncratic time variation in those variables,
some of the scheme-induced migrants would stay after 3 years and some would leave before 3
years.

Wage determination. Within the band [y0 , y] of acceptable wages, how is the equilibrium
wage determined? While there are many potential models of wage determination in this type of
setting, the most widely used model assumes that the pre-tax wage z splits the surplus between
the worker and the firm through a Nash bargaining process in which an exogenous parameter
0 ≤ β ≤ 1 captures bargaining power of the worker (and 1 − β captures bargaining power
of the firm). As we shall see, the Nash bargaining framework is particularly useful to solve
the model in the presence of discontinuous incentive schemes (which arise here because of the
scheme eligibility threshold).
                                                                                                       β
       Given the tax rate τ , pay z is set to maximize W = (y − z)1−β ((1 − τ ) z − y0τ =0 ) where
y − z is the firm’s surplus and (1 − τ )z − y0τ =0 is the worker’s surplus. To begin with, we ignore
the notch (discrete jump in τ ) at the threshold z̄ in which case the solution to the bargaining
problem is characterized by

                                 z = βy + (1 − β)y0         with 0 ≤ β ≤ 1.                                  (1)

Note that this model nests the standard frictionless case when β = 1.22 From condition (1),
earnings under the scheme tax rate τ S are equal to z S = (1 − β)y0S + βy, while earnings under
  22
    More generally, any wage z in the acceptable band [y0 , y] implicitly defines a bargaining weight β such that
equation (1) holds.

                                                       13
the regular Danish tax rate τ D are equal to z D = (1 − β)y0D + βy. Hence, the scheme reduces
pre-tax earnings as long as firms have some bargaining power so that 1 − β > 0 (i.e., when
we are not in the standard competitive model with β = 1), because the lower reservation wage
induced by the preferential tax scheme allows firms to bargain down wages.
   Let us now consider the implications of the tax notch at the eligibility threshold z̄. There will
be bunching at the threshold as in the standard labor supply model, but a conceptual difference
is that the matching model predicts that bunchers may be coming from both the low-tax and
the high-tax side of the threshold. This can be understood as follows. First, consider workers
with earnings above the threshold z̄ in the absence of the scheme, i.e. workers for whom z D > z̄.
As shown above, the introduction of the preferential scheme rate reduces pre-tax earnings inside
the eligible range when firms have positive bargaining power, and so we will have z S < z D for
these workers. However, if earnings were sufficiently close to the threshold to begin with, a
situation arises where z S < z̄ < z D which is inconsistent with an interior solution in either
tax bracket. Such workers will therefore bunch from above and the amount of this bunching is
increasing in the bargaining power of firms 1 − β. Second, consider workers with earnings below
the threshold z̄ in the absence of the scheme, i.e. workers for whom z D < z̄. Even though the tax
rate has not changed in this range, the introduction of the notch at z̄ may allow these workers
to push up their wages provided that they have positive bargaining power β. In particular,
for a worker with earnings just below the threshold absent the scheme, a small increase in pay
produces a large gain for the worker at a small cost for the firm, and such a pay increase will
be the equilibrium outcome under Nash bargaining with positive bargaining power for workers.
Hence, there will also be bunching from below and the amount of this bunching is increasing
in the bargaining power of workers β. Finally, note that extensive migration responses also
contribute to bunching as marginal entrants have an excess tendency to locate at z̄. Again,
this reflects bunching either from above (those for whom z̄ < z D < y0D without the scheme and
z S = z̄ > y0S with the scheme) or from below (those for whom z D < z̄, y0D without the scheme
and z S = z̄ > y0S with the scheme).
   Importantly, bunching from below (created by β > 0) is associated with a hole in the earnings
distribution below the threshold, whereas bunching from above (created by 1 − β > 0) is created
by a shift in the entire distribution above the threshold and is therefore not associated with
any hole. Hence, for any size of bunching, the size of the hole below the eligibility threshold is


                                                14
informative of the bargaining power of workers β. When β = 1 (standard frictionless model),
all bunching is coming from below and creates a hole on this side of the threshold. When β = 0,
all bunching is coming from above and creates no hole on either side of the threshold.
    Figure 3 illustrates these theoretical results in a density distribution diagram. Panel A shows
how the bunch and the hole is created by bargaining responses (conditional on migration) from
below and above depending on the bargaining power of workers relative to firms, while Panel B
shows how migration responses affect the distribution and adds to bunching. We may summarize
the key predictions of the matching frictions model as follows.

Prediction 1: Migration. All workers for whom y0S < y ≤ y0D and z̄ ≤ y migrate into the
country because of the scheme. This lifts up the density of foreign migrants above z̄. A fraction
of those migrants will bunch at z̄.

Prediction 2: Duration. The 3-year duration of the scheme produces excess mass in the
duration density below 3 years and sharp bunching at the 3-year threshold.

Prediction 3: Wages. Among migrant workers paid above the eligibility threshold z̄, the
scheme reduces pre-tax earnings.

Prediction 4: Bunching & Hole. There is bunching at z̄ from above when employers have
bargaining power (1 − β > 0). There is bunching at z̄ from below when workers have bargaining
power (β > 0). There is a hole below z̄ only when workers have bargaining power (β > 0).


4     Empirical Evidence
In the following, we estimate the empirical effects of the scheme on migration and duration
(Section 4.1), wages (Section 4.2) and spillovers on natives (Section 4.3), using the conceptual
framework set out above. We show that each of the four predictions of the matching frictions
model are borne out by the data.

4.1    Migration Effects

differences-in-differences approach. As a first step in testing whether the Danish tax scheme
had an impact on high-skilled migration, we consider the evolution of the number of foreigners



                                                15
with earnings above the scheme threshold between 1980-2005 in Figure 4, Panel A.23 This series
(labelled ‘treatment’ in the figure) shows that the number of highly paid foreigners was fairly
stable around 800 in the pre-scheme period from 1980 to 1990. After the scheme is introduced
in 1991, demarcated by a vertical line in the figure, there is a steady increase in the number of
highly paid foreigners. The number reaches 2000 by 1997 and is close to 3000 by 2005. It is
of course conceivable that the number of highly paid foreigners would have increased even in
the absence of the scheme. For example, European Union labor market integration following
the Single European Act (taking effect from 1987) and the Maastricht Treaty (taking effect
from 1993) could have increased labor mobility across European countries. The simplest way to
control for such trends is to plot the number of highly paid foreigners just below the eligibility
threshold for the scheme. Hence, Panel A also shows the number of foreigners in Denmark with
earnings between 80% and 90% of the threshold (control 1) and with earnings between 90% and
99.5% of the threshold (control 2). Both series are normalized so that they match the treatment
series in 1990, the year before the scheme came into force. Before we address below potential
confounders to this simple differences-in-differences strategy, two lessons emerge from the use
of those controls.
       First, the control series follow the treatment series extremely closely in the period before the
scheme is introduced. The remarkable similarity and stability of the three series lend credibility
to our assumption that foreigners just below the threshold are good control groups for the
treated foreigners above the threshold. Second, after the scheme is implemented, the control
groups series only increase modestly in the first 5 years. By 1995, the control series are virtually
identical to 1990 levels while the treatment series have almost doubled. After 1995, the control
series increase steadily over time but more slowly than the treatment series. Indeed, after 1995,
the treatment series are consistently about twice as high as the control series.
       Next, we zoom in on the flow of arrivals of highly paid foreigners in Denmark (instead
of focusing on the stock). Figure 4, Panel B reports the number of foreigners with annualized
earnings above the scheme eligibility threshold (treatment series) arriving each year in Denmark
from 1980 to 2006. As control groups, we again consider the number of foreigners arriving in
Denmark with annualized earnings between 80% and 90% of the threshold (control 1) and with
  23
    Earnings are annualized based on duration of stay in the year for part-year residents. Duration of stay in
the year is measured using the migration database.




                                                     16
earnings between 90% and 99.5% of the threshold (control 2).24 This panel is consistent with
the picture provided by the previous panel for the stock of foreigners. It shows that the number
of arrivals of foreigners above the threshold relative to foreigners below the threshold more than
doubles quickly after the scheme is put in place. Naturally the series for arrivals in Panel B are
noisier than the series for stocks in Panel A.
       Table 2 summarizes the graphical evidence described above by presenting elasticity estimates.
The three columns consider different migration elasticity concepts (all defined with respect to
the average net-of-tax rate): (1) the elasticity of the total number of foreigners (as in Panel A
of Figure 4), (2) the elasticity of the number of arrivals of foreigners (as in Panel B of Figure 4),
and (3) the elasticity of the number of foreigners with less than 3 years of presence in Denmark.
These elasticities are estimated using a 2SLS regression specification of the form

                        log Nit = α0 + β · 1[i = 1] + γt + e · log(1 − τit ) + νit ,                     (2)

where i = 0, 1 denotes control and treatment group, t denotes year, Nit is the number of
foreigners in group i and year t (corresponding to each of the outcomes in columns 1-3), τit is
the average tax rate in group i and year t, 1[i = 1] is the treatment group dummy, and γt are
year fixed effects. The key variable of interest log(1 − τit ) is instrumented by the interaction
1[i = 1] · 1[t > 1991]. As a baseline, we compute τit assuming a 100% take-up rate in which
case the results should be interpreted as intent-to-treat effects.
       The treatment group is defined as foreigners with earnings above the eligibility threshold,
while the control group is defined as foreigners with earnings between 80% and 99% of the
eligibility threshold. Effectively, the elasticity estimate e is the Wald ratio of the differences-in-
differences of the log number of foreigners to the differences-in-differences of the log net-of-tax
rate. We always exclude the year 1991 from the regression, because the reform was enacted
in 1992 but applied retroactively starting in mid-1991. We consider two time horizons for the
migration response. The long-term elasticity refers to a specification that includes 1992-2005
as the post-reform period, whereas the short-term elasticity includes only 1992-1996 as the
post-reform period. All specifications include 1980-1990 as the pre-reform period.
       Our baseline estimates in Panel A1 of Table 2 show that elasticities are large and precisely
estimated, between 1.5 and 2 across the different elasticity definitions. The large magnitude of
  24
    Again, both control series are normalized so that they match the treatment series in 1990 the year before
the scheme was first implemented.

                                                     17
elasticities can be understood directly from Figure 4: the scheme slightly more than doubles
the number of highly paid foreigners while increasing the average net-of-tax rate from about 0.4
to about 0.7, which translates into an elasticity of log(2.2)/ log(.7/.4) ' 1.5. The short-term
elasticities are somewhat smaller than the long-term elasticities as the migration effect builds
gradually after the reform. However, in the case of the number of arrivals, short-term and
long-term elasticities are extremely close suggesting that the response to the scheme was fast.
Naturally, the elasticity of the number of foreigners with less than 3 years of presence is larger
(close to 2) than for all foreigners as the scheme targets foreigners during their first three years
of stay, an important point to which we come back later.
   The following panels consider various robustness checks. Panel A2 controls for a potential
difference in pre-existing trends between the treatment and control groups. We first regress
log Nit for all years prior to the reform on group fixed effects and two group specific time trends
(i.e., 1[i = 0] · t and 1[i = 1] · t). And then we use the difference between log Nit and the
                                          \
predicted values of the first regression log Nit as the outcome in the regression specification (2).
The elasticity estimates are virtually unchanged compared to the baseline. Panel A3 presents a
placebo specification, where the treatment group is defined as foreigners with income between
90% and 99% percent of the eligibility threshold and the control group is defined as foreigners
with income between 80% and 90% of the threshold (with the net-of-tax rate variable—the
denominator of the elasticity—being the same as in Panel A1). This specification also tests
for the potentially confounding implications of shifting around the eligibility threshold (via
earnings or avoidance responses) in order to qualify for the scheme, since such shifting would
produce a dip in the number of foreigners just below the threshold relative to the number of
foreigners further down. The elasticities are small (.1 or less) and insignificant, which confirms
the graphical evidence that the two control groups follow extremely similar trends and shows
that shifting around the threshold is second order (we come back to this below).
   Panel A4 controls for imperfect take-up by taking into account that some individuals in the
treatment group (those with earnings above the eligibility threshold) are not on the scheme.
Specifically, we compute actual tax rates (given actual take-up) and instrument the actual tax
rates by the intent-to-treat tax rates. This correction has a small impact on the estimates for
the number of arrivals and the number of foreigners in their first three years of stay (columns
2 and 3), reflecting that scheme take-up rate is high as discussed earlier (around 80-85%). It


                                                18
has a much bigger effect on the estimate for the total number of foreigners in column (1) as
foreigners who stay beyond 3 years are no longer eligible for the scheme.25
   Panels A5 and A6 estimate the effects of the scheme by country of citizenship for two groups:
foreigners coming from Nordic countries (Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden) in Panel A5, and
foreigners coming from English-speaking countries (Australia, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand,
South Africa, UK, US) in Panel A6. Elasticity estimates are slightly larger for English-speaking
countries, especially for the total stock of foreigners in column (1) due to the fact that the stock
of immigrants from those countries was considerably smaller to begin with.
   Finally, in Panel A7, we report estimates of the effect of the scheme on expatriates, i.e.,
Danish citizens returning to Denmark after a spell of at least three years abroad (so that they
qualify for the scheme upon their return). Panel A7 shows small and insignificant estimates.
This implies that the scheme was not successful at bringing back highly-paid Danish expatriates
to their home country. This is very important for the policy debate on taxes and mobility as
we discuss below.

Potential confounders. Our simple graphical differences-in-differences analysis relies on the
standard parallel trend assumption. That is, absent the scheme, the trend in the number of
foreigners above the threshold would have been parallel to the trend in the number of foreigners
just below the threshold. There are two potential confounders: (1) a fanning-out of the earnings
distribution after 1990, (2) an endogenous earnings response to the scheme threshold (notch)
as analyzed in the conceptual framework of Section 3. Let us address them in turn.

Confounder 1: Fanning out of the earnings distribution. A fanning-out of the earnings distri-
bution would increase the number of workers (natives and foreigners) paid above the eligibility
threshold, thereby creating a divergence in the number of foreigners in the treatment and con-
trol groups even absent the scheme. However, this concern is unlikely to be very important in
the case of Denmark as Kleven and Schultz (2012) have shown that top earnings shares have
been remarkably stable in Denmark since 1980. To address this issue more directly and control
for any change in the earnings distribution, Figure 5 plots the fraction of foreigners in different
percentiles of the earnings distribution. Since the threshold for scheme eligibility is always be-
tween the 99.2th and the 99.4th percentile of the full earnings distribution among Danish adults
  25
     This elasticity can be used to predict the effect on the total number of foreigners if the scheme were of
infinite duration, extrapolating from the estimated effects of the actual 3-year duration.


                                                     19
with positive earnings, Figure 5 compares the fraction of foreigners in the 99.5-100th percentile
(treatment) to the fraction of foreigners in the 95-97th percentile (control 1) and the 97-99th
percentile (control 2). Note that the figure features a gap for the treatment group between
1991-1994, because the scheme data does not provide scheme earnings for those years. Two im-
portant findings emerge from the figure. First, the fraction of foreigners in each percentile group
is extremely stable before 1991.26 Second, after 1991, the fraction of foreigners increases much
more rapidly—in absolute as well as percentage terms—above the 99.5th percentile where the
scheme applies. Consistent with Figure 4, there is a doubling of the fraction foreigners above the
99.5th percentile relative to percentile groups just below the scheme eligibility threshold. This
finding confirms that changes in the earnings distribution do not pose a threat to our findings.
This graphical result is confirmed in Table 2, Panel B where we define the treatment group as
individuals with earnings above the 99.5th percentile and the control group as individuals with
earnings between the 95th and 99th percentile. The elasticity estimates are slightly attenuated
relative to our baseline specification of panel A1, but remain very large around 1.2 and precisely
estimated.

Confounder 2: Intensive earnings response to the scheme. The second confounder is that for-
eigners above the eligibility threshold might be displacing foreigners slightly below the threshold
through intensive earnings responses as we described in the theory section. Such shifting should
produce a dip in the number of foreigners just below the threshold relative to the number of
foreigners further down. The completely parallel trends of the two different control groups in
Figure 4 (those between 90-99% of the threshold and those between 80-90% of the threshold)
along with the placebo estimates in Panel A3 of Table 2 suggest that this dip effect was not
significant. To cast further light on this and understand the nature of the behavioral response,
it is fruitful to look directly at the density of earnings among foreigners.
    Figure 6 plots such densities before the scheme was introduced (1980-1990 in dashed grey)
and after the scheme was introduced (1995-2010 in solid black). Earnings are measured in
proportion to the eligibility threshold such that 1 corresponds to the threshold, demarcated by
a solid vertical line. The post-scheme density is normalized so that the average level of the
density between 70% and 90% of the threshold is the same as in the pre-scheme period. The
  26
     The fraction of foreigners is higher in levels, around 3%, above the 99.5th percentile, than in percentiles 96
to 99.5 where it is around 2%.



                                                        20
figure limits the sample to foreigners in their first and second full calendar years in Denmark.
This is done to avoid using years where the person is either a part-year resident (year of arrival)
or a part-year scheme beneficiary (as the scheme elapses at some point during the third full
calendar year in Denmark), because annualizing earnings for such observations introduces noise.
       The density is smooth around the threshold before the introduction of the scheme. After
the scheme is introduced, the density is virtually identical below the threshold, but two differ-
ences appear above the threshold. First, the density is everywhere higher above the threshold
confirming the strong migration response in Figure 4 and showing that this response occur at
all earnings levels above the threshold. Second, there is clear bunching just above the threshold
(notch point), but no discernible hole below the threshold. The figure reports that the excess
mass due to bunching is statistically significant while the missing mass on the left of the thresh-
old is not statistically significant. Excess bunching and missing mass is estimated following
the method developed by Chetty et al. (2011) and adapting it to a differences-in-differences
setting to take advantage of the counterfactual distribution before the introduction of the tax
scheme.27 The presence of bunching is consistent with both the standard labor supply model
and the matching friction model presented above. Even though the bunching is clearly visible
in the figure and therefore provides compelling evidence of an intensive earnings response, it is
in reality very modest when compared to the extremely large notch in the budget set created by
the scheme (Figure 2, Panel B). Using the method developed by Kleven and Waseem (2013), the
  27
    Formally, in the absence of directly observable
                                                  Pp counterfactualPpfor the distribution in the
                                                                                               Pabsence of the notch,
                                                                                                 u
one would estimate models of the form: cj = i=0 αi− · (zj )i + i=0 αi+ · (zj )i · 1[z > z̄] + i=l γi · 1[zj = i] + νj ,
where [l, u] is the excluded range around the notch point, cj is the log number of observation in each bin
of earnings zj , and (zj )i are non-parametric polynomial fits. The counterfactual distribution is then, cˆj =
Pp c               Pp c
  i=0 α− · (z )i +
         i   j      i=0 α+ · (z )i · 1[z > z̄]. From this counterfactual distribution, missing mass M and bunching
                          i    j               Pz̄                         Pu
B can easily be estimated as M  c = i=l (cj −cˆj ) and Bb = i=z̄ (cˆj −cj ) . The difference here is that we take
                                           cbz̄                    cbz̄
advantage of the existence of a counterfactual distribution prior to 1991 in the absence of a notch to enrich the
quality of the counterfactual estimate of the distribution in the absence of a notch after 1991. We do so by
estimating a model of the form

                            baseline density before 1991
                                                           shift in the distribution over time
                                  z       }|          {
                                  X p
                                                       i                   z }| {
                   cj,t   =           αi,t1 · (zj,t1 )   +                 α0,t2
                                         i=0
                                   p
                                   X                                           u
                                                                               X
                              +          ηi,t2 · (zj,t2 )i · 1[zj,t2 > z̄] +         γi · 1[zj,t2 = i] + νjt
                                   i=0                                         i=l

where t = t1 is before 1991, and t = t2 is after the scheme was introduced in 1991 and [l, u] is the excluded range
around the notch point. In practice we chose to exclude the range between .95 and 1.05 of the threshold and we
used polynomial specifications of order 6.



                                                                   21
implied labor supply elasticity in the standard model of Section 3.1 would be extremely small,
less than .01 (in the case where there are no frictions due to imperfect information or costly
labor supply adjustment). The fact that no hole or missing mass is discernible below the notch
is inconsistent with the standard labor supply model (where bunching is coming from below),
but is consistent with the matching frictions model when employers have most of the bargaining
power (in which case bunching is coming from above). It is important to note though that our
ability to detect a hole is limited, because such holes are not as visible as bunching spikes in a
world with optimization frictions (see Kleven and Waseem, 2013 for an analysis of how frictions
affect both bunching and holes in the standard labor supply model).

Duration. We now analyze the effect of the scheme on the duration of stay for immigrants by
plotting the duration densities for foreigners (below and above the earnings eligibility threshold;
before and after the scheme enactment) in Figure 7. Panel A focuses on the pre-reform period
1980-1990 and compares duration densities for foreigners just below the earnings threshold
(96-99th percentile) to foreigners above the threshold (99.5-100th percentile). Vertical lines
demarcate year thresholds, with the solid vertical line representing the 3-year threshold where
the scheme elapses. In Panel A, the P99.5-100 series are normalized to be equal to the P96-99
series on average (so that both series are comparable in levels). This placebo panel shows no
noticeable difference between duration distributions below and above the scheme threshold prior
to the introduction of the scheme.
   Panel B focuses on the post-reform period 1991-2006, but is otherwise constructed as the
top panel. In Panel B, the P96-99 series are normalized to be equal to the P96-99 series from
Panel A on average (so that series P96-99 are comparable across Panels A and B). In Panel B,
the P99.5-100 are then doubly normalized using both the Panel A normalization for P99.5-100
and the Panel B normalization for P96-99 (so that the excess density of P99.5-100 relative to
P96-99 in Panel B can be interpreted as the extensive migration response). Two clear changes
emerge after the introduction of the scheme. First, there is a big jump in the duration density
for the treatment group in the interval below 3 years compared to the interval above 3 years,
confirming that the scheme favors durations of at most three years. Using a differences-in-
differences specification, the scheme has reduced the probability of staying more than 3 years
in Denmark (conditional on migration) by about 15 percentage points. Second, large and sharp
bunching emerges in the duration density precisely at the 3-year threshold consistent with the

                                                22
conceptual framework. Interestingly, bunching also emerges at the 1-year and 2-year thresholds
(and to a small extent at the 4-year and 5-year thresholds), which shows that scheme foreigners
tend to negotiate work contracts in full years. Excess bunching at the 3-year threshold is larger
than excess bunching at all the other year thresholds as one would expect.

Tax policy implications. Using the elasticities estimated in Table 2, the revenue-maximizing
tax rate (Laffer rate) can be computed using the classic inverse elasticity formula, τ = 1/(1 + e).
Note that this is the revenue-maximizing tax rate for a special tax scheme applying solely to
foreign immigrants. Using an elasticity of 1.5, the revenue-maximizing tax rate equals τ =
1/(1 + 1.5) = 40%, which is not very far above the current total tax rate of about 30% when
including scheme and payroll taxes. Assuming an elasticity of 2 (as suggested by specifications
that control for incomplete take-up), the revenue-maximizing tax rate is only τ = 1/(1 + 2) =
33%, about the level of the current total tax rate under the scheme.
   Note also that foreigners pay additional taxes in Denmark when they consume their income in
Denmark through the value-added-tax (VAT) and various other commodity taxes.28 Accounting
for such consumption taxes would imply that the Laffer rate on foreigners could be slightly lower
than the current total tax rate under the scheme.
   Importantly, the revenue-maximizing tax rate on natives would be much higher, because
the elasticity of the number of natives with respect to the net-of-tax rate is much lower. As
shown in Table 2, Panel A7, the elasticity for Danish expatriates is much smaller, and at most
0.1. This implies that the migration effect of changing the top tax rate for all Danish residents
would be small (see Piketty and Saez, 2013 for a detailed exposition).29

4.2     Wage Effects

We now turn to the effect of the preferential scheme tax on the wage earnings of foreign scheme
beneficiaries. Recall that the standard labor supply model and the matching friction model
make opposite predictions on the effect of the tax scheme on earnings.
  28
     The VAT normal rate in Denmark is equal to 25%, and on top of that come substantial excises on certain
goods. According to Immervoll et al. (2007), the total average consumption tax rate in Denmark is 36%. To
the extent that top foreign earners consume a fraction of their Danish income outside Denmark, this rate would
have to be scaled accordingly.
  29
     Our scheme experiment allows us to measure how many Danish expatriate come back because of the scheme
which is only one side of the natives behavioral response. The other side, which is how many Danish people
would stay in Denmark (instead of migrating away) if the Danish top tax rate were lowered cannot be directly
estimated with our scheme induced tax variation.


                                                     23
Repeated cross-section evidence. Figure 8 depicts the average nominal annual earnings
for foreigners in their first full calendar year in Denmark (denoted by year 1) for the sample
of foreigners with year 1 earnings between 70% and 95% of the scheme eligibility threshold
(dashed line) and between 105% and 400% of the scheme eligibility threshold (solid line). We
exclude those earning between 95% and 105% of the scheme eligibility threshold as bunching at
the eligibility threshold naturally biases downward average earnings.30 For year t, the sample
includes foreigners who have arrived in Denmark in year t − 1, and stay the full calendar year
t in Denmark. Both series are normalized to 100 in year 1990, the year before the introduction
of the scheme. The graph shows that the earnings of foreigners below and above the eligibility
threshold follow a parallel trend from 1980 to 1991, before the scheme introduction. The earnings
of foreigners above the scheme eligibility threshold decrease sharply relative to foreigners below
the eligibility threshold after the scheme is in place. Hence, paralleling our identification strategy
for migration effects presented in Section 4.1, a differences-in-differences estimate based on
Figure 8 would imply that the scheme reduces pre-tax earnings. This is consistent with the
matching friction model (and inconsistent with the standard labor supply model). We discuss
the plausibility of the identification assumption below.
       Table 3 presents systematic differences-in-differences estimates of the effect of the scheme on
log annual pretax earnings using the same strategy as the one depicted on Figure 8. For year t,
the sample again includes foreigners who arrived in Denmark in year t − 1, and stayed the full
calendar year t in Denmark, so that they would be eligible for the scheme based on duration
requirements. Hence, the sample is a set of repeated cross-sections with non-overlapping sets
of foreigners in each year. We denote by zit the earnings of individual i in year t. We always
exclude years t =1991–1994 from the sample (as we have no scheme earnings information for
those years). In all columns of Table 3, except (5), we exclude potential bunchers by removing
all individuals with earnings between 95% and 105% of the threshold.
       We consider first the following reduced form specification:

                   log zit = α + β · 1[zit ≥ z̄] + γt + η · 1[zit ≥ z̄] · 1[t > 1991] + νit , ,         (3)

where 1[zit ≥ z̄] is a dummy variable for having earnings above the eligibility threshold z̄, γt
are year fixed effects, and 1[zit ≥ z̄] · 1[t > 1991] is the interaction term for being above the
  30
     We exclude those with earnings above 400% of the threshold to reduce noise due to outliers. We include
outliers in Table 3 below where we consider log-earnings elasticity specifications that naturally dampen the
influence of outliers.

                                                       24
eligibility threshold and arriving after the scheme is in place. Hence, η is the coefficient of
interest and is reported in the first row of Table 3. In the traditional labor supply model, η is
positive as the lower tax rate from the scheme should increase labor supply and hence earnings
(if the uncompensated labor supply elasticity is positive). In the matching friction model, η
is negative as the lower tax rate from the scheme allows the employer to reduce the pre-tax
earnings paid to the employee.
       Next, we present elasticity estimates based on the following 2SLS specification

                         log zit = α + β · 1[zit ≥ z̄] + γt + δ · log(1 − τit ) + νit , ,                           (4)

where τit is the average tax rate for individual i in year t. The key variable of interest log(1−τit )
is instrumented by the interaction 1[zit ≥ z̄] · 1[t > 1991]. We again compute τit assuming a
100% take-up rate in which case the results should be interpreted as intent-to-treat effects. The
coefficient δ can be interpreted as the elasticity of pre-tax wage earnings with respect to the
                                          d log z
individual net-of tax rate: δ =        d log(1−τ )
                                                   .   It is reported in the second row of Table 3. Again, in
the traditional labor supply model, this elasticity is positive while it is negative in the bargaining
model.
       Consistent with Figure 8, column (1) of Table 3 shows a significantly negative effect of the
                                                                                                  d log z
scheme on earnings of -4.8 log-points which translates into an elasticity δ =                  d log(1−τ )
                                                                                                             of pre-tax
earnings with respect to the net-of-tax rate of -.18. Column (1) clusters standard errors at
the group×year level. Because with only 46 clusters, robust standard errors might not be fully
accurate, we use a grouped estimator in column (2) where we collapse all observations at the
group×year level to obtain more conservative standard errors based on this aggregated sample
of 46 observations. The point estimates are naturally the same as in column (1) but the standard
errors are slightly larger. The estimates in column (2) however remain highly significant with a
t-statistics in excess of 3.
       In column (3), we add individual controls for age, citizenship, and 27-digit industry codes.
This hardly affects the estimates. In column (4), we further control for potential differential
trends in log earnings before the reform between the control and treatment group.31 This leads
to a larger but less precise estimate (significant only at the 5% level). Column (5) adds to
  31
      More precisely, we begin by regressing individual log-earnings on two linear time trends t · 1[zit ≥ z̄] and
t · 1[zit < z̄] for all observations before 1991, and then estimate our regression specifications (3) and (4) using as
an outcome the difference between actual earnings and predicted earnings from the initial regression.


                                                            25
the sample individuals with earnings between 95% and 105% of the threshold. The estimate is
larger than in column (1) and remains highly significant, with an implied elasticity of -.30.
    The last column of Table 3 presents a robustness check by estimating a triple-difference
model where foreigners with more than 3 years of presence are used as a control.32 This again
translates into a significant estimate of -9.4 log-points and an implied elasticity of -.30.
    A potential confounder for the findings from Figure 8 and Table 3 is that the set of foreigners
who arrive after the scheme is in place might be different as the scheme induces a very large
migration response as we showed in Section 4.1. For example, if scheme induced immigrants have
lower skills and earnings than immigrants who would have come absent the scheme (conditional
on having earnings above 105% of the eligibility threshold), then the estimates reported in
Table 3 would be biased downward. Therefore, to control for such compositional effects, we
next turn to an alternative test using a balanced panel of migrants who stay five or more years
in Denmark.

Panel evidence. The scheme elapses after 3 years, producing a large tax increase among
scheme beneficiaries who stay in Denmark more than 3 years. This allows us to estimate the
effects of the scheme on earnings while controlling for individual fixed effects.
    Figure 9 depicts the average real annual earnings for foreigners arriving in Denmark after
the scheme is in place (from 1995 to 2002) in Panel A and before the scheme is in place (from
1980 to 1991) in Panel B. Year 0 is the year of arrival, year 1 is the first full calendar year in
Denmark, etc. Earnings are normalized by year 2 earnings. The sample includes all foreigners
who stay 5 or more full calendar years in Denmark and have gross earnings in year 1 between
70% and below 95% of the scheme eligibility threshold in dashed line (this is the control group
never eligible for the scheme) and between 105% and 150% of the scheme eligibility threshold
in solid line (this is the treatment group eligible for the scheme after enactment). We exclude
those earning between 95% and 105% of the scheme eligibility threshold as bunching at the
eligibility threshold naturally biases downward average earnings.
    To control for the effects of selection into staying in Denmark, we restrict the sample to a
balanced panel following exactly the same set of individuals over their first five full calendar
years of stay in Denmark. If we were not controlling for selective attrition, the effects of the
  32
     More precisely, in year t, we include foreigners who arrived in Denmark in year t − 3 or before (and therefore
are not eligible for the scheme in year t) with earnings in year t in the relevant control and treatment ranges.



                                                        26
variation in net-of-tax rates at year 3 on observed average earnings would be mixing two effects:
the potential direct effects of the net-of-tax rates on the distribution of earnings, and a selection
effect through the effect of the net-of-tax rate on the reservation wage. Because we focus on
a fixed sample of stayers, we get rid of the selection effect, and variations in the earnings
distribution in year 3 cannot be attributed to variations in the distribution of unobserved fixed-
effect characteristics correlated with the net-of-tax rate. The estimated treatment effect of the
change in tax rate at year 3 remains a local average treatment effect though, in the sense that
it is estimated on the population of stayers, an important external validity limitation to keep
in mind.
    Panel A shows that earnings increase in years 3 to 5 (relative to years 1 and 2) for those
eligible for the scheme. This implies that the end of the scheme leads to an increase in earnings,
which is consistent with the matching friction model (and inconsistent with the standard labor
supply model). Note that year 3 is a transition year when individuals are eligible part-year for
the scheme. The spike in earnings in year 3 (relative to years 4 to 5) could be due to re-timing to
maximize scheme benefits as discussed in the theory section. Therefore, to eliminate potential
inter-temporal shifting from years 4-5 to year 3, the legitimate comparison is between years 1
and 2 vs. years 3 to 5.
    Panel B is a placebo comparison (for entrants before the scheme was introduced) showing
that no such differential increase takes place for immigrants arriving before the scheme is in
place. This confirms that the results from Panel A are due to the scheme.
    Formally, we can estimate the differences-in-differences effects of the scheme on earnings
using the following reduced form specification.

                log zid = αi + β · 1[zi,d=1 ≥ z̄] + γd + η · 1[zi,d=1 ≥ z̄] · 1[d ≥ 3] + νid ,     (5)

where zid are earnings of individual i in years d = 1, .., 5, αi is an individual fixed effect, γd is a
year fixed effect, and 1[zi,d=1 ≥ z̄] · 1[d ≥ 3] is the interaction of having year 1 earnings above
the eligibility threshold and the scheme having elapsed. Next, to obtain an elasticity estimate,
we consider the following 2SLS fixed-effects specification:

                      log zid = αi + β · 1[zi,d=1 ≥ z̄] + γd + δ · log(1 − τid ) + νid ,           (6)

where τid is the average tax rate. The variable log(1 − τid ) is instrumented with the interaction
1[zi,d=1 ≥ z̄] · 1[d ≥ 3].

                                                     27
       The estimates corresponding to specifications (5) and (6) are presented in the first and
second rows of Table 4 respectively. Consistent with Figure 9, Panel A, column (1) of Table
4 shows that both the reduced form coefficient η and the elasticity coefficient δ are negative
and significant in the case of entrants after 1991 (when the scheme is in place). Note also that
the coefficient δ is comparable in magnitude to the coefficients estimated using repeated cross-
sections in Table 3. Consistent with Figure 9, Panel B, column (3) of Table 4 shows that both
the reduced form coefficient η and the elasticity coefficient δ are insignificant for the placebo
case of entrants before 1990 (when the scheme is not yet in place).33
       While the panel analysis controls for individual fixed-effects, it is conceivable that individuals
earnings differ not only in level but also in profile across individuals. Such profile effects cannot
be controlled solely with individual fixed effects. If selection into staying in Denmark was based
on earnings profiles (and not only on earnings levels), then treated and control groups in our
sample of stayers might have different earnings profiles, potentially creating a bias. For example,
suppose individual earnings fully reflect productivity and that productivity varies across years
idiosyncratically. Suppose further that individuals leave Denmark when their net-of-tax earnings
fall below their net-of-tax reservation wage (i.e., individuals behave in a completely myopic way
and consider only current potential earnings when deciding to leave Denmark). Net-of-tax
earnings mechanically fall when the scheme elapses due to the tax rate increase. Therefore,
workers for whom the scheme elapses are more likely to leave Denmark (relative to ineligible
workers) precisely when they experience a fall in earnings. Hence, in that case, the panel
treatment sample would be selecting scheme workers who tend to experience pre-tax earnings
raises when the scheme elapses. Such a scenario seems implausible to us because pay for such
high top earners is set by contract in advance of realized productivity. Furthermore, Figure 9
shows that the profiles of earnings are very close across the control and treatment groups before
the scheme elapses. If the treatment group were selected based on disproportionate increases
in productivity at the time the scheme elapses, it seems unlikely that the productivity profile
from year 1 to year 2 would be so close between the treatment and control groups.
       Nevertheless, to alleviate this concern, we estimate in Table 4 two-step Heckman models
where the second stage is the same fixed effect model as in (6), but where we use citizenship
  33
    For the placebo elasticity estimate, we again assume that the group above the eligibility threshold would
have benefitted from the scheme in their first 3 years of stay when computing the average tax rates.




                                                     28
and imputed average tax rates in the home country at the time scheme elapses34 as exclusion
restrictions in the selection equation. Those estimates are reported in columns (2) and (4) of
Table 4 for post-scheme entrants and pre-scheme entrants respectively. Even though results
suggest that we cannot reject that selection is partially correlated with wage profiles, this
correlation does not affect at all the estimates of the effect of scheme lapse, which confirms that
the effect of the three-year discontinuity on pre-tax earnings cannot be attributed to selection
effects only.

4.3       Spillover Effects

An important rationale put forward by Danish policy makers as well as other European gov-
ernments which have adopted similar preferential tax schemes for highly paid foreigners (see
OECD 2011) is that highly skilled workers generate positive externalities on their co-workers
and the economy at large, over and above the fiscal effects we have described. At the same
time, people often worry that these highly paid foreigners might displace or reduce the earnings
of native workers. The Danish scheme creates an exogenous influx of highly skilled workers in
the Danish economy, concentrated among specific industries and firms and it is worth investi-
gating whether we can find evidence of negative or positive spillovers of the scheme on highly
paid native workers, at the industry level and/or at the firm level. Unfortunately, we do not
have reliable measures of individual productivity, nor do we have data on firms’ profits before
1998. We therefore restrict our attention to the effect of the scheme on the distribution of wage
earnings of high-skilled natives, defined as all native workers paid at least 75% of the scheme
eligibility threshold.35 This group represents approximately the top 3% of the native earnings
distribution.
       Spillover effects on the earnings distribution of high-skilled natives might arise from two
broad classes of phenomena: productivity spillovers and incidence effects. The analysis of
spillovers from human capital through knowledge diffusion has a long tradition in economics
dating back to Marshall (1890) and has been used extensively in theoretical endogenous growth
  34
     We use average tax rates computed using the OECD Taxing Wages calculator for a single individual with
taxable income equivalent to 167% of average earnings in the home country.
  35
     Native workers paid slightly below the scheme eligibility threshold and native workers paid slightly above
are close substitutes, and there is no reason for scheme workers to have a spillover impact solely on natives paid
above the scheme eligibility threshold. Our findings that the scheme had no spillover effects are however not
sensitive to how exactly we define the group of high-skilled natives.



                                                       29
models. There is also substantial work in the urban economics literature trying to uncover
such productivity spillover effects empirically (see e.g., Moretti, 2004). There is also a large
literature on the effects of immigrants on native wages (see e.g., Borjas, 1999 for a survey).
While productivity spillovers are expected to be positive, incidence effects would generally play
in the opposite direction. In a standard model with downward-sloping labor demand due to
diminishing returns to labor, the influx of high-skilled workers could reduce the demand for
native high-skilled workers and depress high skill wages (for the benefit of other complementary
factors in production).
   Importantly, even if the migration elasticities we have estimated are large, because the
fraction of foreigners at the top of the Danish distribution is relatively modest (see Figure 5),
the influx of foreigners is small relative to the total stock of highly paid workers in Denmark.
Therefore, we cannot expect to find very large spillover effects, whether the channel for spillovers
is the standard equilibrium incidence effect or complementarities in the production function.

Industry level spillovers. At the industry level, we test whether industrial sectors which used
scheme workers intensively experienced more or less growth in the average earnings of the highly
paid native individuals, and in the number of highly paid native individuals, where highly paid
for natives is defined as having earnings above 75% of the scheme eligibility threshold. To be
concise, we refer to this group as top natives in what follows.
   Panel A of Figure 10 plots the average growth of the real gross average earnings of top natives
from the period 1980-1990 (on the y-axis) to the period 1991-2000 (on the x-axis) against the
scheme use across industrial sectors. Our measure of scheme use is the growth of the number
of top foreign employees (defined as foreign employees with less than 3 years of presence in
Denmark and annualized earnings above the scheme eligibility threshold) between 1980-1990
and 1991-2000 divided by the total number of top native employees in the period 1980-1990.
This scaling is useful to assess the relative size of the influx of scheme workers relative to the stock
of top natives. The average across industries is around 2%, with substantial variation across
industries. The size of the dots is proportional to top native employment in the period 1991-2000.
As expected, some sectors such as telecommunications, or sports have used the scheme more
intensively.36 Most importantly, the graph shows that there is almost no correlation between
  36
     Kleven, Landais, and Saez (2013) have shown that the Danish scheme increased dramatically the fraction
of foreign players in the Danish football first league relative to comparable countries.



                                                    30
scheme use and the wage growth of top natives at the industry level, implying that the scheme
has produced no visible spillover effects, either positive or negative, on the wages of top natives.
   To formalize this test, Panel A of Table 5 presents the corresponding industry level regres-
sions. It estimates the effects of the scheme use on the log of the average real gross earnings
of top natives (cols. 1-2) and on the number of top natives (cols. 3-4). Column (1) presents
the OLS regression of the difference in log average real gross earnings of top natives between
1980-1990 and 1991-2000 for each industry on the difference in the log number of top foreign
employees (defined as foreigners with annualized earnings above the scheme eligibility thresh-
old) by industry between 1980-1990 and 1991-2000. Consistent with Panel A of Figure 10, the
coefficient is small and insignificant. Column (2) instruments for the difference in log number of
top foreign employees using the log initial number of top foreign employees by industry. There
is a strong first stage but the IV coefficient remains small and insignificant. Both regressions
control for the log initial number of top natives in the industry and the log initial size of the
industry (measured by total number of workers).
   Column (3) and (4) repeat the same specifications using the log number of top natives as
an outcome. In that case, the coefficients are strongly positive and significant: Industries which
experienced a surge in the number of highly paid foreigners also experienced a surge in the
number of top natives. Obviously, this correlation cannot be interpreted as causal, as growing
industries (and particularly growing industries that employ high-skilled workers) will naturally
hire both more top natives and top foreign earners. The instrument is unlikely to eliminate
bias in this case because having many top foreigners before the scheme is enacted could be a
good predictor of the dynamism of the industry and hence its subsequent high-skill employment
growth for natives.

Firm level spillovers. At the firm level, we compare firms who use scheme workers to firms
who never use scheme workers and assess whether they differentially change the average pay of
their top native workers or the number of their high-skill native workers. As above, top natives
are defined as Danish workers with earnings above 75% of the scheme eligibility threshold.
   Panel B of Figure 10 plots the evolution of average real gross earnings of top natives in a
balanced panel of firms active in all years between 1986 and 1996, broken down according to
scheme use. Scheme participating firms are firms with at least one scheme employee between
1991 and 1996. The figure shows that average earnings of top natives follow almost exactly the


                                                31
same pattern both before and after the scheme introduction among firms which use the scheme
and among firms which never use the scheme. This is consistent with the scheme having no
spillover effects on the pay of high-skill natives, consistent with our industry level analysis.
       Panel B of Table 5 presents the corresponding firm-level regressions. The first row of es-
timates are reduced form estimates where we regress the difference in log average real gross
earnings of top native employees in the firm between 1986-1990 and 1991-1996 (cols. 1-3) or
the difference in the log number of top native employees in the firm between 1986-1990 and
1991-1996 (cols. 4-6) on an indicator for scheme participation (having at least one scheme
employee between 1991 and 1996). For the second row of estimates, we regress the difference
in log average real gross earnings of top native employees (or log number of top natives) in
the firm on the difference in the log number of top foreign employees between 1980-1986 and
1991-1996. This estimates the elasticity d log y/d log(Top foreigners) with y the outcome of in-
terest. All specifications control for firm size, industry, initial average earnings in the firm for
all non-scheme employees, and initial number of top earners.
       For each of the two outcome variables (log average earnings of top native workers, and log
number of top native workers), the first column is a simple OLS regression, the second column
presents a matching estimator using the Mahalanobis distance based on the same controls as
in the OLS regression. The third column is an IV regression where we instrument the right-
hand-side variable using the log initial number of top foreign employees in the firm (as shown
in Table 5, the partial R-squared from the first stage are reasonably large which proves that the
first stage is strong).
       For the outcome log average earnings of top natives in columns (1)-(3), consistent with Panel
B of Figure 10, we find small and insignificant effects in all three specifications.37 This suggests
again that the scheme had no spillover effects on the wages of top natives.
       For the outcome log number of top natives, both the OLS and the matching estimators are
large and significant, implying that firms using the scheme experience a growth in the number
of top natives they employ. As in the case of Panel A, we cannot interpret this correlation as
causal as growing firms will naturally start to employ both more native and foreign highly paid
employees. Interestingly however, the instrumented estimates in column (6) are not significant.
  37
    Note that the Durbin-Wu-Hausman test of exogeneity is not rejected in the case of log average earnings,
which suggests that the endogeneity problem is not very important, contrary to the case of log number of top
natives in column (6), where the test supports the presence of endogeneity.


                                                    32
Firms with more top foreign employees before the scheme are more likely to employ scheme
workers (first stage) but they are not more likely to employ more top native workers. In that
case, the exogeneity assumption for the instrument is more plausible at the firm level than at
the industry level in Panel A. Those insignificant coefficients are therefore our best evidence
suggesting that the scheme had no impact on the number of top native employees at the firm
level.
    To summarize, while the spillover evidence is at best suggestive given the lack of fully
compelling identification, our findings suggests that scheme workers did not have strong spillover
effects (either negative or positive) on the number of top native employees, and perhaps more
convincingly on the average earnings of top native employees.


5        Conclusion
Our paper has analyzed the effects of income taxation on the international migration and earn-
ings of top earners using a Danish preferential tax scheme targeted to highly paid migrants into
Denmark. This scheme offers a unique opportunity to credibly estimate elasticities of interna-
tional mobility with respect to tax rates as well as the effects of top tax rates on individual
earnings. Using population wide Danish administrative tax data, we have obtained three results.
First, we have shown that the scheme doubled the number of highly paid foreigners in Denmark
relative to slightly less paid ineligible foreigners, which translates into a very large elasticity of
migration with respect to the net-of-tax rate. Hence, preferential tax schemes for highly paid
foreign workers could create severe tax competition across European countries. Second, we find
compelling evidence of a negative effect of scheme-induced increases in the net-of-tax rate on
pre-tax earnings at the individual level. This finding cannot be explained by the standard labor
supply model where pay equals marginal productivity, but can be rationalized within a simple
matching friction model of job search and wage bargaining where there is a gap between pay
and marginal productivity. Third, we find no evidence of positive or negative spillovers of the
scheme-induced influx of highly skilled foreigners on the earnings of natives, but the identifi-
cation of such spillovers is in general very difficult even with the sharp tax variation in our
data.
    Our findings show that the migration elasticity is much larger than the conventional within-
country earnings elasticity with respect to the net-of-tax rate. As in the case of wealth mobility

                                                 33
across countries (Kanbur and Keen, 1993), it is conceivable that elasticities of worker mobility
are particularly large for small countries (with small tax bases relative to the global economy)
and that those small countries therefore have the most to gain from preferential tax schemes to
foreigners. Such incentives to offer tax havens for highly skilled workers are likely to generate
tax competition across European countries by limiting the ability of European governments to
use progressive taxation. This will require international coordination and the design of rules
regulating such special schemes.
   In future work, we hope to make progress on estimating spillovers of foreign workers on native
co-workers using specifically the researcher part of the scheme that we have not analyzed in this
paper. We plan to analyze the effect of the influx of researchers in Denmark on the patents,
publications, and placement of Ph.D. candidates of Danish research centers vs. comparable
European countries such as Sweden. The comparison could be done across academic fields
using the pre-scheme fraction of foreign researchers across fields.




                                                34
References
Bakija, Jonathan and Joel B. Slemrod (2004). “Do the Rich Flee from High State Taxes?
Evidence from Federal Estate Tax Returns,” NBER Working Paper No. 10645.
Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy (1999). “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
Approaches,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3A,
North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Borjas, George J. (1999). “The economic analysis of immigration.” In: Orley C. Ashenfelter
and David Card, Ed(s), Handbook of Labor Economics, Elsevier: Amsterdam, Volume 3A.
Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri (2011). “Adjustment
Costs, Firm Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish
Tax Records,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(2): 749-804.
Feldstein, Martin. (1999). “Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax,”
Review of Economics and Statistics 81(4): 674-680.
Fullerton, Don and Gilbert Metcalf (2002). “Tax Incidence,” in A. Auerbach and M.
Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 4, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Hall, Robert E. (2005). “Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,”
American Economic Review 95(1), 50–65.
Howitt, Peter, and R. Preston McAfee. (1987). “Costly Search and Recruiting.” Inter-
national Economic Review 28(1): 89–107.
Immervoll, Herwig, Henrik J. Kleven, Claus T. Kreiner, and Emmanuel Saez (2007).
“Welfare Reform in European Countries: A Microsimulation Analysis.” Economic Journal 117,
1-44.
Kanbur, Ravi and Michael Keen (1993). “Tax Competition and Tax Coordination When
Countries Differ in Size,” American Economic Review 83(4), 877-892.
Keen, Michael and Kai Konrad (2013). “The Theory of International Tax Competition
and Coordination,” in A. Auerbach, R. Chetty, M. Feldstein, and E. Saez (eds.), Handbook of
Public Economics, Volume 5, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Kirchgassner, Gebhard and Werner Pommerehne (1996). “Tax harmonization and tax
competition in the European Union: Lessons from Switzerland,” Journal of Public Economics
60, 351-371.
Kleven, Henrik J., Camille Landais, and Emmanuel Saez (2013). “Taxation and Inter-
national Migration of Superstars: Evidence from the European Football Market,” forthcoming
American Economic Review 103
Kleven, Henrik J. and Esben A. Schultz (2012). “Estimating Taxable Income Responses
using Danish Tax Reforms.” LSE Working Paper, Revised May 2012.
Kleven, Henrik J. and Mazhar Waseem (2013). “Using Notches to Uncover Optimization
Frictions and Structural Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 128(2).



                                            35
Liebig, Thomas, Patrick A. Puhani, and Alfonso Sousa-Poza (2007). “Taxation and In-
ternal Migration: Evidence from the Swiss Census using Community-Level Variation in Income
Tax Rates.” Journal of Regional Science 47(4), 807–836.
Marshall, Alfred. (1890) Principles of economics, New York: Macmillan.
Mirrlees, James A. (1982). “Migration and Optimal Income Taxes.” Journal of Public Eco-
nomics 18, 319-41.
Moretti, Enrico (2004). “Workers’ Education, Spillovers and Productivity: Evidence from
Plant-Level Production Functions.” American Economic Review 94(3).
Mortensen, Dale and Christopher Pissarides (1999). “New Developments in Models
of Search in the Labor Market,” in O. Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 3B, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
OECD. (2011). “The Taxation of Mobile High-Skilled Workers,” Chapter 4 in OECD Tax
Policy Study No. 21: Taxation and Employment, OECD, Paris.
Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez (2013). “Optimal Labor Income Taxation,” in A.
Auerbach, R. Chetty, M. Feldstein, and E. Saez (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, Volume
5, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Pissarides, Christopher A (2000). Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, 2nd ed., Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Saez, Emmanuel (2010). “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?” American Economic Jour-
nal: Economic Policy 2(3), 180-212.
Saez, Emmanuel, Manos Matsaganis, and Panos Tsakloglou (2012). “Earnings Deter-
mination and Taxes: Evidence from a Cohort Based Payroll Tax Reform in Greece.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 127(1), 493–533.
Saez, Emmanuel, Joel Slemrod, and Seth Giertz (2012). “The Elasticity of Taxable
Income with Respect to Marginal Tax Rates: A Critical Review.”Journal of Economic Literature
50(1), 3–50.
Young, Cristobal and Charles Varner (2011). “Millionaire Migration and State Taxation
of Top Incomes: Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” National Tax Journal 64, 255–284.




                                            36
                                                                 1.6% 8.2%
                                                         12%



                                               10%
                                                                                     26%




                                                21%
                                                                              7.3%

                                                               5.7%   7.2%




                              Denmark                    Nordic Countries                  Germany
                              Benelux                    France                            UK−Ireland
                              USA−Canada                 Other                             E. Europe/ Former USSR




                                                           11%    1.8%4%


                                                  6.5%                         17%



                                                                                     .3%
                                                                                      4%
                                               24%



                                                                             25%
                                                          6.8%




                              Others                                       Agr./Fishing             Manufacturing
                              Energy                                       Construction             Trade/services
                              Transport                                    Finance                  Public sector
                              Others incl. sports/entertainmt




      Figure 1: Citizenship and Industry Composition of Scheme Beneficiaries, 1991-2010
Notes: Panel A reports the composition of tax scheme spells (excluding researchers) by country of citizenship of
the beneficiaries (at the time of scheme) across all years 1991 to 2010. Panel B reports the composition of tax
scheme spells (excluding researchers) by industry across all years 1991 to 2010.
                                         Panel A: Bunching at the Duration Kink
                                                                                                  Individual H
                      After-tax lifetime                                                          indiff. curves
                      income
                                                                     Individual L
                                                                     indiff. curve




                                                                                                                slope depends on
                                                                                                                regular tax liability




                                  slope depends on
                                  scheme tax liability




                                                                  bunchers
                                                                                                                                   Duration
                                                           {D*                   D*+ΔD*                                            of stay


                                    Panel B: Bunching at the Earnings Notch
                      After-tax annual
                      income
                                                                                         Individual H
                                                                                         indiff. curves
                                                                         Individual L
                                                                         indiff. curve
                                                                                                          slope 1 – scheme tax rate




                                                                                                   slope 1 – regular tax rate




                                                              bunchers
                                                                                                                           Before-tax
                                                         {




                                                         z*–Δz*          z’ z*                                             annual income




          Figure 2: Responses to the Tax Scheme in the Standard Labor Supply Model
Notes: The figure illustrates behavioral responses to the duration kink (Panel A) and the earnings notch (Panel
B) in the standard labor supply model of Section 3.1. Panel A depicts the kink created by the scheme in
the life-time budget defined over duration D of stay in Denmark and life-time consumption. The solid blue
line represents the budget under the scheme with maximum duration D∗ (= 3 years). The dashed grey line
represents the budget under a scheme with indefinite duration. A scheme with finite duration generates bunching
at the threshold D∗ as all individuals with preferences in between individual L and individual H bunch at the
kink. Panel B depicts the notch created by the scheme at the earnings eligibility threshold z ∗ in the annual
budget set of individuals (solid blue line). The notch creates excess bunching at the eligibility threshold and a
corresponding hole in the density distribution just below the threshold. Above the notch, the scheme increases
the net-of-tax wage rate and therefore increases labor supply and earnings if the uncompensated labor supply
elasticity is positive.
                           Panel A: Intensive Earnings Responses Conditional on Migration

                 Density
                                                                                    pre-scheme density
                                                                                    post-scheme density
                                                                                    without migration effect




                                                        Density shift creates bunching
                                                        from above (increasing in 1-β)
                             Density hole creates
                             bunching from below
                             (increasing in β)




                                                                                                            Earnings z
                                                    z


                                     Panel B: Intensive and Migration Responses

                 Density
                                                                                    pre-scheme density
                                                                                    post-scheme density
                                                                                    without migration effect
                                                                                    post-scheme density
                                                                                    with migration effect
                                                         new migrants
                                                         add to bunching




                                                                     migration
                                                                     response




                                                                                                            Earnings z
                                                    z



             Figure 3: Responses to the Tax Scheme in the Matching Frictions Model
Notes: The figure shows earnings density diagrams depicting intensive earnings responses (Panel A) and extensive
migration responses (Panel B) to the scheme in the matching friction model of Section 3.2. Absent the scheme,
the earnings density of immigrants is smoothly decreasing (short-dashed line). The top panel shows that the
scheme reduces earnings above the eligibility threshold z̄ if employers have positive bargaining power (1−β > 0),
which shifts the density left (to the solid blue line) and creates bunching at the threshold from above. This panel
also shows that there will be bunching from below if workers have positive bargaining power (β > 0), creating a
hole in the density distribution just below z̄. The bottom panel shows that the scheme induces migration, which
shifts the distribution upward above the eligibility threshold z̄ and adds to bunching at z̄.
                          A. Number of foreigners in different earnings groups




                        4000
                                    Control #1: .8 to .9*threshold
                                    Control #2: .9 to .99*threshold      DD elasticity:
                                                                      Long−term: 1.62 (.16)
                                    Treatment: earnings> threshold    Short−term: 1.28 (.15)




                        3000
                        2000
                        1000
                        0
                               1980
                               1981
                               1982
                               1983
                               1984
                               1985
                               1986
                               1987
                               1988
                               1989
                               1990
                               1991
                               1992
                               1993
                               1994
                               1995
                               1996
                               1997
                               1998
                               1999
                               2000
                               2001
                               2002
                               2003
                               2004
                               2005
                                     B. Number of foreigners’ arrivals
                        1000




                                                                         DD elasticity:
                                    Control #1: .8 to .9*threshold    Long−term: 1.78 (.17)
                                    Control #2: .9 to .99*threshold   Short−term: 1.59 (.21)
                                    Treatment: earnings> threshold
                        800
                        600
                        400
                        200
                        0
                               1980
                               1981
                               1982
                               1983
                               1984
                               1985
                               1986
                               1987
                               1988
                               1989
                               1990
                               1991
                               1992
                               1993
                               1994
                               1995
                               1996
                               1997
                               1998
                               1999
                               2000
                               2001
                               2002
                               2003
                               2004
                               2005




               Figure 4: Migration Effects of the Tax Scheme: Diff-in-Diff Evidence
Notes: Panel A reports the number of foreigners with earnings above the scheme eligibility threshold (treatment
series) from 1980 to 2005. As control groups, it reports the number of foreigners in Denmark with earnings
between 80% and 90% of the threshold (control 1) and with earnings between 90% and 99.5% of the threshold
(control 2). Both control series are normalized so that they match the treatment series in 1990–the year before the
scheme was first implemented. The vertical line at year 1991 denotes the year the scheme was first implemented
(the scheme was enacted in 1992 and applied retrospectively to all contracts starting after June 1st, 1991). All
numbers are weighted by duration of stay during the year for part-year foreign residents. Earnings are also
annualized for part-year residents. Panel B repeats the same series with the flow number of arrivals of foreigners
in each year instead of the total stock number of foreigners (earnings of immigrants are annualized to classify
them into earnings groups). The corresponding elasticity estimates are reported (see Table 2).
                          .125




                                       Control #1: P95−97
                                       Control #2: P97−99
                                       Treatment: P99.5−100                DD elasticity:
                                                                        Long−term: 1.13 (.08)
                          .1




                                                                        Short−term: 1.18 (.1)
                 Share of foreigners
                   .05       .075
                          .025
                          0
                                       1980
                                       1981
                                       1982
                                       1983
                                       1984
                                       1985
                                       1986
                                       1987
                                       1988
                                       1989
                                       1990
                                       1991
                                       1992
                                       1993
                                       1994
                                       1995
                                       1996
                                       1997
                                       1998
                                       1999
                                       2000
                                       2001
                                       2002
                                       2003
                                       2004
                                       2005

                  Figure 5: Fraction of Foreigners in Different Earnings Percentiles
Notes: The figure plots the fraction of foreigners in various upper percentile groups of the distribution of earnings
(percentiles are defined including solely Danish citizens with positive earnings) from 1980 to 2005. The threshold
for eligibility to the scheme is always between the 99.2th and the 99.4th percentile. P95-97 denotes all individuals
between the 95th and 97th percentile, etc. Earnings are annualized for part-year residents. There is a gap in
1991-1994 for the top group because the data do not provide scheme earnings for those years. The vertical line
at year 1991 denotes the year the scheme was first implemented. The corresponding elasticity estimates are
reported (see Table 2).
                                      60
                 Yearly Number of Foreigners in Income Bin




                                                                                        Bunching=1.3 (.35)
                                                     50




                                                                                       Missing mass=.21 (.14)
                                            40




                                                                                                                     1995−2010
                                    30




                                                                                                                     1980−1990
                   10      20         0




                                                             .7   .8   .9   1   1.1   1.2    1.3   1.4   1.5   1.6     1.7   1.8
                                                                                  Earnings/threshold




       Figure 6: Earnings Density for Foreigners Before and After Scheme Introduction
Notes: The figure reports the density of the earnings distribution of foreigners around the eligibility threshold
(denoted by the vertical line) in 1995-2010 (dark line after scheme implementation) and in 1980-1990 (grey line
before scheme implementation). The sample is restricted to individuals in their first and second full calendar
year of presence in Denmark (to avoid having to correct for part-year earnings or part-year scheme eligibility).
The 1980-1990 density is reweighed so that it matches the 1995-2010 density on average between 70% and 90%
of the scheme eligibility threshold. The graph shows that the scheme almost doubled the density above the
threshold due to extensive migration responses and also created bunching at the eligibility threshold due to an
intensive margin earnings response. There is no evidence of a hole in the density of earnings below the scheme
eligibility threshold. Non-parametric estimates of excess bunching at the threshold and missing mass below
the eligibility threshold are reported. They are estimated using the method of Chetty et al. (2011) by fitting
polynomials for the densities of the left and right of the vertical dashed lines (see the main text for details of
the estimation method).
                                                   A. 1980-1990




                              200
                              160
                       Number of stays
                         80   40
                              0  120




                                         0   500           1000              1500           2000
                                                     Duration in Days

                                                    P96−99              P99.5−100


                                                   B. 1991-2006
                              200




                                                                    Diff−in−Diff
                                                                    dP[Stay>3yr] / d(P99.5*After)
                              160




                                                                        = −.152 (.022)
                       Number of stays
                         80   40
                              0  120




                                         0   500           1000              1500           2000
                                                     Duration in Days

                                                    P96−99              P99.5−100




                       Figure 7: Density of the Duration of Stay of Foreigners
Notes: The figure reports the number of stays by duration of foreigners with (annualized) earnings above
percentile 99.5th (P99.5-100) in solid line and earnings between percentile 96 and percentile 99 (P96-99) in
dashed line. The P99.5-100 group is always above the eligibility threshold for the scheme while and the P96-
99 group is always below the eligibility threshold for the scheme. Panel A is for years 1980-1990 (before the
scheme was implemented) while Panel B is for years 1991-2000 (after the scheme was implemented). Vertical
lines demarcate year thresholds, with the solid vertical line representing the 3-year threshold where the scheme
elapses. In Panel A, the P99.5-100 series are normalized to be equal to the P96-99 series on average (so that
both series are comparable in levels). In Panel B, the P96-99 series are normalized to be equal to the P96-99
series from Panel A on average (so that series P96-99 are comparable in levels across Panels A and B). In Panel
B, the P99.5-100 series are then doubly normalized using both the Panel A normalization for P99.5-100 and the
Panel B normalization for P96-99 (so that the excess density of P99.5-100 relative to P96-99 in Panel B can be
interpreted as the extensive migration response). Both panels use the same y-axis scale for direct comparison
purposes.
                   25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200
                 Average annualized income (Millions DK)
                                      0
                                                           1980
                                                           1981
                                                           1982
                                                           1983
                                                           1984
                                                           1985
                                                           1986
                                                           1987
                                                           1988
                                                           1989
                                                           1990
                                                           1991
                                                           1992
                                                           1993
                                                           1994
                                                           1995
                                                           1996
                                                           1997
                                                           1998
                                                           1999
                                                           2000
                                                           2001
                                                           2002
                                                           2003
                                                           2004
                                                           2005
                                                           2006
                                                           2007
                                                           2008
                                                           Below elig. threshold   Above elig. threshold




 Figure 8: Effects of the Tax Scheme on Pre-tax Earnings: Repeated Cross-Section Evidence
Notes: The figure depicts the average nominal annual earnings for foreigners in their first full calendar year in
Denmark (denoted by year 1) for the sample of foreigners with year 1 earnings between 70% and below 95% of
the scheme eligibility threshold (dashed line) and between 105% and 400% of the scheme eligibility threshold
(solid line). Both series are normalize to 100 in year 1990, the year before the scheme starts. We exclude those
with earnings between 95% and 105% of the eligibility threshold to abstract from bunching effects. For year t,
the sample includes foreigners who arrive during year t − 1, stay the full calendar year t in Denmark. Data for
years 1991-1994 are not available. The graph shows that the earnings of foreigners above the scheme eligibility
threshold decrease after the scheme is in place, suggesting that the scheme reduces pre-tax earnings. This is
consistent with the matching friction model (and inconsistent with the standard labor supply model).
                                                                A. After introduction of the scheme




                                       160
                                                                                      Transition year


                                                        d(log gross earnings) / dlog(1− )


                        Real gross earnings, 100=yr 2
                                                140
                                                            = −.196 (.054)

                         100        12080
                                                        1




                                                                            2




                                                                                               3




                                                                                                              4




                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                  Time in Denmark (years)

                                                                             Below threshold            Above threshold


                                                               B. Before introduction of the scheme
                                       160




                                                                                      Transition year


                                                        d(log gross earnings) / dlog(1− )
                        Real gross earnings, 100=yr 2
                                                140




                                                            = .042 (.038)
                         100        12080
                                                        1




                                                                            2




                                                                                               3




                                                                                                              4




                                                                                                                          5




                                                                                  Time in Denmark (years)

                                                                             Below threshold            Above threshold




            Figure 9: Effects of the Tax Scheme on Pre-tax Earnings: Panel Evidence
Notes: The figure depicts the average annual earnings for foreigners arriving in Denmark after the scheme is in
place (from 1995 to 2002) in Panel A and before the scheme is in place (from 1980 to 1991). Year 0 is the year
of arrival, year 1 is the first full calendar year in Denmark, etc. Earnings are normalized by year 2 earnings.
The sample includes all foreigners who stay five or more full calendar years in Denmark and have gross earnings
in year 1 between 70% and below 95% of the scheme eligibility threshold (dashed line) and between 105% and
150% of the scheme eligibility threshold (solid line). Hence, the sample is a balanced panel. Panel A shows that
earnings increase in years 3 to 5 (relative to years 1 and 2) for those eligible for the scheme. This implies that
the end of the scheme leads to an increase in earnings, which is consistent with the matching friction model (and
inconsistent with the standard labor supply model). Year 3 is a transition year when individuals are eligible
part-year for the scheme. The spike in earnings in year 3 (relative to year 4) could be due to re-timing to
maximize scheme benefits. Panel B is a placebo comparison (for entrants before the scheme was introduced).
                                                                                                                A. Industry level




                     Growth of top native avg real earnings 80−90 vs 91−00
                                                                                      Textile
                                                                                                                Log(Avg earnings) / Log(Top Foreigners):




                                                                   .25
                                                                                                                           OLS: .012 (.018)
                                                                                              Transport
                                                                                                                            IV: −.035 (.089)




                                                         .2
                                                                                                                                                                    Telecom

                                             .15
                                                                                             Food                           Sports
                                                                                        Repair
                                                                                        Finance
                                                                                      Culture
                                                                                 Glass
                                                                                      WoodMetal Real
                                                                                   Educ/Research
                                                                                                        estate services
                                                                                                     Business
                                                                                           Other manuf.      Chemical
                                  .1




                                                                                  Admin.
                                                                                                            Wholesale
                                                                                       Health
                                                                                Fish.
                                                                                           Car manuf.
                                                                                      Energy
                                                                                                      Hotel
                      .05

                                                                                0




                                                                                                          .02




                                                                                                                               .04




                                                                                                                                                       .06




                                                                                                                                                                              .08
                                                                                         Growth of top foreigners as fraction of 1990 top employment


                                                                                                                   B. Firm level
                                                              13.75
                     Log avg gross earnings of top non−scheme empl.




                                                                                    Log(Avg earnings) / Log(Top Foreigners):
                                                                                              OLS: −.009 (.017)
                                                                                                 IV: .03 (.046)
                     12.75       13       13.25       13.5
                                                                             1986


                                                                                       1987


                                                                                                   1988


                                                                                                            1989


                                                                                                                     1990


                                                                                                                              1991


                                                                                                                                     1992


                                                                                                                                                1993


                                                                                                                                                             1994


                                                                                                                                                                      1995


                                                                                                                                                                              1996




                                                                                                Non−participating firms                     Scheme−participating firms




                                         Figure 10: Evidence on Spillovers Effects of the Scheme
Notes: Panel A plots the average growth of the real gross earnings of top native employees from the period
1980-1990 to the period 1991-2000 against the scheme use across industrial sectors. Top native employees are
defined as employees with earnings above 75% of the scheme threshold (which corresponds roughly to the top 4%
of the distribution of earnings among the natives.) Our measure of scheme use is the growth of the number of top
foreign employees (defined as foreign employees with less than 3 years of presence in Denmark and annualized
earnings above the scheme eligibility threshold) between 1980-1990 and 1991-2000 divided by the total number
of top native employees in the period 1980-1990. The size of the dots is proportional to top native employment
in the period 1991-2000. The graph shows that there is almost no correlation between scheme use and the wage
growth of top native employees at the industry level. Panel B plots the evolution of average real gross earnings
of top native employees (defined as above) in a balanced panel of firms alive between 1986 and 1996, broken
down according to scheme use. Scheme participating firms are firms with at least one scheme employee between
1991 and 1996.
                                       Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
                                                                            (1)             (2)
                                                                           mean      standard deviation

                                                                  Scheme employees 1991-2010
                                                                  Number of scheme spells=11642

       Fraction with proof of residence                                     .949              .220
       Duration of stay (years)                                            2.345              1.448
                                  fraction > 3 years                       .251               .434
       Scheme earnings (2009 DK1000s)                                     1217.8             2094.7
                          as a fraction of threshold                       1.53               2.67
       Average tax rate                                                    .308               .003
       Age                                                                 39.97              8.80

                                                                     Scheme take-up rate: .81

                                                                           Firms 1991-2010
                                                                               N=2235

       Number of employees                                                438.06            2316.47
       average gross wage (2009 DK1000s)                                  437.6              305.0
       Number of scheme employees                                           1.8               3.2
       Number of native employees above threshold                         13.99              61.65


Notes: This table presents a number of summary statistics for all individuals who used the foreigners’ tax scheme
in Denmark from 1991 to 2010 (we always exclude foreigners who qualify as researchers). The top panel reports
spell level summary statistics. Multiple contracts for the same individual with the same employer are counted
as one unique spell. 11,642 distinct spells have been recorded in the scheme. For 94% of spells, we were able to
find a proof of residence from the registry files. All other statistics in the table (and in the subsequent analysis
of the paper) are restricted to spells with proof of residence. The average tax rate is 30% before 1995 and
25%*(1-AMB)+AMB=31% after 1995 where AMB is a flat payroll tax rate of 8%. The bottom panel reports
firm level summary statistics. 2,235 distinct firms hired scheme workers at some point between 1991 and 2010.
The statistics report the average characteristics of the firms at the time they have at least one scheme employee.
Scheme-participating firms are usually large firms with an average of 438 employees in total. The average yearly
gross wage of scheme-participating firms (including scheme employees is 437,000 DK2009.
                                       Table 2: Migration Elasticity Estimates

                                                            (1)                   (2)                              (3)
                                                     Total number of        Number of arrivals           Number of foreigners
                                                        foreigners                                       with less than 3 years
                                                                                                              of presence
                                                                             Panel A:
                                                                Treatment: Earnings above threshold,
                                                        Control: Earnings between 80% and 99% of threshold

 A1. Baseline
 εlt (long-term)                                          1.625∗∗∗                 1.779∗∗∗                      2.049∗∗∗
                                                           (0.162)                  (0.168)                       (0.148)

 εst (short-term)                                         1.280∗∗∗                 1.590∗∗∗                      1.756∗∗∗
                                                          (0.151)                   (0.228)                       (0.170)
 A2. Control for pre-existing trends
 εlt (long-term)                                          1.756∗∗∗                 1.771∗∗∗                      2.152∗∗∗
                                                           (0.176)                  (0.168)                       (0.158)
 A3. Placebo
 εlt (long-term)                                           -0.0602                 -0.0101                        0.0796
                                                          (0.0823)                 (0.245)                        (0.161)
 A4. Control for imperfect take-up (IV)
 εlt (long-term)                                          2.892∗∗∗                 1.945∗∗∗                      2.392∗∗∗
                                                           (0.232)                  (0.167)                       (0.138)
 A5. Nordic countries
 εlt (long-term)                                          1.442∗∗∗                 1.805∗∗∗                      2.208∗∗∗
                                                           (0.166)                  (0.287)                       (0.257)
 A6. English-speaking countries
 εlt (long-term)                                          1.852∗∗∗                 2.186∗∗∗                      2.281∗∗∗
                                                           (0.222)                  (0.246)                       (0.206)
 A7. Danish expatriates
 εlt (long-term)                                           0.0185                   -0.0913                       -0.0998
                                                          (0.0280)                 (0.0708)                      (0.0613)

                                                                             Panel B:
                                                     Treatment: percentile 99.5-100, Control: percentile 95-99

 B1. Baseline
 εlt (long-term)                                          1.133∗∗∗                 1.015∗∗∗                      1.257∗∗∗
                                                          (0.0802)                  (0.169)                       (0.109)


Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. The table displays elasticity estimates based on
equation (2). Number of arrivals is the number of foreign individuals entering Denmark in a given year. Number of foreigners with
less than 3 years of presence are foreigners who are eligible for the scheme based on all rules except the income threshold rule. The
long-term (short-term) elasticity refers to a specification that includes years 1992-2005 (1992-1996) as the post-reform period. We
always exclude 1991 from the specification, because the reform was enacted in 1992 but applied retroactively starting in mid-1991.
Panel A displays estimates where the control group is defined as foreigners with (annualized) earnings between 80% and 99% of the
threshold and the treatment group is foreigners with (annualized) earnings above the eligibility threshold. Panel A1 is the baseline
estimate. Panel A2 controls for differential pre-existing trends specific to the control and treatment groups. Panel A3 is a placebo
where the control group is foreigners with earnings between 80% and 90% of the threshold while the treatment group is foreigners
with earnings between 90% and 99% of the threshold (we assume that the scheme tax rate applies to the treatment group when
estimating the elasticity). Panel A4 controls for imperfect take-up, instrumenting the actual average tax rate (given actual take-up)
by the intention-to-treat average tax rate. Panels A5 and A6 break down the elasticity by countries of citizenship among foreigners.
Nordic countries= Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden. English-speaking countries=Australia, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand, South
Africa, UK, US. Panel A7 looks at the behavioral response of Danish expatriates (also eligible for the scheme). In panel B, the
control group is all foreigners with (annualized) earnings between the 95th and 99th percentile of the earnings distribution of natives,
and the treatment group is all foreigners with (annualized) earnings above the 99.5th percentile.
                    Table 3: Repeated Cross-section Estimates of the Effects of the Tax Scheme on Pre-tax Earnings

                                                       (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)               (5)              (6)
                                                                              DD:                                           DDD:
                                                                  Less than 3 years of presence                        More than 3 years
                                                                                                                          as control
                                                                  Grouped                                  With
                                                                 estimator                               bunchers

              Reduced form estimate                 -0.0476∗∗∗   -0.0476∗∗    -0.0566∗∗∗     -0.130∗ -0.0951∗∗∗             -0.0946∗∗∗
                                                     (0.0103)    (0.0138)      (0.0117)     (0.0535) (0.0103)                (0.0205)
                              d log z
              Elasticity   d log(1−τ )
                                         estimate   -0.180∗∗∗    -0.180∗∗      -0.171∗∗∗     -0.390∗     -0.296∗∗∗           -0.297∗∗∗
                                                    (0.0371)     (0.0498)      (0.0342)      (0.156)     (0.0345)            (0.0604)

              Industry, Age, Citizenship                                           ×            ×            ×                   ×

              Differential time trends                                                          ×

              N                                       18518         46          18518         18518        21245              22382

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the group×year level in parentheses, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001. The table presents differences-in-
differences estimate of the effect of the scheme on log annual pretax earnings. For year t, the sample includes foreigners who arrive during year t − 1,
stay the full calendar year t in Denmark, and stay for a duration of less than 3 years in Denmark. The sample includes years 1980-2006 but excluding
years 1991-1994 (data for years 1991-1994 are not available). The control group are foreigners with earnings between 70% and 95% of the scheme eligibility
threshold while the treatment group are foreigners with earnings above 105% of the scheme eligibility threshold. In all columns, except (5) we exclude
potential bunchers by removing all individuals with earnings between 95% and 105% of the threshold. The first row reports the effect of the scheme is given
by the interaction between having earnings above the scheme eligibility and having entered Denmark after 1991 (specification (3) in the main text). The
second row reports the corresponding elasticity estimate obtained with a 2SLS regression (specification (4) in the main text). We cluster standard errors at
the group×year level. Because with 46 clusters, inference can be problematic, we use a grouped estimator in column (2) where we collapse all observations
at the group×year level. In column (3) we add controls for age, citizenship and 27-digit industry codes. In column (4) we control for potential differential
time trends in log earnings before the reform between the control and treatment group. Column (6) estimates a triple-difference model where foreigners
with more than 3 years of presence are used as a control.
         Table 4: Panel Estimates of the Effects of the Tax Scheme on Pre-tax Earnings

                                            (1)             (2)                        (3)            (4)
                                                Treatment                                   Placebo
                                              Entry after 1991                         Entry 1980 to 1990

                                            OLS               Heckman                 OLS                Heckman
                                       (stayers only)          2-step            (stayers only)           2-step

 Reduced form estimate                   0.0925∗∗∗            0.0829∗∗               -0.0229               0.0314
                                         (0.0256)             (0.0265)              (0.0228)              (0.0245)

                 d log z
 Elasticity   d log(1−τ )
                            estimate      -.196∗∗∗             -.176∗∗                .049                  -.067
                                           (.054)              (.056)                (.048)                (.052)

 Exclusion restrictions:                                 Average tax rate                           Average tax rate
                                                         in home country                            in home country
                                                           + citizenship                              + citizenship

 N                                         2943                  5616                 2341                  3508

 λ                                                             0.187                                       0.152
                                                              (0.0149)                                    (0.0162)
 ρ                                                             0.824                                       0.747

 LR test of independence                                    χ2 = 118.5                                 χ2 = 91.35
                                                          Prob > χ2 = .00                            Prob > χ2 = .00

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the individual level in parentheses, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p <
0.001. The table presents panel estimates of the effect of scheme lapse on pre-tax earnings using the reduced form
specification (5) in row 1 and the 2SLS specification (6) in row 2. All specifications are fixed-effects models. The
reduced form estimate is the effect on log earnings of being after year 3 and having been eligible for the scheme
in the first 3 years of presence in Denmark. Column (1) is the OLS regression on a balanced panel of stayers
only. Column (2) controls for potential selection on the earnings profile and implements a two-step Heckman
estimator using the average tax rates in the home country at the time scheme elapses and citizenship dummies
as exclusion restrictions in the selection equation for staying more than 3 years. λ is the estimated inverse Mills
ratio and ρ is the estimated correlation between the error terms in the first and second stage equations. Column
(3) and (4) repeat the same specifications on a placebo sample of top foreign earners who entered Denmark
between 1980 and 1990 and hence were never eligible for the scheme.
                Table 5: Regression-Based Estimates of Spillovers Effects of the Scheme

                                                       A. Industry Level
                                                       (1)                 (2)                  (3)              (4)
                                                   Log average earnings of top                  Log number of top
                                                     non-scheme employees                     non-scheme employees
                                                    OLS            IV                         OLS         IV

                d log y
         d log(Top foreigners)
                                                    .012                  -.035               .471               .564
                                                   (.018)                (.089)               (.07)             (.312)
        N                                              27                  27                   27                27

                                                        B. Firm Level
                                                 (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)           (5)              (6)
                                               Log average earnings of top                     Log number of top
                                                 non-scheme employees                        non-scheme employees
                                               OLS Matching          IV                    OLS Matching         IV

   Reduced form estimate                       -.002           .018           -.028        .187          .163             -.006
                                              (.013)          (.017)         (.045)       (.019)        (.062)           (.051)

           d log y
    d log(Top foreigners)
                                               -.009           .036            .03         .573           .32             .012
                                              (.017)          (.033)         (.046)       (.022)        (.122)           (.104)

   Post-estimation
   Durbin-Wu-Hausman                                         F (1, 2825) = 1.0799                     F (1, 26938) = 31.214
   test of endogeneity                                        Prob > F = .299                            Prob > F = .00

   Shea partial-R-square                                                     .0941                                       .0446
   N                                           2852            2852           2852        26966         26966            26966

Notes: Robust s.e. in parentheses. Panel A presents industry level regressions. It estimates the effects of the scheme use on the
log of the average real gross earnings of top native employees (cols. 1-2) and on the number of top native employees (cols. 3-4).
Top native employees are defined as employees with earnings above 75% of the scheme threshold (which corresponds roughly to the
top 3% of the distribution of earnings among the natives.) Column (1) regresses the difference in log average real gross earnings
of top native employees between 1980-1990 and 1991-2000 for each industry on the difference in the log number of top foreign
employees (defined as foreigners with annualized earnings above the scheme eligibility threshold) by industry between 1980-1990
and 1991-2000. Column (2) instruments for the difference in log number of top foreign employees using the log initial number of
top foreign employees by industry. Column (3) and (4) repeat the same specifications using the log number of top native employees
as an outcome. All specifications control for the log initial size of the industry, and in column (1) and (2) for the log initial number
of top employees in the industry.
Panel B repeats the same strategy at the firm level. The estimation sample is a balanced panel of all firms active in Denmark in all
years between 1986 and 1996. Reduced form estimates regress the difference in log average real gross earnings of top native employees
in the firm between 1986-1990 and 1991-1996 (cols. 1-3) or the difference in log number of top native employees between 1986-1990
and 1991-1996 (cols. 4-6) on an indicator for scheme participation (having at least one scheme employee between 1991 and 1996).
d log y/d log(Top foreigners) is obtained from the same regression where the indicator for scheme participation is replaced by the
difference in log number of top foreign employees. In columns (2) and (5), we present a matching estimator using the Mahalanobis
distance based on the same controls as in the OLS regression. In columns (3) and (6), we instrument for scheme participation
(reduced form) or for the difference in log number of top foreign employees using the log initial number of top foreign employees
in the firm. All specifications control for firm size, industry, initial average earnings in the firm for all non-scheme employees and
initial number of top earners. The bottom part of Panel B presents results from the Durbin-Wu-Hausman test of exogeneity of our
instrument and the Shea partial-R-square for estimates in columns (3) and (6).
