                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE IMPACT OF CHICAGO’S SMALL HIGH SCHOOL INITIATIVE

                                           Lisa Barrow
                                          Amy Claessens
                                   Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach

                                        Working Paper 18889
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18889


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2013




This research was supported by grant #R305R060062 from the Institute of Educational Sciences. We
thank John Easton and Steve Raudenbush for helpful discussions, and Todd Rosenkranz and Sue Sporte
for their exceedingly patient help with the data. Any views expressed in this paper do not necessarily
reflect those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, the Federal Reserve System or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. All errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Lisa Barrow, Amy Claessens, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of Chicago’s Small High School Initiative
Lisa Barrow, Amy Claessens, and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
NBER Working Paper No. 18889
March 2013
JEL No. I21,I24

                                               ABSTRACT

This project examines the effects of the introduction of new small high schools on student performance
in the Chicago Public School (CPS) district. Specifically, we investigate whether students attending
small high schools have better graduation/enrollment rates and achievement than similar students who
attend regular CPS high schools. We show that students who choose to attend a small school are more
disadvantaged on average. To address the selection problem, we use an instrumental variables strategy
and compare students who live in the same neighborhoods but differ in their residential proximity
to a small school. In this approach, one student is more likely to sign up for a small school than another
statistically identical student because the small school is located closer to the student’s house and therefore
the “cost” of attending the school is lower. We find that small schools students are substantially more
likely to persist in school and eventually graduate. Nonetheless, there is no positive impact on student
achievement as measured by test scores. The finding of no test score improvement but a strong improvement
in school attainment is consistent with a growing literature suggesting that interventions aimed at older
children are more effective at improving their non-cognitive skills than their cognitive skills.


Lisa Barrow                                            Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
Economic Research                                      School of Education and Social Policy
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago                        Northwestern University
230 South LaSalle Street                               Annenberg Hall, Room 205
Chicago, IL 60604                                      2120 Campus Drive
lbarrow@frbchi.org                                     Evanston, IL 60208
                                                       and NBER
Amy Claessens                                          dws@northwestern.edu
University of Chicago
Harris School of Public Policy
1155 E. 60th St.
Chicago, IL 60637
aclaessens@uchicago.edu
    I.       Introduction

         There is a building consensus among policy makers, educators, parents and future

employers that American high schools are in need of significant reform. Nationwide, only about

75 percent of high school freshmen graduate from high school within 4 years (Snyder and

Dillow, 2011). Students from poor families and students of color are more likely to drop out than

more advantaged youth. Improvements that have recently been seen in lower grades (possibly

because of the introduction of accountability reforms like No Child Left Behind) have failed to

carry over to high school performance. According to the National Assessment of Educational

Progress (NAEP), 74 percent of 12th graders have math skills below the proficiency level, and

90-95 percent of African-American and Hispanic students fail to meet the bar.1 Further, over 60

percent of employers complain that high school graduates do not have good math and writing

skills (U.S. Department of Education, 2003).

         The organization of schools has a potentially large impact on the performance of students

(Barker and Gump, 1964; Chubb and Moe, 1990). In the recent past, high schools have been

accused of being rather large, impersonal educational “factories” where teachers know little

about the students in their charge, and the learning environment is not very supportive (Sizer,

1984; Sizer 1997). In response, reform efforts known as the “Small Schools Movement” have

been mounted to reduce the size of high school learning communities by breaking up existing

large schools and creating new schools that are small by design. The Bill & Melinda Gates

Foundation was a major supporter of this reform, making over $2 billion in grants to invest in

small schools (Gates Foundation, 2009). The Annenberg Foundation, Carnegie Foundation, and

Department of Education also contributed substantial resources to small schools (Shear and


1
 Cited statistics are 2009 NAEP test score results for 12th grade students reported in the Digest of Education
Statistics, 2012.

                                                                                                                 1
Smerdon, 2003).

          Despite the substantial financial investment in small school reforms, there have been few

experimental or quasi-experimental evaluations of their impacts on student outcomes. This

project attempts to isolate the causal impact of the 22 new small high schools created in Chicago

between 2002 and 2006 under the Chicago High School Redesign Initiative (CHSRI). We use

individual-level longitudinal data from the Chicago Public Schools (CPS) and employ an

instrumental variables design based on a student’s residential proximity to a small high school to

measure their impacts on enrollment and graduation up to 5 years after a student began high

school.

          We document substantial negative selection into small high schools in Chicago. When we

control for background characteristics, the correlation between small school attendance and

enrollment indicates that small school students are somewhat less likely to drop out and more

likely to progress on time and graduate. The instrumental variables results are substantially larger

than the OLS results and suggest that small schools increase the likelihood that a student

graduates from high school on time by 9 percentage points on a base of 48 percent. We find no

impacts on test scores. These findings are consistent with the broader literature that finds that

better high schools – such as Catholic high schools (Evans and Schwab 1995; Altonji et al. 2005)

or small schools in New York City (Bloom and Unterman 2012; Schwartz et al. 2013) – improve

educational attainment but not test scores.



          II.    Background on the Small Schools Movement

          The small schools movement grew out of the observation that that poor, urban students

who already have lower levels of academic performance are more likely to drop out of large high



                                                                                                    2
schools (Toch, 1991; Bryk and Thum, 1989; Maeroff, 1992). There are several theories about

why small schools can be more effective, largely involving improved relationships between

teachers and students in small schools (Rossi and Montgomery, 2004). In smaller schools,

teachers may be able to get to know their students better and tailor their teaching approaches to

students’ interests and strengths; students may feel more connected to a small school community

which leads to reduction in violence and dropping out; and expectations may be raised for the

high achievement of all students. In addition, teachers are thought to be more collaborative,

creative and effective in small schools.

       Policies to expand the availability of small schools in urban environments were motivated

by mostly correlational research from an earlier generation of small school interventions that

showed positive outcomes (Cotton, 1996; Haller, 1993; Howley, 1989). Small schools had been

shown to have lower dropout rates, smaller achievement gaps, and better access to challenging

coursework (Bryk et al. 1990; Darling-Hammond et al., 2002; Holland, 2002; Pittman and

Haughwout, 1987). However, the research was not universally positive; one-half of the studies

reviewed in Cotton (1996) showed no impact of small schools.

       Fueled by this theory and empirical evidence, over 1600 new, mostly urban small schools

were founded in the early 2000’s (Toch, 2010). While the guideline for enrollment was no more

than 600 – and ideally closer to 400 students – it is important to note that the intervention of the

small schools movement was intended to be about more than just the number in the student body.

The small schools were expected to have an additional set of attributes including common focus,

high expectations, a culture of respect and responsibility, performance standards, and effective

use of technology.

       Despite much previous research on small schools, our knowledge of the potential impact



                                                                                                  3
of policies encouraging the formation of new small high schools in urban districts is limited.

The most credible evidence comes from two recent studies of new small high schools in New

York City. Bloom and Unterman (2012) use lotteries for admission to over-subscribed small high

schools in order to compare outcomes for lottery winners who go on to attend one of the new

small high schools to lottery losers who attend one of the other types of public high schools

available in New York City. Because lottery winners were randomly chosen, on average the two

groups should have identical observable and unobservable characteristics. The authors find that

in 9th grade the lottery winners were 10 percentage points more likely to be on track to graduate,

and that they were 8.6 percentage points more likely to graduate four years after entering 9th

grade. They also find that lottery winners are more likely to score at or above 75 on the English

Regents exam, the level at which the City University of New York exempts students from taking

remedial English classes.

       In work most closely related to our paper, Schwartz, Stiefel, and Wiswall (2013) also

study the effect of new small high schools on student outcomes in New York City using distance

from student zip codes to the nearest schools by size and age as instrumental variables for

attending a new small school, a new large school, an old small school, or an old large school.

They find that students who attend one of the new small high schools are 17.5 percentage points

more likely to graduate from high school than students who attend a large high school. Further,

new small high school students are more likely to attempt a Regents math or English test by

around 16 percentage points. In contrast to the findings of Bloom and Unterman (2012),

however, Schwarz et al. (2013) find that new small high school students perform less well on the

English Regents’ exam than their large high school counterparts although they are also more

likely to have taken the exam.



                                                                                                  4
          Early studies the introduction of small schools in Chicago found positive impacts on

measures of student engagement, but no impact on gross measures of achievement (Kahne et al.,

2005; Wasley et al. 2000; Hess and Cytrynbaum, 2002). The lack of findings on achievement

may be due to evaluating the schools “too early” after their opening while schools were still

struggling with basic start-up organizational challenges or because selection into the new schools

was not properly accounted for. Additionally, the first small high schools to open in Chicago

differ from later-opening small schools in potentially important ways. Namely, the first schools

were so-called “conversion” schools that divided a large high school into a number of small

schools in the same building. Later-opening schools were more typically new-start schools.

Using longer run data, Sporte and de la Torre (2010) find that small school students in Chicago

have better attendance and persistence than a demographically similar control group, but perform

no better on test scores. They find similar impacts for both conversion and new-start schools.

Our paper is the first to use a quasi-experimental design to evaluate the performance of small

schools in Chicago.



   III.      Data

          The data used in this project come from the Consortium on Chicago School Research’s

longitudinal dataset on student enrollment patterns and test scores. These data have been a

fruitful source for many recent research projects on a variety of topics (e.g., Roderick et al.,

2002; Cullen et al., 2005; Jacob, 2005; Jacob and Levitt, 2003; Neal and Schanzenbach 2009).

These data allow us to address some of the problems that have plagued earlier studies of high

school reform. Because of the availability of prior test scores and other demographic

characteristics, we can account for selection on observables into new high schools. We include



                                                                                                5
controls for a student’s age, race, gender, neighborhood characteristics, whether she is old for her

cohort (a proxy for grade retention), and whether the student is eligible for free or reduced price

lunch or participates in a special education program. We have pre-test scores from the 8th grade

math and reading components of the state standardized test, the Illinois Standards Achievement

Test (ISAT). Because the Consortium has access to student address data they were able to

construct for us our instrumental variable, the distance from the student’s home to the closest

small school.

           The Chicago Public School District (CPS) is the third-largest district in the United States,

with large numbers from several racial/ethnic groups. CPS overall is 40 percent African-

American, with another 45 percent Hispanic, 3 percent Asian and the remainder Caucasian. Most

students in the district are disadvantaged – 85 percent are from low-income families who qualify

for free or reduced-price lunch – and dropout rates are high (35-43 percent in recent cohorts).2

Chicago’s introduction of new small high schools occurred against a backdrop of considerable

existing school choice (over half of the 100,000 Chicago high school students attend a high

school outside of their attendance area), several charter high schools, and improving test scores

as a result of its 1997 NCLB-style accountability reforms (Jacob 2005).

           Our primary outcome measures use fall administrative enrollment records to construct

indicators of whether a student is still enrolled, is progressing from grade to grade on time, and

whether they graduated from high school. We use five cohorts of students who enter 9th grade

between fall 2002 and fall 2006 at one of 22 new small high schools. We have data to follow all

students through 5 years after entering high school, long enough to capture most high school

completion information even for students who are delayed. We also have standardized test scores

from ACT’s Educational Planning and Assessment System (EPAS) given to students in the fall
2
    These are five-year cohort dropout rates reported by CPS (2012).

                                                                                                     6
of 9th and 10th grades, and spring of 11th grades. The 11th grade test includes a full-length ACT

test that can be sent to colleges for admissions purposes.

         The primary challenge of evaluating the effectiveness of new small schools is to isolate

causality – that is, how would a student have scored this year if she had attended a “regular”

school, and how does that compare to how she scored at the small school she actually attended?

In order to begin to describe the difficulties of isolating causality, we first document the extent of

the selection problem by presenting 8th grade characteristics of students who do and do not

choose to attend a small school in 9th grade.3 These are presented in Table 1. The first column

shows mean characteristics of students who enroll in a small school. Because the schools are

located in particular neighborhoods, we do not compare these students to the overall CPS

population. Instead, we form the comparison group for 9th grade small school students using their

former 8th grade classmates. Small school students were drawn from about 400 different 8th grade

“sending” schools (out of almost 500 8th grade schools in the CPS system). Mean characteristics

of the 8th grade classmates of small school students are in column (2). Because sending schools

have varying rates of treatment (that is, one school might only send one or two students to a

small high school, while another might send half of their enrollment or more to a small school),

we test whether these characteristics are different conditional on sending school fixed effects. In

other words, we examine how students who go to small schools compare to their own 8th grade

classmates. P-values associated with tests for differences in means between columns (1) and (2)

after conditioning on sending school fixed effects in an OLS regression are shown in column (3).

Most characteristics are measured as binary variables, with a value of one indicating that the

student has the characteristic described (e.g. female, receive free or reduced price lunch).

3
 Our sample is limited to students who are in 8th grade in the spring of year t-1 and in 9th grade in the fall of year t.
We omit approximately 5 percent of the control group who enrolled in a selective high school in 9th grade; this has
no significant impact on the results.

                                                                                                                            7
       About 80 percent of the small school students are Black or African-American, 20 percent

are Hispanic, and nearly 90 percent are eligible for free or reduced price lunch. Roughly one-

third of the small school students are old for their grade, and almost one-quarter has some type of

disability. Small school students live 1.2 miles away from the closest small school (whether or

not they attend that particular small school). While their 8th grade classmates are equally likely to

be low-income as measured by school-lunch eligibility, they are less likely to be African

American, somewhat more likely to be Hispanic, more likely to be old for their grade, and less

likely to have any disability. Small school students are more likely to have unstable enrollment in

8th grade, which is measured as whether a student ends the school year attending a different

school than he or she began the year.

       We also observe ISAT test scores from when the students were enrolled in grade 8. The

ISAT was re-normed in 2005 (when our final cohort was in 8th grade), so we standardize math

and reading scores by the mean and standard deviation across all CPS test takers in the same

grade level and year in order to produce comparable statistics over time. The average 8th grade

math score among small schools enrollees is -0.45, or 0.45 standard deviations below the district

average, and the average reading score is -0.34. While the 8th grade classmates of small high

school students also score below the district average on the 8th grade ISAT tests, their average

test scores are significantly higher than the small school enrollees by roughly 0.2 standard

deviations.

       Finally, we also include mean characteristics for the Census block groups in which the

students reside based on data from the 2000 Census. Specifically we look at poverty

concentration, socioeconomic status (SES), and the average number of years household heads




                                                                                                   8
have lived in their residence.4 Students enrolling in small high schools have very similar

neighborhood characteristics to their 8th grade classmates.

         Overall, we conclude that small school students are negatively selected in terms of

expected educational outcomes compared to their prior classmates: they are more likely to be

disabled and be old for their grade (a proxy for whether they have been held back in a prior

year), more likely to have changed schools during the 8th grade school year, and their test scores

are markedly worse in both math and reading and in 8th grade. Based on these differences we

would expect small school students to have worse high school outcomes than their peers, all else

equal.

         The raw outcome means are presented at the bottom of Table 1. About 10 percent of

students drop out or leave the Chicago Public Schools after each year of high school. That is, in

the control group 10.8 percent of students are no longer enrolled in CPS in the fall of what would

be their 10th grade year if they had progressed on time, denoted here as t+1 for one year after

starting 9th grade. Twenty percent are no longer enrolled in the fall 2 years after starting 9th grade

(i.e. what would be their 11th grade year), and thirty percent are no longer enrolled in the third

fall after starting high school. Forty percent have dropped out or left CPS as of the fall 4 years

after starting high school. A related measure of high school attainment is whether a student is

still enrolled and is accumulating course credits progressing up the grade levels on time.

Approximately three-quarters of the 9th graders in our sample are enrolled as 10th graders in CPS

the subsequent year, and just under half of them graduate from high school on time. Note that


4
 All three measures are constructed by CCSR. Poverty concentration is constructed using percent of adult males
employed and percent of families with incomes above the poverty line. The measure is standardized such that the
mean value for all census block groups in Chicago equals zero and one-half of the Census blocks will have above
average poverty concentration (a positive value) and one-half will have below average poverty concentration. The
SES measure is constructed using data on mean level of adult education and the percentage of employed persons
who work as managers or professionals. The measure is similarly standardized so that mean Census block in
Chicago equals zero, high SES block groups have positive values, and low SES block groups have negative values.

                                                                                                                   9
despite the fact that small school 9th graders are negatively selected along observable

characteristics, their average high school outcomes are the same as their prior classmates.

            Cohort-by-cohort summary statistics are presented in Appendix Table 1. Over time, the

cohorts attending small schools become slightly less negatively selected on test scores: each year

the pooled mean test scores among the small schools treatment group improve by approximately

0.04 standard deviation in math (from -0.54 for 2002 9th graders to -0.39 for 2006 9th graders)

and 0.025 standard deviation in reading (from -0.38 to -0.32). In the empirical work that follows,

we always condition on cohort fixed effects.



      IV.      Empirical Approach

      As shown above, small school students differ from their prior classmates along observable

characteristics. One approach to measure the relationship between small school attendance and

student outcomes would be to condition on these observable characteristics such as special

education status, race and gender. We model this approach as follows:

(1)                                    Yitys = α 0 + X i β + α1SM i 9 + γ y + ε itys

where Y is an outcome measure, such as standardized test score or dropout status, for student i at

time t in cohort y in school s. X is a vector of student characteristics such as race, gender and

free-lunch status, SM is an indicator variable for whether a student is enrolled in a small school

in grade 9, γ is a cohort fixed effect (that is, a dummy variable for the year in which the cohort

enters 9th grade), and ε is an individual error term that includes a component that allows for

correlations across students in the same school. In some specifications, we augment the equation

to include fixed effects η for 8th grade school units, or fixed effects φ for a student’s home ZIP

code, or both. This approach adjusts for selection into small schools as reflected by demographic


                                                                                                    10
characteristics.

        However, equation (1) ignores potentially important unobserved characteristics that may

be correlated with both the outcome and the decision to enroll in a small school. Failure to

control for these characteristics would bias the measured impact of small schools. A potential

method to address this problem is to control for additional observable characteristics a baseline

test score T, that is:

(2)                              Yitys = α 0 + X i β + α1SM i 9 + Tiδ + γ y + ε itys .

This strategy works under the (likely untenable) assumption that the baseline test score

adequately captures all of the other unobserved characteristics that affect both the student

outcome and whether a student enrolls in a small school. In effect, equation (2) compares two

children who have the same prior test score and share the same demographic characteristics, but

one is enrolled in a small school and the other is enrolled in a regular school. A positive

coefficient on α1 (for an outcome such as a test score) would indicate that the test score gain (or

value-added) is larger for a student who attends a small school.

        While the approach described in equation (2) is an improvement over the approach in

equation (1), there are still potentially serious shortcomings. For example, there is considerable

year-to-year fluctuation in test score performance. If due to chance a student has an unusually

bad test performance in 8th grade, her parents may react to this low score by enrolling her in a

new school. The next year, we would expect her score to rebound to its previous higher level no

matter whether she enrolls in a small or a regular high school. But failure to account for her

previous test score trend will result in this “rebound” effect being attributed to the new school

(Ashenfelter, 1978). If on the other hand an 8th grader has an unusually high score – again, just

due to chance – his parents will likely judge that the current school regime is serving him well


                                                                                                11
and may be less likely to enroll him in a different school. One can imagine situations in which

this type of bias cuts in favor of small schools and other situations in which it cuts against them.

In any case, the estimated effect will be biased.

       Ideally, we would be able to evaluate the effectiveness of small schools by utilizing some

sort of random assignment mechanism. Some recent studies of school reforms – including the

Bloom and Unterman (2012) paper on small schools in New York – have used variation induced

by randomized lotteries that are often used to allocate school admissions when there are more

students who want to participate in a program than can be accommodated. In a classic lottery-

style setup, students would be randomly assigned by a lottery to attend the new school or not

from a school’s application pool, and then the students who were assigned to attend the new

school would be compared to those who lost the lottery. The students who signed up for the

lottery likely share some similar characteristics – they may have highly motivated parents who

are looking for the best available educational opportunity, or they may be students who feel they

were not served well by the old school, or they may be students who faced academic or

disciplinary problems at their prior school. The key feature for evaluation is that once the

students identified themselves as being interested in changing schools, no characteristics predict

whether they were selected from the list of applicants to attend the new school. As a result, the

lottery “winners” and “losers” share the same distribution of prior achievement, family

characteristics, etc. Since the groups are on average the same at the beginning of the year, any

average difference at the end of the year would be due to the impact of the new school.

Unfortunately, in this case there are no such lotteries available to use to help isolate the treatment

effect of attending a small school.

       In the absence of a truly randomized experiment, we turn to an instrumental variables



                                                                                                   12
strategy to isolate the causal impact, similar to the approach in recent papers in the economics

literature that use proximity to college (Card 1995; Kling 2001; Currie and Moretti 2003) or

selective high schools and career academies (Cullen et al. 2005) as an instrument for attendance.

In this approach, the distance between a student’s home and the nearest small school is used as a

proxy variable for the time cost of attending a small school. The maintained assumption is that

residential location is given, and proximity to a small school is not correlated with other

determinants of attending a small school. If living closer to a small school increases the

likelihood of enrolling in a small school but does not directly impact (or proxy for) student

outcomes, then distance to the nearest small school can be used as an instrument for small school

enrollment.

       In other words, there is some (partially unobserved) selection process into small schools.

Conditional on observable characteristics, those who choose small schools could have the most

highly motivated parents, or they could be the most likely to drop out of a regular high school, or

something else. The instrument is based on the intuition that students who live 1.0 vs. 1.4 miles

away from a small school have the same underlying propensity to have motivated parents, a high

likelihood of dropping out, etc. The difference in proximity to a small school induces one student

to have a lower daily costs (in time and money) in terms of commuting to this particular school

instead of a regular high school. To be a credible instrument, distance from small school must be

a strong predictor of small school attendance but must not belong in the outcome equation

directly nor proxy for other unmeasured characteristics that are omitted from the outcome

equation. Preliminary evidence on the validity of the instrument is presented in Table 2.

       When we condition on relatively small geographic units such as ZIP code, 8th grade

neighborhood school, or both, the difference in proximity to a small school is relatively small



                                                                                                   13
with standard deviation ranging from 0.55 to 0.76 miles.5 Nonetheless, proximity to the nearest

small school is a strong predictor of small school attendance as shown in the row marked “First

stage estimates.” Conditional on background characteristics and 8th grade neighborhood school

fixed effects (column 2), living one mile closer to a small school increases the probability that a

student attends a small school by 5 percentage points, with an F statistic of 54. Results are

similar if we condition on ZIP code fixed effects (column 3) or saturate the model with both

types of fixed effects (column 4).6 To further assess the validity of the instrument, we investigate

whether distance from a new school is correlated with pre-existing characteristics such as a

student’s prior test scores that might proxy for other, unobservable characteristics. When we

control for ZIP code fixed effects, the instrument does not predict 8th grade math scores, student

gender, whether they had unstable enrollment in 8th grade, or disability status. It is, however,

correlated with 8th grade reading scores, free lunch status and student race. The estimated

coefficients are not large, and we control for these characteristics directly in all subsequent

regressions.

         Specifically, the first stage equation is:

(3)                        SMiyn = α0 + Xiβ1 + Nnβ2 + α1MinDisti + γy + δn + εiyn

where an individual i in cohort year y living in neighborhood n decides to enroll in a small

school based on distance to the nearest small school, a vector X of other student-level

characteristics including race, gender, disability status and prior achievement, a vector N of

neighborhood characteristics measured at the Census block level such as SES and poverty

concentration, cohort-specific dummy variables, neighborhood-specific dummy variables


5
  The average (standard deviation) of students per cohort in a ZIP code is 292 (326), and in an 8th grade
neighborhood school zone is 43 (53).
6
  Results are very similar if only geographic fixed effects are included and individual and neighborhood
characteristics are omitted.

                                                                                                            14
(measured as fixed effects for 8th grade neighborhood school, ZIP code, or both) and an error

term. The instrumental variable is the minimum distance between a student’s home address and

the closest small school location. In the data, a student who attends a small school attends the

unit that is closest to her home about three quarters of the time.



    V.      Results

         To construct the analysis sample, we identify all students in each school year T (spanning

fall 2002-fall 2006) who are enrolled in 9th grade in either the fall or spring semester at a small

school and who were enrolled in 8th grade in a CPS school in the spring of the previous school

year, T-1. We construct a control group consisting of the small school enrollees’ 8th grade

classmates who also went on to enroll in 9th grade in a non-selective enrollment, CPS high school

in school year T.

         We construct several outcome measures for students in school years T through T+5. If

the student progresses at an expected rate they will be in grade 10 in year T+1, grade 11 in year

T+2, grade 12 in year T+3, and will have graduated by year T+4. Our primary outcomes of

interest are measures of persistence in school. We calculate these measures using the district’s

fall master enrollment file, which includes information on a student’s school attended, grade

level, if they are currently an active student. If the student is not currently active, a code is

included indicating the reason that a student exited the system, for example, whether they

graduated, dropped out, transferred to a private school or a school out of the area, and so on.

Using these data, we construct an indicator for whether in the current year a student is enrolled,

graduated, or has dropped out or otherwise left the Chicago Public School system. In theory, this

allows us to separate those who drop out from those who otherwise exit the system for parochial



                                                                                                      15
or suburban schools. In practice, we are both concerned about the quality of the drop out reason

variable in general (because schools may have an incentive to erroneously code a student as a

transfer instead of a dropout), and that the quality of this variable may be systematically different

in small schools. For example, small schools might systematically do a better job keeping

records on the whereabouts of their exiting students because there are fewer of them and would

be more likely to know whether a student enrolled in a non-CPS school. As a result, we

aggregate leavers and dropouts in our main specifications.7 We also construct indicator variables

for whether a student is in the grade level that would be expected if they were progressing at a

normal rate of one grade level per year.

           In addition, we have access to test score outcomes. CPS requires all high schools to

administer the EXPLORE and PLAN tests from ACT’s Educational Planning and Assessment

System (EPAS). These test score outcomes affect high schools’ probation status in the CPS

Performance, Remediation and Probation Policy. In addition, Illinois requires all students to take

the Prairie State Achievement Examination (PSAE) in order to receive a regular high school

diploma. One component of the PSAE is a full-length ACT that can be used for college

admission. As a result, we generally observe EXPLORE math and reading scores from the fall of

9th grade, PLAN math and reading test scores from the fall of 10th grade, and ACT math, reading,

English, and science test scores from the spring of 11th grade.

           Of course, test scores are not available for all students in part due to the fact that some

students drop out of school before reaching the grade in which the exam is administered and in

part because test scores are missing for some enrolled students. Not surprisingly we observe test

scores for the largest share of students on the 9th grade exam. Here we observe math scores for

87 percent of the sample of students for whom we also have baseline 8th grade test scores. In
7
    Results separating dropouts and leavers are substantially similar, and are available upon request.

                                                                                                         16
contrast, we only observe 10th grade test scores for 69 percent of the sample and ACT scores for

roughly 42 percent of the sample. If attrition due to dropout, for example, differs between small

high schools and all other CPS high schools then examining test score differences between these

school types will likely produce biased results. In particular, if we think that students who are

most likely to dropout also have the lowest test scores and that small high schools reduce the

dropout rate, then small high schools are likely to have lower average ACT test scores.

       One simple way to try to correct for the potentially differential selection across the two

groups of students is to impute test scores for all students missing test scores. In order to do this,

we assume that a student’s percentile rankings on the 8th grade tests equal the percentile rankings

they would have received on the later tests had they taken the tests. We then set the missing test

scores equal to the scores associated with their percentile rankings. For the ACT science test we

assume a student’s ranking is equal to her 8th grade math percentile ranking, and for the ACT

English test we assume a student’s ranking is equal to her 8th grade reading percentile ranking.8



    A. Descriptive Results

       In the first columns of Table 3 we present OLS estimates of the relationship between

small school enrollment in 9th grade and persistence and graduation as described in equation (2).

Standard errors are clustered by cohort-by-8th grade school groupings. Each row represents a

separate outcome variable. Column (1) presents control group means for the outcome variables,

and columns (2) through (4) represent particular specifications in terms of included geographic



8
 Because the EXPLORE, PLAN, and ACT tests are based on scales of only 25 to 36 points, we
average test scores within percentile ranks and interpolate scores across gaps in percentile
rankings. For example, an ACT math score of 18 equals the 77th percentile in the CPS while a
score of 19 is at the 82nd percentile. In order to assign scores to the intervening percentile ranks
we set the 78th percentile equal to 18.2, the 79th percentile equal to 18.4, and so on.
                                                                                                    17
dummy variables. All estimates include controls for individual demographic characteristics

measured in 8th grade including indicators for female, black, Hispanic, eligibility for free or

reduced price lunch, whether the student was over age-for-grade, had unstable school enrollment,

was disabled or had a learning disability, residential neighborhood characteristics measured at

the Census block level, and cohort dummy variables. Since small school students are observably

more disadvantaged on many of these characteristics, their inclusion in the regression pushes the

coefficients toward more positive estimates (i.e. less likely to drop out and more likely to

progress or graduate on time). Each cell in columns (2) through (4) reports the estimate and

standard error on the small school indicator from a separate regression. By the time we would

expect students to be enrolled in 10th grade (year T+1), approximately 10 percent of students

have dropped out of school or otherwise left CPS (see column 1). After conditioning on

background characteristics and ZIP code fixed effects, students who attend small schools are 0.5

percentage points less likely to drop out or leave, but this relationship is not statistically different

from zero. The coefficient estimates on dropout rates hover around zero in the first 3 years of

high school, and emerge negative and statistically significant by the beginning of what would be

a student’s senior year if he or she progressed on time. Small school students are slightly more

likely to be progressing on time in grade level in grades 10 through 12. They are 3 percentage

points more likely to graduate from high school on time, and 2 percentage points more likely to

graduate within 5 years. In column (3) we replace ZIP code fixed effect with a fixed effect for

residential neighborhood measured as the student’s assigned neighborhood school in 8th grade

(whether or not the student attended this school). In column (4) we saturate the model with both

ZIP code and neighborhood school fixed effects. The estimates are very similar across different

specifications.



                                                                                                     18
    B. Instrumental variables approach

        In order to isolate the causal impact of small school attendance on student outcomes we

turn to using distance to the closest small school as an instrumental variable for small school

attendance as described in equation (3). We present results using this approach in columns (5)

through (7) of Table 3. As with the OLS results, the treatment effect is relatively stable across

specifications that control for different geographic units.

        The results show consistent, strong and positive results of attending a small high school

that are uniformly larger than the corresponding OLS results. This suggests that small school

students are negatively selected on unobservable characteristics just as they are negatively

selected on observable characteristics. In the fall one year after starting 9th grade, small schools

improve the likelihood that a student is still enrolled in CPS by 9 percentage points in the fully

saturated model (column 7). Three years after enrolling in 9th grade they are 14 percentage points

less likely to have dropped out or left CPS.

        Small school attendance also increases the likelihood that a student is still enrolled and

progressing through the grade levels on time. Small school students are 13 percentage points

more likely to be on time in 10th grade, and 18 percentage points more likely to be on time in 11th

grade. They are 9 percentage points more likely to have graduated on time, although the standard

errors in this instrumental variables regression are large so the result is not statistically

significant.

        One lingering concern about the instrument is whether distance to school attended

belongs in the equation directly. After all, if the cost of attending school is lower because a

student lives closer to the school, it might directly impact their likelihood of dropping out



                                                                                                     19
regardless of whether the high school is small or large. To address this, we can additionally

control for distance from a student’s residence to his or her assigned high school. Distance to

high school generally is a significant predictor of dropout in the expected direction, that is, living

farther away from high school slightly increases the likelihood of dropping out. Nonetheless,

directly controlling for distance does not alter the IV relationship between small school

attendance and dropout or persistence outcomes.9



       C. Heterogeneous Impacts across Students

           In Table 4 we present OLS and instrumental variables estimates by subgroups for the

fully saturated model with neighborhood school and ZIP code fixed effects (i.e. columns 4 and 7

from Table 3). In each case we present the control group mean in the first column, the OLS

relationship between small school attendance and the outcome in the second column, and the IV

coefficient and standard error estimates in the third columns. We also show that the first stage

relationship between distance to school and small school attendance is strong for each subgroup.

           Comparing the first two sets of columns, the impact of small schools on African

American and Hispanic students are quite different. According to the IV results, the small school

impact on African American students is strongest in years T+1 to T+3, but declines sharply

thereafter. Note that among African American students the OLS results are consistently zero,

suggesting that failing to account for unobservable determinants of small school enrollment

paints a particularly misleading picture for this subgroup. Among Hispanics, the pattern is

reversed with the estimated impact on the dropout rate and persistence approximately zero in the

first two years, but a stronger impact in years T+3, T+4, and T+5. This finding is especially

interesting because the year-to-year dropout rates appear quite similar between African
9
    Results available upon request.

                                                                                                   20
American and Hispanic students. More research is needed to understand whether this finding

reflects a school effect (which would be hard to disentangle, since most small schools are

predominantly Hispanic or African American), or something else specific to the education

production function for these groups.

        Comparing across gender, the small school impacts are relatively similar for the first year

after high school entry, but by year T+2 the impacts on boys become larger. Small school

attendance reduces boys’ dropout rate in T+3 by 19 percentage points compared to a (statistically

insignificant) 8 percentage point reduction for girls. Small schools improve the likelihood of

graduating on time by 15 percentage points for boys compared to a statistically insignificant

impact of 1 percentage point for girls. Note that the base dropout rate for boys is substantially

higher than it is for girls in each year as well. While all of the corresponding impact estimates for

girls are positive, all are smaller than the estimates for boys, and they are generally not

statistically different from zero.

        Next we look at the impact by the level of the student’s 8th grade test scores. We define a

student (somewhat arbitrarily) as having “high” prior test scores if his math and reading z-scores

were greater than 0.5, and as having “low” prior scores if both math and reading z-scores were

less than -0.5 in 8th grade. Even among students with high 8th grade test scores, 30 percent of

students fail to graduate from a CPS school. Although the standard errors are large, the point

estimates suggest that small school attendance seems somewhat more important for improving

outcomes among the higher performing students, especially on measures of staying on track to

graduate and graduating on time. In particular, the point estimates suggest that small schools

reduce dropout rates for both high and low-performing students and that the magnitudes are

larger for high performing students that low-performing students. However, none of the



                                                                                                    21
estimates are statistically different from zero at conventional levels. Similarly, the estimated

impacts of small school attendance on grade progression and graduation are all positive and

generally larger (relative to the control group means) for high-performing students, but once

again, very few are statistically significant. Finally, we see that the point estimates of small

school impacts are generally largest in magnitude for students who were categorized as learning

disabled in grade 8. Three years after 9th grade enrollment, small schools reduce dropout/leave

rates for students with disabilities by 32 percentage points (from a base of 34 percent), and five

years after high school enrollment small schools reduce their dropout/leave rates by 16

percentage points from a base of 50 percent (although this latter estimate is no longer statistically

different from zero). This translates into increases in four- and five-year graduation rates of over

50 percent. In summary, we find that small school attendance improves outcomes for all types of

students with larger impacts for boys and students with an identified disability.



   D. Test scores

       Test score outcomes are even more problematic than other outcomes because, at a

minimum, they are only available for students who are still enrolled in school. Even among

students who are still enrolled in CPS we only observe test scores for a sub-sample. The fact that

we find impacts of small school attendance on dropout probabilities and the likelihood of

progressing on time through the grades suggests that analysis of the small school impact on test

score outcomes will yield biased results. With that in mind, however, we present OLS and

instrumental variable estimates of the effect of small school attendance on test scores in 9th

grade, 10th grade, and ACT test score outcomes. In order to have some sense of the effect of

sample selection on test score estimates, we include one set of estimates based on observed test



                                                                                                   22
scores and a second set in which we impute missing EPAS and ACT test scores in 9th, 10th, and

11th grade with a student’s 8th grade ISAT test scores. We present both OLS and IV estimates for

each. The top panel of the table presents results for the math and science tests, while the bottom

presents results for the reading and English tests. Note that these scores are measured in score

points; the average score is approximately 14 and the standard deviation of scores ranges

between 3 and 4.

       Comparing the OLS estimates in columns (2) and (5) for 9th and 10th grade math we see,

indeed, that the estimates from the imputed sample are larger than the estimates from the select

sample, consistent with small schools reducing dropout/increasing persistence among lower

performing students. However, we do not see a similar increase in estimated coefficients on the

ACT math and science tests which is puzzling. Once we instrument for small school attendance

using distance to the nearest small school, we find negative but not statistically significant

impacts on math and science test scores for the imputed test score sample. In the select sample,

we estimate a negative impact of small school attendance on ACT math scores that is significant

at the 5 percent level. Overall, we find no evidence of a positive impact of small school

attendance on student math and science test scores.

       Results from the reading and English test score outcomes are more puzzling. Once again,

the OLS estimates from the select and imputed samples for the 9th and 10th grade reading test

scores are consistent with small high schools reducing dropout and increasing persistence among

lower performing students but no similar observation from the ACT reading and English test

scores. Our instrumental variables estimates indicate strong negative impacts of small school

attendance on both 9th grade reading test scores and the ACT reading and English test scores.

The statistically significant, negative 9th grade reading score estimates are particularly hard to



                                                                                                     23
understand because the tests are taken in the fall before we would expect the schools to have a

large impact on the students. Further research is needed to fully understand these test score

implications, but we conclude, once again, that there is no evidence of a positive impact of small

school attendance on student test scores.



   VI.      Discussion and Conclusions

         This paper has examined the effects of the introduction of small schools in the Chicago

Public School district on student performance. As in any exercise in evaluating a policy

intervention, the strength of the results rests on how well one can define the counter-factual –

i.e., what would have happened to the small school students if they had not been granted access

to these new schools? We show definitively that students who attend small high schools look

different from even their own 8th grade classmates along several observable characteristics. They

have a higher probability of having been retained in grade, a history of substantially lower test

scores, and are more likely to have a disability. If these characteristics are not properly accounted

for, the estimated “impact” of attending a small school will be biased.

         We use an instrumental variables strategy to address the selection problem and compare

students who attended the same schools for 8th grade and live in neighborhoods with similar

characteristics. In this approach, one student was more likely to sign up for a small school than

another similar student because the small school was located closer to the student’s house and

therefore the “cost” of attending the school as measured by commuting time is lower. Distance to

the nearest small school has strong predictive power to identify who attends a small school.

Using this strategy, we find that small school students are substantially more likely to persist in

school and eventually graduate. Nonetheless, there is no consistent measurable impact on student



                                                                                                  24
achievement as measured by test scores. The finding of no test score improvement but a strong

improvement along dimensions of persistence and attainment is similar to the literature on the

impacts of Catholic high schools (e.g. Evans and Schwab 1995, Altonji et al. 2005) and to the

findings of evaluations of the New York City small schools intervention (Bloom and Unterman

2012; Schwartz et al. 2013). Further, it is consistent with a growing literature that suggests that

interventions aimed at older children can improve their non-cognitive skills but do little to

improve their cognitive skills (Cunha et al. 2006).

       Our empirical strategy provides the means to identify the causal impact of enrollment in a

small school on student outcomes. An important remaining question, then, is what is the likely

mechanism for the improvements? While limiting the enrollment of the student body was an

important cornerstone of the small schools movement, it also encouraged differences in

personnel and culture compared to a typical, large, urban high school. Unfortunately, while we

can say that the impact of the introduction of small schools in Chicago has been positive –

especially for students who were already relatively disadvantaged – we cannot at this point

disentangle what exactly it is about these small schools that generated the improvements in

student outcomes.




                                                                                                25
REFERENCES


Allensworth, E. (2005). “Graduation and Dropout Trends in Chicago: A Look at Cohorts of
Students from 1991-2004.” Chicago: Consortium on Chicago School Reform.

Allensworth, E. & Easton, J.Q. (2001). Calculating a Cohort Dropout Rate for the Chicago
Public Schools: A Technical Research Report. Chicago: Consortium on Chicago School Reform.

Altonji, J., Elder, T.E. & Taber, C.R. (2005). “Selection on Observed and Unobserved Variables:
Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), 151-
184.

Ashenfelter, O. (1978). “Estimating the Effects of Training Programs on Earnings.” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 60: 47-57.

Barker, R. & Gump, P. (1964). Big School, Small School: High School Size and Student
Behavior. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.

Bloom, Howard S. and Rebecca Unterman. (2012). Sustained Positive Effects on Graduation
Rates Produced by New York City’s Small Public High Schools of Choice. New York City :
MDRC.

Bryk, A. & Driscoll, M.W. (1988). The high school as community: Contextual influences and
consequences for students and teachers. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin- Madison,
National Center on Effective Secondary Schools.

Bryk, A.S., Lee, V.E. & Smith, J.B. (1990). “High school organization and its effects on
teachers and students: An interpretive summary of the research.” In W.H. Clune & J.F. Witte
(Eds.), Choice and control in American education, Vol. 1 (pp. 135-226). New York: Falmer
Press.

Bryk, A.S. & Thum, Y.M. (1989). “The effects of high school organization on dropping out: An
exploratory investigation.” American Educational Research Journal, 26, 353-383.

Bryk, A.S. & Raudenbush, S.W. (2002). Hierarchical Linear Models (Second Edition).
Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.

Card, David (1995) “Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the Return to
Schooling,” in Aspects of Labour Economics: Essays in Honour of John Vanderkamp edited by
Louis Chrisofides, E. Kenneth Grant and Robert Swindinsky, University of Toronto Press.

Chicago Public Schools. (2013). Cohort Dropout and Graduation Rates, 1999 through 2012.
Accessed February 22, 2013 from http://www.cps.edu/SchoolData/Pages/SchoolData.aspx.

Chubb, J.E. & Moe, T.M. (1990). Politics, Markets & America’s Schools. Washington, DC:

                                                                                               26
Brookings Institution Press.

Cotton, K. (1996). “School size, school climate, and student performance.” Northwest Regional
Educational Laboratory.

Cullen, J., Jacob, B. & Levitt, S. (2006). “The Effect of School Choice on Participants: Evidence
from Randomized Lotteries.” Econometrica. 74(5): 1191-1230.

Cullen, J., Jacob, B. & Levitt, S. (2005). “The Impact of School Choice on Student Outcomes:
An Analysis of the Chicago Public Schools.” Journal of Public Economics. 89(5-6): 729-760.

Cunha, F., Heckman, J., Lochner, L. & Masterov, D.V. (2006). “Interpreting the Evidence on
Life Cycle Skill Formation.” In Hanushek, E. & Welch, F., eds., Handbook of the Economics of
Education, Volume 1. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Currie, Janet & Moretti, E. (2003). “Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational Transmission
of Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 118(4):
1495-1532.

Darling-Hammond, L., Ancess, J. & Wichterle Ort, S. (2002). “Reinventing high school:
outcomes of the coalition campus schools project.” American Educational Research Journal,
39(3), 639-73.

Evans, W.N. & Schwab, R. (1995). “Finishing High School and Starting College: Do Catholic
Schools Make a Difference?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(4): 941-974.

Gates Foundation (2009). “Annual Letter 2009”. http://www.gatesfoundation.org/who-we-
are/resources-and-media/annual-letters-list/annual-letter-2009

Haller, E.J. (1993). “Small schools and higher-order thinking skills.” Journal of Research in
Rural Education, 9(2), 66-73.

Hess, G.A. & Cytrynbaum, S. (2002). “The effort to redesign Chicago high schools: effects on
schools and achievement.” In V. Lee (ed.) Reforming Chicago’s High Schools: Research
Perspectives on School and System Level Change. Chicago: Consortium on Chicago School
Research.

Holland, N.E. (2002). “Small schools transforming teacher and student experiences in urban high
schools.” In V. Lee (ed.) Reforming Chicago’s High Schools: Research Perspectives on School
and System Level Change. Chicago: Consortium on Chicago School Research.

Howley, C.B. (1989). “Synthesis of the effects of school and district size: what research says
about achievement in small schools and school districts.” Journal of Rural and Small Schools.

Jacob, B. (2005). “Accountability, Incentives and Behavior: Evidence from School Reform in
Chicago.” Journal of Public Economics, 89(5-6): 761-796.

                                                                                                 27
Jacob, B. & Levitt, S. (2003). “Rotten Apples: An Investigation of the Prevalence and Predictors
of Teacher Cheating.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3): 843-877.

Kahne, J.E., Sporte, S.E. & Easton, J.Q. (2005). “Creating small schools in Chicago: an early
look at implementation and impact.” Improving Schools 8(1): 7-22.

Kling, Jeffrey R. (2001). “Interpreting Instrumental Variables Estimates of the Returns to
Schooling.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 19(3): 358-364.

Maeroff, G.I. (1992). “To improve schools, reduce their size.” College Board News, 20(3), 3.

Pittman, R. & Haughwout, P. (1987). “Influence of high school size on dropout rate.”
Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 9(4), 337-43.

Roderick, M., Jacob, B. & Bryk, A. (2002). “The Impact of High-Stakes Testing in Chicago on
Student Achievement in Promotional Gate Grades.” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis.
24(4): 333-357.

Rossi, R. & Montgomery, A. (2004). Educational Reforms and Students at Risk: A Review of
the Current State of the Art. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Office of
Educational Research and Improvement, Office of Research.

Schwartz, A.E., Stiefel, L, & Wiswall, M. (2013). “Do Small Schools Improve Performance in
Large, Urban Districts? Causal Evidence form New York City.” Unpublished manuscript ,
Institute for Education and Social Policy, New York University.

Shear, L., & Smerdon, B. (2003). Mapping the terrain: Year 1 of the evaluation of the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation's National School District and Network Grants Program. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago.
http://ctl.sri.com/projects/displayProject.jsp?Nick=gates

Sporte, S. & de la Torre, M. (2010). Chicago High School Redesign Initiative: Schools, Students,
and Outcomes. University of Chicago Consortium on Chicago School Research Report.

Snyder, Thomas D. and Sally A. Dillow. (2012). Digest of Education Statistics 2011. (NCES
2012-001). National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.
Department of Educaiton. Washington, DC.

Toch, T. (1991). In the name of excellence. New York: Oxford University Press.

Toch, T. (2003). High Schools on a Human Scale. Boston: Beacon Press.

Toch, T. (2010). “Small is Still Beautiful.” Washington Monthly, July/August.

U. S. Dept of Education (2003). Preparing America’s Future High School Initiative.

                                                                                                28
U.S. Department of Education (forthcoming). Digest of Education Statistics 2012. Advanced
release of selected 2012 Digest Tables Accessed on February 21, 2013 from
http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/2012menu_tables.asp	  	  
	  
Wasley, P., Fine, M., Gladden, M., Holland, N., King, S., Mosak, E. & Powell, L. (2000). Small
Schools: Great Strides. New York: Bank Street College of Education.




                                                                                            29
Table	  1:	  Mean	  characteristics	  of	  small	  high	  school	  students	  and	  their	  8th	  grade	  schoolmates

                                                                               Small	  school	  9th	              Former	                      p-­‐value	  of	  
Characteristic                                                                    graders                          classmates                      difference
                                                                                           (1)                             (2)                            (3)

8th	  grade	  year	  demographics
Female                                                                                   0.503                          0.505                           0.653
Black                                                                                    0.806                          0.696                           0.012
Hispanic                                                                                 0.177                          0.262                           0.057
Free	  and	  reduced	  price	  lunch                                                 0.885                          0.885                           0.687
Over	  age-­‐for-­‐grade                                                                0.328                          0.287                           0.000
Unstable	  enrollment	  8th	  grade                                                   0.063                          0.051                           0.001
Disability:	  any                                                                       0.225                          0.187                           0.000
Diability:	  learning	  disabled                                                       0.161                          0.128                           0.000
Minimum	  distance	  to	  a	  small	  high	  school                                 1.21                           2.47                           0.000

Prior	  test	  scores
8th	  grade	  math	  z-­‐score                                                       -­‐0.453                       -­‐0.238                         0.000
8th	  grade	  reading	  z-­‐score                                                    -­‐0.343                       -­‐0.180                         0.000

2000	  Census	  block	  group	  characteristics
Poverty	  concentration                                                                  0.604                          0.502                          0.113
Socioeconomic	  status                                                                 -­‐0.395                       -­‐0.392                         0.198
Tenancy                                                                                    11.8                           11.7                          0.961

High	  school	  outcomes
Dropout/left	  year	  t+1                                                              0.106                          0.108                           0.302
Dropout/left	  year	  t+2                                                              0.214                          0.205                           0.094
Dropout/left	  year	  t+3                                                              0.307                          0.299                           0.226
Dropout/left	  year	  t+4                                                              0.410                          0.411                           0.807
Dropout/left	  year	  t+5                                                              0.438                          0.434                           0.775

On	  time	  10th	  grade                                                              0.765                          0.737                           0.591
On	  time	  11th	  grade                                                              0.635                          0.608                           0.381
On	  time	  12th	  grade                                                              0.554                          0.546                           0.893
Graduated	  on	  time                                                                  0.491                          0.481                           0.449
Graduated	  within	  5	  years                                                        0.529                          0.527                           0.731
N                                                                                        7368                           57568


Notes:	  This	  table	  presents	  summary	  statistics	  for	  the	  analysis	  sample.	  Column	  (1)	  presents	  average	  
characteristics	  among	  students	  who	  attended	  a	  small	  high	  school	  in	  9th	  grade.	  Column	  (2)	  presents	  average	  
characteristics	  of	  the	  8th	  grade	  schoolmates	  of	  the	  students	  in	  column	  (1).	  Students	  who	  attended	  a	  selective	  
enrollment	  high	  school	  are	  omitted	  from	  column	  (2).	  Column	  (3)	  presents	  the	  p-­‐value	  of	  a	  test	  for	  equality	  across	  
columns	  (1)	  and	  (2)	  after	  conditioning	  on	  8th	  grade	  school	  fixed	  effects.	  5th	  and	  8th	  grade	  test	  scores	  are	  
normalized	  by	  the	  district-­‐wide	  mean	  and	  standard	  deviation	  in	  the	  year	  of	  the	  test.	  High	  school	  outcomes	  are	  
measured	  in	  the	  fall.




                                                                                                                                                                                30
Table	  2:	  Relationship	  between	  Distance	  to	  Nearest	  Small	  School	  and	  Selected	  Variables


                                                                   Control	               OLS	  relationship	  between	  instrument	  
Characteristic
                                                                 group	  mean                       and	  dependent	  variable

                                                                          (1)                    (2)                     (3)                     (4)

Panel	  A:	  First	  stage	  regressions
Attends	  small	  school                                                                     -­‐0.046                -­‐0.054                -­‐0.045
                                                                                              (0.006)                 (0.007)                 (0.006)
F	  statistic                                                                                    54.1                    63.7                    51.9

Panel	  B:	  Correlation	  between	  distance	  and	  8th	  grade	  characteristics
8th	  grade	  math	  z-­‐score                      -­‐0.238                0.009          0.015                                              0.009
                                                      (0.831)               (0.008)        (0.008)                                            (0.008)
8th	  grade	  reading	  z-­‐score                      -­‐0.18              0.021          0.025                                              0.021
                                                      (0.900)               (0.008)        (0.007)                                            (0.008)
Female                                                   0.505               -­‐0.002       -­‐0.001                                           -­‐0.001
                                                      (0.500)               (0.003)        (0.002)                                            (0.003)
Black                                                    0.696                 0.004          0.011                                              0.005
                                                      (0.460)               (0.002)        (0.006)                                            (0.002)
Hispanic                                                 0.262               -­‐0.010       -­‐0.018                                           -­‐0.010
                                                      (0.440)               (0.002)        (0.006)                                            (0.002)
Free	  or	  reduced	  price	  lunch                  0.885               -­‐0.005       -­‐0.009                                           -­‐0.005
                                                      (0.319)               (0.002)        (0.002)                                            (0.002)
Over	  age-­‐for-­‐grade                                0.287               -­‐0.010       -­‐0.012                                           -­‐0.010
                                                      (0.452)               (0.003)        (0.003)                                            (0.003)
Unstable	  enrollment	  8th	  grade                   0.051               -­‐0.001         0.000                                              0.000
                                                      (0.219)               (0.002)        (0.001)                                            (0.002)
Disability:	  any                                       0.187               -­‐0.001       -­‐0.001                                           -­‐0.001
                                                      (0.390)               (0.002)        (0.002)                                            (0.002)
Diability:	  learning	  disabled                       0.128                 0.000        -­‐0.002                                             0.000
                                                      (0.334)               (0.002)        (0.002)                                            (0.002)

ZIP	  code	  fixed	  effects                                                                  yes                                             yes
8th	  grade	  neighborhood	  school	  fixed	  
                                                                                                                         yes                     yes
effects


Note:	  Sample	  size	  is	  64,936.	  The	  first	  column	  presents	  control	  group	  means	  (standard	  deviations).	  In	  
columns	  (2)	  through	  (4)	  each	  cell	  presents	  the	  coefficient	  and	  standard	  error	  on	  a	  variable	  measuring	  the	  
distance	  between	  a	  student's	  residence	  and	  the	  closest	  small	  high	  school.	  The	  columns	  differ	  by	  what	  
geographic	  fixed	  effects	  are	  included.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  by	  cohort	  and	  8th	  grade	  school.	  Panel	  A	  
reports	  the	  first	  stage	  regression	  and	  includes	  the	  following	  control	  variables	  in	  addition	  to	  the	  geographic	  
fixed	  effects:	  indicators	  for	  whether	  a	  student	  is	  female,	  black,	  Hispanic,	  over	  age-­‐for-­‐grade,	  learning	  
disabled,	  received	  free	  or	  reduced-­‐price	  lunch	  or	  had	  unstable	  8th	  grade	  enrollment,	  and	  Census	  tract	  
information	  on	  concentration	  of	  poverty,	  socioeconomic	  status	  and	  tenancy.	  Panel	  B	  regresses	  the	  
dependent	  variable	  listed	  in	  the	  row	  on	  the	  distance	  measure,	  cohort	  fixed	  effects,	  and	  geographic	  fixed	  
effects	  only.	  




                                                                                                                                                                   31
Table	  3:	  Small	  school	  effects	  on	  high	  school	  persistence	  and	  completion

Outcome                                                         (1)                   (2)            (3)            (4)                                      (5)         (6)             (7)
                                                                                        Ordinary	  Least	  Squares                                            Instrumental	  Variables

Dropout
  Dropout/left	  year	  T+1                                0.108                 -­‐0.005              -­‐0.003              -­‐0.002                   -­‐0.077              -­‐0.090              -­‐0.094
                                                            (0.310)               (0.006)               (0.006)               (0.005)                    (0.037)               (0.043)               (0.083)
    Dropout/left	  year	  T+2                              0.205                   0.000                 0.004                 0.004                    -­‐0.097              -­‐0.100              -­‐0.105
                                                            (0.403)               (0.006)               (0.006)               (0.006)                    (0.047)               (0.059)               (0.066)
    Dropout/left	  year	  T+3                              0.299                 -­‐0.002              -­‐0.001              -­‐0.001                   -­‐0.088              -­‐0.140              -­‐0.144
                                                            (0.458)               (0.007)               (0.007)               (0.007)                    (0.050)               (0.066)               (0.068)
    Dropout/left	  year	  T+4                              0.411                 -­‐0.017              -­‐0.017              -­‐0.018                   -­‐0.008              -­‐0.037              -­‐0.032
                                                            (0.492)               (0.007)               (0.008)               (0.008)                    (0.051)               (0.066)               (0.078)
    Dropout/left	  year	  T+5                              0.434                 -­‐0.015              -­‐0.014              -­‐0.015                   -­‐0.032              -­‐0.060              -­‐0.062
                                                            (0.496)               (0.007)               (0.008)               (0.008)                    (0.050)               (0.067)               (0.076)
Persistence
  On	  time	  10th	  grade                                0.737                 0.030                 0.027                 0.026                      0.095                 0.132                 0.133
                                                            (0.440)               (0.009)               (0.008)               (0.008)                    (0.063)               (0.071)               (0.086)
    On	  time	  11th	  grade                              0.608                 0.033                 0.029                 0.028                      0.134                 0.174                 0.178
                                                            (0.488)               (0.008)               (0.008)               (0.008)                    (0.062)               (0.073)               (0.080)
    On	  time	  12th	  grade                              0.546                 0.023                 0.021                 0.021                      0.058                 0.102                 0.098
                                                            (0.498)               (0.008)               (0.008)               (0.008)                    (0.056)               (0.069)               (0.076)
    Graduated	  on	  time                                  0.481                 0.031                 0.027                 0.028                      0.067                 0.092                 0.089
                                                            (0.500)               (0.008)               (0.008)               (0.008)                    (0.051)               (0.065)               (0.069)
    Graduated	  within	  5	  years                        0.527                 0.022                 0.021                 0.022                      0.026                 0.048                 0.051
                                                            (0.499)               (0.007)               (0.008)               (0.008)                    (0.049)               (0.064)               (0.071)

    ZIP	  code	  fixed	  effects                                                  yes                                         yes                        yes                                         yes
    8th	  grade	  neighborhood	  
    school	  fixed	  effects                                                                             yes                   yes                                              yes                   yes

Note:	  Sample	  size	  is	  64,936.	  The	  column	  (1)	  presents	  control	  group	  means	  (standard	  deviations).	  In	  columns	  (2)	  through	  (4)	  each	  cell	  presents	  
the	  coefficient	  and	  standard	  error	  on	  an	  indicator	  for	  whether	  a	  student	  attended	  a	  small	  school	  in	  9th	  grade	  in	  a	  regression	  where	  the	  
dependent	  variable	  is	  listed	  in	  the	  row	  and	  geographic	  fixed	  effects	  specificied	  in	  the	  column.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  by	  cohort	  and	  8th	  
grade	  school.	  Baseline	  controls	  include	  In	  columns	  (5)	  through	  (7)	  each	  cell	  presents	  the	  coefficient	  and	  standard	  error	  of	  an	  instrumental	  
variables	  regression	  where	  enrollment	  in	  a	  small	  high	  school	  is	  predicted	  by	  the	  minimum	  distance	  between	  a	  student's	  home	  address	  and	  the	  
closest	  small	  high	  school.	  All	  regressions	  in	  columns	  (2)	  through	  (7)	  have	  standard	  errors	  clustered	  by	  cohort	  and	  8th	  grade	  school,	  and	  control	  
for	  cohort	  fixed	  effects	  and	  the	  following	  characteristics:	  indicators	  for	  whether	  a	  student	  is	  female,	  black,	  Hispanic,	  over	  age-­‐for-­‐grade,	  learning	  
disabled,	  received	  free	  or	  reduced-­‐price	  lunch	  or	  had	  unstable	  8th	  grade	  enrollment,	  and	  Census	  tract	  information	  on	  concentration	  of	  poverty,	  
socioeconomic	  status	  and	  tenancy.	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                           32
Table	  4:	  Small	  school	  effects	  on	  high	  school	  persistence	  and	  completion:	  Subgroup	  analysis

                                                                   African	  American                                                             Hispanic                                                          Female                                                          Male
                                                             control	                                                         control	                                                        control	                                                     control	  
                                                                          OLS          IV                                                              OLS                   IV                                         OLS                   IV                                      OLS                   IV
                                                              mean                                                              mean                                                             mean                                                          mean
                                                               (1)         (2)         (3)                                       (4)                    (5)                  (6)                  (7)                    (8)                 (9)               (10)                   (10)                (12)

First	  stage
      Attend	  small	  school                                                                         -­‐0.039                                                          -­‐0.070                                                         -­‐0.043                                                     -­‐0.048
                                                                                                       (0.006)                                                           (0.014)                                                          (0.007)                                                      (0.006)
Dropout
    Dropout/left	  year	  t+1                               0.102                  0.002             -­‐0.128                 0.121                -­‐0.021             -­‐0.004               0.098                  0.002              -­‐0.115            0.118                -­‐0.005            -­‐0.061
                                                              0.302               (0.009)             (0.054)                   0.326               (0.020)              (0.077)                 0.297               (0.011)              (0.059)              0.323               (0.010)             (0.056)
        Dropout/left	  year	  t+2                           0.201                  0.014             -­‐0.187                 0.208                -­‐0.036               0.054                0.179                  0.004              -­‐0.044            0.230                  0.007             -­‐0.144
                                                             (0.401)              (0.010)             (0.078)                  (0.406)              (0.019)              (0.108)                (0.384)              (0.011)              (0.075)             (0.421)              (0.010)             (0.086)
        Dropout/left	  year	  t+3                           0.300                  0.004             -­‐0.157                 0.291                -­‐0.025             -­‐0.141               0.257                -­‐0.007             -­‐0.082            0.342                  0.007             -­‐0.186
                                                             (0.458)              (0.011)             (0.081)                  (0.454)              (0.019)              (0.115)                (0.437)              (0.011)              (0.082)             (0.474)              (0.012)             (0.093)
        Dropout/left	  year	  t+4                           0.421                -­‐0.011              0.037                  0.386                -­‐0.051             -­‐0.159               0.353                -­‐0.026             -­‐0.025            0.471                -­‐0.008            -­‐0.023
                                                             (0.494)              (0.012)             (0.086)                  (0.487)              (0.024)              (0.112)                (0.478)              (0.013)              (0.090)             (0.499)              (0.014)             (0.091)
        Dropout/left	  year	  t+5                           0.446                -­‐0.009            -­‐0.005                 0.402                -­‐0.039             -­‐0.226               0.367                -­‐0.027             -­‐0.049            0.503                -­‐0.002            -­‐0.063
                                                             (0.497)              (0.012)             (0.089)                  (0.490)              (0.025)              (0.112)                (0.482)              (0.013)              (0.094)             (0.500)              (0.014)             (0.092)

Persistence
    On	  time	  10th	  grade                               0.744                0.018               0.169                    0.717                0.077               0.055                   0.784                0.023                 0.094              0.688                0.027               0.161
                                                             (0.436)              (0.018)             (0.092)                  (0.450)              (0.028)             (0.112)                 (0.412)              (0.016)             (0.083)              (0.463)              (0.020)             (0.099)
        On	  time	  11th	  grade                           0.610                0.019               0.233                    0.604                0.085               0.085                   0.670                0.033               -­‐0.005             0.546                0.022               0.325
                                                             (0.488)              (0.016)             (0.096)                  (0.489)              (0.026)             (0.120)                 (0.470)              (0.016)             (0.092)              (0.498)              (0.016)             (0.103)
        On	  time	  12th	  grade                           0.541                0.013               0.044                    0.557                0.057               0.236                   0.613                0.025               -­‐0.006             0.479                0.015               0.184
                                                             (0.498)              (0.014)             (0.087)                  (0.497)              (0.027)             (0.129)                 (0.487)              (0.015)             (0.094)              (0.500)              (0.015)             (0.092)
        Graduated	  on	  time                               0.469                0.022               0.017                    0.507                0.054               0.255                   0.556                0.040                0.014               0.404                0.013               0.148
                                                             (0.499)              (0.013)             (0.086)                  (0.500)              (0.025)             (0.110)                 (0.497)              (0.014)             (0.095)              (0.491)              (0.014)             (0.091)
        Graduated	  within	  5	  years                     0.510                0.018               0.008                    0.567                0.041               0.161                   0.599                0.033                0.007               0.454                0.009               0.077
                                                             (0.500)              (0.013)             (0.087)                  (0.495)              (0.025)             (0.100)                 (0.490)              (0.014)             (0.094)              (0.498)              (0.014)             (0.088)

Notes:	  This	  table	  presents	  heterogeneous	  impacts	  across	  different	  subgroups.	  Each	  set	  of	  columns	  is	  limited	  to	  the	  subgroup	  named	  at	  the	  top	  of	  the	  column.	  The	  first	  column	  in	  each	  set	  presents	  control	  
group	  means	  (standard	  deviations).	  The	  second	  column	  reports	  the	  OLS	  relationship	  between	  small	  school	  attendance	  and	  the	  outcome	  denoted	  in	  the	  row	  title,	  and	  uses	  the	  same	  specification	  as	  column	  
(4)	  of	  Table	  3.	  The	  third	  column	  reports	  the	  IV	  estimate	  of	  the	  impact	  of	  small	  school	  attendance	  on	  each	  outcome,	  and	  uses	  the	  same	  specification	  as	  column	  (7)	  of	  Table	  3.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  
by	  cohort	  and	  8th	  grade	  school.	  All	  regressions	  include	  fixed	  effects	  for	  cohort,	  8th	  grade	  neighborhood	  school,	  and	  ZIP	  code.	  Where	  appropriate,	  additional	  controls	  include	  indicators	  for	  whether	  a	  
student	  is	  female,	  black,	  Hispanic,	  over	  age-­‐for-­‐grade,	  learning	  disabled,	  received	  free	  or	  reduced-­‐price	  lunch	  or	  had	  unstable	  8th	  grade	  enrollment,	  and	  Census	  tract	  information	  on	  concentration	  of	  
poverty,	  socioeconomic	  status	  and	  tenancy.	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        33
Table	  4:	  Small	  school	  effects	  on	  high	  school	  persistence	  and	  completion:	  Subgroup	  analysis	  (Part	  2)

                                                                        Prior	  Low	  Score                                              Prior	  High	  Score                                             Learning	  Disabled
                                                               control	                                                           control	                                                            control	  
                                                                                 OLS           IV                                                   OLS            IV                                                OLS            IV
                                                                mean                                                                mean                                                                 mean
                                                                (13)             (14)         (15)                                  (16)            (17)          (18)                                   (19)        (20           (21)

First	  stage
      Attend	  small	  school                                                                           -­‐0.051                                                             -­‐0.040                                                            -­‐0.061
                                                                                                         (0.007)                                                              (0.007)                                                             (0.008)
Dropout
    Dropout/left	  year	  t+1                                 0.122                  0.000              -­‐0.078                  0.082                0.007                 -­‐0.143                  0.121                -­‐0.006             -­‐0.221
                                                                0.327               (0.009)              (0.053)                    0.274               (0.015)               (0.091)                    0.326               (0.013)              (0.091)
        Dropout/left	  year	  t+2                             0.246                  0.003              -­‐0.067                  0.138                0.021                 -­‐0.110                  0.225                 0.014               -­‐0.321
                                                               (0.431)              (0.010)              (0.072)                   (0.345)              (0.018)               (0.118)                   (0.418)              (0.017)              (0.137)
        Dropout/left	  year	  t+3                             0.366                -­‐0.011             -­‐0.127                  0.194                0.037                 -­‐0.186                  0.343                 0.018               -­‐0.321
                                                               (0.482)              (0.012)              (0.081)                   (0.395)              (0.019)               (0.134)                   (0.475)              (0.019)              (0.144)
        Dropout/left	  year	  t+4                             0.492                -­‐0.025             -­‐0.020                  0.278                0.013                 -­‐0.178                  0.462                 0.004               -­‐0.150
                                                               (0.500)              (0.013)              (0.083)                   (0.448)              (0.023)               (0.154)                   (0.499)              (0.019)              (0.135)
        Dropout/left	  year	  t+5                             0.523                -­‐0.019             -­‐0.050                  0.286                0.003                 -­‐0.235                  0.496                 0.007               -­‐0.163
                                                               (0.499)              (0.013)              (0.081)                   (0.452)              (0.023)               (0.150)                   (0.500)              (0.020)              (0.133)

Persistence
    On	  time	  10th	  grade                                 0.676                0.024                0.067                     0.838                  0.015               0.211                     0.683                  0.011              0.084
                                                               (0.468)              (0.020)              (0.087)                   (0.368)              (0.021)               (0.132)                   (0.465)              (0.027)              (0.123)
        On	  time	  11th	  grade                             0.520                0.033                0.183                     0.754                  0.017               0.147                     0.547                  0.019              0.368
                                                               (0.500)              (0.017)              (0.084)                   (0.431)              (0.022)               (0.153)                   (0.498)              (0.024)              (0.146)
        On	  time	  12th	  grade                             0.446                0.027                0.084                     0.712                -­‐0.006              0.194                     0.477                  0.005              0.222
                                                               (0.497)              (0.015)              (0.083)                   (0.453)              (0.023)               (0.157)                   (0.499)              (0.022)              (0.138)
        Graduated	  on	  time                                 0.375                0.031                0.099                     0.660                  0.001               0.182                     0.409                -­‐0.012             0.290
                                                               (0.484)              (0.013)              (0.075)                   (0.474)              (0.025)               (0.162)                   (0.492)              (0.021)              (0.132)
        Graduated	  within	  5	  years                       0.426                0.028                0.066                     0.698                 0.002                0.154                     0.458                -­‐0.007             0.264
                                                               (0.494)              (0.013)              (0.077)                   (0.459)              (0.023)               (0.151)                   (0.498)              (0.020)              (0.130)

Notes:	  This	  table	  presents	  heterogeneous	  impacts	  across	  different	  subgroups.	  Each	  set	  of	  columns	  is	  limited	  to	  the	  subgroup	  named	  at	  the	  top	  of	  the	  column.	  The	  
first	  column	  in	  each	  set	  presents	  control	  group	  means	  (standard	  deviations).	  The	  second	  column	  reports	  the	  OLS	  relationship	  between	  small	  school	  attendance	  and	  
the	  outcome	  denoted	  in	  the	  row	  title,	  and	  uses	  the	  same	  specification	  as	  column	  (4)	  of	  Table	  3.	  The	  third	  column	  reports	  the	  IV	  estimate	  of	  the	  impact	  of	  small	  school	  
attendance	  on	  each	  outcome,	  and	  uses	  the	  same	  specification	  as	  column	  (7)	  of	  Table	  3.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  by	  cohort	  and	  8th	  grade	  school.	  All	  regressions	  
include	  fixed	  effects	  for	  cohort,	  8th	  grade	  neighborhood	  school,	  and	  ZIP	  code.	  Where	  appropriate,	  additional	  controls	  include	  indicators	  for	  whether	  a	  student	  is	  
female,	  black,	  Hispanic,	  over	  age-­‐for-­‐grade,	  learning	  disabled,	  received	  free	  or	  reduced-­‐price	  lunch	  or	  had	  unstable	  8th	  grade	  enrollment,	  and	  Census	  tract	  
information	  on	  concentration	  of	  poverty,	  socioeconomic	  status	  and	  tenancy.	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       34
Table	  5:	  Small	  school	  effects	  on	  high	  school	  test	  scores


                                                                                                          Test	  scores                                             Test	  scores	  with	  missing	  scores	  imputed

                                                                                Mean	  of	                                                                          Mean	  of	  
                                                                                                                OLS                           IV                                                    OLS                           IV
                                                                                control                                                                               control
                                                                                  (1)                            (2)                         (3)                        (4)                          (5)                         (6)
Mathematics/science	  test	  scores
 Math	  fall	  9th	  grade                                                       13.0                        -­‐0.69                    -­‐0.83                       12.9                       -­‐0.59                    -­‐0.69
                                                                                    (3.6)                      (0.17)                     (0.72)                         (3.7)                     (0.16)                     (0.70)
   Math	  fall	  10th	  grade                                                    14.2                        -­‐0.54                    -­‐0.10                       14.1                       -­‐0.46                    -­‐0.60
                                                                                    (3.1)                      (0.12)                     (0.59)                         (3.2)                     (0.11)                     (0.58)
   Math	  ACT	  score	  (spring	  11th	  grade)                                16.1                        -­‐0.61                    -­‐1.28                       16.7                       -­‐0.61                    -­‐0.75
                                                                                    (2.8)                      (0.11)                     (0.61)                         (3.0)                     (0.11)                     (0.59)
   Science	  ACT	  score	  (spring	  11th	  grade)                             16.4                        -­‐0.49                    -­‐0.44                       16.9                       -­‐0.79                    -­‐0.87
                                                                                    (3.6)                      (0.14)                     (0.73)                         (3.6)                     (0.15)                     (0.73)
Reading/English	  test	  scores
 Reading	  fall	  9th	  grade                                                    12.7                        -­‐0.59                    -­‐1.14                       12.6                       -­‐0.50                    -­‐1.24
                                                                                    (2.8)                      (0.14)                     (0.55)                         (2.8)                     (0.13)                     (0.52)
   Reading	  fall	  10th	  grade                                                 14.3                        -­‐0.51                    -­‐0.46                       14.1                       -­‐0.44                    -­‐1.09
                                                                                    (3.4)                      (0.14)                     (0.66)                         (3.4)                     (0.13)                     (0.63)
   Reading	  ACT	  score	  (spring	  11th	  grade)                             15.7                        -­‐0.74                    -­‐1.79                       16.2                       -­‐0.78                    -­‐2.25
                                                                                    (4.1)                      (0.16)                     (0.92)                         (4.1)                     (0.17)                     (0.89)
   English	  ACT	  score	  (spring	  11th	  grade)                             15.1                        -­‐0.99                    -­‐2.12                       15.6                       -­‐0.90                    -­‐2.56
                                                                                    (4.5)                      (0.21)                     (1.00)                         (4.7)                     (0.20)                     (1.02)

Notes:	  This	  table	  presents	  impacts	  of	  small	  schools	  on	  high	  school	  test	  score	  outcomes.	  The	  first	  set	  of	  columns	  uses	  all	  available	  test	  scores,	  and	  the	  
second	  set	  imputes	  missing	  values	  for	  students	  who	  were	  no	  longer	  enrolled	  or	  did	  not	  take	  the	  test	  for	  some	  other	  reason.	  The	  first	  column	  in	  each	  set	  
presents	  control	  group	  means	  (standard	  deviations).	  The	  second	  column	  reports	  the	  OLS	  relationship	  between	  small	  school	  attendance	  and	  the	  outcome	  
denoted	  in	  the	  row	  title,	  and	  uses	  the	  same	  specification	  as	  column	  (4)	  of	  Table	  3.	  The	  third	  column	  reports	  the	  IV	  estimate	  of	  the	  impact	  of	  small	  school	  
attendance	  on	  each	  outcome,	  and	  uses	  the	  same	  specification	  as	  column	  (7)	  of	  Table	  3.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  by	  cohort	  and	  8th	  grade	  school.	  All	  
regressions	  include	  fixed	  effects	  for	  cohort,	  8th	  grade	  neighborhood	  school,	  and	  ZIP	  code,	  and	  indicators	  for	  whether	  a	  student	  is	  female,	  black,	  Hispanic,	  
over	  age-­‐for-­‐grade,	  learning	  disabled,	  received	  free	  or	  reduced-­‐price	  lunch	  or	  had	  unstable	  8th	  grade	  enrollment,	  and	  Census	  tract	  information	  on	  
concentration	  of	  poverty,	  socioeconomic	  status	  and	  tenancy.	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     35
Appendix	  Table	  1:	  Mean	  characteristics	  of	  small	  high	  school	  students	  and	  their	  8th	  grade	  schoolmates,	  by	  9th	  grade	  cohort	  year

                                                                                                9th	  grade	  in	  2002                                          9th	  grade	  in	  2003                                          9th	  grade	  in	  2004

                                                                                 Small	                                          Small	                                          Small	  
Characteristic
                                                                               school	  9th	   Former	   p-­‐value	  of	   school	  9th	   Former	   p-­‐value	  of	   school	  9th	   Former	   p-­‐value	  of	  
                                                                                graders classmates difference                    graders classmates difference                    graders classmates difference
                                                                                      (1)                   (2)                    (3)                     (4)                    (5)                   (6)                    (7)                   (8)                   (9)

8th	  grade	  year	  demographics
Female                                                                             0.530                  0.519                  0.719                   0.470                 0.518                 0.000                  0.497                 0.511                 0.096
Black                                                                              0.820                  0.857                  0.276                   0.858                 0.752                 0.678                  0.863                 0.693                 0.000
Hispanic                                                                           0.175                  0.122                  0.223                   0.133                 0.213                 0.930                  0.116                 0.261                 0.012
Free	  and	  reduced	  price	  lunch                                           0.879                  0.895                  0.762                   0.881                 0.879                 0.161                  0.863                 0.875                 0.251
Over	  age-­‐for-­‐grade                                                          0.269                  0.237                  0.253                   0.347                 0.291                 0.000                  0.358                 0.284                 0.000
Unstable	  enrollment	  8th	  grade                                             0.042                  0.045                  0.347                   0.079                 0.053                 0.074                  0.075                 0.050                 0.002
Disability:	  any                                                                 0.241                  0.156                  0.000                   0.221                 0.185                 0.000                  0.257                 0.196                 0.000
Diability:	  learning	  disabled                                                 0.168                  0.113                  0.003                   0.160                 0.127                 0.001                  0.189                 0.133                 0.000
Minimum	  distance	  to	  a	  small	  high	  school                           1.09                   2.88                  0.000                    1.15                  2.58                 0.000                   1.28                  2.48                 0.000

Prior	  test	  scores
8th	  grade	  math	  z-­‐score                                                 -­‐0.534               -­‐0.237                0.000                  -­‐0.489              -­‐0.257               0.000                  -­‐0.516              -­‐0.221              0.000
8th	  grade	  reading	  z-­‐score                                              -­‐0.376               -­‐0.117                0.000                  -­‐0.384              -­‐0.181               0.000                  -­‐0.391              -­‐0.168              0.000

2000	  Census	  block	  group	  characteristics
Poverty	  concentration                                                            0.628                  0.618                 0.928                    0.657                 0.581                0.040                    0.605                 0.502               0.674
Socioeconomic	  status                                                           -­‐0.217               -­‐0.271                0.249                  -­‐0.287              -­‐0.399               0.075                  -­‐0.341              -­‐0.382              0.896
Tenancy                                                                              12.0                   12.4                 0.856                     11.7                  11.8                0.036                     11.9                  11.6               0.639

High	  school	  outcomes
Dropout/left	  year	  t+1                                                        0.133                 0.110                   0.743                   0.135                 0.095                 0.002                  0.116                 0.100                 0.055
Dropout/left	  year	  t+2                                                        0.252                 0.197                   0.142                   0.261                 0.207                 0.011                  0.225                 0.223                 0.720
Dropout/left	  year	  t+3                                                        0.339                 0.297                   0.295                   0.350                 0.329                 0.174                  0.344                 0.286                 0.000
Dropout/left	  year	  t+4                                                        0.486                 0.408                   0.040                   0.484                 0.447                 0.117                  0.463                 0.418                 0.018
Dropout/left	  year	  t+5                                                        0.516                 0.442                   0.036                   0.507                 0.458                 0.043                  0.477                 0.442                 0.029

On	  time	  10th	  grade                                                        0.797                 0.758                   0.084                   0.734                0.757                  0.038                  0.694                 0.738                 0.016
On	  time	  11th	  grade                                                        0.603                 0.641                   0.062                   0.569                0.602                  0.085                  0.595                 0.575                 0.306
On	  time	  12th	  grade                                                        0.479                 0.543                   0.051                   0.502                0.518                  0.374                  0.528                 0.552                 0.146
Graduated	  on	  time                                                            0.409                 0.470                   0.034                   0.422                0.438                  0.262                  0.464                 0.481                 0.326
Graduated	  within	  5	  years                                                  0.451                 0.500                   0.135                   0.458                0.492                  0.106                  0.493                 0.520                 0.097
N                                                                                   428                  4419                                            1011                 10794                                         1478                  13196


Notes:	  This	  table	  presents	  summary	  statistics	  for	  the	  analysis	  sample,	  separately	  by	  9th	  grade	  cohort	  year.	  The	  first	  column	  in	  each	  group	  presents	  average	  characteristics	  among	  
students	  who	  attended	  a	  small	  high	  school	  in	  9th	  grade.	  The	  second	  column	  presents	  average	  characteristics	  of	  the	  8th	  grade	  schoolmates	  of	  the	  students	  in	  column	  (1).	  The	  third	  
column	  presents	  the	  p-­‐value	  of	  a	  test	  for	  equality	  across	  the	  first	  two	  columns	  after	  conditioning	  on	  8th	  grade	  school	  fixed	  effects.	  5th	  and	  8th	  grade	  test	  scores	  are	  normalized	  by	  
the	  district-­‐wide	  mean	  and	  standard	  deviation	  in	  the	  year	  of	  the	  test.	  High	  school	  outcomes	  are	  measured	  in	  the	  fall.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           36
Appendix	  Table	  1:	  Mean	  characteristics	  of	  small	  high	  school	  students	  and	  their	  8th	  grade	  schoolmates,	  by	  9th	  grade	  cohort	  year

                                                                                                                9th	  grade	  in	  2005                                                                          9th	  grade	  in	  2006


Characteristic
                                                                                Small	  school	  9th	                Former	                       p-­‐value	  of	            Small	  school	  9th	                Former	                       p-­‐value	  of	  
                                                                                   graders                            classmates                       difference                      graders                            classmates                       difference
                                                                                            (10)                            (11)                             (12)                               (13)                            (14)                             (15)

8th	  grade	  year	  demographics
Female                                                                                    0.515                            0.499                           0.264                              0.506                            0.491                            0.067
Black                                                                                     0.784                            0.671                           0.016                              0.765                            0.636                            0.001
Hispanic                                                                                  0.201                            0.289                           0.051                              0.213                            0.312                            0.006
Free	  and	  reduced	  price	  lunch                                                  0.883                            0.889                           0.649                              0.905                            0.891                            0.307
Over	  age-­‐for-­‐grade                                                                 0.326                            0.306                           0.352                              0.313                            0.285                            0.741
Unstable	  enrollment	  8th	  grade                                                    0.060                            0.051                           0.373                              0.055                            0.051                            0.292
Disability:	  any                                                                        0.216                            0.195                           0.003                              0.213                            0.183                            0.007
Diability:	  learning	  disabled                                                        0.150                            0.129                           0.003                              0.150                            0.127                            0.024
Minimum	  distance	  to	  a	  small	  high	  school                                  1.17                             2.35                           0.000                               1.25                             2.39                            0.000

Prior	  test	  scores
8th	  grade	  math	  z-­‐score                                                         -­‐0.442                        -­‐0.261                          0.000                             -­‐0.391                        -­‐0.221                          0.000
8th	  grade	  reading	  z-­‐score                                                      -­‐0.314                        -­‐0.201                          0.001                             -­‐0.315                        -­‐0.188                          0.003

2000	  Census	  block	  group	  characteristics
Poverty	  concentration                                                                    0.598                          0.485                            0.514                               0.579                           0.429                           0.030
Socioeconomic	  status                                                                   -­‐0.472                        -­‐0.416                          0.279                             -­‐0.437                        -­‐0.408                          0.796
Tenancy                                                                                      11.8                            11.5                           0.470                                11.8                            11.5                           0.259

High	  school	  outcomes
Dropout/left	  year	  t+1                                                               0.089                            0.137                            0.028                             0.097                            0.096                            0.198
Dropout/left	  year	  t+2                                                               0.206                            0.199                            0.246                             0.187                            0.194                            0.628
Dropout/left	  year	  t+3                                                               0.299                            0.311                            0.814                             0.264                            0.278                            0.298
Dropout/left	  year	  t+4                                                               0.379                            0.411                            0.409                             0.359                            0.382                            0.031
Dropout/left	  year	  t+5                                                               0.415                            0.438                            0.678                             0.388                            0.405                            0.146

On	  time	  10th	  grade                                                               0.768                           0.680                             0.004                             0.820                            0.766                            0.019
On	  time	  11th	  grade                                                               0.655                           0.598                             0.146                             0.677                            0.641                            0.156
On	  time	  12th	  grade                                                               0.573                           0.539                             0.669                             0.591                            0.570                            0.116
Graduated	  on	  time                                                                   0.512                           0.485                             0.482                             0.536                            0.510                            0.041
Graduated	  within	  5	  years                                                         0.557                           0.532                             0.396                             0.573                            0.562                            0.306
N                                                                                         2264                            13747                                                               2187                             15412


Notes:	  This	  table	  presents	  summary	  statistics	  for	  the	  analysis	  sample,	  separately	  by	  9th	  grade	  cohort	  year.	  The	  first	  column	  in	  each	  group	  presents	  average	  characteristics	  
among	  students	  who	  attended	  a	  small	  high	  school	  in	  9th	  grade.	  The	  second	  column	  presents	  average	  characteristics	  of	  the	  8th	  grade	  schoolmates	  of	  the	  students	  in	  column	  
(1).	  The	  third	  column	  presents	  the	  p-­‐value	  of	  a	  test	  for	  equality	  across	  the	  first	  two	  columns	  after	  conditioning	  on	  8th	  grade	  school	  fixed	  effects.	  5th	  and	  8th	  grade	  test	  scores	  
are	  normalized	  by	  the	  district-­‐wide	  mean	  and	  standard	  deviation	  in	  the	  year	  of	  the	  test.	  High	  school	  outcomes	  are	  measured	  in	  the	  fall.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       37
