                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE EARNINGS GAP BETWEEN MALE
                       AND FEMALE WORKERS:
                    AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE




                          Claudia Goldin




                      Working Paper No. 1888




                NATIONAL BUREAU )F ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             April 1986




Earlier and substantially longer versions of this paper have been
presented to the United States Commission on Civil Rights
Consultation on Comparable Worth, June 1984 and the Conference to
honor Stanley Lebergott, Wesleyan University, March 1985. The
research reported here is part of the NBERs research program in
Development of the American Economy. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #1888
                                             April 1986




         The Earnings Gap Between Male and Female Workers:
                     An Historical Perspective




                               ABSTRACT

Ras economic progress increased the relative earnings of females to
males over the long run? Evidence on trends in the earnings gap for
the last four decades appears to run counter to this hypothesis.
Numerous data sources are used in this paper to piece together a 170
year history of the earnings of females relative to those of males and
the variables that determine earnings in the market place. In brief.
the constancy of the earnings gap from the 1950s is a short—run
phenomenon and cannot be extrapolated into the more distant past.
The ratio of female to male earnings in the economy as a whole rose
from just over 0.45 to just under 0.60 during 1890 to 1930. It rose
to just over 0.60 by 1950 but has been virtnally stable from then,
declining somewhat during the early to mid—fifties and rising after
1981. The ratio in the manufactnritg sector rose from about 0.35 in
1820, to 0.50 in 1850, and to 0.58 in 1930.

Advances in the labor market expex lence of the female working population
account for 24 percent of the increase in the earnings ratio over the
1890 to 1940 period. Increases in the returns to education and, to a
lesser extent, in educational attainment, account for about 40 percent
of the increase from 1890 to 1970. It is also possible that the decreased
return to physical attributes (such as strength) accounts for another
28 percent of the increase in the female to male earnings ratio. The
various factors considered account for about 85 percent of the entire
increase in the ratio from 1890 to 1970 (some factors served to
decrease the ratio). The constancy of the gender gap frcm the 1950s
is a function of the increased labor force participation of wonen
which served to stabilize the work experience of the working population
of women and to make the future 1igFly unpredictable for many cohorts.




                                            Claudia Goldin
                                            Department of Economics
                                            3718 Locust Walk
                                            University of Pennsylvania
                                            Philadelphia, PA 19104
                                            (215) 898-7733
     Over the long—run, advances in technology, work organization, educational

standards, social norms, and life—cycle labor force participation ought to

increase the relative earnings of females to males. The labor market's rewards

to strength should be minimized by the adoption of machinery and those to

brain—power should be increased. Formal education, supplied by the employee.

should replace on—the—job training possibly deried individuals in groups having

brief life—cycle enploynieat. As more women enter and remain in the labor

market, their experiences in jobs and with firms should approach that of the

male labor force. Economic progress, it seems, should narrow and eventually

eliminate differences in the earnings of females and males.

     The evidence on trends in the gender gap, however, appears to run counter

to this hypothesis. The ratio of female to male full—time earnings has been

virtually stable over the last 35 years, hovering just under 0.60 (0.66 adjusted

for hours of work) with a mild decline in the early to mid 1950s and a rise

beginning around 1981.' Although short—run data, those for the past three to

four decades, do not appear consistent with this depiction, are longer—run

historical data? The answer to this question has not been readily available

because the Current Population Reports, which made comprehensive national

earnings data accessible, began in the 1950s. There are no corresponding

figures for earlier periods.2

     Numerous data sources are used in this paper to piece together a 170—year

history of the earnings of females relative to those of males and the variables

that determine earnings in the market place. In brief, the constancy of the

earnings gap from the l9SOs to the 1980s is a short—run phenomenon; it cannot

be extrapolated into the more distant past. Furthermore, economic progress has

decreased the earnings gap by increasing the returns to schooling, by increasing


                                      1
                                                                               2

the labor market experience of women, andby decreasing the returns to physical

strength.

     The ratio of female to male earnings in the economy as a whole rose from

just over 0.45 to just under 0.60 during the period 1890 to 1940, but was

virtually stable from 1950. declining somewhat during the early to mid—fifties

and rising after 1981. The increase in the ratio from 1890 to 1940 can be

traced primarily to an increase in the ratio of female to male earnings within

broad occupational groupings. The increase in the ratio within these groupings

was, in turn, a function of increases in educational norms in general and the

emergence of jobs, such as those in the clerical sector, in which the returns

to education were enhanced.

     Although an economy—wide series cannot be extended before i890, a history

of relative earnings for the manufacturing and agricultural sectors can be

constructed. The gender gap in both sectors shows a narrowing from around 1815

to 1900, but stays virtually constant thereafter. The early narrowing was due

to the enhanced division of labor in manufacturing and the increased demand for

relatively unskilled labor. The virtual stability in the gap after 1900 appears

to be due to the growing heterogeneity of the female labor force. By 1960 the

manufacturing sector was employing among the least educated female workers,

working the fewest hours and weeks per year.

     Finally, the absence of a narrowing of the gap during the past three to

four decades is shown, here and elsewhere (Smith and Ward. 1984), to be a

function of the increased labor force participation of women. Many social

commentators (for example,          1986) have claimed that the social significance

of increased participation of women is called into question by the stability of

the earnings gap between men and women. However, the earnings gap has been
                                                                                3

stabilized precisely because of changes in the role of women in the economy and

not in spite of them.

     This paper examines three related topics: (1) the history of the ratio of

female to male earnings; (2) an analysis of the ratio at various points in time

with an explanation for changes in the ratio over time; and (3) the reasons for

the relative constancy of the gender gap over the past 35 years. The reasons

for the earnings gap at various dates have been the subjects of a lengthy and

inconclusive literature, which is only briefly discussed here. My focus is,

instead, on changes in the gap over time.

1.0 The Ratio   of Feaale to Male   Earnings, 1815 to 1985

     The history of relative earnings can begin almost two centuries ago with

data from the agricultural and manufacturing sectors. Earnings ratios for the

entire economy, however, can be constructed only for the last century and with

caution for the pre—1950 period. Jt should be noted at the outset that all

earnings and wage data presented have been adjtsted, where possible, for differences

in weeks worked per year between men and women, hut not necessarily differences

in hours of work per day among full—time workers. Thus the data refer to full—

time workers, unless otherwise indicated.

     The wage of females relative to males was fairly low in the northeastern

states prior to industrialization but rose quickly wherever manufacturing

activity spread (001dm and Sokoloff, 1982. 1984). Around 1815 the ratio of

female to male wages in agriculture and domestic activities was 0.288 and rose

to about 0.303 to 0.371 among manufacturing establishments at the inception of

industrialization in the United States in 1820. By 1832 the average ratio in

manufacturing was about 0.44, and it continued to rise to just below 0.50 in

the northeastern states by 1850. Early industrialization, therefore, increased
                                                                                4

the wage of females relative to males by over 70 percent (from 0.288 to 0.50)

and the ratio in the industrial sector expanded by 43 percent (from about 0.35

to 0.50). In the briefest of periods, a mere two decades, the gender gap in

manufacturing narrowed by about 15 percentage points. NatiSnwide the ratio

rose slowly to about 1900 when it reached its current value of about 0.56 (see

Table 1 and Bigure 1). The magnitude and implications of the initial advance

are sufficiently important to warrant further attention.

     The observations of those who lived through the transitionary times of the

early nineteenth century support the fragile quantitative evidence that the

wages of females relative to males rose considerably over this period. Perhaps

the best known commentary on the relative productivity of females in the

preindustrial period and on the opportunities in manufacturing for their employment

is that of Alexander Hamilton. "In general, women and children [would be]

rendered more useful, and the latter more early useful, by manufacturing

establishments than they would otherwise be (Taussig, 1892, p. 9)." These notions

were echoed by another Secretary of the Treasury, Albert Gallatin, who knew in

1831 far better than Hamilton could have imagined in 1791 that "female labor

employed in the cotton and woollen [sic] manufactures appears from the rate of

their wages to be more productive than applied to the ordinary occupation of

women (Taussig, 1892, p. 192)." Henry Carey, whose essay on wage rates appeared

in 1835, noted that:

    agricultural Jabor has not varied materially in these forty years [1793
    to 18331 in its money price . . . the wages of men having been very
    steadily about nine dollars per month [with board] . . . [but] the wages
    of females have greatly advanced being nearly double what they were forty
    years since (Carey, 1835, p. 26).

But these individuals may not have been entirely uninterested in the impact

industrial development would have on particular groups including female laborers.
                                                                                5

     Additional evidence is readily available from the rather ordinary individuals

surveyed by the McLane Report of 1832 (see Goldin and Sokoloff, 1982 for a

description of this document). flis extraordinary source contains information

on the period of transition and on the wages of males and females in areas yet

untouched by industrial development. One Aaron Tufts in Dudley, Massachusetts noted

in his schedule that, "Comparatively nothing is done in the household manufactory: a

female can now earn more cloth in a day than she could make in the household

way in a week (McLane, 1832, Vol. I, p. 69)." A fairly typical McLane Report

respondent referred to the factories as affording the employment of "females

who had little else to do (Vol. I, p. 819)." Thus the commentary of the exceptional

individuals who lived through these transitionary decades is corroborated by

the many respondents to the McLane Renort, all supporting the quantitative evidence

on the increase in the relative wages of females to males from around 1800 to 1830.

     Relative wages continued to rise in the manufacturing sector across most of

the nineteenth century but stabilized sometime before 1900. The only indication

of an increase in. the ratio is in Beney (1936), particularly those of the

Depression years. and the data for the immediate post—World War II period. The

Beney data appear to produce a somewhat inflated ratio in comparison with the

Brissenden (1929) data, which are consistent with those from the 1890 Census of

Manufacturing, the Dewey Report from Long (1960). and the First Annual Report

of Commissioner of Labor also from Long for 1885. The years of overlap between

the Beney and Brissenden data, the early l9ZOs, suggest that the Beney ratios

are inflated by about 10 percent.'

    One other aspect of the manufacturing data in Table 1 should be noted. The

data for 1914 to 1935 from Beney indicate that the ratio of hourly wages in

manufacturing was more than 10 percent higher than that for weekly or'annual
                                                                               6

earnings because of the smaller number of hours per week worked by women in

manufacturing. O'Neill (1985, implicit in Table 1) reports sinilar findings

for more recent data. There is little indication, however, that hours worked

differed for the earliest years being considered, those for the first half of

the nineteenth century. Thus the increase in the ratio of female to male wages

in manufacturing corrected for hours worked is somewhat understated by the

uncorrected figures iv Table 1.

     The narrowing of the earnings gap in manufacturing across the nineteenth

century resulted from the increasing division of labor and use of machinery.

Furthermore, the role of industrialization in increasing the ratio of female to

male wages depended on the initial crop; grain, but not cotton, growing areas

experienced the greatest increases (see Goldin and Sokoloff, 1984). The relative

constancy of the gender gap within the manufacturing sector, extending from the

late—nineteenth century to the present, is discussed at length in Goldin (in

progress). In short, as the female labor force became more diverse, in terms

of levels of experience, education, desired hours of work, and so on, the

manufacturing sector, it seems, hired those having the lowest levels of human

capital and those desiring to work the fewest hours.

     Manufacturing data provide nearly two centuries of information or the

gender gap, but the manufacturing sector hired only one—third of all female

employees across the last century. It becomes necessary, therefore, to construct

earnings data for a wider range of occupations. These constructed date cannot

extend to the early nineteenth century but do indicate that the gender gap

across all sectors narrowed from 1890 to about 1940.

    Full—time earnings for females and males are given in Table 2, Part A, for

six major occupational groupings for three bench mark years. 1890, 1930, and
                                                                                7

 1970. Average   earnings are constructed by weighting these earnings by the

 occupational distributions. The ratios of female to male eaxnings for the

 three bench mark years are given in the first line of Part D and the within

occupational group ratios are given in Part B. Ratios of female to male earnings

across all occupations for the post—World War TI period, obtained from conventional

sources, are presented in Table 1.

     The ratio of female to male full—time earnings increased from 0.463 to

0.603 from 1890 to 1970 (Part D), or by 30 percent.4 The latter figure is

unadjusted for differences among full—time workers in average hours of work per

week and increases to 0.663 when the implied earnings per hour are used (0.603

x 1.1). Data for 1890 indicate that scheduled hours per day were approximately

the same in female and male—intensive industries, thus there is no adjustment

for full—time workers.

     Thus the increase in the ratio of female to male earnings is between 30

and 43 percent, depending on whether one uses the hours correction, over the

eighty—year period considered. This finding distinctly overturns the notion

that the economy—wide earnings gap was stable for a period extending into the

distant past. Furthermore the gender gap closed to about 1940, and, with some

ups and downs, has remained virtually stable to about 1980. Thus the narrowing

from 1890 by about one—third extended over only a forty to fifty—year period.

    Part B of Table 2 gives the ratios of female to male earnings within each

occupational group and most show a rise over time, particularly in the period from

1890 to 1930. An exception would be the manufacturing sector, as discussed

above. Increases were greatest in the professional and clerical categories, for

which advances in education appear to have augmented both the relative earnings

of females to males and the numbers employed in these sectors (see Goldin 1984).
                                                                                 8

     Part C constructs aggregate earnings for each year using the earnings and

occupational weights of that year. Average earnings data using the earnings of

a particular year but the occupational weights of another are also given. Part

D uses these data to construct a matrix of female to male earnings ratios in

which the occupational structure varies across the columns and the earnings

data vary down the rows.

     It is generally presumed that the occupational distribution between men and

women is a prime determinant of the gender gap and that changes in the occupational

distribution, therefore, provide the primary way of altering relative earnings

between men and women. There are two ways of formulating this proposition. The

first concerns whether changes over time in the occupational distribution have

significantly affected the gender gap. If changes in the occupational distribution

have been of primary importance, then allowing the distribution to change but

keeping earnings constant, should account for most of the increase in female to

male earnings over time. The second is to test whether the occupational

distribution is important in determining the earnings gap at a particolar

date. If women are relegated to lower paying occupations, then giving them the

male occupational distribution should substantially increase relative earnings.

     The matrix of Part D has been constructed to examine the first proposition.

Row (1) gives the actual ratio of female to male earnings for the three years.

The next three rows hold female and male wages within occupational groups constant

for each of the three years, but vary the occupational distributions across the

columns. The ratio of female to male earrings increases going down the rows

far more than it does going across the columns. The ratio of female to male

earnings iose from 0.463 to 0.556 over the first forty—year period. Had the

earrings figures by occupation rewained at their 1890 levels but had the structure
                                                                               9

of occupations changed, the ratio would have increased from 0.463 to 0.489 (row

2, Part El).   The remaining difference of 0.067 was due to changes in the structure

of e?rnir.gs, both between the sexes and across aJI occupations. Similar findings

result fror holding the structure of earnings at the 1930 and 1970 levels (rows

3 and 4, Part El).

     Across the last period, 1930 to 1970. the male labor force moved relatively

into the high—paying positions, out of the farm sector and into professional

activities. The share of the male labor force in the professional category

increased from 14 to 25 percent; that for females increased from 17 to only 19

percent. but the proportion of female employment in the clerical sector continued

to expand. As in the previous forty years, the ratio of female to male earnings

rose during the 1930 to 1970 period, from 0.556 to 0.603. But had the earnings

figures remained at their 1930 levels, this ratio would have declined, from

0.556 to 0.507. Alternatively had the 1970 earnings prevailed, the ratio would

have been 0.610 in 1930 but would have declined to 0.603 by 1970. Thus the

relative shift of both males and females across sectors from 1930 to 1970

reduced the relative earnings of women. That the aggregate ratio increased at

all was due to the increase in the ratio of ferrale to male earnings for

professionals and to the reduction of skill differentials for men (Keat, 1960;

Williamson and Lindert, 1980). Over the last ten years (not in Table 2, although

see Table 1) the average earnings of women relative to those of men have risen

precisely because women have progressively shifted into the professional sector,

a move previously accomplished by males from 1950 to 1970.

    Thus the increase in the relative earnings of ferales ever the past century

was due far more to changes in relative earnings within occupations than it was

to changes in the distribution of occupations between men and women. The
                                                                              10

narrowing of skill premia from 1890 to 1930 with the increase in schooling

levels greatly increased relative earnings of women.5 This finding is particularly

noteworthy since it is generally presumed that the occupational distribution is

the primary determinant of relative wages. Although the exercise in Table 2,

Part D is performed for only six occupational groups, it is still surprising

that occupational changes had so little impact on the ratio of female to tale

earnings and that relative earnings within the broad occupational groups had so

much more.

     A test of the second proposition, that the occupational distribution was a

prime determinant of the ratio of female to male earnings, involves giving the

female population the male occupational distribution for each date but holding

female earnings for each occupational group at the actual levels. Once again,

the number of occupations in the table are very few, but are the largest that

can presently be retrieved.

     If women had the occupational distribution of the male labor force would

their average earnings been substantially greater? The answer is no. Had

females in 1890 the male occupational distribution given in the table for 1890,

the ratio of female to male earnings would have been 0.473, but it was actually

0.463; bad females in 1970 the male occupational distribution for 1970, the

ratio would have been 0.629, but it was 0.603. While these findings hold for

the limited number of occupational groups in Table 2, there is reason to believe

that they would hold as well for wore numerous classifications.'

    The matrix of Table 2, Part U is not a true partitioning of the two factors

comprising the change in the ratio of female to male occupation—weighted earnings.

To get a full partitioning of the ratio one must use a geometrically—weighted

average of earnings by occupation for each of the three bench mark years. The
                                                                                  11

 use of the geometric mean cat be defended on the grounds that the
                                                                     underlying
 structure of earnings is a function of its log, although it is used here strictly

 out of necessity.

      8ix terms result from the partitioning of Table 2. Part E, and the two

 columns alter the weights, using either 1890 or 1970. The first term is the

 change in the ratio of female to male earnings by occupation,
                                                                 weighted by the

female share in the occupation; the third term is the change in male earnings

by occupation weighted by the ratio of the female to male share of employment

by occupation. The change in male earnings captures changes in skill differentials

within the male labor force. The second ten! is the change in the structure of

occupations weighted by the ratio of female to male earnings for each occupation;

the fourth term is the change in the ratio of the female to male share of

employment weighted by male earnings. The last two terms are interactions, for

which row (5) is added to the 1890 weighted average but subtracted from 1970,

with the reverse for row (6).

     The partitioning of the change in the relative earnings of females to males

reinforces the results given in the matrix of Part D. Over the entire period

1890 to 1970, the change in relative earnings (terms 1 and 3)
                                                              encompassed 83 to
111 percent of the entire change (depending on the weights used), while the change

in structure (terms 1 and 4) added only —11 to 17 percent respectively (the

interaction terms add the remainder).'

     The largest of the first four terms, the first, demonstrates that the rise

in relative earnings of females to males within occupations greatly increased

the overall ratio. The effect is greater given the structure of female occupations

in 1970 than it is for the 1890 structure, as would be expected if female

employment increased in sectors experiencing relative increases in earnings.
                                                                                12

The   second,   third, and fourth terms, while relatively small, change signs

depending on the year chosen for the weights. The second term weights the

change in the structure of female occupations by the ratio of female to male

earnings. Females moved relatively into their more highly paying pursuits,

thus the 1970 weights yield a positive effect and the 1890 weights a negative

one. The same logic holds for the fourth term, which weights the relative

occupational shift of females to males by male earnings. Females moved into

those occupations which were high paying within the male earnings dist±ibution.

The third term, negative for the 1970 structure while small but positive for

1890, indicates for the 1970 weights male earnings increased relatively more in

occupations that contained more males. In this manner it serves to diminish

the effect of the first term.

      The complete partitioning and the matrix are proximate determinants, or

mechanical features, of the gender gap. Before exploring bow the underlying

determinants of the earnings gap have changed over time, it will be instructive

to examine several features of the female labor force.

2.0 labor Force Psrticip.tion Rates

       Earnings are highly dependent on the degree of labor market involvement,

and the wanner in which participation rates tffect earnings depends, in part,

on the relationship between labor force participation and life—cycle labor market

experience. Expected life—cycle experience determines whether individuals

appropriately invest in training, both on and off the job, and it is the stock

of human capital which, to a very great extent, determines monetary rewards in

the labor market.'

      Participation rates for a group can be low, but its members can remain in

the labor force for long periods of time. If they do and if they had perfect
                                                                              13

foresight, their investments in job training could have been appropriately formed

and substantial. Participation rates for women have increased rapidly over time.

particularly over the last four decades. The marketable skills of this emerging

labor force will depend on the degree to which these women worked in the past;

this in turn depends on tbe precise meaning of labor force participation.

     A participation rate of, say, 50 percent can indicate that one—half of all

individuals are in the labor force art! one—half are not. But a participation

rate of 50 percent can also indicate that all individuals are in the labor

force half time, say 26 weeks per year (see Ben—Porath, 1973 for an early

statement of this distinction). Combinations of these two extreme cases could

also exist. The meaning of labor market participation in a historical context

is further complicated by changes, beginning with the 1940 census, in the

procedures ned to compile the national labor force participation rate. Before

1940 the "gainful worker" definition was used and after that date the "labor

force" construct. Under the latter definition, individuals were in the labor

force if they responded positively to a question concerning the amount they

worked in the previous week. Under the former definition individuals were in

the labor force if they stated they bad an occupation. Because there was no

clear notion of what it meant to have an occupation, it is difficult to assess

the precise meaning of the "gainful worker" data. Fortunately, other data sets

provide the necessary information to distinguish between the two extreme views

of Jabor force ;articipation (see Goldin, forthcoming).

     Labor force participation rates for women have varied narkedly by age.

marital status, nativity, and race. Table 3 presents labor fotce participation

rate data by race and marital status for 1890 to 1980. The starting point for

these data, 1890, is dictated by the availability of labor force statistics in
                                                                               14

published format (although see Goldin and Sokoloff, 1982 for earlier estimates).

    The labor market involvement of white rarried women wes very low until

well into the twentieth century. Rates for single women increased steadily

over time, although they were quite high in most industrial and urban areas

throughoot the nineteenth century. For much of American history the labor force

participation rate of all adult woLen was low but began to expand during the

1920s. These rates rapidly increased after 1950, first for women over age 35

and later for those under 35 years (see also Goldin, 1983b and Easterlin, 1980).

     But the issue of the relationship between Itbor force participation and

life—cycle experience depends on the actual experiences of cohorts of women.

When the data on labor force participation for adult rarried women are arrayed

by birth cohort, as they are in Figure 2, the increase in participation rates

over time is reflected in average labor market life—cycle experiences. For

every cohort of women within their married years, participation rates rose with

age, with younger cohorts of women having progressively increased participaticn

rates.1° Some cohorts, such as those born around 1906 to 1915 and 1946 to 1955,

had larger increases in participation rates than those preceding them. But all

cohorts experienced similar changes across their own life cycles and bad

participation rates that were higher than those before.

     Three aspects of these data, together with the relationship between

participation and life—cycle labor force experience, affect the ratio of female

to male earnings and changes in the ratio over time. Because participation

rates for adult women were low until the relatively recent past, most women aivd

their families would not have found it profitable to invest in job training.

flerefore the earnings and occupations of these women could be expected to have

differed considerably from those of men, even when these women were young and
                                                                               15
had   high participaticir rates.

       Participation rates for adult women eventually began to increase, and it

becomes necessary to understand what brought the change about. Were more women

participating or were the same women participating more? It appears that while

some combination of these two extreme views is the most accurate depiction, a

large proportion of women who participated in the labor force when young continued

to do so (for the 1910 to 1940 period see 601dm 1983a; corroborating evidence

on the mote recent period is in Heckman and Willis, 1979; Moulton, 1985; O'Neill,

1985; Smith and Ward1 1984). As participation rates increased over time, women

with little labor force experience entered the market joining those with more

accumulated labor force experience. Thus periods of rapidly increasirg female

participation rates may have been associated with a stable, if not dccl 5ring.

number of years work experience for the working population.

       Furthermore, because each cohort's participation rates exceeded the previous

one's, all women may have had difficulty predicting their own future labor

force participation rates. Each cohort when young may have extrapolated fror

the experiences of their elders and thereby underestimated their own future

labor force participation rates. The implications of these remarks are explored

further below.

3.0   Expla1aI tie Gender Gap: At Various Dates and Over Tiac
      The degree to y.J'ich human capital measures can explain differences in the

earnings of males and females has been a matter of continuing debate, although

a general consensus has emerged that around 30 to 50 percent can be explained

by differences in conventional factors, such as job experience, education, and

hours of work.1' Many interpret the unexplained portion of the gap1 or overage

60 percent or 24 percentage points, as a measure of discrimination against
                                                                                 16

women. Others cite omitted factors under the control of individuals, such as

work intensity, 'hicb might close the entire gap. Yet others, moving in the

opposite direction, note that the factors used to explaiü the gap are themselves

endogenous, possibly rooted in discrimination against women.

     Has our ability to explain the gap in earnings increased or decreased over

time with its narrowing? It appears that the explanatory power of the conventional

earnings eqtzat ion, in terms of the percentage of the difference in the log of

earnings that is "expJained," has decreased over time. However, the difference

in the log of earnings that is unexplained —— the residual —— has remained roughly

constant over time. Therefore although the proportion that is unexplained has

increased, the increase is almost entirely due to the narrowing of the gap itself.12

     Evaluating how much of the difference in nineteenth century earnings between

males and females can be explained by human capital variables involves estimating

earnings equations for both. There re numerous studies using recent data, but

only a handful for the late—nineteenth century. One of these has looked at

wale and female workers in California manufacturing industries in 1892 and is

consistent with several other studies for this period.13

     The difference in the log of male and female earnings in the 1892 sample is

0.767 of which 0.466 to 0.492 can be accounted for by differences in the mean

values of the independent variables (depending on whether the male or female

weights are used) ——   that   is, 62.5 percent can be explained. The remaining

0.302 or 0.275 is explained by differences in the coefficients, including the

constant terms. Therefore, if one defines "discrimination' as that which

cannot be explained, discrimination accounts for 37.5 percent of the difference

in the log of earnings in this sample, or 0.288 in absolute value.

    One recent study has found that discrimination, computed in this manner,
                                                                                 17

 accounts for 56 percent of the difference in the log of earnings.1' The difference

 it   the   log of the hourly viage was 0.438 (its a1ue when the ratio of wages is

0.645). Therefore the explained portion is 0.193 and the unexplained portion

 is 0.245, or just below its value around 1890. Thus the vlue of the unexplained

portion has fallen slightly, but the proportion that is unexplained has risen,

and that which is explained has fallen, with the narrowing of the earnings gap.

       What are the factors accounting for the decline in the explained proportion

of the difference in the log of earnings? Table 4 details the consensus

coefficients and variable means of recent earnings functicn studies and those from

the turn of this century. The variables that can be considered are experience,

education, and "home time," although variable accounting for physical strength

is discussed below. The coefficients on experience arc! experience sqvared have

been condensed.15 Because workers in the late—nineteenth century entejed the labor

market when they were qtite young, some of the measured returns to experience

are really those to simple maturation and a maturation factor is deducted.

Although the coefficients and mean values for the current studies apply to the

entire labor force, those that have beer computed for 1890 apply only to

manufacturing. Therefore certain assumptions were made to convert the 1890

values to represent those of the entire working population.

       The framework employed assumes that female and male earnings equations are

given by:

       In w       a +   aX                                             (1)
       lnw= n:+:z:
The closing of the gap can then be written in four ways, one of which is:
                                                                                         18

 in (w 1/w 1)/(w 01w 0) = (Au —
      I   at    f   m        0    A 0)   #                                     (2)

                         Aa(X0 — Z0) + Z1(Aa —            A)   +        (2a)

                          AZ(a0 —    0) + l( —                          (2b)

where superscript 1    circa 1970, 0 =       circa   1890, Ay = y1 —   y°,   and all I

subscripts have been dropped for convenience. Portion (2a) of equation (2) is

due to changes in the coefficients, while (2b) is due to changes in the

characteristics. The change in the constant terms is a residual.

     The estimated and approximated coefficients and means in Table 4 yield a

total explained Portion of 0.205. Of the total. 0.085 is due to changes in the

experience variable, 0.143 is due to changes in the education variable, and the

 increase in home time reduces the total by 0.023 (see detail in Table 4).

Changes in characteristics have had a greater effect for experience, while

changes in coefficients have had the greater effect on education. These findings

are robust to the method of decomposition. They are also consistent with the

conclusions of Table 2, that increases in female earnings within certain occupations

were most important in narrowing the earnings gap. These occupations were

those for which returns to education were highest.

     One variable that has not been included in the decomposition is the premiun

paid to men for their larger average size and strength, a premium that ought to

have declined over the last century with technological advances. Tn the early

nineteenth century the relative wage of female to males, and boys to adult

males, was very low in the northeastern United States. While the early factory

system and its machinery airost doubled the ratio, it was still much below one

in 1850 (601dm and Sokoloff, 1982). Jt is clear that machinery and the division

labor augmented the earnings of females relative to those of tales, but how

much of the remaining gap was due to physical differences?
                                                                               19

     The extensive use of piece—rate wages for females in manufacturing enables

a lower—bound estimate of the wage premium for strength and other physical

differences correlated with gender. The premium can be measured only for jobs

in which both men and women were employed, and, given extensive occupational

segregation, this is a rather short list. Because of this, the difference

between the wages of males and females i.orking on piece rates for a particular

job may understate the difference across all occupations, bad men and women

been found in all jobs. Males may have been temporarily placed until a job in

a "male" position came available; alternatively males employed in these jobs

may have been less productive than the average.

     Data on piece—rate earnings in 1895 indicate that males earned on average

30 percent more than did females (that is. the wage ratio was 0.77), when the

piece—rate was identical for both, and when botb worked at the same job, in the

same factory, and were in the same age group." Because piece rates are paid

on actual physical product, any difference in earnings for full—time workers

Occupying the same position in the same firm must reflect a difference in

strength, dexterity, determination, or the quality of the complementary inputs.

The average ratio of female to male earnings for time—rate work in the factories

sampled was about 0.60 in the 1895 report. The ratio for piece—rate work was

0.77. Thus the difference in physical product accounts for 23 percentage

points and the residual    17 percentage points, out of a possible 40 percentage

points. If the basis ratio ii nanufacturing for this period was 0.77, rather

than 1.00, the gender gap would narrow to 0.78 (=   0.60/0.77)   from 0.60.

    Thus the premium paid to men for gender—specific abilities, of which

strength may have been a factor, was at least 58 (= 23/40) percent of the

actual difference of 40 percent. It was at least this amount because time—rote
                                                                                   20

jobs, in which there were few women, paid more, and men may have been preferred

to women in such jobs because of various gender—specific stilts. Comparable

data for other periods of time and other occupations are not presently available.

But it is clear that as desk jobs have zeplaced manual labor the returns to

gender—specific differences such as strength must have decreased, and the

piece—rate data give one measure. A variable for the decrease in strength with

advances in technology and the replacement of white collar for blue collar

labor, could well add another 0.10, bringing the total change to 0.305.'

     The left hand side of equation (2). that is the difference in the log of

the ratio cf female to male earnings in 1970 and 1890, was 0.2642 using the

data in Table 2. It increases to 0.3595 when the 1970 figure is corrected for

hours of work among full—time workers and to 0.3921 when the actual data (as

opposed to those in Table 2) are corrected for hours.1' The three factors in

Table 4 ——   experience,   education, and home time —— account for a substantial

share of the change —— from 52 to 78 percent —— and the addition of a factor to

chart the declining return to strength would increase the percentage even

further.

4.0 Evidence on the Recent Stability in the Earnings Cap

     For most of American history the vast majority of women have not participated

in the labor market on par with men and the participation rate of white married

women was low until the 1950s. Despite the low degree of labor market participation

of married women, those in the labor force could have remained in for substantial

periods of time, if their labor market turnover was low. If this was the case,

the expansion of the female labor force over time implies that new entrants,

with little prior labor force experience, must have joined existing workers.

Their entry would have tended to decrease the average level of experience of
                                                                                  21

 the currertly working population of women.

      Data on life—cycle labor force participation and the average labor market

 experience of working women are scarce even for the post—World War II period

 with the exceptions of certain panel surveys that begin in 1967. Two separate

 studies have constructed estimates cf these variables for the period from 1930

 to 1980." The findings indicate that average years of labor market experience

 for currently working women hae bately increased over this period, despite the

 rather large increases in labor force participation so evident from the data in

 Table 1.50 Years of job experience for the
                                               currently working population of
 mairied women increased from 9.06 in 1930, to 9.78 in 1940, to 10.52 in 1950

 (Goldin. l983a, p. 26). The labor market
                                             experience of working women age 40
remained roughly constant at 13.5 years from 1940 to 1980, while the work

experience of the entire population of women aged 40 rose by over 4 years

 (Smith and Ward, 1984).

     The apparent paradox afforded by these two disparate trends, that for

working women and that for the entire populatior of
                                                       women, is easily resolved.
Adult women in the labor force have had
                                           a strong tendency to remain in the
labor force for substantial periods of
                                          Lure, and those just entering the labor
force have had relatively low experience
                                           levels. The average work experience
of the entire population of
                              working women increased greatly over the last fifty
years, but the average work experience of those currently working did not, as

new entrants continually brought down the average. For similar reasons the

educational attainment of the working population of women did not increase

along with that of the entire population, until
                                                  recently (see t!'e discussion in
Smith and Ward, 1984).

    These data cut in two different ways it. the explanatic,r lo, the relative
                                                                               22

earnings data and the changes in these ratios. In terms of the absolute level,

the tendency for wowen to remain in the labor force should have led to higher

wages and better jobs. But the stability of average years experience should have

lessened the relative gains in the ratio of female to male earnings. Because

earnings are only observed for individuals in the labor market, the experience

level arid educational attaingent of the working, and Dot the entire, population

is the relevant variable. The findings with respect to change over time in

life—cycle work experience are consistent with those ccn.cerning change over

time in the ratio of female to male earnings.

     Yet another reason for the relative stability in the earnings gap over the

past 35 years concerns the method by which individuals form expectations about

their future. Labor force participation anong cohorts of white married women

has increased within marriage (at least until age 55) for every cohort of women

born in the United States since about 1890. As was shown in Figure 2. each

successive decade brought an expanded participation of married women in the

market economy. The actual cohort labor force participation rates have been

substantially different from the cross section ones (e.g. contrast the 1970

cross—section line with any of the cohort lines).

     The differences between the true cohort participation profiles and those of

the cross sections are of critical importance in understanding how older generations

socialize the younger, how the younger form their own expectations about their

future labor market participation, and how society and employers do the same.

The vast differences between the true cohort profiles and those in the cross

sections imply that no generation of young women in America could have predicted

solely from the experiences of their elders what their own work histories would

have been.
                                                                                  23

         In 1930, for example, a cohort of 20 year oJd daughters born it 1910 would

    have been off by a factor of about 4 in predicting their own participation

    rates in 25 years had they simply used the experierces of their 45 year old

    mothers born in 1885 as a guide. But they were far more informed than this

    simple extrapolation would suggest. They knew, for example, that their years

    of schooling were higher than their mothers', and they may have been aware that

    the jobs they held when unmarried were different from their mothers'. Knowledge

    of these differences would have narrowed the gap between the simple extrapolation

    and the actual value of the daughters' labor force participation (see Goldin,

    1983b for an estimated model). However empirical evidence indicates that many

    cohorts have vastly underestimated their own future labor force participation and

    therefore may have underinvested in job related skills.

         In 1968 the National Longitudinal Survey asked young females 14 to 24

    years old whether they believed they would be in the labor force at age 35.

    The response was 29 percent for whites and 59 percent for blacks (Sandell and

    Shapiro, 1980). More than half of these young women are now age 35, and their

    labor force participation rate already exceeds 60 percent if they are married and

    even higher if not. The figures they had reported when young were more in line

    with their mothers' labor force participation rates, at age 35, than with their

    own (as can be seen in Figure 2 by assuming their mothers were born around

1925). Although the expectations of young women in 1968 were much below their

eventual labor force participation, a similar question asked of young women in

1973 indicates a rapid convergence of expected and actual participation rates.

•

        These data suggest that during periods of rapid labor market change it nay

be difficult to forecast one's future labor force participation. Individuals

extrapolate from the world around them and in doing so they may underestimate
                                                                               24

their need for formal and on—the—job training. The result nay be that the

actual returns to job experience for women are less than are those for men and

wage ratios are less than one even when job experience is equal.11

5.0 Suary Renrks
     Is the scenario described at the beginning of this paper an accurate

depiction of the historical record? Have technological advance, economic

progress, education, and in-creased female labor force participation served to

raise the average earnings of females relative to males?

     The answer is generally in the affirmative. Relative earnings across all

occupations have increased throughout most of this century and have advanced

within manufacturing across the nineteenth century. Certain occupations that

rewarded intellect more than strength witnessed increased earnings for women

relative to men, but others that required, in addition, a long labor force

commitment have not, at least until recently. Earnings ratios have been stable

during the last century for occupational groups requiring little skill and

education.

     Advances in the labor market experience of the female working population

account for 24 percent of the increase in the earnings ratio over the 1890 to

1940 period. Increases in the returns to education and, to a lesser extent, in

educational attainment, account for about 40 percent of the increase from 1890

to 1970. It is also possible that decreased returns to physical attributes (such

as strength) accounts for another 28 percent of the increase in the female to

male earnings ratio.13 The various factors considered account for about 85

percent of the entire increase in the ratio from 1890 to 1970.

     Increased female labor force participation over the last four decades has

served to stabilize, and not increase, accumulated years of labor force experience
                                                                              25

and educational attainnent of the average female worker.' Furthermore, the rapid

expansion of the female labor force throughout this century may have made the

future highly unpredictable for many cohorts; one shoujd rot underestimate the

extent of the social revolution that has occurred in the labor market and the

difficulties in forecasting the future in times of rapid change. Today's young

women, however, seem to have revised their expectations in light of past change,

and may provide a true test of the ideals of the compeUtive marketplace.

     The stability of the gender gap over the last 35 years has raised questions

about the meaning of the increased labor market participation of women over

that period. But the historical record indicates that the greatest narrowing

within the industrial and agricultural sectors took place during the period of

early industrialization, and that the gender gap across all occupations was

narrowed to about 1930 or 1940. The presence of change during the period from

1815 to 1940 did not indicate social advancement, just as the absence of change

in the period after 1940 does not indicate the opposite.
                                                                              26

                                   FOOThOTES
1. On recent trends in the gender gap see Smith and Ward (1984) and O'Neill
(198$).

2. Smith and Ward (1985. Table 9) construct earnings ratios by applying earnings
for 1970 to occupational distributions from 1890 to the present. Because the
ratio of female to wales earnings within occupations changed considerably over
this period, their procedure is incorrect and results in ratios that do not reveal
the increases indicated in the actual data.

3. The reasons for the inflated ratio in the Beney data probably concern the
industries surveyed. Although the Brissenden data are consistent with the
somewhat earlier ratios, they are virtually stable from 1899 to 1925. The
Beney ratio rises in the immediate post—World War I period and then declines
sonewbat, a pattern consistent with the general rise in the unskilled to skilled
wage ratio in that period.

4. The ratio in 1970 of 0.603 is a weighted average of the median earnings of
various occupational groups. The ratio of the actual medians (for weekly, as
opposed to year—round employment, see Table 1 for distinction) is 0.623 in 1970
and 0.617 in 1973. the date for which the data in Table 2 pertain.

5. Goldin (1984) presents evidence on the role of educational advances during the
first fejk decades of this century Jr hc.ieasing the supply of clerical workers.

6. Polachek (1984) finds a similar result for recent data and notes that the
occupational classification would have to be considerably finer to overturn the
conclusion that changes in occupational structure matter less than changes in
relative wages within occupations. Polachek estimates that occupational segregation
explains only 17 to 21 percent of the 1970 earnings gap using 195 occupations.
Following Polachek's definition of a narrowing of the earnings gap and using
the data in Table 2 yields only 5.7 percent for 1970. This result suggests that
while increasing the number of occupations does not overturn the conclusion of
the exercise, the use of only 6 occupations is limiting. Treiman and Rartmarn
(1981, Table 9) present evidence pertaining to 12, 222., and 479 occupations.
Occupational segregation explains only 11 to 19 percent of the differential for
222 occupations. Although the authors claim that occupational segregation
explains 35 to 39 percent of the differential for 479 occupations. there is an
error in the table that reduces one of the figures to 19 percent. Furthermore,
it is unclear that 479 occupations is an appropriate number.

7. See the justification for this assumption in Mincer (1974). The geometric
means are not entirely good substitutes for their arithmetic counterparts. The
implied ratio of female to aele eairdngs using the geometric means is 0.487 in
1890, rising to 0.586 in 1970, while the arithmetic means are 0.463 and 0.603

8. For example, using the 1890 weights the impact of relat3e earnings is
(0.1452 + 0.0071) or 83% of the entire change of 0.1836.

9. Polaciek (1975) estinates snch ct nodel and finds that it eiplains almost all
of the earnings gap, or about twice that of other models.
                                                                             27
 10. For a more detailed description and analysis of the cohort labor
                                                                      force data
 see 001dm (1983b).

 11. Treiman and Hartminn (1981, Table 10) summarize various studies. The wide
 range of estimates owes, primarily, tc Cifferences in the D.ecsvre of experience
 for women. For example, Polachek (197$) is an outlier at the upper end. By
 including a measure of life—cycle htran capital, his earnings equations explain
 over 90 percent of the gap between married male and female workers. In the
 discussion that follows, the estimates of Corcoran and Duncan (1979), who
 employ a direct measure of experience and tenure, will be used.

 12. This technique is generally attributed to Ronald Oaxaca (1973).

 13. Goldin (1980, 1984) contain estimates for female manufacturing workers ii
 1888 and 1907; Hannon (1977) has estimates for various ethnic groups of males
 in Michigan industries. Bichengreen (1984) estimates equations for both males
 and females in manufacturing in California in 1892. The ratio of female to
male earnings in his sample. 0.464, is considerably lower than that in all
U.S. manufacturing industries at that tine (see Table 1). The coefficients
 from his sample differ in only small ways from those in the 001dm and Hannon
 studies. Eichengreen adds a "schooling" variable to his equation that is
defined as the age at which work began minus 6. Because many of these individuals
did not attend school for that period of time (the derived years of attendance
are far too high), this variable probably measures, in part, the return to
maturity.

14. Corcoran and Duncan (1979, pp. 10 and 18) for all (white) working household
heads and wives, ages 18 to 64. The explanatory variables are education, work
history including currert job, and other indicators of labor force attvchment.

15. This is accomplished by setting the contribution of experience equal in the
quadratic and linear versions. Thus if      and 2 are the coefficients on
                                        fi1
experience and experience squared and if    is the coefficient on experience in
a regression without the squared term, then         + 2E, where E = the mean
experience level.

16. All cigar, clothing, cotton, and printing factories were sampled from
U.S. Commissioner of Labor (1897). The figure of 0.77 is derived from a regression
across 134 firms of the ratio of female to male wages regressed or the male
wage. The mean male wage of *11.74 was used to compute the 0.77 figure. See
Goldin (in progress).

17. A figure of 0.10 may well be a lower bound. The 1890 estimate was about 0.30
for manufacturing. There are no comparable studies of piece rates for the
recent period, but various productivity studies reveal no differences between
men and women (Voos, 1985). In 1890 about one—third of the labor force was in
manufacturing, but over another third was in agriculture. Therefore if the
1890 figure applies only to manufacturing, that for the aggregate is about
0.10, relative to the figure for 1970 (which is assumed to be zero).
                                                                             28

18. The difference between the 1970 figure in Table 2 and the actual statistic
is that the former is the average of median earnings by occupation and the latter
is the average across all individuals.

19. Goldin (1983a) produces estimates of life—cycle labor force experience for
1920 to 1950, and Smith and Ward (1984) contrvcts estimates for 1940 to 1980.

20. See also estimates of labor market tenure in O'Neill (1985) and Moulton (1985).

21. Sandell and Shapiro (1980) show that young women who l'ad lower labor market
expectations did invest less. Jt should be noted that future labor force
participation rates will, in turn, be redriced by this lower rate of investment
and thus lower future earnings.

22. These figures express the percent explained in terms of the log of the
earnings ratios and are those in Table 4, where the log of tie earnings ratios
in the two years is 0.3595.

23. Jf the increase in the labor force participation of women is, in part, due
to a shifting out of their labor force supply function over time, then a relative
wage decline would be expected. Estimates in Smith and Ward (1984) of the
selectis-ity effect indicate that it is rather small compared with the other factors.
                                                                                  29
                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY

 Ben—Porath, Yoram. "Labor—Force Participation Rates and the Supply of Labor,"
 tournal of Political Economy 81 (May/June 1973): 697—704.

 Beney, M. Ada. Wages. Hon sand Employment in the United States. 1914—1936.
 New York: National Industrial Conference Board. 1936.

 Brissenden, Paul F. Earnings of Factory Workers. 1899 to 1927: An Analysis of
 Parroll Statistics. Census Monographs X. Washington. D.C., 1929.

 Carey, Henry C. Essay on the Rate of Wages: With an Examination of the Causes
 of the Differences in the Condition of the Labouring Populations Throuahout the
 World. Philadelphia, 1835.

 Corcoran, Mary and Greg I. Duncan. "Work History, Labor Force Attachment, and
 Earnings Differences Between the Races and Sexes." Lournal of Human Resources
 XJV (Winter 1979): 3—20.

Faster] jr. Richard. Birth and Fortune: The
                                            Impaip_umbers on Personal Welfare.
New York: Basic Books, 1980.

Eichengreen, Barry. "Experience and the Male—Female Earnings Gap in the 189Os."
Journal of..cponijc_fljstory XLIV (Sept. 1984): 822—34.

Gallatin, Albert. "Free Trade Memorial." In F. W. Taussig (ed.) State Papers
L$psceson the Tariff. Cambridge, Mass., 1892.

Goldin, Claudia. "The Work and Wages of Single Women, 1870 to 1920." Journal of
conQ.iicistory XL (March 1980): 81—88.

                    Labor Force Participation of Married Women: Historical
Evidence and Implications." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No. 1251 (Dec. 1983a).
    -
        - . "The
             Changing Economic Role of Women: A Quantitative Approach." Journal
of Interdisciplinary History 13 (Spring 1983b): 707—33.

             "The Historical Evolution of Female Earnings Functions and Occupations."
Enloration.inEconornidnistQfl 21 (Jan. 1984): 1—27.
        "Maximum Hours Legislation and Female Emplo rent it Ihe
         .
                                                                l92Os." University
of Pennsylvania Working Paper. March 1986.

        "The Female Labor Force and American Economic Growth, 1890 to 1980." In
Stanley Ergeinan and Robert Gallman (eds.) LonQ—Term Trends in the American
Economy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

        —.   "Assessing Various Theories of DiscrimiptJ by Sex Vsing Manufacturing
Data: 1890 to the present." In progress.
                                                                                 30

Goldin, Claudia and Kenneth Sokoloff. "Women. Children, and Industrialization
in the Early Republic: Evidence from the Manufacturing Censuses." Iurnalof
Economic llistorj XLIX (Dec. 1982): 741—74.

          .   "The Relative Productivity Hypothesis of Industrialization: The American
Case." Q.ua;fl;.l.y Journal of Economics XCIX (Aug. 1984): 461—87.

Hamilton, Alexander. "Report on Manufactures." In F. W. Taussig (ed..1, State
Payers and Sneeches on th Tariff, Cambridge, Mass.. 1892.

Hannon, Joan. "The Immigrant Worker in the Promised Land: Human Captial and
Ethnic Discrirrinetion in the Michigan Labor Market." Ph.D. dissertation. University
of Wisconsin (1977).

Beckman, James I. and Robert I. Willis. "A Beta—logistic Model for the Analysis
of Sequential Labor Force Participation by Married Women." JournajofFojitical
Economy 85 (Feb. 1979): 27—58.

Hewlett, Sylvia Ann. A Lesser Life: The M1th of Womens Liberation in America.
New York: William Morrow and Company, 1986.

Keat, Paul 6. "Long Run Changes in Occupational %'age Structure. 1900—1956."
Journal of Political Economy 68 (Dec. 1960): 584—600.

Long. Clarence 13. Wages and Earnings in the United States 1860—1890. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1960.

McLane, Louis. Secretary of the Treasury. U.S. House of Representatives, Documents
Relative to the Statistics of k!p.p_Ip.c.tures in the U.S., Vols. I and II, Serial
Set Nos. 222 and 223. Washington, D.C., 1833.

Mincer, Jacob. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York: NBER, 1974.

Mincer, Jacob and Solomon Polachek. "Family Investments in Human Capital:
Earnings of Women." Journal of Political Economy 82, Pt. II (March/April 1974):
576—608.

Moulton, Brent it. "Human Capita] Accumulation and Trends in the Male—Female
Wage Gap in the United States, 1956—1983." xerox. (Sept. 1985).

Oaxaca, Ronald. "Male—Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets."
International Economic Review 14 (Oct. 1973): 693—709.

O'Neill, June. "The Trend in the Male—Female Wage Gap in the United States."
Journal of Labor Economics 3 (Jan. 1985): 591—5116.

Polachek. Solomon. "Differences in Expected Post—School Investment us a Deterrz.itant
of Market Wage Differentials." jternationalEconornftReyw 16 (June 1975):
451—70.
                                                                                    31
        "Women in the Economy: Perspectivcs
                                            on Gender Inequality." Paper presented
 to the U.S. Conmission on Civil Rights,
                                         Consultation on Comparable Worth,
 Washington, D.C. June 1984.

Sandell, Steven and David Shapiro. "Work
                                         Expectation5, Human Capital Accuwulat ion,
and the Wages of Young Women." Journal of H an1c.ources 15 (Summer 1980):
335—53.

Smith, lames P. (ed.) Female Labor Supyly: Theory and Estiniatjop. Princeton:
Princeton University Press. 1980.

Smith, James P. and Michael P. Ward. Women's Wages and Work in the_Twentieth
cent'. Santa Monica: The Rand Corporation, 1984.

          and ——————. "Time—Series   Growth iv   the   Female Labor Force." Journal of
Labor   Economics 3 (Jan. 1985): S59—590.
Treiman, Donald I. and Heidi Baxtinarn. (eds.)
                                               Women, Work and Wages: Fatal Pay
for lobs of Equal Value. Washington,
                                        D.C.: Natioral &ademy Press, 1981,
U.S. Census Office. Report on Manufacturing Industries in the United States at
the Eleventh Census: 1890. Part I: Totals for States and Industries. Washington,
D.C., 1895.

U.S. Commissioner of Labor. Eleventh Annual Report cit the Commissioner of
Labor. 1895—96. Work and Wages of Men,
                                       Women, and Children. Washington, D.C., 1897.
Voos, Paula. 'Wage Discrimination. A New Approach Based on the Direct Measurement
of Productivity." Paper presented at the A.F..A. Meetings, New York City. Dec. 1985.

Williamson, Jeffrey and Peter Lindert. American
Ristq New York: Academic Press, 1980.
                                    Table 1
  Page katios for Males and Females in Manufacturing Eaplo,mant 1815 to 1970
                   and Across All Occupations. 1950 to 1983

Except where noted these ratios are based on full—time, year—round employees.

Aariculture
1815 0.30

Nanutac tar
1820 0.37—0.30
1832 0.44—0.43
1850 0.46—0.50

1885    0.559

1890a 0.539

1890b   0.538
         Full—time Actual        Full—time
                               weekly hourly
1899     0.535    0.536
1904     0.536    0.535
1909     0.536    0.537
1914     0.535    0.534         0.568     0.592
1920                            0.559     0.645
1921     0.536    0.536         0.617     0.653
1922                            0.612     0.677
1923    0.535     0.536         0.607     0.672
1924                            0.593     0.664
1925    0.536     0.536         0.592     0.657
1926                            0.585     0.662
1927                            0.587     0.652
1928                            0.573     0.645
1929                            0.575     0.637
1930                            0.578     0.635
1931                            0.612     0.621
1932                            0.653     0.618
1933                            0.661     0.656
1934                            0.688     0.704
1935                            0.653     0.700
            Manufacturjj&                          All Qsssnations
           Full—time Total                 Median,          Median, Weekly
                                         Year—Round     Actual Hours—Adjusted
 1939      0.539     0.513

 1950                0.537
 1951               0.532
1952                0.558
1953                0.512
1954                0.497
1955       0.580    0.526                  0.639
1957       0.554    0.496                  0.638
1959       0.580                           0.613
1961       0.534                           0.594
1963       0.544                           0.596
1965       0.532                     -
                                          0.600
1967       0.563                          0.578
1969       0.544                          0.605
1971                                      0.595            0.62       0.68
1973                                      0.566            0.62       0.68
1973                                      0.588            0.62       0.68
1977                                      0.589            0.61       0.67
1979                                      0.596            0.62       0.68
1981                                      0.592
1982                                      0.617            0.65       0.71
1983
                                                           0.66       0.72


Sources;
1815—1850. Goldin and Sokoloff (1PU, Table 5). The range is for New England
ard the Middle Atlantic. The (b) results from Table 5 are given and use Lebergott's
male common laborer wage as the base.
1885. Long (1960, p. 146). from First Report of the U.S. Commissioner of Labor,
daily wages.
1890a: Long (1960, p. 148), from Dewey, actual wages used.
1890b: U.S. Census Office (1895), actual wages used.
1899—1935. First two columns. F.rissenden (1929, Table 33, p. 85). Second two
columns Beney (1936, Table 3, pp. 48—51).
1939—1983. Manufacturing. Historical_St;tistics, 6 372—415, pp.. 304305.
Female earnings for operatives were multiplied by 1.02 to adjust for craft
                                                                            and
supervisory positions where such data were unavailable. Male earnings weze
weighted equally between craft and operative positions, consistent with the
labor force percentages.
All Occupations. O'Neill (1985, Tables 1 and 3). The difference between the
year—round and the weekly data is primarily the exclusion of teachers and other
less—than—year—round workers from the (orDer. Median earnings of weekly workers
s,e I .gJei for women than hr I•SI because
                                           of the higher—than—average earnings
of female teachers. Both sets of data are from the Current
From 1955 to 1980 crly                                            Population Surveys.
                         odd   numbered years have been given.
                                              Table 2
                 Full—Tine Earnings and Occupational Distributions
                         of the Pestle and Male Labor Forces,
                       1890, 1930. and 1970: Entire United States


Part    A: Full—Tine Earnings (Current t)            and    Occupational Distributions


                S
                        1890
                     Male
                       'a
                               Fesaje
                               *     S        *
                                                Male
                                                   S
                                                      1930
                                                             Fistic
                                                             S     S         S
                                                                                 Male
                                                                                     S
                                                                                     1970
                                                                                            Fe.ale

Clerical       943 2.8 459 4.0              1566     5.5 1105 20.9         8750     7.6 6000 34.5
Sales          766 4.6 456 4.3              1580     6.1    959 6.8       10150    6.8 4450 7.4
Manual         587 37.6       314 27.7      1532 45.2       881 19.8       8891 48.1 4950 17.9

 Craft. soperv. (12.6)             C 1.4)          (16.2)        ( 1.0)           (21.3)      ( 1.8)
 Operative, lab. (25.0)            (26.3)          (29.0)        (18.8)           (26.8)      (16.1)
Service        445    3.1     236 35.5      1220     4.8 730 27.5         7100     8.2 3965 20.5
Par.           445 41.7       236 19.0      1220 24.8 730



Part B: The Ratio of Pestle to Male Earnings Within Each Occupation
Professional          0.263                        0.385                    0.710
Clerical              0.487                        0.706                    0.686
Sales                 0.595                        0.607                    0.438
Manual                0.535                        0.575                    0.557
Service               0.530                        0.598                    0.558
Pars                  0.530                        0.598                    0.589


Part C: Male and Pestle Earnings in Current Dollars (0                     occupational share)

 91w1          624           275            1741           968             9581            5776

               624           289             683           325              809             368
 0i'193O      1618           864            1741           968             2043            1035

 0i'1970      8306          4834            8874       5411                9581            5776
 Part D: Ratios of Female to Male
                                    Earnings (e varies across the columns)
 (1) [Wfi/Wi]          0.463                0.556                   0.603
 (2) [Wf/Wm]1890       0.463               0.489                    0.455
 (3) Ewf/w 1930        0.534               0.556                    0.507
 (4) (wf/wa11970       0.571               0.610                    0.603


Part E: Partitioning Change I. the Ratio of the Log of Female to Male Earnings,
(average earnings are geometrically weighted averages of the six occupations)

                               1890 Weights                  1970 Weights
1. Of(R1 — R°)                 +0.1452                       +0.3018
2. R(Of1 —      Of)            —0.0880                       +0.0687
3. a(ç' — Wn°)                 +0.0071                        0.0981
4.          —   a°)            +0.0679                       —0.0373
5. (k — RO)(0f1 —
                  Of°)         +0.1567                       —0.1567
6. (W —      Wm°)(a1
                       — a°)   —0.1052                       +0.1052
     Total Change              +0.1836                       +0.1836

 a Where w 5          for males and females. A
                                               geometrically weighted average
enables a partitioning of the various factors
                                              accounting for change in the
ratio of female to male earnings. W = log (w); R
                                                    (Wf — Wm); a =
1   1970; 0 = 1890. Note that the total change in the ratio        (Of
                                                             when earnings are
a geometrically weighted average is considerably less than when average earnings
are the aritSetic mean. The geometrically weighted results are: (Wr/wm) =
0.487, but 0.463 for the arithmetic mean in 1890; the results for 1970 are
0.586 for the geometric weights, but 0.603 for the arithmetic means. Therefore
the geometrically weighted averages understate the total increase. Columns
not add up due to rounding error.                                           may




Sources and Notes: See Appendix.
                                         Table 3
             Female Labor Force Participation Rates by Marital Status.
                          Race. and Nativity. 1890 to 1980


                     2 16 years old            2 15 years old      2 16 yrs.
             1890     1900a 1920 1930        1940   1950   1960   1970 1980
Total         18.9    20.6   23.7     24.8   25.8   29.0   34.5   42.6   51.5 (49.9)
   Married     4.6     5.6    9.0     11.7   13.8   21.6   30.7   40.8   50.1 (49.2)
   Single     40.5 43.5      46.4     50.5   45.5   46.3   42.9   53.0   61.5
White         16.3 17.9      21.6     23.7   24.5   28.1   33.7   41.9 (49.4)
   Married     2.5     3.2    6.5      9.8   12.5   20.7   29.8   39.7   49.3 (48.1)
   Single     38.4 41.5      45.0 48.7       45.9   47.5   43.9   54.5   64.2
Nonwhite      39.7 43.2      43.1     43.3   37.6   37.1   41.7   48.5 (53.3)
   Married    22.5 26.0      32.5     33.2   27.3   31.8   40.6   52.5   59.0 (60.5)
   Single     59.5 60.5      58.8     52.1   41.9   36.1   35.8   43.6   49.4
Foreign Born 19.8                     19.1
   Married    3.0                      8.5
   Single    70.8                     73.8




Sources: See Goldin (forthcoming). All data are from U.S. Population Censuses
except 1980 data are the Current Population Survey figures. Figures in parentheses
are from are the population census figures.

a The 1910 labor force figures Jan been omitted. See Goldin (forthcoming)
for a discussion of the overcount of the agricultural labor force in that year.
                                               Table 4
   Estiaated   and Approximated Coefficients and Means fro. Earnings Equation,
       and a   Decosiposit Los of the Change in the Earnings Gap. 1890 to 1970
                            Coefficients                Means
                          Male     Female                Yale    Female
 circa 1890
   Experience             o.os         0.065              15.0      5.0
   Education              0.02         0.010               7.0      5.4
 circa 1970
   Experience            0.035      0.020                  16.0 11.0
   Education             0.065      0.070                  12.7 12.6
   Rome time             0.0       —0.005                  0.0      4.6

                                         Experience      Education        Rome time
Due to               Aa(X0 — Z0)           +0.450          —0.096             0.0
coefficients         Z0(Aa — Ap)           —0.480          +0.191             0.0
Due to               AZ(a0 — pO)           +0.015          —0.057             0.0

characteristics      a(Ax —      AZ)       +0.100          +0.105           —0.023
TOTAL                ( = 0.205)            +0.085          +0.143           —0.023
Notes and Sources:
 c.1890: Experience, Eichengreen (1984), Goldin (1980). and Bannon (1977) produce
 similar estimates of the returns to experience among manufacturing workers.
 The coefficient for female workers has been reduced by 0.015 to account for
 returns to maturity; that for the male labor force has not been adjusted because
 the age at beginning work has a far smaller effect with longer experience. The
 mean values for experience are from Eichengreen (1984) and are consistent with
 those from the other studies. Education. Goldin (1980) estimates returns to
 education among female manufacturing workers in 1907 using actual schooling
 data. The higher estimate for the male labor force is assumed, based on their
proportion in nonmanual activities. Mean education levels are based on data in
 Smith and Ward (1984). Male workers are assigned the mean education level for
 their cohort; female workers are assigned 0.75 times the mean level because the
 labor force contained less educated female workers. The 0.75 figure was computed
 from data used in Goldin (1980) and Smith and Ward (1984).
c.1970: Experience, The coefficients are consistent with those in Corcoran and
Duncan (1979) for both males and females, Beckman (1980) for females, Schultz
 (1980) for males, Mincer and Polachek (1974) for males and females. Moulton
 (1985) for males and females, although Mincer (1974) has somewhat higher returns
for males. The means are from Corcoran and Duncan (1979) and are consistent
with those in the other studies cited when corrected for differences in coverage.
Educatjct, Coefficients are from Corcoran and Duncan (1979); Moulton (1985),
among others, also estimates a slightly higher coefficient for females. Means
are from Corcoran and Duncan (1979), averaged for the black and white labor
forces using population (not sample) proportions. Home time. The coefficient
is from Corcoran and Duncan (1979) which is somewhat lower than that in Mincer
and Polachek (1974). Mean value is based on Corcoran and Duncan (1979) with an
adjvstment for single women froit data in Mincer and Polachek (1974).
Figure 1: The Ratio of Full-time Female to Male Earnings: United States, 1815 to 1983

                                                                           All sectors
.60



•   50




.40
                                                           NI dO til acturing. New   LiIgI a11(1 to

                                                           JIanufac'i ilihig, Middle Allaiihic
:40

                                                           Manufacturing, (IS, after 1850

                                                       *   Weighted average if'six sectors

                                                                                 Survey, median vcai'—rutnid
                                                       0 turret ISpiilai 'oh
                                                       •            l'nptilai iii Sursey, iiiediaii weekly
         1800     1820     18-lU




         Sources: Tables 1 and 2.
 Figure 2 Labor Force Participation Rates of Cohortsof White, Married Women, Born
 1866 to 1955, Entire U.S.
 % in Labor Force
                                                           1936—191
                       60                                             V

                       50          I946-I..                               I926-I
                                                          //"                         96-1925

                      -40                                                             .
                      30                                   V  Zr-S>                        l906-I9 IS
                                                                          1896-1905
                      20       z
                              —_l88895                                                          1876-1885

                                                                                         1866-1875          __
                             2))
                                                                                                                                     Age
Sotiir:   I)tiietI I ruin injniIttiuii census dart.
Dashed lines denote missing (lata. Data               br 1890 to 1920 are 11w native-born women with native-born parents. Dotted line is
1970 cross section.
                    APPaCU: Sources sad Notes for Table 2
 OCCUPATIONAL DISTRIBUTION.
 Historical Statistics, series 0 182—232, pp. 139—40. The 1900 occupational
 distribution was used for 1890. The professional category includes professional.
 technical, and kindred workers, and managers, officials and proprietors (lines
 218 + 219).
 EARNINGS. All earnings are arrual, full—tine, and in current dollars.
 1890, Male, Professional: Weighted average of professional (34 percent) and
 managerial (66 percent) workers. Professional earnings for six categories,
 representing over 75 percent of all professionals, were obtained from: Stanley
 Lebergott, Manpower in Economic Growth: The American Record Since 1800 (New
 York, 1964), p. 500, gives *1662 for 1st to 3rd class postal workers (government
 officials); Historical Statistics, series 0 793, p. 168 gives *731 for ministers
 (clergy); a value of *460 for male teachers was derived from Historical Statistics
 series 0 763, p. 167, given the assumption that the ratio of female to male
 teacher salaries was 0.8 and a value of *1505 for the 5 percent who were college
 teachers; the figures for physicians (*2540), lawyers (*2691). engineers (*2108),
 and college teachers (*1505) were derived from Historical Statistics, series
o 913—920, p. 176 for 1929. extrapolated back to 1900 on federal employee
 earnings, Historical Statistics, series 0 764. p. 167. Managerial earnings
were derived from U.S. Census Office, Report on Manufacturing Industries in the
United States at the Eleventh Census: 1890, Part II: Statistics of Cities
 (Washington, D.C., 1895), Table 6, using the category "officers or firm members
actively engaged in the industry or in supervision." A figure of $1264 was
converted Into a 1900 figure of *1285, based on nonfarm money (when employed)
earnings. Historical Statistics, series 0 735. p. 165. The final estimate of
*1391 (*1414. for 1900) was constructed by weighting by the actual occupational
distribution, and it is consistent with the notion that the ratio of full—time
earnings in manufacturing jobs to those in professional occupations must have
been smaller in 1890 than it was in 1930; Jeffrey Williamson and Peter Lindert,
American Inequality: A Macroeconomic History (New York, 1980).
Clerical: U.S. Census Office, Report on Manufacturing. 1890. Part II, p. 10, yields
data for urban clerical workers excluding salaried personnel.
Sales: Data for dry goods salesmen in U.S. Commissioner of Labor, Eleventh
Annual Report of the Commissioner of Labor, 1895/96: Work and Wages of Men.
Women and Children (Washington. D.C. 1897) for 11 states yield a mean of $13.58/week
or *706/year for 1895, and conversion to 1890 based on nonfarm money (when
employed) earnings gives *766.
Manual: Paul F. Brissenden, Earnings of Factory Workers. 1899 to 1927: An
Analysis of Pay—roll Statistics (Washington, D.C. 1929), p. 94; full—time
manufacturing earnings are used. Although these are given for 1899, the
accompanying actual figures are identical to those for 1890. See also Elyce
Potella, From Home to Office: U.S. Women at Work. 1870—1930 (Ann Arbor, 1981),
pp. 197—212, Appendix B on the 1890 figures. The implied ratio of full—tine to
actual earnings is 1.18.
Service and Farm: Lebergott, Manpower; common laborer's wage x 310 days. The
figure for service is almost identical to that in Lucy Maynard Salmon, Domestic
Service (New York, 1972; orig. pub. 1897). p. 96, of *6.93/week, given 52 weeks
and *100/year board. Conversion was made to 1890 based on full—time annual
earnings. The farm figure poses problems because no data exist for owner
operator farmers in 1890, and those for more recent periods indicate lower
earnings for operators than for farm laborers. Farm wage laborers received
less than the wage for common laborers, but owner operators earned far more.
 The ratio of female to male farm
                                   wages for yearly contracts in 1909 was 0.578
 and those for seasonal contracts (with board)
                                                was 0.538; George Holmes, Wages
 of Farm Labor. U.S. Department of Agriculture
                                                Bureau of Statistics, Bulletin 99
 (Washington, D.C. 1912). Therefore the relationship between male and female
 earnings on farms does not differ significantly from
                                                        that given by the rate for
 farm wage laborers.
 1890, Female, Professional : Listorical
 for 1900.                               Statistics, series D 760, 763, p. 167,
 Clerical: Rotella, From Home to Office, pp. 197—212, Appendix B.
 Sales: See source for male earnings. The 1895 figure is *421.
Manufacturing: U.S. Census Office, Census of Manufacturing: 1890, Part I.
Service: Historical Statistics series D 758. p. 167, for 1900. Salmon, Domestic
Service, gives an average of *3.23/week or *268/year, including *100 board.
Lebergott, Manpower, p. 542, gives an estimate of *3.14/week in 1900. 1930,
Male, Professioyaj: A weigLtee average of the earnings of lawyers, physicians,
engineers, and dentists from Milton Friedman and Simon Kuznets, Income from
lEdependent Professional Practice (New York. 1945); semiprofessionals, clergy,
professors, and teachers from Historical Statistic,, series D 793, D 792, D 913),
*4099, The earnings of proprietors, managers and officials are from U.S. Bureau
of the Census. Sixteenth Census of the United States: 1940, Poyulatjon,
Vol. III: The Labor Force, Part 1, United States
                                                   Summary (Washington, D.C.,
1943). p. 121, for males who worked 12 months in 1939, adjusted to 1929 dollars,
*3 500.
 Clerical: Rotella, From Home to Office. pp. 197—212, Appendix B.
  Sales: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Sixteenth Census:
                                                        1940. Vol. III, p. 121, for
 males who worked 12 months in 1939, adjusted to 1929 dollars.
 Manual: The weekly full—time wage from Beney, Wages, Fours, and Employment, for
 50 weeks; also in flistorical_itausun, series D 835. p. 172. The Beney data
 imply a ratio of female to male earnings for
                                                manufacturing workers of 0.575 in
 1929 which might be too high in light of Brissenden's ratios for the 1920s
 which are lower than Beney's for the sac period.
 Service and Farm: Unskilled manufacturing laborers, Historical Statistics.
 series D 841, p. 172 x 50 weeks.
 1930, Females, Professional: A weighted average of professors, teachers, nurses,
 and attendants from Historical Statistics,
                                              series D 763, p. 167. and Department
 of Labor, Women's Bureau. "The Age Factor as it Relates to Women in Business
 and the Professions," by Harriet A. Byrne, Bulletin of the Women's Bureau.
No.137 (Washington, D.C., 1934).
Clerical and Manual; The weekly full—time
                                            wage from Beney, Wages, Hours, and
Emn.Iovnient, for 50 weeks; Rotella, F.rom Rome to Office, pp. 197—212, Appendix B
gives 868. Department of Labor, Women's Bureau, "The Employment of Women in
Offices." by Ethel Erickson, Bulletin of the Women's Bureau, No. 120 (Washington,
D.C., 1934) gives median clerical earnings for 193]. of between *1044 and *1308.
Sales: U.S. Bureau of the Census. Sixteenth Census:
                                                       1940. Vol. III, p. 125; see
1930, Males above.
Service: Historical Statistics, series D 758, p. 167, for 1929.
1970, Male and Female, All Sectors: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Labor Force Statistics Derived from the Current Population Survey: A
Databook, Vol. I, Bulletin 2096 (Washington. D.C.,
                                                      1982), p. 732, Table C—23.
Median, full—time, weekly earnings for facl sex—occupational group. The
manufacturing group for males and the service group for females are weighted
averages of subgroups. Earnings for the farm sector are those of nonfarm
laborers. Annual wages are weekly x 50 weeks.
