NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNEMLOYMENT AND UNOBSERVED CREDIT RISK IN THE FHA SINGLE FAMILY
MORTGAGE INSURANCE FUND
Joseph Gyourko
Joseph Tracy
Working Paper 18880
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18880
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013

These views represent those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. John Grigsby
provided excellent research assistance. We thank Andrew Haughwout and Wilbert van der Klaauw
for their helpful comments. Gyourko thanks the Research Sponsor Program of the Zell/Lurie Real
Estate Center at Wharton for financial support.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18880.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Joseph Gyourko and Joseph Tracy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Unemloyment and Unobserved Credit Risk in the FHA Single Family Mortgage Insurance
Fund
Joseph Gyourko and Joseph Tracy
NBER Working Paper No. 18880
March 2013
JEL No. G17,R48
ABSTRACT
Empirical models of mortgage default typically find that the influence of unemployment is negligible
compared to other well known risk factors such as high borrower leverage or low borrower FICO scores.
This is at odds with theory, which assigns a critical role to unemployment status in the decision to
stop payment on a mortgage. We help reconcile this divergence by employing a novel empirical strategy
involving simulated unemployment histories to measure the severity of attenuation bias in loan-level
estimations of default risk due to a borrower becoming unemployed. Attenuation bias results because
individual data on unemployment status is unobserved, requiring that a market-wide unemployment
rate be used as a proxy. Attenuation is extreme, with our results suggesting that the use of an aggregate
unemployment rate in lieu of actual borrower unemployment status results in default risk from a borrower
becoming unemployed being underestimated by a factor of 100 or more. Correcting for this indicates
unemployment is more powerful than other well-known factors such as extremely high leverage or
extremely low FICO scores in predicting individual borrower default. Our simulated data indicate
that adding the unemployment rate as a proxy for the missing borrower-specific unemployment indicator
does not improve the accuracy of the estimated model over the specification without the proxy variable
included.
Joseph Gyourko
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School of Business
3620 Locust Walk
1480 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
gyourko@wharton.upenn.edu
Joseph Tracy
Executive Vice President
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
joseph.tracy@ny.frb.org

I.

Introduction

The recent announcement of a negative estimated economic value of the Federal Housing
Administration’s (FHA) single-family mortgage insurance portfolio, which measures the
difference between expected fund revenues and costs, has increased interest in the financial
viability of what is now over a $1 trillion guarantee program that amounts to about 7% of annual
national output.1 Each of us in prior research has argued that unobserved credit risk in the FHA
guarantee portfolio is high (Caplin, et. al. (2010, 2012); Gyourko (2011)), with FHA’s persistent
overestimation of the value of each new book of insured loans indicating that over the past
several years something systematic in terms of uncontrolled-for risk is being missed by program
evaluators. In this paper, we focus on unemployment as a key uncontrolled for risk factor.
From 2008 until the most recent annual evaluation, FHA’s outside actuarial reviewer
made no attempt to control for unemployment, having discontinued use of a metropolitan areawide unemployment rate in its default models. The explanation provided was that controlling for
unemployment did not help in explaining default.2 This decision was at odds with theories of
default, which hypothesize that unemployment risk plays a key role in any decision to stop
paying on a mortgage.3 The most recent annual review of the FHA insurance program reversed
this decision and included aggregate unemployment rates as controls in their underlying default
(and prepayment) models. Consistent with other recent empirical evidence (e.g., Elul, et. al.
1

The report, entitled Actuarial Review of the Federal Housing Administration Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund
Forward Loans for Fiscal Year 2012 (IFE (2012), indicated the fund had an economic value of -$13.478 billion. It
can be accessed at http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/housing/rmra/oe/rpts/actr/actrmenu.
2
The actuarial review for 2008 specifically noted the following: “The unemployment rate variables did not perform
well in any of the preliminary models that were estimated, and have not been included in the final model
specifications. No consistent pattern was observed between mortgage claims and increases in local unemployment
rates.”[IFE 2008, page A-13]
3
As is discussed more fully in the literature review in the next section, the so-called ‘double trigger’ hypothesis
suggests that it is a combination of an adverse income shock and the borrower being in negative equity that results in
a default. See Gerardi, et. al. (2007), Foote, et. al. (2008), Foote, et. al. (2010), and the discussion in Section II for
more on the double trigger hypothesis, as well as additional evidence on the correlation between unemployment and
default.

1

(2010)), the 2012 actuarial review reports evidence of a positive correlation between an
aggregate unemployment rate and the propensity of individual borrowers in the market to
default.
However, the estimated economic influence of unemployment rates on default is very
small empirically compared to other known risk factors such as borrower credit quality as
reflected in FICO scores and loan-to-value (LTV) ratios. One possible reason investigated in
this paper is attenuation bias. This is a potentially serious problem because the default decision
is observed at the micro-household level, but the unemployment status of the borrower is not.
Hence, a market-level unemployment rate is used as a proxy for the unobserved unemployment
status of the borrower in empirical models of individual default, and it well could be a very noisy
proxy.4 For example, even in a market with a high unemployment rate of 10%, the vast majority
of borrowers still are employed, and rises in that rate obviously do not mean that most borrowers
lose their jobs and become income constrained.
We bring new empirical analysis to bear on this issue, using results from a simulation
exercise involving transitions into and out of unemployment, to help gauge the true impact of
unemployment on default. The analysis strongly suggests that borrower unemployment status is
very important in determining default behavior, with the likely impact at least as large as that
found for other well known risk factors such as FICO score and loan-to-value ratio. Hence, we
are able to account for the discrepancy between the prominent role that unemployment risk is
accorded in conceptual models of default and the very limited impact estimated in recent
empirical work.
The plan of the paper is as follows. The next section begins by briefly reviewing the
literature on the linkage between mortgage default and unemployment risk. This is followed
4

This point was raised by Haughwout, et. al. (2010), page 17 footnote 22.

2

with a presentation of our analysis on how one can use labor market employment transition data
to estimate the potential magnitude of the attenuation bias that inevitably results from regressing
individual borrower default data on a market-wide measure of unemployment. Section III then
describes the sample of mortgages and borrowers used to estimate the impact of unemployment
on the propensity to default. That is followed by a presentation and discussion of our key results
in Section IV. This section also addresses the implication of our analysis for whether the FHA’s
outside actuary’s recent inclusion of the aggregate unemployment rate in its micro-level default
model helps it generate more reliable forecasts of portfolio-level default risk. Unfortunately, the
answer is that it likely does not in this case. Hence, unemployment largely remains an unpriced
risk factor in terms of evaluating the likely cost of the FHA insurance program. Finally, there is
a brief summary and conclusion.

II.

Default and Unemployment Risk

a. Literature Review
There is a long academic literature on mortgage default (and prepayment). Financial
economists have traditionally modeled default as a put option because the decision not to pay the
contractually required future stream of interest and principal payments essentially involved the
borrower ‘putting’ back the mortgage to the lender. Early thinking on the problem viewed the
decision to default as being determined by whether the borrower had negative equity in the
home, on the premise that it was rational to walk away from a house only when its value was less
than the present value of the debt owed on it. Kau, et. al. (1994) showed that even this was not
sufficient because it still could be optimal for a borrower to wait and default in the future. That

3

is, the value of the put option need not be maximized when the borrower first enters negative
equity.
That negative equity is not the sole factor behind the decision to default seems evident
from the fact that at any point in time most borrowers with negative equity are not seriously
delinquent on their mortgages. One recent industry estimate indicates that about 85% of
households with a mortgage who are estimated to be in negative equity are current on their debt
service payments.5 Empirical analysis in the academic literature also concludes that the decision
to default is based on more than current and prospective negative equity.6 In particular, default
has been shown to be associated with negative shocks to income, including that arising from
becoming unemployed.7 Deng, et. al.’s (2000) classic empirical paper on the competing risks of
default and prepayment reports evidence consistent with negative equity and income each
influencing the probability of default.
One way to summarize the literature is with the so-called ‘double trigger’ terminology in
which negative equity and income loss are the two triggers.8 In this framework, a borrower in
negative equity is at heightened risk of default. But, we know from above that this is not a
sufficient condition for default to occur. The second trigger is a large enough adverse income
shock, say via losing one’s job, that leaves the borrower unable to make scheduled monthly

5

This particular estimate is from a study by CoreLogic in the second quarter of 2012. See the web article here
(http://www.dsnews.com/articles/borrowers-in-negative-equity-slowly-declining-as-home-values-gain-report-201209-12) for more on this.
6
Measurement error in determining if a borrower is in negative equity is also likely a factor. That is, some
borrower’s who are estimated to be in negative equity may in fact have positive equity.
7
See Foster and Van Order (1984) and Vandell (1995) for early discussions and presentation of data on this matter.
8
See Gerardi, et. al. (2007), Foote, et. al. (2008), and Foote, et. al. (2010) for more on the double trigger hypothesis
and the most recent housing cycle.

4

mortgage payments. That will precipitate default because the borrower also cannot pay off the
mortgage in full from sale proceeds.9
That unemployment risk plays a critical role in conceptual models of default through its
impact on income is consistent with the FHA’s own survey results from special servicers which
tell us that income loss is the primary reason why the typical FHA borrower is no longer current
on her mortgage payments.10
This then begs the question of whether one can reconcile the important role of
unemployment in mortgage default models with the economically small effects found for this
factor in empirical studies. If not, then a potentially important mistake is being made in terms of
risk analysis. To better understand this issue, we turn next to how unemployment risk should be
measured if it were to be controlled for in an empirical investigation of risk in mortgage pools
guaranteed against default.

b. Measuring Unemployment Risk
To measure how unemployment-related risk would affect a portfolio of mortgages such
as that insured by the FHA, one would like to include a variable in a default model that
accurately reflects changes over time in the unemployment status of individual borrowers.11
That would allow researchers to estimate the extent to which becoming unemployed is
9

Even before a borrower experiences a negative income shock, negative equity makes it difficult for the borrower to
pay off the mortgage either by selling the house or by refinancing (see Ferreria, et.al. (2010, 2012) and Caplin, et. al.
(1997)). This means that the mortgage will be exposed to the default risk for a longer period of time, which
increases the expected cumulative default probability.
10
See Table 5 (p. 22) of HUD’s Annual Report to Congress, Fiscal Year 2011 Financial Status, FHA Mutual
Mortgage Insurance Fund, November 15, 2011.
11
One potential alternative in which the market-level unemployment rate would be the appropriate control variable
involves strategic default. Even in the absence of an income shock, borrowers who are in negative equity and
perceive that they will remain so for a prolonged period of time may choose to default even when they still have the
income to make the monthly payments. Such behavior has been labeled “strategic” or “ruthless” default. Foote, et.
al. (2008) and Haughwout, et. al. (2010) provide more recent discussions of this concept. Experian (2011) and
Bradley, et. al. (2012, 2013) provide estimates of the magnitude of this type of default. In this situation, the risk of a
future job loss to a borrower is important and that may be best captured by the aggregate unemployment rate.

5

positively correlated with default. The problem is that mortgage servicing data that are typically
used to estimate default models do not track the borrower’s unemployment status. Lenders know
a borrower’s employment status when a mortgage is originated, but borrowers are not required to
report it subsequently. With no accurate measure of unemployment status at the borrower level,
one is forced to fall back upon more aggregated, market-level unemployment measures such as
the metropolitan area-wide unemployment rate calculated each month by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics. Clearly, this is an imperfect proxy for what is happening at the borrower level. Even
in a market with a very high unemployment rate of (say) 10%, the vast majority of borrowers
still are employed at any point in time. Similarly, an increase in the market average rate of
unemployment does not mean that most borrowers became unemployed or otherwise suffer
adverse income shocks.
More formally, the implications of using a local unemployment rate as a proxy for an
indicator of the unemployment status of an individual borrower can most easily be seen if we use
a simple linear probability model to estimate the determinants of mortgage default. Let Dijt be an
indicator that takes a value of one if borrower i in metro area j defaults in time t. Let I ijtU denote
an indicator that takes a value of one if borrower i in metro area j is unemployed in period t.
Letting all other variables one wants to control for be denoted as x1 … xk-1, our simple default
specification can be expressed as in equation (1):

(1)

Dijt   0  1 xijt1  ...   k 1 xijtk 1   k I ijtU   ijt ,

where εijt is the error term.

6

Because individual borrower employment status is not directly observed, it cannot be
controlled for in estimating (1). The two options are either to drop the unemployment status
variable or to add a proxy variable in its place. Assume that the borrower’s local market
unemployment rate, which is denoted by Ujt, is used as the proxy. The estimation specification
then is given by equation (2).

(2)

Dijt  0  1 xijt1  ...   k 1 xijtk 1  kU jt   ijt ,

Pinning down the relationship between k and k obviously is key. To help do so, let the
relationship between an individual i’s employment status at time t and her market’s
unemployment rate in the same period be described by the following simple linear equation:12

(3)

I ijtU   0  1U jt  ijt .

Using these three equations, the coefficient on the market-level unemployment rate, k , in
equation (2) will equal βkδ1 (and 0 is given by 0  k 0 ). Thus, if the market unemployment
rate is such a noisy proxy for individual unemployment status that δ1 is close to zero in equation
(3), then the regression results from estimating equation (2) would show that unemployment has
little impact on default decisions even if individual borrower unemployment spells significantly
increase the risk of default. In that case, the resulting small coefficient on the unemployment
rate reflects the severe attenuation bias from measurement error of individual employment status.

12

U

For simplicity, this specification ignores that I ijt is a limited dependent variable.

7

This means that we need an estimate of δ1 in order to recover the coefficient of interest,

k . To help gauge the potential magnitude of 1 and evaluate the likely effectiveness of using
the unemployment rate as a proxy for an individual borrower’s unemployment experience, we
carry out the following simulation exercise using the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) monthto-month employment transition rates.13 These data are available only at the national level.
Figure 1 plots the nine distinct transition rates reported by the BLS. Start with an individual who
is employed in period t. The probability that individual remains employed in period t+1 is given
by eet . Similarly, the probability that the same individual becomes unemployed is given by eut,
while the probability that the individual leaves the labor market is ent. The analogous
permutations for individuals starting out either as unemployed or out of the labor market yield
the nine possibilities depicted in Figure 1.
We use the BLS reported transition rates starting in February 1990 and ending in October
2012 to simulate employment paths for 150,000 individuals. We initialize everyone as employed
in February 1990. We then randomly transition individuals across the three employment states
through time. We use the data up to December 2004 to generate a distribution of individuals
across the three labor market states as of January 2005. Figure 2 shows the aggregate
unemployment rate for the nation computed by the BLS and compares it to the implied aggregate
unemployment rate from our simulated data for the period covered by our FHA data to be
discussed below – from January 2005 to March 2012. As expected, the two series track each
other very closely.
This simulated data is then used to obtain an estimate for 1 . More specifically, we begin
by randomly merging simulated employment histories into a sample of mortgages that we will

13

The labor flow data is produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. For details, see Frazis, et. al. (2005).

8

describe later. For each potential merge between a mortgage and an employment history, we
verified that the borrower was employed in the month that the mortgage was originated to
account for standard lending practice. Otherwise, we randomly selected a new employment
history for that mortgage until this condition was satisfied. The final sample consists of 149,336
mortgages with associated employment histories. For each employment history, we selected the
monthly observations between the time the mortgage was originated and the earlier of the date
the mortgage prepaid or the borrower became 90 days delinquent for the first time. For each
borrower, we create an indicator variable that takes a value of one if the borrower is unemployed
in that month. We then merge in the implied aggregate unemployment rates for each month
derived from our unmerged simulated employment histories.14
Using this data on mortgages merged with simulated employment histories, we next
regress the individual borrower unemployment indicator on the aggregate unemployment rate for
the month, as above in equation (3). The coefficient estimates (standard errors) from this
bivariate regression are as follows:15

Unemployed  0.00042  0.00553*Unemployment _ rate
(0.00052) (0.00006)

R2 = 0.0019.

This result highlights how noisy a proxy the aggregate unemployment rate is for any given
individual’s true unemployment status. Taking the estimation at face value implies that the
coefficient on the unemployment rate in our default regression will understate the true effect of
14

Here we follow the convention of measuring the unemployment rate so that a unit change equals a one percentage
point change.
15
This regression has 4.081 million simulated monthly observations.

9

the borrower being unemployed by a factor of about 180 (  1/0.00553). If this simulation
exercise with national data is informative about the relationship between individual employment
status and unemployment rates at the metropolitan area-level, then the results help account for
why recent academic research and FHA’s actuarial reviewer finds that controlling for marketwide unemployment yields such a small economic impact empirically, especially compared to
other well-known risk factors such as borrower leverage and FICO score at origination.16
Importantly, the small estimated value for 1 implies that the small estimated coefficient
for unemployment in a default regression does not mean that unemployment status really has
only a minor influence on a given borrower’s decision to default. To investigate this question
further, we estimate a default specification like that in equation (1) on a sample of FHA-insured
loans, and then use our imputed value of δ1 to adjust the regression coefficient on the marketlevel unemployment variable. The next section describes our underlying mortgage data and the
key variables used in that analysis.

III.

Data Description

Our primary data source on loans that likely were insured by FHA is Lender Processor
Services Inc. (LPS) Applied Analytics. The LPS data form a monthly panel of loans, which is
derived from the portfolios of large mortgage servicers in the U.S. Information provided
includes mortgage-level data on loan payment status, documentation on the loan, mortgage terms
such as length (e.g., 30 years) and coupon, loan-to-value (LTV) ratio at origination17, whether
the loan was reported to be for a home purchase or a refinance, the type and location of the
property, and the borrower’s FICO score at origination.
16

We find similarly small impacts in our own analysis, which is discussed below.
The origination LTV only reflects the first-lien mortgage, but this is less of an issue for FHA-insured loans given
the very high LTVs permitted with a single loan by that guarantor.
17

10

We take a 5% random sample of loans from the LPS database, and constrain ourselves to
a coverage period from January 2005 through March 2012 to combat any selection bias that
might arise due to LPS’s relatively sparse coverage of the U.S. mortgage market before 2005.
We limit our sample to loans held by the Government National Mortgage Association
(henceforth GNMA or Ginnie Mae) in order to isolate those mortgages most likely to be insured
by the FHA.18 Even this sample is not a perfect representation of the loans held by Ginnie Mae
at any given time. Since loans can be traded, a loan may enter the GNMA portfolio and
subsequently exit. Because we are interested primarily in the loans guaranteed by the FHA, we
keep all loans in our sample that were owned by Ginnie Mae at any time, whether permanently
or temporarily.
For our dependent variable, we create an indicator of whether a loan is 90 days
delinquent for the first time. This is in keeping with much of the literature (e.g., see Caplin, et. al.
(2012) for a recent example and discussion). Once a borrower reaches the 90-day delinquency
trigger, we censor the remaining observations for that borrower. For borrowers who prepay their
mortgage, we include data up to the month prior to the prepayment.
Our unemployment data come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Local Area
Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) database, which is comprised of non-seasonally adjusted
county- and state-level unemployment rates.19 These data are used to create metropolitan arealevel unemployment rates which are then matched to our sample of loans using the Zip code of
the underlying properties (which is provided in the LPS files).

18

Not only is the underlying data base large (e.g., it contained 37 million active loans at the end of 2010), but its
coverage of the GNMA universe in this period is good. From 2005-2012, LPS averaged a coverage rate for GNMA
loans of 77.3%, versus an average coverage rate of 41.8% for similar loans from 2000-2004.
19
The web site describing these data in more detail is here: http://www.bls.gov/lau/.

11

The current LTV ratio provided in the LPS data is calculated by dividing the balance
remaining on the mortgage by the sale price of the property. As such, it does not account for
changes in home prices, so to better reflect a borrower’s current equity position we adjust for
changes in the value of their home. Since we do not directly observe the current value of any
specific house, we estimate this value based on the cumulative change in the metro area house
prices from the origination date to the current date.20
We also construct dummy variables for whether a borrower would be at risk of recourse
to a deficiency judgment from the lender in the event of a default and whether the property is in a
judicial foreclosure state.21 Finally, we construct dummies for the duration of the loan that
measure whether the loan has survived a given number of months since the origination date.
Because we do not consider a loan to have defaulted until it is at least 90 days late, this vector of
dummies begins with the fourth month after loan origination. We control for each subsequent
month through the 24th month after origination. After that, we aggregate to three month periods
through the 48th month due to small cohort sizes at the upper end of the duration scale.

IV.

Estimation and Results

a. Linear Probability Model Results
We begin by estimating a simple linear probability model for the default indicator as
described above in equation (1). The X’s from that specification include a number of controls
traditional to the mortgage default estimation literature as described just above. These are a

20

We use the CoreLogic metro area overall house price indices.
A borrower is not at risk of recourse if he/she lives in Arizona, Iowa, Minnesota, Washington or Wisconsin, or
lives in North Carolina or California and the loan is for a home purchase. Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Iowa,
Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Maryland, Maine, North Dakota, Nebraska, New
Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania and South Carolina are the states with a judicial foreclosure
process. See Ghent and Kudlyak (2009).
21

12

measure of the degree of leverage by the borrower (e.g., loan-to-value (LTV) ratio below 80%
[left-out category], between 80% and 100%, between 100% and 120%, and greater than 120%),
the vintage year of the loan pool, FICO score categories at the time of loan origination (e.g.,
below 580, from 580-680, and 680+[left-out category]), dummies for loan type (e.g., whether the
mortgage required full documentation, whether it was for a home purchase versus a refinancing,
whether it had a 30 year term versus anything else), whether it was on a single unit residence
versus anything else, whether it was taken out in a non-recourse state, and whether it was taken
out in a judicial foreclosure state. Also included is the series of duration dummies discussed in
the previous section. We also explicitly control for unemployment with the metropolitan arealevel proxy discussed above.
We estimate this model on a sample of markets that had at least 50 observations on
borrowers per month and use the full sample period from March 2005-March 2012 available to
us. We restrict the sample geographically this way because we are concerned that including data
on markets with very small samples of borrower observations in given months will amplify the
measurement error problem plaguing the relationship between unemployment status and default
risk. This still leaves us with fifty metropolitan areas in the sample which are listed in Appendix
Table A1.22 Summary statistics are provided in Appendix Table A3.
Our baseline results are reported in Table 1. Two specifications are estimated. The first
controls for vintage (i.e., origination year) effects and year (i.e., time) effects, but not MSA
effects. The second adds in MSA effects. Depending upon the specification, the results indicate
that a one percentage point increase in the area unemployment rate is associated with from a 3.6
(column 1) to 6.3 (column 2) basis point increase in the monthly default risk. These effects are

22

FHA insurance exposure is not uniformly distributed around the country, so these 50 markets are not a random
sample of the nation’s population. Given our focus on FHA-insured borrowers, that is not our goal in any event.

13

highly statistically significant, but are economically small relative to an average monthly default
risk of about 50 basis points, and are consistent with findings in recent academic work (e.g., Elul,
et. al. (2010)) and FHA’s latest actuarial review (IFE (2012)). Other variables are much more
influential. For example, moving from a high FICO score (above 680) to a low score (below
580) is associated with roughly a 120 basis point increase in the default risk, which is equivalent
to at least a 20 percentage point increase in the local market unemployment rate.
However, we know from equations (1) to (3) that the point estimates reported in the first
row of Table 1 are the product of βkδ1 and reflect the attenuation bias from having a noisy proxy
for individual borrower employment status. We can help correct for this by using the result
about the relationship between individual borrower employment status and the national
aggregate unemployment rate from our simulation exercise. Our estimate above that δ1=0.00553
implies that the impact of a borrower unemployment spell on default is likely very large, with an
imputed magnitude of 645 basis points. This is roughly 12 times the average monthly default
risk.23
A second thing to note in Table 1 is that the marginal effect associated with the
unemployment proxy variable increases by 75 percent when we control for MSA effects. By
adding MSA controls, only the variation within each metro area’s unemployment rate is used to
estimate the associated default risk. Any persistent differences in area unemployment rates
between metro areas are removed from the estimation. For our sample period and our top-50
metro areas, 19% of the total variation in the area unemployment rates is associated with the
between variation in average unemployment rates across the metro areas. The results indicate
that the factors which impact these average unemployment rate differences across metropolitan
23

Using column 1’s estimated coefficient implies that βkδ1=0.000357. Rearranging leaves us that
βk=0.000357/δ1=0.00036/0.0055309=0.0645, which implies 645 basis points given the underlying units of
measurement.

14

areas are not as strongly associated with whether a FHA borrower is unemployed as the timeseries variation in the unemployment rate within a metropolitan area around this average.
To further explore the attenuation bias from using the unemployment rate as a proxy for
the borrower specific unemployment indicator, we generate simulated defaults and prepayments
for our sample of mortgages. The monthly predicted default and prepayment probabilities are
based on the results from specification (1) of Table 1 (with the prepayment coefficient estimates
provided in Appendix Table A2). These predicted probabilities are determined using the
borrower specific unemployment indicator in place of the unemployment rate with a default
coefficient of 0.0645 (to reflect the 645 basis point impact just discussed).24 We then employ
these estimated monthly predicted default and prepayment probabilities to simulate defaults and
prepayments for each mortgage.25 Finally, the simulated data are used to re-estimate the default
specification replacing the unemployment indicator with the unemployment rate. The estimated
coefficient (standard error) on the unemployment rate from that regression is a very small
0.00042 (0.00011). This reiterates how severe attenuation bias is likely to be when one uses an
aggregate unemployment rate to proxy for individual employment status and the true default risk
of becoming unemployed is large.
We obtain similar results when we simulate defaults and prepayments using a stylized
double trigger model. In that analysis, the monthly default risk was increased by 1,000 basis
points for a borrower who becomes unemployed and is in negative equity. No increase in default
risk from unemployment was presumed if the borrower has positive equity. Analogously, we
24

The prepayment coefficient for the unemployment indicator was set to negative 651 basis points.
We draw pairs of uniform (0,1) random variables and code the default indicator equal to one if the first uniform
random variable takes a value less than the predicted default probability, and we code the prepayment indicator
equal to one if the second random variable takes a value less than the predicted prepayment probability. In the event
that this process leads both indicators to be set to one, we decide which indicator to set to one by drawing a third
uniform (0,1) and set the default indicator to one (zero) and the prepayment indicator equal to zero (one) if this
random variable falls below (above) one half. We censor the default data going forward if the borrower prepays.
25

15

increase the prepayment risk by 1,000 basis points for a borrower who becomes unemployed and
has positive equity, and presume no increase in the prepayment risk from unemployment if the
borrower is in negative equity. The model is then estimated using the aggregate unemployment
rate and the interaction of the unemployment rate with an indicator for negative equity. The
coefficient on the unemployment rate is small and not statistically different from zero, while the
coefficient (standard error) on the interaction term is 0.00044 (0.00008). The estimated
interaction effect is only 0.44 percent the size of the actual effect.26
The severe attenuation bias documented here arises from two sources. The first source
reflects a scaling issue that affects interpretation of the estimated impact. Because an individual
borrower either is employed or unemployed, I ijtU in equation (1) takes on values of either 0 or 1.
A unit change represents moving a borrower from a zero chance of being unemployed in a given
time period to a one hundred percent chance of being unemployed. Now, consider aggregating
specification (1) to the metro area level by averaging all of the individual variables by metro area
as given in equation (4).

(4)

D jt   0  1 x jt1  ...   k 1 x jtk 1   k I Ujt    jt ,

where I Ujt is the average of the unemployment indicators across borrowers in metro area j at time
t, with the same notation applying for the other variables. Note that I Ujt in this regression still
ranges from zero to one so that  k , which captures the impact of unemployment on the individual
borrower’s default risk, still is associated with a unit change in the average of the borrower
specific unemployment indicators in the metro area for each time period. In this case, a unit
26

Note that this exercise assumed no measurement error in the negative equity indicator variable. In practice,
measurement error would even further bias downward the estimated interaction effect.

16

change still reflects a one hundred percentage point increase in the likelihood of becoming
unemployed.
Note that the impact researchers typically estimate when they use a market-level
employment rate as a proxy in a specification like that in equation (2) is not that of a 100 percent
change in the unemployment rate. As we have done in the regression underlying Table 1’s
results, standard practice is to scale the proxy variable such that a 5% unemployment rate is
entered as a 5 (not 0.05), so that a one unit change reflects a one percentage point change (say
from 5% to 6% unemployment), not a 100 percentage point change. Rescaling this variable so
that a unit change in it reflects a 100 percentage point change, as with I ijtU or I Ujt , effectively
scales up the coefficients on the unemployment rate proxy reported in Table 1 by 100. In that
case, the 0.00036 coefficient becomes 0.036, which implies a 360 basis point higher default
probability, which is seven times the average monthly default rate and three times the impact of
moving from a higher credit quality FICO score (>680) to a subprime credit quality score
(<580).
That this reflects the impact of unemployment on an individual borrower’s default risk
can be confirmed as follows. First, replace the metro area unemployment rate with the metro
area averages of the unemployment status indicator variable, I Ujt , in the loan level default
regression specification using the simulated default data. In generating the default and
prepayment outcomes in this analysis, recall that the simulated default risk was increased by 645
basis points when a borrower becomes unemployed. Using I Ujt in place of the BLS metro area
unemployment rate yields an estimate for k of 662 basis points (with a standard error of 56
basis points). Similarly, if we regress the individual borrower unemployment status indicators,

17

I ijtU , on the metro area aggregates, I Ujt , the coefficient equals one. That is, there is no attenuation
bias from using I Ujt as a proxy variable for I ijtU . The main effect of switching from the borrowerspecific unemployment indicator, I ijtU , to the metro area average, I Ujt , is to increase the standard
error of the estimate of k .27
While this shows that an unbiased estimate of the impact of unemployment risk on the
probability of default by an individual borrower could be obtained with aggregated micro data on
individual unemployment status if available, the second source of the attenuation bias is that the
metro area unemployment rate, Ujt , an imperfect proxy variable for I Ujt must be used instead.
Measurement error arises because each variable is created from different samples of people.
First, I Ujt is averaged over borrowers (of the specific type of mortgages under study), while Ujt is
averaged over all prime age adults who are participating in the labor market – including both
renters and owners without mortgages who are not included in I Ujt . A second factor is that the
unemployment rate excludes individuals who are classified as being out of the labor force. To
illustrate the differences between the two measures, when we regress I Ujt rescaled by 100 on Ujt
we get a coefficient of 0.23.
This last point suggests one possible strategy to improve the ability to recover the impact
of unemployment on default risk. The monthly Current Population Survey (CPS) is used to
produce the reported unemployment rate, with the survey asking if a household rents or owns
their residence. Using the same CPS data, one could reestimate metro area unemployment rates

27

Using our simulated default data, the standard error increased by a factor of 6.6 (increasing from 0.00085 for the
borrower specific unemployment indicator to 0.0056 for the metro average of the indicators). A related issue is
downward bias to the reported standard errors on group level variables that have been merged into individual level
data if independence is assumed across observations in the same group. See Moulton (1990).

18

restricting attention to homeowners and including all respondents in the denominator. In
addition, if demographic characteristics are available for the targeted set of borrowers under
study, one could tailor the CPS sample to align with those demographic characteristics. The
resulting alternative metro area unemployment rates will likely have a higher correlation with

I Ujt , thereby reducing the second source of attenuation bias.

b. Discussion: Individual Borrower Default Risk
While Table 1’s results indicate that unemployment is an important risk factor, we do not
mean to imply that it is as least five times more influential than having a high versus a low FICO
score. That is literally what one would conclude if those results were taken at face value: the
120 basis point impact of going from a 680+ FICO score to below a 580 FICO score is
approximately one-fifth the 645 basis point impact implied after adjusting column 1’s coefficient
on the metropolitan area unemployment rate variable.
There are a number of factors that lead one to question the precision of the 645 figure, but
none that lead us to conclude that unemployment risk is not at least the equal of FICO score in
importance. Correctly scaling the unemployment rate measure implies a marginal effect for
borrower unemployment that is larger by a factor of 100. This result does not rely on using the
simulated employment histories. However, sizing the remaining attenuation bias from using BLS
metro area unemployment rates likely is sensitive to using simulated versus actual employment
histories. The simulations do not fully account for likely differences in employment dynamics
between owners and renters. Another is that the simulation itself is done using national data,
which means that we must presume the relationship between individual employment status and
the aggregate unemployment rate is the same at the metropolitan area level. That will not be the

19

case for any given MSA, but there also is no reason to presume that our estimate of δ1 is not
informative at all for sub-national populations. Indeed, there is good reason to suspect
significant measurement error at that level, too (and, thus, attenuation bias in the estimation of βk
at the local market level).
It is likely also the case that some of the traditional risk factors included in our estimation
and in most other default models, including FICO score and LTV, are correlated with individual
unemployment risk. If so, some of the impact of the imperfectly controlled for unemployment
risk is being picked up by those other variables.28 That said, there are very strong reasons to
believe this countervailing force is limited. Among them is the fact that even noisy proxies for
unemployment status are statistically significantly correlated with default. In addition, Gyourko
(2011) notes that time dummies for recent years are very influential in predicting default in the
model used by FHA’s actuarial reviewer, which strongly suggests the presence of omitted risk
factors such as unemployment.29
We have also used a simple linear regression framework in this analysis rather than the
more standard hazard model specification. That was done solely for ease in explaining and
adjusting for attenuation bias with our simulation exercise results. In hazard model results not
reported here, we still found than a one percentage point increase in a metropolitan area’s
unemployment rate was associated with about a 6% higher propensity to default, all else
constant. That still is far less of an impact that the change from a high to low FICO score, but it
does indicate that the key issue is not one of functional form. Thus, we find similar impacts of
28

If the unemployment rate is a valid proxy variable for individual borrower unemployment status, then including
the unemployment rate will eliminate this left-out-variable bias. However, some of the explanatory variables that are
U

correlated with I it may also be correlated with the error term in equation (3),

it .

29

FHA’s outsider actuary explicitly controls for FICO and LTV (among many other variables), so if they did largely
capture unemployment risk because they were strongly correlated with unemployment status, the year dummies
would not be influential predictors of default unless there are other important left-out variables in addition to the
borrower unemployment status that vary by year.

20

noisy proxies for individual employment status in both linear probability and hazard
specifications. We also strongly suspect that we would find similar attenuation bias in both
settings.
In sum, we believe that the prudent way to interpret our findings is that unemployment
risk is likely a very important factor in explaining default, quite plausibly more influential than
other well-known risk factors such as borrower FICO score and the loan-to-value ratio.

c. Discussion: Portfolio-Level Default Risk
While use of the market-level proxy for individual borrower unemployment status clearly
leads to gross error in predicting default behavior for specific borrowers, it still could be useful
in an important policy sense if it helps the FHA generate more reliable forecasts of future default
risk in its overall portfolio. Attenuation bias does not preclude that. If the proxy is positively
correlated with individual unemployment status, as we have shown above is the case, then
including it can help produce an unbiased forecast of the mean future default risk under certain
conditions.
To better understand this, consider forecasting the average default rate for a portfolio of
active FHA mortgages for a given date t, where we denote this average default rate by Dt . To
simplify the discussion further, assume that the borrower-specific unemployment status variable
is uncorrelated with the other explanatory variables in the default model. In that case, averaging
across individuals and metro areas the actual portfolio default rate would give the following.

(5)

D t   0  1 x1t  ...   k 1 x k 1t   k I Ut   t

21

If no proxy variable is used for I Ut in the estimation of equation (5), then the predicted
portfolio default rate would be given by equation (6).

Dˆ t  ˆ0  ˆ1 x1t  ...  ˆk 1 x k 1t

(6)

Given our assumptions, the expected value for the difference between the actual and predicted
portfolio default rates is  k I Ut   t . Note further that adding time fixed effects in the form of
year dummies to the specification that includes no proxy variable would absorb the uncontrolled
for unemployment risk. In that case, letting t=0 denote the omitted time period, the expected
value for the estimated year effect associated with period t would be  k ( I Ut  I U0 )  (  t    0 ) . If
the labor market worsened between these two periods, this year effect would likely be positive.
Thus, adding year effects allows the model to capture within sample the differences in the mean
default rates across years for the portfolio, given our assumptions.30 However, this presents a
problem when forecasting future portfolio default rates in that an assumption must be made in
terms of future year effects.
Now consider adding the unemployment rate as a proxy variable and re-estimating the
portfolio default risk. Here, we make the assumption that the unemployment rate is a valid proxy
variable so that the other explanatory variables in (1) are uncorrelated with ijt . In this case, the
portfolio default risk is given by equation (7).

(7)

Dt  0  1 x1t  ...   k 1 x k 1t  kU t + t +t .

30

If we relax the assumption that the borrower specific unemployment indicator is uncorrelated with the other
control variables, then some of the impact from the average incidence of unemployment will be captured through the
other variables.

22

Given our assumptions, OLS will give unbiased coefficient estimates so that the expected value
of the difference between the actual and predicted yearly portfolio default rates will be
( t    0 )  ( t   0 ) . In this case, year effects, if added to the specification would reflect
only the residual unemployment risk. In addition to controlling for any left-out-variable bias on
the coefficients of the other explanatory variables, adding the proxy variable improves the ability
to estimate the aggregate default risk in a portfolio.31 Importantly, forecasts of future portfolio
default rates can incorporate a projected value for the unemployment rate instead of assuming a
value for a future year effect.
However, the reliability of that forecast depends upon the strength of the relationship
between the market unemployment rate proxy and individual unemployment status, not just its
existence. Ohtani (1981) shows that the forecast mean square error (MSE) can be higher when
including the proxy, as compared to leaving it out of the prediction specification, when the
partial correlation between the missing variable and its proxy is weak enough.32 Unfortunately,
our case appears to be one in which there may be no improvement in the reliability of the
portfolio-level forecast from including a market-level rate to proxy for individual borrower
unemployment status.
We explore this issue using our simulated default data. Consider first the specification
that included both origination year vintage effects as well as year effects. We can estimate this
model using the unemployment indicator, the unemployment rate and dropping both. The square

31

This is an improvement over the specification that omits the proxy variable but includes year effects in that it is
more straight forward to construct an out-of-sample forecast. A forecast using the specification with the proxy
variable requires a forecast for the unemployment rate. However, it is less clear what to do with the time effects in
the specification that omits the proxy variable.
32
Specifically, the condition for the MSE when using the proxy variable to be lower than the MSE when the proxy
variable is omitted is that the square of the t-statistic on the unobserved variable times the square of the partial
correlation coefficient between the unobserved variable and the proxy variable given the other control variables
must exceed one (Ohtani (1981), page 627 equation (8)).

23

root of the mean square error (root MSE) from the model with the unemployment indicator is
0.0758. For this specification, we find that including the proxy variable does not change the root
MSE from the specification that omits the proxy – both generate a higher root MSE of 0.0769.
Not having the borrower-specific unemployment indicator increases the root MSE by 11 basis
points relative to the average monthly default risk of 50 basis points. This conclusion is only
reinforced if the relationship between the aggregate unemployment rate and individual
unemployment status changes over time. Recent declines in the labor force participation rate
suggest this may be the case over the recent period.
The only solution to this problem is better data. An improved proxy is needed which will
covary more strongly with the average of the individual borrowers unemployment status. One
can imagine such variables being created—perhaps, as discussed earlier, an unemployment rate
series for homeowners (or FHA borrowers) and at the metropolitan area level. Alternatively,
borrower employment status could be merged from state unemployment insurance records to
mortgage servicing records if confidentiality concerns could be addressed.
In language borrowed from an entirely different context, this means that the question of
how much aggregate portfolio default risk truly is affected by borrower unemployment status
will remain a ‘known unknown’ over any reasonable horizon. The likely correlation between the
market-level unemployment rate and individual borrower unemployment status is so weak that
including the proxy variable does not improve the reliability of the portfolio-level default
forecast. Thus, while we can address the academically interesting puzzle of why theory and
empirics diverge on the importance of borrower unemployment status in accounting for
individual default behavior, that does not solve the policy need to be able to control for

24

unemployment risk empirically in a way that helps policy makers pin down its likely influence
on portfolio-level default risk.

V.

Conclusions

Economic theory and empirical practice regarding the estimation of default vary greatly
in their treatment of unemployment risk. While the former assigns a large role for income loss
associated with unemployment and other negative labor market shocks through the so-called
double trigger hypothesis, empirical models of default used by academics and FHA’s outside
actuarial reviewer find only a minor influence, at best, associated with unemployment rates.
Pinning down the impact of unemployment on default risk is hard because a noisy proxy for
individual borrower unemployment status must be used in any such estimation. Of course, that
only implies that the results of such an exercise are a lower bound on the true influence of
unemployment because of attenuation bias, not that unemployment risk is small or nonexistent.
That argues for developing credible ways to try to recover the true impact of this factor, not
simply taking at face value estimates suffering from severe attenuation bias.
We suggest a new empirical approach to better gauge the likely impact of unemployment
risk on borrower default. A simulation exercise using national data on labor market transitions
into and out of work yields two noteworthy results: (a) it closely matches the BLS’s national
unemployment rate over time; and (b) it confirms that the aggregate unemployment rate is a very
noisy proxy for individual employment status. We use a statistical measure of just how noisy
that relationship is to recover the ‘true’ impact of aggregate unemployment on borrower default.
Those results imply that unemployment has a powerful influence on default behavior. A large
component of the attenuation bias is due to a scaling issue so that even if one ignored the second

25

source of attenuation bias, unemployment is a key default risk factor. While our analysis helps
reconcile the difference between theory and empirics on the role of borrower unemployment
status on individual default behavior, that insight does not translate into more reliable forecasts
of default risk at the portfolio level for entities such as FHA. Under certain conditions, a proxy
will help generate unbiased forecasts of portfolio risk, but the precision of those estimates may
still be very low. Unfortunately, that is likely the case here, so we cannot be confident that
including the market unemployment rate helps generate more reliable forecasts of aggregate
default risk in the FHA guarantee portfolio. Solving the problem requires better data, which
almost certainly involves significant effort should policy makers decide that more reliable
forecasts of FHA default risks are necessary.

26

References
Aragon, Diego, Andrew Caplin, Sumit Chopra, John V. Leahy, Marco Scoffier, and Joseph
Tracy. "Reassessing FHA Risk." Working Paper No. 15802. National Bureau of
Economic Research, March, 2010. http://www.nber.org/papers/w15802.pdf.
Bradley, Michael G., Amy Crews Cutts, Biplab K. Gosh, and Wei Liu. "Uncovering the Risks of
Strategic Default." Working Paper. CoreLogic, 2012.
------, Amy Crews Cutts, and Wei Liu. "Strategic Mortgage Default: The Effect of Neighborhood
Factors." Working Paper. CoreLogic, January, 2013.
Caplin, Andrew, Anna Cororaton, and Joseph Tracy. "Is the FHA Creating Sustainable
Homeownership?" NBER Working Paper No. 18190, June, 2012.
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18190.
------, Charles Freeman, and Joseph Tracy. "Collateral Damage: Refinancing Constraints and
Regional Recessions." Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 29 (November 1997): 496516.
Deng, Yongheng, John M. Quigley, and Robert van Order. "Mortgage Terminations,
Heterogeneity and the Exercise of Mortgage Options." Econometrica 68 (March 2000):
275-307.
Elul, Ronel, Nicholas S. Souleles, Chormsisengphet Souphala, Dennis Glennon, and Robert
Hunt. "What 'Triggers' Mortgage Default?" American Economic Review 100 (May 2010):
490-94.
Ferreira, Fernando, Joseph Gyourko, and Joseph Tracy. "Housing Busts and Household
Mobility." Journal of Urban Economics 68 (July 2010): 34-45.
------, Joseph Gyourko, and Joseph Tracy. "Housing Busts and Household Mobility: An Update."
Economic Policy Review 18 (November 2012): 1-15.
Foote, Chris, Kristopher Gerardi, Lorenz Goote, and Paul Willen. "Reducing Foreclosures: No
Easy Answers." In NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2009, 89-138. Chicago and London,
University of Chicago Press, 2010.
Foote, Christopher L., Kristopher Gerardi, and Paul S. Willen. "Negative Equity and
Foreclosure: Theory and Evidence." Journal of Urban Economics 6 (September 2008):
234-245.
Foster, Chester, and Robert van Order. "An Option-Based Model of Mortgage Default." Housing
Finance Review 3 (October 1984): 351-372.

27

Frazis, Harley J., Edwin L. Robison, Thomas D. Evans, and Martha A. Duff. "Estimating Gross
Flows Consistent With Stocks in the CPS." Monthly Labor Review, September 2005, 3-9.
Gerardi, Kristopher, Adam Hale Shapiro, and Paul S. Willen. "Subprime Outcomes: Risky
Mortgages, Homeownership Experiences, and Foreclosures." Working Paper No. 07-15.
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, December, 2007.
Ghent, Andra C., and Marianna Kudlyak. "Recourse and Residential Mortgage Default: Theory
and Evidence from U.S. States." Working Paper No. 09-10. Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond, July, 2009.
Gyourko, Joseph. Is FHA the Next Housing Bailout? A Report Prepared for the American
Enterprise Institute, 2011.
Haughwout, Andrew, Ebiere Okah and Joseph Tracy. “Second Chances, Subprime Mortgage
Modifications and Re-Default”, Staff Report No. 417, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, August 2010.
Integrated Financial Engineering, Inc. Actuarial Review of the Federal Housing Administration
Mutual Mortgage Insurance Fund for Fiscal Year 2008. Prepared for U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development. Washington, DC, October 13, 2008.
------. Actuarial Review of the Federal Housing Administration Mutual Mortgage Insurance
Fund Forward Loans for Fiscal Year 2011. Prepared for U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development. Washington, DC, October 12, 2011.
____. Actuarial Review of the Federal Housing Administration Mutual Mortgage Insurance
Fund for Fiscal Year 2012. Prepared for the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development. Washington, D.C., November 5, 2012.
Kau, James, Donald Keenan, and Taewon Kim. "Default Probabilities for Mortgages." Journal
of Urban Economics 35 (May 1994): 278-296.
Moulton, Brent R., “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate Variables
on Micro Units.” Review of Economics and Statistics 72, no. 2, (May 1990): 334-338.
Vandell, Kerry D. "How Ruthless Is Mortgage Default? A Review and Synthesis of the
Evidence." Journal of Housing Research 6, no. 2 (1995): 245-264.

28

Figure 1: Labor Market Transition Rates
ee

Employed
eu

ne
ue

Unemployed

en
un

Non-participant

nu
uu

nn

29

Figure 2: Actual and Simulated Unemployment Rates
12.0

10.0

8.0

6.0

4.0

BLS

Simulated

2007

2008

2.0

0.0
2005

2006

2009

2010

2011

2012

Note: BLS non-seasonally adjusted national unemployment rate for individuals 16 year or older.
Simulated unemployment rate based on BLS published monthly non-seasonally adjusted transition rates
from February 1990 to October 2012 and 150,000 simulated individual histories.

30

Table 1. LPM Default Regressions
Variable
Unemployment rate
Current loan-to-value (LTV):
80 – 99
100 -- 119
120+
Missing
Credit score (FICO):
<579
580 – 679
Missing
Not fully documented
Not purchase mortgage
Not 30-year term
Not single family residence
Recourse state
Judicial foreclosure state

(1)
0.00036**
(0.0001)

(2)
0.00063**
(0.0001)

0.0016**
(0.0002)
0.0038**
(0.0003)
0.0105**
(0.0008)
0.0021**
(0.0005)

0.0016**
(0.0002)
0.0036**
(0.0002)
0.0100**
(0.0009)
0.0022**
(0.0005)

0.0120**
(0.0004)
0.0049**
(0.0002)
0.0036**
(0.0002)
–0.0008**
(0.0001)
0.0015**
(0.0002)
–0.0016**
(0.0002)
–0.0002*
(0.0001)
0.0000
(0.0004)
–0.0003**
(0.0003)

0.0119**
(0.0004)
0.0049**
(0.0002)
0.0036**
(0.0002)
–0.0007**
(0.0001)
0.0015**
(0.0002)
–0.0015**
(0.0003)
–0.0003**
(0.0001)
–0.0003
(0.0007)
–0.0006
(0.0002)

Fixed effects included:
Vintage year of origination
Y
Y
Year
Y
Y
MSA
N
Y
Notes: Coefficients represent the average change in the monthly default risk for a unit change
in the indicated variable. Standard errors are given in parenthesis and are clustered at the MSA
level. Mean monthly default risk is 0.0054. Sample is restricted to the top-50 metropolitan
areas. Sample size is 3,238,458.
** significant at the 5% level, * significant at the 10% level

31

Appendix Table A1. Top 50 MSA List
1. Albuquerque, NM (10740)
2. Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta, GA (12060)
3. Austin-Round Rock, TX (12420)
4. Baltimore-Towson, MD (12580)
5. Birmingham-Hoover, AL (13820)
6. Buffalo-Niagara Falls, NY (15380)
7. Charlotte-Gastonia-Concord-Rock Hill, NC-SC (16740)
8. Cincinnati-Middletown, OH-KY-IN (17140)
9. Clarksville, TN-KY (17300)
10. Cleveland-Elyria-Mentor, OH (17460)
11. Colorado Springs, CO (17820)
12. Columbia, SC (17900)
13. Columbus, OH (18140)
14. Dayton, OH (19380)
15. Denver-Aurora, CO (19740)
16. Fayetteville, NC (22180)
17. Hartford-CT (25540)
18. Houston-Sugar Land-Baytown, TX (26420)
19. Indianapolis-Carmel, IN (26900)
20. Jacksonville, FL (27260)
21. Kansas City, MO-KS (28140)
22. Killeen-Temple-Fort Hood, TX (28660)
23. Las Vegas-Paradise, NV (29820)
24. Little Rock, AR (30780)
25. Louisville-Jefferson County, KY-IN (31140)

26. Memphis, TN-MS-AR (32820)
27. Milwaukee-Waukesha-West Allis, WI (33340)
28. Minneapolis-St Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI (33460)
29. Nashville-Davidson-Murfreesboro-Franklin, TN (34980)
30. Ogden-Clearfield, UT (36260)
31. Oklahoma City, OK (36420)
32. Omaha-Council Bluffs, NE-IA (36540)
33. Orlando-Kissimmee, FL (36740)
34. Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, AZ (38060)
35. Pittsburgh, PA (38300)
36. Portland-Vancouver-Beaverton, OR-WA (38900)
37. Raleigh-Cary, NC (39580)
38. Richmond, VA (40060)
39. Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA (40140)
40. Rochester, NY (40380)
41. Sacramento-Arden-Arcade-Roseville, CA (40900)
42. Saint Louis, MO-IL (41180)
43. Salt Lake City, UT (41620)
44. San Antonio, TX (41700)
45. San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos, CA (41740)
46. Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL (45300)
47. Tucson, AZ (46060)
48. Tulsa, OK (46140)
49. Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News, VA-NC (47260)
50. Wichita, KS (48620)

32

Appendix Table A2. LPM Prepayment Regression
Variable
Unemployment rate
Current loan-to-value (LTV):
80 – 99
100 -- 119
120+
Missing
Credit score (FICO):
<579
580 – 679
Missing
Not fully documented
Not purchase mortgage
Not 30-year term
Not single family residence
Recourse state
Judicial foreclosure state
Refinance incentive

(1)
−0.0004
(0.0002)
−0.0022**
(0.0004)
−0.0003
(0.0005)
0.0013
(0.0011)
−0.0002
(0.0006)
−0.0055**
(0.0005)
−0.0030**
(0.0001)
−0.0018**
(0.0002)
0.0007**
(0.0002)
0.0021**
(0.0002)
−0.0011**
(0.0004)
–0.0003
(0.0004)
−0.0022*
(0.0010)
–0.0011
(0.0010)
0.0089**
(0.0009)

Fixed effects included:
Vintage year of origination
Y
Year
Y
MSA
N
Notes: Coefficients represent the average change in the monthly prepayment risk for a unit
change in the indicated variable. Standard errors are given in parenthesis and are clustered
at the MSA level. Mean monthly prepayment risk is 0.0087. Sample is restricted to the
top-50 metropolitan areas. Sample size is 3,238,458.
** significant at the 5% level, * significant at the 10% level

33

Appendix Table A3. Summary Statistics for regression covariates
Variable
Unemployment Rate

Mean
8.073

Standard
Deviation
2.396

Current loan-to-value
(LTV):
80 – 99

0.554

0.497

0

1

100 – 119

0.331

0.471

0

1

120+

0.034

0.182

0

1

Missing

0.0162

0.126

0

1

0.047

0.211

0

1

580 – 679

0.410

0.492

0

1

Missing

0.132

0.339

0

1

Not full documented

0.521

0.500

0

1

Not purchase loan

0.393

0.488

0

1

Not 30-year term

0.044

0.205

0

1

Not single family residence

0.235

0.424

0

1

Refinance incentive

0.592

0.599

0

3.9

Credit Score (FICO):
< 579

Minimum
2.2

Maximum
15

34

