                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               TRICKLE-DOWN CONSUMPTION

                                         Marianne Bertrand
                                           Adair Morse

                                        Working Paper 18883
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18883


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2013




We thank Chris Carroll, Ulrike Malmendier, and Jonathan Parker for helpful comments. We also would
like to thank seminar participants at the AEA, NBER Economics of Household Savings, Chicago Booth,
Harvard University, Harvard Business School, Princeton University, EIEF, University of California
at Berkeley - Haas, Northwestern - Kellogg, NBER Summer Monetary Economics, and UC Davis
Household Finance Conference for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Marianne Bertrand and Adair Morse. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Trickle-Down Consumption
Marianne Bertrand and Adair Morse
NBER Working Paper No. 18883
March 2013
JEL No. D1,E21

                                                 ABSTRACT

Have rising income and consumption at the top of income distribution since the early 1980s induced
households in the lower tiers of the distribution to consume a larger share of their income? Using state-
year variation in income level and consumption in the top first quintile or decile of the income distribution,
we find evidence for such “trickle-down consumption.” The magnitude of effect suggests that middle
income households would have saved between 2.6 and 3.2 percent more by the mid-2000s had incomes
at the top grown at the same rate as median income. Additional tests argue against permanent income,
upwardly-biased expectations of future income, home equity effects and upward price pressures as
the sole explanations for this finding. Instead, we show that middle income households’ consumption
of more income elastic and more visible goods and services appear particularly responsive to top income
levels, consistent with supply-driven demand and status-driven explanations for our primary finding.
Non-rich households exposed to higher top income levels self-report more financial duress; moreover,
higher top income levels are predictive of more personal bankruptcy filings. Finally, focusing on housing
credit legislation, we suggest that the political process may have internalized and facilitated such trickle-down.


Marianne Bertrand
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
marianne.bertrand@chicagobooth.edu

Adair Morse
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
amorse@chicagobooth.edu
I. Introduction


        Since the early 1980s, real incomes in the lower and middle parts of the U.S. income
distribution have risen much more slowly than those in the upper part of the distribution (see
Goldin and Katz (2007), Autor, Katz and Kearney (2008) and Piketty and Saez (2003), among
others). While this growing income inequality has coincided with increased sorting of
households by income level across cities and states (Moretti (2012), Diamond (2013)), inequality
has also risen within geographic markets (see Appendix Table A1). This implies that the median
household within a market, whose real income has been essentially stagnant since the mid-1980s,
has been increasingly exposed to some rich or very rich co-residents.
        In this paper, we start by documenting that the growing local inequality in the United
States has been systematically associated with a change in observed consumption for the median
household. Specifically, using the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX), we construct a micro,
cross-sectional dataset of households’ consumption for the period 1980 to 2008. We merge this
dataset to state-year level income distribution data from the March Current Population Surveys
(CPS). Exploiting within state and year variation in the income and consumption of households
in the upper part (top quintile or top decile) of the income distribution, we show that middle
income households consume a larger share of their current income when exposed to higher upper
income and consumption.1 This association is robust and economically meaningful. A 10 percent
rise in the 90th (80th) percentile of the income distribution within a state increases consumption
among middle income households within that state by 2.2 (2.8) percent, holding those middle
income households’ own income constant.
        In a second step, we investigate both traditional and more behavioral explanations for this
primary finding. The first traditional explanation we consider is Friedman (1957)’s permanent
income hypothesis. Specifically, we consider the possibility that rising upper income (and
consumption) in a given state-year is predictive of faster future income growth lower down in the
income distribution in the same state. Maybe the non-rich are consuming more out of disposable
income today in those state-years where the rich are richer because they rationally expect their
future income to rise. Using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), we fail to find support

1
  We define middle income household as households whose income between the 20 th and 80th percentile of the income
distribution in their state-year cell.


                                                            1
for this explanation. Holding own current household income constant, rising top income levels in
a state do not predict higher future income for non-rich households.
         In the PSID, we also find no support for the view that rising top income levels in a state
are predictive of more stable future income for non-rich households in that state, contrary to what
one would have expected under a precautionary saving motive explanation for our primary
finding (Carroll, 1992).
         We next consider the possibility that wealth effects are driving our preliminary finding.
The housing boom that characterized the second half, and particularly last third, of the period
under study may have encouraged households with growing net wealth to save less out of current
disposable income (Mian and Sufi, 2011). If house prices grew more quickly in markets with
rapidly-rising top incomes (as suggested by Matlack and Vigdor, 2008), our primary finding
might simply be capturing such wealth effects. Yet, contrary to this being the key explanation for
our primary finding, we find that rising top income levels are associated with higher
consumption out of current income not only for home owners but also for renters, even though
the effect appears somewhat larger for home owners. Moreover, our primary finding holds in two
subsamples of the data that were not or less exposed to the housing boom: the first half of the
sample period (1980-1995) and the subset of states where housing supply is more elastic (Saiz,
2010).
         Having failed to find much support for those traditional explanations, we then turn to
more behavioral explanations. First, while we do not see that rising top income levels in a state
are predictive of faster future income growth for middle income households in that state, it is
possible that middle income households have unduly optimistic expectations about their future
income growth when they see some of their co-residents getting richer. To test for this
possibility, we use micro data from the University of Michigan’s Surveys of Consumers. We fail
to find any evidence that non-rich households’ expectations about future income are positively
affected by increases in the income of the upper decile or upper quintile in their state.
         If middle income households have strong consumption habits, or if there are important
rigidities inherent in the consumption of many goods and services in their consumption portfolio
(Chetty and Szeidl, 2007), they may end up spending more out of their disposable income if the
local prices of the goods and services they are “committed to” go up. If rising top income levels
in a state are associated with rising local prices, such stickiness in middle income households’

                                                      2
consumption portfolio may lead to higher spending out of current disposable income. We do find
a positive and significant relationship between top income levels in a state and the local
Consumer Price Index (CPI). However, controlling for the local CPI does not qualitatively affect
the primary relationship we had uncovered between middle-income households’ consumption
and top income levels.
       We then consider two remaining behavioral explanations for our primary finding. First is
the possibility that higher top income levels in a market increases the supply of “rich” goods
within this market. Such positive local shocks to the supply of “rich” goods might induce the
non-rich to demand and consume more of these goods. The non-rich might then end up spending
more out of current income if this increased consumption of “rich” good happens without fully
scaling back on the consumption of other goods. A second possibility is that social comparisons
(Veblen (1899), Duesenberry (1949)) may explain part of primary finding. While this relative
income hypothesis has been mainly formulated and tested in the context of social comparisons to
the “Jones” (see for example, Luttmer (2005)), Frank et al. (2010) propose a variant of this
relative income model where a given household’s consumption is directly positively affected by
the consumption of the households whose permanent income is just above theirs, generating
what they label as “expenditure cascades”. Expenditure cascades result in a negative relationship
between income inequality and the savings rate of middle-income households. We test for these
explanations by studying whether the sensitivity of budget shares to top income levels varies in a
systematic way with the income elasticity or visibility of the expenditure categories. We find
evidence consistent with both explanations, even though the patterns appear more robust for the
“supply-driven demand” channel than for the “conspicuous consumption” channel.
       To get a better sense of the magnitude of the effects, we perform a simple counterfactual
exercise. We ask by how much would have middle income households’ consumption-out-of-
current-income gone down, and hence middle income households’ saving rate gone up, had the
income levels at the top grown at the same rate as income levels at the median of the distribution
since the beginning of our sample period. We estimate that, by 2005, middle income household
would have consumed between 2.6 and 3.2 percent less had income levels at the top grown at the
same rate as income levels at the median since the beginning of the sample period; this
corresponds to between $1271 and $1571 less in consumption in 2005 for middle-income
households. We argue that this might explain a small, but non-trivial part of the decline in the

                                                    3
aggregate personal savings rate. As is well known, macroeconomic data reveals a steady decline
in the personal saving rate from the early 1980s to until about the beginning of the Great
Recession. Series from the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPAs) show that the
personal savings rate dropped from about 10 percent of disposable income in the early 1980s to
about 1.5 percent in 2005. A back-of-the envelope analysis suggests that, under the
counterfactual, the aggregate personal savings rate would have between 2.6 and 2.8 percent in
2005. We also argue that the magnitudes of effect we estimate are not inconsistent with the latest
work on the relative rise in income and consumption inequality (Aguiar and Bils (2012) and
Attanasio et. al. (2013)).
       The final topic we address relates to the credit environment that may have facilitated the
behavioral consumption response we have isolated. There is now ample evidence that the period
under study, covering the early 1980s to the onset of the financial crisis and the Great Recession,
was a period of rapid expansion of credit supply, not just because of the housing boom in the
later part of the period, but also because of financial innovation and financial liberalization
(White (2007); Dynan and Kohn (2007); Mian and Sufi (2009)). We provide indirect evidence
in support of the hypothesis that middle income households may have relied on this easier credit
and thus stretched their personal finances to “keep up” with their richer co-residents. In the
Consumer Sentiment Survey data, we show that more non-rich households report being
financially worse off the current year compared to last year when exposed to higher top income
levels in their state. Also, in the same spirit as Frank et al. (2010), we show, in a state-year panel,
that there is positive relationship between the number of personal bankruptcy filings and lagged
top income levels.
       Finally, we conjecture, with some suggestive evidence, that the political process may
have internalized the trickle-down pressures and responded to these pressures by further easing
access to credit, as argued by Rajan (2010). Specifically, we study voting patterns on the Federal
Housing Enterprise Safety and Soundness Act (H.R. 5334) which Congress passed in 1992.
Among other things, this Act mandated that HUD set specific affordable housing goals for
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, opening up the credit supply. While essentially all Democrats
voted in favor of this bill, voting was more divided among Republicans. We find that Republican
Congressmen that represented districts with a larger income gap between the 80th percentile-
household and the median household were more likely to vote in favor of H.R. 5334.

                                                      4
         The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Our CEX dataset is presented is Section II.
Section III reports our primary finding of a positive relationship between non-rich consumption
and income or consumption in the upper part of the local income distribution. Section IV
investigates traditional explanations for this primary finding, while Section V investigates more
behavioral explanations. Section VI provides some counterfactual analysis and discussion of
magnitude of effects. Section VII discusses the relationship between top income levels and the
use and supply of credit. We conclude in Section VIII.


II. Data: Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) Sample
         Our primary data source is the Interview Survey of the Consumer Expenditure Survey
(CEX) of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). We measure consumption in the 1980-2008
annual expenditure data of the CEX, reflecting four quarters of surveying for a given household.
We exclude households who fail to complete all four surveys, except in 2008 (the end of our
sample), where we annualize answers for respondents truncated two quarters because of the end
date of our sample.
         We exclude the purchasing and selling of homes and vehicles; instead, following Cutler
and Katz (1991), Chetty and Szeidl (2007) and Meyer and Sullivan (2010), our annual
consumption measures for shelter and vehicle are rental equivalences of how much service flow
of these items a given household decides to consume.2 In particular, annual shelter consumption
is constructed as follows. For renters, we use rent paid; for homeowners, we use the sum of
mortgage payments, property taxes and home repair.3 For vehicles, we closely follow the method
of Meyer and Sullivan (2010) by using the CEX asset data to infer rental equivalence
consumption in vehicles. The CEX asset data records the year, make, and model of each
household’s car(s). From this, we calculate rental service flows of car consumption using an
accelerated depreciation metric. For households with no vehicles, we assign a value of zero.4

2
  We also exclude savings deposit outflows and gifts.
3
  While others (see for example Charles, Hurst and Roussanov (2009)) have instead used the rental equivalence in the CEX or
inferred rental equivalences form the CEX asset data, we do not use this approach for housing consumption as it results in many
missing values, especially in the earlier years of our sample. The difference between this alternative measure and our current
consumption flow measure will be largest for long-time homeowners; specifically, our method will underestimate housing
consumption for those who have paid off their mortgages, primarily retirees. Our results hold if we impose an age threshold.
4
  The CEX records purchase prices of cars only if a household buys a car in that year. Like Meyer and Sullivan, we collect
original purchases prices of specific makes and models using all purchases in the CEX for the same car. We then apply these
values to individuals who own that car but were not surveyed in the purchase years. We fill in missing price information using
blue books and dealer guides. We then compute the service flow using the guidelines from Kelley Blue Book that a depreciation


                                                                   5
          While the first part of our analysis below will focus on total consumption, we later
present results where we break down total consumption into more and less visible categories, or
more and less income elastic categories. To do this, we rely on twenty-nine consumption
categories following Harris and Sabelhaus (2000) and Heffetz (2011) classifications.5 Following
Aguiar and Bils (2012), we drop households whose consumption in any of these twenty-nine
categories (other than food and shelter) is greater than one-half of total consumption for the year.
          Also available in the CEX are households’ demographic characteristics and income
during the first and last survey quarters, as well as during the middle quarters if a household
reports that changes in these demographics or income have occurred. The income variable in the
CEX (FINCBTAX) includes wage income, income from businesses, transfers, dividends,
interest, alimony, child care, veteran’s benefits, benefits from social security and other retirement
plans, and workers’ compensation. We define a household’s total annual income as the average
of income across the quarters with non-missing income data. We drop households with zero
total income.
          Our empirical design calls for measuring income distribution in each geographic unit-
year cells, and in particular top income levels in each of those cells. The smallest geographic unit
identifiable in the CEX is the state.6 While income distribution by state and year can be
constructed within the CEX, we instead use the much larger March Current Population Survey
(CPS). Specifically, we start from the full March CPS samples which include all households,
including those without labor force participants; we place no restrictions on age of household
head, armed force membership or group living but exclude households with any allocated
income variables. We define a given household’s income as the sum of total money income for
all adult household members. Total money income in the CPS includes income from business,


rate is applied each year at the then-valued value of the car, more along the lines of double-declining balance accounting rather
than straight line accounting. This depreciation rate varies by car type. To make sure we capture purchase decisions, we apply the
upper end of the estimates, which report that 15-25% of a car’s value is lost in the first year of ownership. For example,
consumption from $20,000 new car would be $5,000 the first year (=20,000*0.25) and $3,750 the second year (=(20,000-
5,000)*0.25).
5
  Harris and Sabelhaus (2000) assign just over 100 classifications to the UCC codes in the CEX. Hefftez (2011) collapses these
to 31 categories. We collapse Heffetz’s underwear category into clothes, air travel and hotels into travel, cars and car repair into
vehicle, bus fares and gasoline into local transport, and three non-health insurances into one. We split out appliances from
furniture, health insurance from health, recreational vehicles from recreation, home maintenance from home additions.
6
  Our CEX sample only covers 44 states plus the District of Columbia. The CEX does not sample from all states, and state
identifiers from sparsely-sampled states are not included. We are missing Mississippi, Montana, New Mexico, North Dakota,
South Dakota, and Wyoming.




                                                                      6
farm rent and government transfers, in addition to wage income. We then compute percentiles of
the household income distribution in each state-year cell using the household weights provided
in the CPS.
       Since our study concerns the consumption of the non-rich, we drop from the CEX sample
all households whose total income is above the 80th percentile in their state-year cell. We will use
the CPS measures of income at the 80th (or 90th percentile) as one of the key dependent variables
in the analysis below. We also compute average annual total consumption among households in
the CEX that are above the 80th (or 90th percentile) of the income distribution in their state-year
cell as an alternative dependent variable. From now on, for simplicity, we will refer to those
households below the 80th percentile in their state-year cell as “non-rich” households; we will
refer to households between the 20th and 80th percentile in their state-year cell as “middle
income” and those below the 20th percentile as “low income.” We will refer to those households
above the 80th (90th) percentile as “rich” (“very rich”) households.
       Panel A of Appendix Table 1 reports consumption, income and demographic
characteristics for our final CEX sample of non-rich households. Consumption and income data
are deflated to 1999 using the CPI deflator from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. All statistics are
weighted using the CEX-provided weights. The average head of household in our samples is 49
years old. About 83 percent of the households’ heads are white, 55 percent are male and 21
percent have a bachelor or graduate degree. The average household contains 1.83 adults, .67
children and has an income of $31,601.
       Panel B of Appendix Table 1 reports half-decade log income thresholds for the 20th, 50th,
80th, 90th, and 95th percentiles of the state income distribution in our CEX sample, as well as half-
decade averages of the logarithm of CEX consumption for the rich and very rich, as defined
above. As well established in the prior literature, median household income levels have been
stagnating over the period under study, growing only by .02 log points between the second half
of the 1980s and the second half of the 2000s. Incomes at the top of the distribution have been
growing steadily, except for an apparent slowdown at the onset of the financial crisis. Average
household income at the 80th percentile grew by .16 log points between the first half of the 1980s
and the first half of the 2000s; average household income at the 90th percentile grew by close to
.23 log points over the same period. The remaining columns of Panel B show similar growth in
both rich and non-rich consumption, even though at a smaller rate than income growth. As we

                                                     7
discussed below, Aguiar and Bils (2012) show some systematic and growing overtime under-
reporting of consumption in the CEX among top income households. So, it is likely that the level
and growth of Log(ConsumptionofRich) and Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich) reported in
Appendix Table 1 are biased downwards.


III. Relationship between Non-Rich Consumption and Rich Consumption and Income
III.A. Empirical Methodology
        Our research goal is to ask whether, holding their income constant, non-rich households
spend more when exposed to higher consumption in the upper quintile or decile of their market.
We first estimate the following OLS specification in the CEX sample of non-rich households:


         Log (Consumption)ist  Log (ConsumptionofRich) st  Household controlsist
          Household Income dummiesist  States  Yeart   ist ,                                           (1)


where i indexes households, s indexes states and t indexes years. The dependent variable is the
logarithm of total consumption for a given household in a given state and year. The key
independent variable in equation (1) is the logarithm of average consumption among rich
households in the same geography and time. Because of small sample sizes in some state-year
cells, we compute Log(ConsumptionofRich) based on all rich households in a state in the current
year (t) and the prior two years (t-1 and t-2). This 3-year averaging also allows us to account for
what might be a realistic delay in the trickling-down of consumption from the rich to the non-
rich.7 To account for systematic differences in consumption level across different types of
households, we control for a battery of household socio-demographic characteristics. These
include: household head’s gender, 7 household head’s education categories, 5 household head’s
race categories, a quadratic in household head’s age, indicator variables for the number of adults
in the household, and indicator variables for the number of children in the household. Most
importantly, we control in a very flexible way for household income: we include indicator
variables for every $2,000 buckets of disposable income. We also include state dummies to
capture any fixed differences across states in the consumption of the non-rich, and year dummies

7
  We replicated the analysis in Table 1 using only the current year to define Log(ConsumptionofRich). The results are
qualitatively similar but smaller in magnitude, as one might have expected due to attenuation bias.


                                                              8
to capture aggregate changes over time in the consumption of non-rich. All observations in
equation (1) are weighted by year CEX population weights. Also, standard errors are clustered
at the state-level.
         The econometric specification described under equation (1) is subject to several concerns.
First, it is possible that unobserved state-year shocks may induce correlated patterns of
consumption between the rich and the non-rich. For example, households in a given state, both
rich and non-rich, may have correlated tastes for high-end technology goods; thus both rich and
non-rich may be more likely to buy, say, the latest generation i-Pad or i-Phone when they are
released for distribution. A second concern relates to measurement issues with the CEX. As
indicated above, prior research has demonstrated that the CEX especially underestimates
consumption among richer households, and increasingly so over time (Garner et al (2006);
Aguiar and Bils, (2012)). One way to address both of these concerns is to directly use variation
in the income of the rich, rather than variation in the consumption of the rich, as our key
independent variable of interest. So, we also estimate the following OLS regression:


         Log (Consumption)ist  Log (80th PercentileIncome) st  Household controlsist
          Household Income dummiesist  States  Yeart   ist ,                                           (2)


where Log(80th PercentileIncome) is the log of the average of the 80th percentile of household
income distribution in a given state in the current year (t) and the prior two years (t-1 and t-2), as
computed in the CPS. All other variables in equation (2) are defined as above.
         For completeness, we also present results where we instrument Log(ConsumptionofRich)
with top percentiles of the income distribution in a state-year cell. We use Log(80th
PercentileIncome) and Log(95th PercentileIncome) as instruments.8 The exclusion restriction is
that the income of the rich is uncorrelated with consumption of the non-rich except through their
own consumption after controlling for state and year fixed effects, as well household-level
controls (including the flexible controls for household income). One should not rule out the
possibility though that non-rich consumption is also directly affected by the income of the rich.
Several of the explanations for the trickle-down consumption we consider in detail in the later

8
 In the results below, we instrument Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich), the logarithm of average consumption among very rich
households, with Log(90thPercentileIncome) and Log(95thPercentileIncome).


                                                              9
sections of this paper, even some of the behavioral explanations, could be consistent with a direct
influence of top income levels on non-rich consumption. For example, households may form
their expectation about what they will earn in the future not based on what they see their rich
neighbors consuming, but what they see them earning (if a paycheck is not often observable, a
place of work or occupation might be). Similarly, while social comparisons and status-related
explanations may fit more naturally into the non-rich responding to rich consumption, any signal
or proxy for the earnings of one’s neighbors may also trigger higher non-rich spending on more
visible goods. Other explanations however ultimately rely on higher top income levels
translating in higher rich or very rich consumption, such as upward pressures on local prices. So,
we stay away from putting a strict “causal” read on these IV results and ultimately defer
interpretation of all of these primary findings to Sections IV and V.


III.B. Results
       Table 1 presents our analysis of the relationship between non-rich and rich consumption.
In particular, column 1 of Panel A presents the results of the estimation of equation (1) above.
For brevity, we only report coefficients on the variables of interest in Table 1.
       Column 1 shows that the elasticity of consumption of the non-rich to the consumption of
the rich is positive and statistically significant at the 1 percent level. A 1 percent increase in
consumption of the rich is associated with .182 percent increase in the consumption of non-rich
households, holding non-rich households characteristics and own income constant. Column 2
replicates column 1 but focuses on the consumption of the very rich (upper decile) in the market
as an alternative independent variable, Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich). Again, we find a positive
and statistically significantly elasticity; a 1 percent increase in consumption of the very rich is
associated with .073 percent increase in the consumption of non-rich households
       Columns 3 to 6 break the non-rich sample into individuals in middle income households
(between the 20th and 80th percentiles) and those in low income households (below the 20th
percentile of income). This break-down shows that the effect of the consumption of the rich, and
in particular the consumption of the very rich, seems to be concentrated among the middle
income households.
       Panel B of Table 1 reproduces the same regressions as Panel A but uses the ratio of
consumption to income as an alternative dependent variable. We continue to absorb income as

                                                     10
levels in $2,000 bucket, hence allowing the ratio of consumption to income among non-rich
households to vary flexibly by income bucket. The results are qualitatively similar to those in
Panel A. Non-rich households spend a higher share of their current income when exposed to
higher rich or very consumption; this relationship is much stronger and much more precisely
estimated for middle income households than low income households.
       Table 2 presents our analysis of the relationship between non-rich consumption and top
income levels in the state-year cell. In particular, Column 1 of Panel A presents the results of the
estimation of equation (2) above. The structure of columns 1 to 6 in Table 2 is similar to that of
Table 1. The results are very consistent with those in Table 1. We find positive and statistically
significant   associations       between     either    Log(80thPercentileIncome)       (column       1)    or
Log(90thPercentileIncome) (column 2) and consumption of the non-rich, whether we define the
dependent variable as the logarithm of consumption of non-rich households (Panel A) or the ratio
of consumption to current income for those households (Panel B). A 1 percent increase in
Log(80thPercentileIncome) increases non-rich consumption by .23 percent, everything else
constant (Panel A; column 1). Again, these relationships appear stronger and more precisely
estimated for middle income households than for low income households.
       In columns 7 and 8 of Table 2, we consider the possibility that middle income
households’ consumption might also be sensitive to changes in income levels at the bottom of the
income distribution. Is there any evidence of some trickle-up mirroring the trickle-down effect
we have focused on so far? To address this, we include Log(20thPercentileIncome) (also
constructed based on the 3-year averaging method described above) as an additional control. The
point estimates on Log(20thPercentileIncome) is essentially 0 in all specifications in columns 7
and 8. Hence, we see no evidence of a symmetric relationship between the upper and lower parts
of the income distribution on the consumption of the middle class.
       Finally,   Table      3    presents    the     IV   results.   As   indicated   above,    we       use
Log(80thPercentileIncome)          and       Log(95thPercentileIncome)         as      instruments        for
Log(ConsumptionofRich). We use Log(90thPercentileIncome) and Log(95thPercentileIncome)
as instruments for Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich). Column 1 of Table 3 presents the first stage
regression for Log(ConsumptionofRich). The first-stage F-statistic (20.72) indicates that the
instruments are strong predictors of Log(ConsumptionofRich). The second-stage results are
reported in columns 2 to 5 (where the dependent variable is Log(Consumption)) and 6 to 9

                                                           11
(where the dependent variable is the ratio of consumption to income). The estimated effects in
the IV model are qualitatively similar to those in the OLS model (Table 1) but 50 to 100% larger
in magnitude. Omitted positively correlated shocks to tastes between the rich and the non-rich
(e.g. all want the new i-Pad when it is released) would have suggested smaller IV estimates. Our
preferred interpretation for the larger magnitudes in Table 3 compared to Table 1 is that it reveals
the     substantial     measurement        issues     with      Log(ConsumptionofRich)          and
Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich).


IV. Traditional Explanations
IV.A. Permanent Income Hypothesis
        While we hold current household income constant in all the specifications reported
above, it is possible that the non-rich households generating our results are in fact different in
terms of their permanent income. In particular, the permanent income hypothesis could explain
our results in Section III if non-rich households in markets where top income levels are higher
rationally expect their own income to go up in the future. In other words, a higher income level
at the 80th percentile in a state today may be systematically related to higher future income for
households below the 80th percentile.
        Unfortunately, because the CEX is structured as a repeated cross-section and not as a
panel, we cannot add future income controls to the analysis we have performed so far. Instead,
we turn to another dataset that is structured as a panel to formally test for the possibility that a
given household’s future income, holding the household’s own current income constant, is
systematically positively related to current top income level in the household’s geographical
market. This panel data set is the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). Specifically, we
study the determinants of future family income among PSID households over the period 1980 to
2007.
        The income variable we consider in the PSID is “total family income”, dropping
observations with negative or zero family income. For each household in the PSID with non-
missing total family income in a given year, we consider total family income in year t+1, t+2 and




                                                    12
t+4.9 By state-year cell, we merge the PSID micro data into the CPS-constructed variables on the
80th, 90th, 50th and 20th percentiles of the household income distribution in each state-year cell (3-
year averages, as in Section III). We focus our analysis on the subset of household-year
observations with incomes below the 80th percentile in the household’s state-year. Summary
statistics for the PSID data are presented in Appendix Table 2. The PSID sample is somewhat
lower income than the CEX sample, and has a higher share of minority households.
         We regress the logarithm of future family income on the logarithm of current family
income, state and year fixed effects, time-varying household controls, and the logarithm of
household income at the 80th (or 90th) percentile in the state-year cell (averaged over the years t,
t-1 and t-2). Specifically, we estimate the following regression:


          Log ( FutureIncome)is ,t  j  Log (80thPercentileIncome) st  Log (CurrentIncome)ist
                                                                                                                      (3)
           HouseholdControlsist  States  Yeart   ist


where i is a household, s a state, and t a year. The time-varying household controls include age
(quadratic), race, gender and marital status of the head of household, as well as dummies for the
number of children and adults in the household. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.
         The results of this analysis are reported in Table 4. In Panel A, we use
Log(80thPercentileIncome); in Panel B, we use Log(90thPercentileIncome). In no specification
do we find evidence that increased top income levels in a state in a given year are significantly
predictive of higher future income levels for non-rich households in that state in future years
(where future is defined as t+1 in columns 1 to 3, t+2 in columns 3 to 6, and t+4 for columns 7
and 8), controlling for current family income. The same holds if we use as dependent variables
the average of future income between t+1 and t+2 (columns 9 and 10) or the average of future
income between t+1 and t+4 (columns 11 and 12).10 In fact, most of the point estimates we
estimate are negative (but most are statistically insignificant). Note that these findings are robust
to controlling for the logarithm of household income lower down in the state-year distribution


9
  Note that because the PSID becomes bi-annual after 1997 and because total family income was not asked in 1994 to 1996, total
family income in t+1 can only be observed for years prior to 1993. In contrast, total family income in t+2 and t+4 can be defined
for later sample years.
10
   Future income measures in columns 9 to 12 are averages of all non-missing values over the relevant time horizon.


                                                                   13
(50th and 20th percentiles). These findings are also robust to the inclusion of household fixed
effects (columns 3 and 6).
       In summary, while we cannot directly control for permanent income level in the CEX
sample, the analysis we perform in the PSID fails to find evidence that higher top income levels
in a state are systematically predictive of higher future income for the non-rich, holding their
current income constant. In other words, a permanent income explanation does not appear to
rationalize the findings we reported in Tables 1 to 3.


IV.B. Precautionary Saving Motive
       In columns (13) and (14) of Table 4, we also consider the possibility that rising top
income levels in a state are correlated with more stable future income for non-rich households in
that state. Indeed, if this were the case, our primary finding could be reconciled with a
precautionary saving motive explanation (Carroll, 1992). If non-rich households expect less
uncertain income in the future, their precautionary motive for savings diminish, which would
translate into higher consumption out of current disposable income.
       In the PSID, we define the standard deviation of log(household income) between t+1 and
t+4. We then estimate equation (3) above using this alternative dependent variable. We fail to
find support for the view that either Log(80thPercentileIncome) (Panel A of Table 4) or
Log(90thPercentileIncome) (Panel B of Table 4) are systematically negatively correlated with a
lower standard deviation of future income for non-rich households. In fact, in all specifications,
the point estimates indicate a positive relationship between top income levels and the standard
deviation of future income. This positive relationship is however only statistically significant in
column (13) (Panels A and B), where we do not also control for Log(50thPercentileIncome) and
Log(20thPercentileIncome).


IV.C. Wealth Effects
       A large literature documents that individuals consume from 3 to 9 cents out of every $1
shock to housing wealth (Case, Quigley, and Shiller (2005), Campbell and Cocco (2007),
Attanasio, Blow, Hamilton, and Leicester (2009), and Carroll, Otsuka, and Slacalek (2011)), and
that home equity generally is a very active source of consumption funds for constrained
households (Hurst and Stafford (2004)). Mian and Sufi (2011) find that borrowing against the

                                                    14
increase in home equity by existing homeowners is responsible for a significant fraction of the
rise in U.S. household leverage from 2002 to 2006. Is it possible that our primary finding is
driven by such wealth effects? To the extent that rising top income levels in a state are associated
with rising home prices (as suggested by Matlack and Vigdor 2008), it is possible that a key
missing variable in our analysis so far is home equity. More specifically, our finding might be
driven by the subset of homeowners who are seeing the value of their home equity rise as the
share of the very rich in their geographic market increases. We test for this possibility in Table 5.
          For this analysis, we return to the CEX sample. Given the results in Tables 1 to 3, we
further constrain that sample to the subgroup of middle income households. Panel A of Table 5
replicates the specification under equation (1) (with log rich consumption as the main
independent variable), and Panel B of Table 5 replicates the specification of equation (2) (with
log rich income as the main independent variable). Our goal is to isolate households, time
periods, and geographic markets in which or for which we would expect large differences in the
sensitivity of non-rich consumption either to rich consumption or to rich income under a wealth
effect explanation. We then allow for heterogeneity of effects across these groups.
          Specifically, in columns (1) and (2), we allow the sensitivity to differ between home
owners and renters.11 While the point estimates indicate moderately larger sensitivities for home
owners, the differences are neither large nor statistically significant. In columns (3) and (4), we
allow for the sensitivity to differ before and after 1995. To the extent that the rise in home prices
started in the middle of the 1990s, a home-equity based explanation for our findings would
predict larger effects post-1995. In fact, we tend to find stronger trickle-down consumption pre-
1995.
          Finally, in columns 5 and 6, we allow the sensitivity to differ across states with more or
less elastic housing supply, using the measure of housing supply elasticity provided by Saiz
(2010).12 Markets where housing supply is inelastic have experienced sharper rises in house
prices; it is therefore relevant to ask whether our key finding systematically differs based on the
level of house supply elasticity in the market.                         In Panel A, but not Panel B, we do find

11
   Unfortunately, while the CEX allows us to separate renters from homeowners, there is no variable capturing when a household
bought their current house.
12
   We use the data from Saiz’s website to construct the housing supply elasticities. Saiz’s data are at the metropolitan level,
however, rather than at the state level. We construct supply elasticities within a state by averaging across metro areas in the state,
using each metro area population as weight. For metro areas that cover multiple states, we assume that the population is split
equally among the states covered in the metro area.


                                                                      15
significantly larger estimates in markets where the housing supply elasticity is lower. But our
effects remain economically large and statistically significant even in the more elastic markets.
       In summary, the rise in home equity might be correlated with the rise in top income
levels in a state. Indeed we find some evidence of stronger trickle-down correlations in more
inelastic housing markets and, to a lesser, among homeowners. However, because our core
results hold both for homeowners and renters, and also hold (and in fact are stronger) prior to the
housing boom, we do not believe that a home-equity, net wealth channel is the sole explanation
for our primary finding.


V. Behavioral Explanations
V.A. Upwardly-Biased Expectations about Future Income
       While we find no evidence that higher current top incomes in a market are predictive of
higher future income for the non-rich in that market (Table 4), it is possible that the non-rich’s
expectations about their future income are systematically biased upwards when they are exposed
to the increasing incomes and consumption of proximate top income earners. To investigate this
possibility, we use micro data from the University of Michigan’s Survey of Consumers. These
surveys, which have been conducted by the Survey Research Center at the University of
Michigan since 1946, are used to construct indices of consumer confidence. In particular, the
Index of Consumer Expectations is an official component of the Index of Leading Indicators
developed by the U.S. Department of Commerce. Each month, 500 individuals are randomly
selected from the contiguous United States (48 states plus the District of Columbia) to participate
in the Surveys of Consumers. We append all of these monthly surveys into a single dataset that
covers the time period 1980 to 2008. For each state-year cell, we merge the CPS information on
key percentiles of the income distribution into the Michigan data cell. Again, we restrict our
analysis to those individuals whose family income is below the 80th percentile in their state-year
cell. Summary statistics for this dataset are presented in Appendix Table 3. In terms of
demographics and income, this sample is very comparable to the CEX sample.
       The following questions in the Surveys of Consumers are used to assess a given
individual’s expectations about their future income. First, individuals are asked: “During the next
year or two, do you expect that your (family) income will go up more than prices will go up,
about the same, or less than prices will go up?” Based on this question, we create a dummy

                                                    16
variable that equals 1 if the individual report expecting his or her family income to go up more
than prices, 0 otherwise. On average across all individuals and years, about 17 percent expect
their real income to go up in the next year or two. Survey participants are also asked to report
their expected percentage change in family income: “By about what percent do you expect your
(family) income to (increase/decrease) during the next 12 months?” On average across all
individuals and years, the expected percent change in family income in the next year is 5.6
percent.
        We regress answers to these income expectation questions on top income levels in the
state-year cell. In particular, we estimate the following baseline regression:


           IncomeChangeExpectationist  Log (80thPercentileIncome) st  Individual Controlsist
                                                                                                 (4)
         HouseholdIncomedummiesist  States  Yeart   ist


where i is an individual, s, a state, and t a year. Individual controls include a quadratic in age,
dummies for the respondent’s gender, race and marital status, and dummies for the number of
adults and children in the household; household income fixed effects are dummies for $2000
buckets of total household income. Each observation is weighted by household head weight
provided in the Surveys. Finally, standard errors are clustered at the state level.
        The results from this analysis are presented in Table 6. The dependent variable in Panel A
is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the individual expects his or her real family income to go up
in the next year or two, 0 otherwise. The dependent variable in Panel B is the individual’s
expected percent change in family income in the next year. We present results for two
subsamples of the data: all individuals whose household income is below the 80th percentile in
their state-year cell (columns 1 to 4), and middle income households (e.g. those with household
income between the 20th and 80th percentiles) (columns 5 and 6), We also present results where
we further control for the logarithm of income in lower parts of the income distribution (50th and
20th percentile).
        In none of the regressions in Table 6 do we find a positive and statistically significant
relationship between expectations about future income growth and top income levels. In fact, all
the estimated coefficients on Log(80thPercentileIncome) and Log(90thPercentileIncome) are
negative. In other words, we fail to find any evidence that non-rich households have

                                                     17
systematically upwardly biased expectations about their future income when exposed to higher
top income levels in their market. If anything, an increase in the income level at the 80th
percentile reduces the likelihood that an individual expects his or her family income to rise.13


V.B. Local Price Pressures and Sticky Consumption
         If middle income households have strong consumption habits, or if there are important
rigidities inherent in the consumption of many goods and services in their consumption portfolio
(Chetty and Szeidl, 2007), households may end up spending more out of their disposable income
when the local prices rise for the goods and services to which they are “committed” . If rising top
income levels in a state are associated with higher local prices, such stickiness in middle income
households’ consumption portfolio may lead to higher spending out of current disposable
income, without middle income households making much active changes to their real
consumption.
         To analyze the effect of local prices, we download the MSA-level local CPI indices from
the BLS.14 In columns (1) and (2) of Table 7, we first show that there is indeed a strong positive
correlation between the state CPI index and top income levels in that state. Specifically, in a
state-year panel regression that covers all state-years included in our CEX sample, we find a
positive correlation between Log(LocalCPI) and both Log(80thPercentileIncome) and
Log(90thPercentileIncome).                  In        contrast,          neither         Log(50thPercentileIncome)or
Log(20thPercentileIncome) are systematically related to Log(LocalCPI). To the extent that house
price variation within state and time is an important component of the variation in
Log(LocalCPI) within state and time, the correlations we observe in columns (1) and (2) of Table
7 are related to Matlack and Vigdor (2008)’s finding of a positive relationship between income
inequality and housing costs in Census data.
         In the remaining columns of Table 7, we replicate the specifications under equations (1)
and (2) but now directly controlling for Log(LocalCPI) in the regressions. Given the results in
Tables 1 to 3, we restrict the sample to the subgroup of middle income households. Log(Local

13
   The results in Table 6 could also be viewed as an alternative test, and additional rejection, of a permanent income hypothesis
explanation for our primary finding.
14
   We force the indices to all be equal to 100 for 1980 to make them comparable over time. For states with only one MSA, we
apply the local MSA index to the state. For MSAs crossing state lines and for states with multiple MSAs we gather county-level
populations and constructed weighted averages of the indices. A few states have no MSA covered by the BLS CPI indices; for
those, we apply the region average.


                                                                   18
CPI) enters positively in each regression but the estimates are noisily estimated. While
controlling for the local CPI tends to somewhat reduce the magnitude and precision of the
estimated   coefficients    on      Log(80th/90thPercentileIncome)    (columns     4   and    5)   and
Log(Consumptionof(Very)Rich) (columns 6 and 7), the coefficients remain economically large.
For example, a comparison of column (4) in Table 7 and column (3) in Table 2 shows that
estimated coefficient on Log(80thPercentileIncome) goes from .279 (s.e.=.110) to .239
(s.e.=.133) after controlling for Log(Local CPI).
       In summary, while it is possible that some of the higher consumption to income ratios
among the non-rich exposed to higher top income levels may be the consequence of upward
local price pressures interacting with the non-rich’s inability to reduce their consumption, our
analysis in Table 7 suggests that such local price effects is not the sole explanation for our
findings. In the sub-section below, we do show, however, that middle-income households’
budget share for shelter increases substantially when top income levels rise. While we propose in
that sub-section other possible explanations for this finding (e.g. the possibility that non-rich
demand for housing might be increasing with top income levels), we however cannot and do not
rule out that at least part of the increase in the shelter budget share might be a reflection of higher
local prices per unit of housing.


V.C. Budget Share Analysis: Income Elasticity and Visibility
       In order to further build our understanding of what drives the non-rich consumption
response, in this section we         analyze how the budget shares of the non-rich across 29
consumption categories respond to top income levels.
       In particular, we are interested in testing two specific behavioral hypotheses. One
hypothesis is that higher top income levels in a market increases the supply of “rich” goods
within this market. For example, higher top income levels within a market may induce the
replacement of some low-end grocery stores with higher-end ones, or the entry of more beauty
salons, fashion stores or bars. Handbury (2012) and Handbury and Weinstein, (2012) find that
the variety of goods changes in proximity to demand from richer households. Positive local
shocks to the supply of “rich” goods might induce the non-rich to demand and consume more of
these goods. The non-rich might then end up spending more out of current income if this
increased consumption on “rich” good happens without fully scaling back on the consumption of

                                                      19
other goods, either because of self-control problems or because much of the other consumption is
already “committed to”. To test for the hypothesis, we ask whether the sensitivity of budget
shares to top income levels varies in a systematic way with the income elasticity of the
consumption categories. Column 1 of Appendix Table A4 reports income elasticity estimates for
each of the 29 consumption categories we have constructed. These elasticity estimates are the
coefficients on disposable income in the CEX from a population-weighted regression of log
consumption in that category on log(income), a quadratic of age, and dummies for race,
education, number of children and number of people in the household.
       The second hypothesis we are interested in testing relates to the possibility that the non-
rich consumption response might be driven by social comparisons and relative income
considerations. The idea that social comparisons might play a role in household consumption
behavior goes back to the early work of Veblen (1899) and Duesenberry (1949). While the
relative income hypothesis has been mainly formulated and tested in the context of social
comparisons to the “Jones” (see for example, Luttmer (2005)), Frank et al. (2010) propose a
variant of this relative income model where a given household’s consumption is directly
positively affected by the consumption of the households whose permanent income is just above
theirs, generating what they label as “expenditure cascades,” and a negative relationship between
income inequality and the savings rate of middle-income households.
       To test for the possibility that such relative comparison considerations might be a driver
of our primary finding, we go back to Veblen’s (1899) original intuition that the consumption
induced by such social comparisons should be more “conspicuous” in nature: a way to signal or
advertise income and wealth through spending on more “visible” items. Hence, we propose to
ask whether the sensitivity of budget shares to top income levels varies in a systematic way with
the visibility of the consumption categories. We use Heffetz (2011) to assign a visibility index to
a given consumption category. Heffetz (2011)’s index was based on answers to a household
telephone survey. For a list of goods and services, survey respondents were asked to answer the
following question: “Imagine that you meet a new person who lives in a household similar to
yours. Imagine that their household is not different from other similar households, except that
they like to, and do, spend more than average on [goods or services category]. Would you notice
this about them, and if so, for how long would you have to have known them, to notice it? Would
you notice it almost immediately upon meeting them for the first time, a short while after, a

                                                    20
while after, only a long while after, or never?” For each consumption category, answers were
coded as 0 (never); .25 (a long while after); .5 (a while after); .75 (a short while after) and 1
(almost immediately). Heffetz’s main visibility index is based on averaging those answers across
survey respondents. Column 2 of Appendix A4 reports the visibility index for each of the 29
consumption categories.
        To proceed with the testing of these two hypotheses, in a first step, we estimate the
following demand system in the CEX subsample:
                                                        5
                                                             pl       p 
        W k ist   k Log (80thPercentileIncome) st   log  t   log  st 
                                                      l 1   Pt        Pt       (5)
         HouseholdControlsist  HouseholdIncomeDummiesist  States  Yeart   ist


where W k ist is consumption share (as a ratio of total consumption) on good k (with k=1 to 29) by

household i in state s and year t; Pt      is the US CPI; ptl are the US CPI for food, shelter,

transportation, clothing and other goods; pst is the local CPI; and all other variables are defined
as above.
        In a second step, we study the relationship between the vector of estimated coefficients
on  k and the income elasticity and visibility measures presented above. For these regressions,
                                                                                k
we weigh each category by the inverse of the square of the standard error of  .
        Given the results in Tables 1 to 3, we again restrict this analysis to the subsample of
middle-income households. We also perform an alternative specification of the demand system
under       equation    (5)       where    we       use    Log(90thPercentileIncome)       instead
Log(80thPercentileIncome). The results of this analysis are presented in the remaining columns
of Appendix Table 4 (first step) as well as in Table 8 (second step).
        Column 3 of Appendix Table A4 reports mean budget shares among middle-income
households in our sample for each of the 29 consumption categories. The estimated coefficients
on          k   are   reported     in    columns     4   (Log(80thPercentileIncome)      and    5
(Log(90thPercentileIncome), with bolded coefficients statistically significant at least at the 10
percent level. Finally, in columns 6 and 7, we normalize the estimated coefficients by the mean
budget share from column 3, to provide a more intuitive sense of magnitude. About a third of the


                                                     21
estimated coefficients are statistically significant. There is broad consistency between the
estimated             coefficients          whether           we           use      Log(80thPercentileIncome)   or
Log(90thPercentileIncome).
            Consistent with our prior findings, we find a large positive estimate is for the shelter
share of budget. The estimate is consistent with the interpretation that a 10% increase in
Log(80thPercentileIncome) increases the shelter budget share by .01 (column 4), about a 5
percent increase (column 6). While scoring quite high on the visibility index (.5), the income
elasticity of shelter consumption is only moderate (.66). Other categories with similarly large
percent increase in budget shares include “alcohol away from home” (not statistically
significant), and “salons, fitness and clubs” (statistically significant), both of which score high on
both the visibility index and in terms of income elasticity. The largest percent decrease in budget
share in for “education,” with a 10% increase in Log(80thPercentileInome) reducing the
education budget share by about 11 percent; education expenses, while quite visible, are only
moderately income elastic.
            A more systematic investigation of the relationship between the budget share responses
and the income elasticity or visibility of the categories is presented in Table 8. We consider two
dependent variables. In columns 1 to 4, the dependent variable is the estimated budget share
sensitivities to rich consumption, normalized to mean budget shares (the coefficients from
Appendix A4, column 6) . In columns 5 to 8, the dependent variable is a dummy variable that
equals 1 if the estimated coefficients are positive. We present results for both the model that uses
Log(80thPercentileIncome) (Panel A) and one that uses Log(90thPercentileIncome) (Panel B).
We also present results where we use the continuous measures of income elasticity and visibility
(columns 1, 3, 5 and 7) and others where we use dichotomous versions (columns 2, 4, 6 and 8).
For these dichotomous versions, we define as “more visible” goods and services that score .5 or
above on the visibility index; we define as “more income elastic” goods and services with
income elasticities of .75 or above (the sample mean).15 Finally, we also present results with and
without shelter. In each regression, we weigh the category by the inverse of the square of the
standard error of the coefficient estimate.



15
     For ease of reading, Appendix Table A5 lists the goods and services across these dichotomous classes.


                                                                      22
          The results in Table 8 are broadly consistent across specifications. All the estimated
coefficients on income elasticity and visibility are positive. In other words, we find more
positive changes in budget shares in response to higher top income levels for those goods and
services that are more income elastic and more visible. The mapping to income elasticity
however appears more robust than the mapping to visibility, particularly in Panel B.
          In summary, the evidence reported in this section suggests that both supply-driven
demand and status-seeking, or status-maintaining, explanations might play a role in explaining
middle income households’ consumption behavior changes when exposed to higher top income
levels.


VI. Economic Magnitude
          To get a better sense of the magnitude of the trickle-down effects on middle-income
households’ consumption, we perform a simple counterfactual exercise. We ask how much lower
would have middle income households’ consumption-out-of-current-income been, and hence
how much larger middle income households’ saving rate, had the income levels at the top grown
at the same rate as income levels at the median since the beginning of our sample period.
          Specifically, we compute the change (decrease) in Log(Consumption) under the
assumption that Log(80thPercentileIncome) or Log(90thPercentileIncome) had grown at the
same rate as Log(50thPercentileIncome). We perform the calculation of these counterfactual
growth rates using the change in average Log(50thPercentileIncome) by year in our CEX
sample. We use the estimates from Table 2 of the sensitivity of Log(Consumption) for middle
income        households        to      either      Log(80thPercentileIncome)             (column        3)      or
Log(90thPercentileIncome) (column 4) to compute counterfactual Log(Consumption).
          The results of this counterfactual analysis are presented in Table 9. We report results for
4 different years: 1990, 2000, 2005 and 2008. Panel A presents the counterfactual for column 3
of Table 2 (Log(80thPercentileIncome), while Panel B presents the counterfactual for column 4
of Table 2 (Log(90thPercentileIncome). We report gaps between actual and counterfactual
consumption both in log points (column 1) and dollar figures (column 2).16 For 1990, we
estimate that Log(Consumption) by middle income households would have been between .7

16
  The dollar figures are obtained by multiplying column 1 by average consumption (in $1999) across all middle-income
households in a CEX in a given year.


                                                             23
(Panel A) and 1.1 (Panel B) percent lower under the counterfactuals. By 2000, the (positive) gap
between actual and counterfactual log consumption grows to between 2.1 (Panel A) and 2.8
percent (Panel B). By 2005, we estimate that middle income household would have consumed
between 2.6 and 3.2 percent less had income levels at the top grown at the same rate as income
levels at the median since the beginning of the sample period; this corresponds to between $1271
and $1571 less in consumption in 2005 for middle-income households (column 2). Because the
rise in income inequality is modest in the second half of the 2000s, the counterfactual
calculations are very similar for 2005 and 2008.
         As is well known, macroeconomic data reveals a steady decline in the personal saving
rate from the early 1980s to until about the beginning of the Great Recession. Series from the
National Income and Product Accounts (NIPAs) show that the personal savings rate dropped
from about 10 percent of disposable income in the early 1980s to about 1 percent in the mid-
2000s. One could therefore ask what fraction of this aggregate decline in the personal savings
rate could be accounted for under our counterfactual exercise. To answer this, we multiply the
dollar figure reduction in consumption by an estimate of the number of middle income
households in the US in each year.17 This defines the additional savings that would have
occurred in each of the years listed in the Table under the counterfactuals. We report this number
in column 4 of Table 9, with the actual personal savings figures from the NIPA data in column 3.
Both are reported in billions of dollars; also, for comparability, both are reported in nominal
terms. Finally, in columns 5 and 6, respectively, we report the actual personal savings rate from
the NIPA data and the counterfactual rate. To compute the counterfactual rate, we take the actual
aggregate personal savings from NIPA (column 3) and add the additional savings under the
counterfactual (column 4); we then divide by aggregate disposable income from the NIPA data.
We estimate that the personal savings rate in 2000, which was 2.9 percent, would have been
between 3.6 (Panel A) to 3.8 (Panel B) percent if top income levels had grown at the same rate as
the median income between 1982 and 2000. In 2005, the actual personal savings rate was 1.5
percent; we estimate counterfactual personal savings rates for that year between 2.6 and 2.8



17
   We use 1990, 2000 and 2010 Census data on total number of households in the US and assume that the number of middle
income households is 3/5 of the total number. For 2005, we average the 2000 and 2010 numbers (equal weights); for 2008, we
also average the 2000 and 2010 numbers, with a weight of .2 on 2000 and .8 on 2010.


                                                                24
percent. Hence, a small but non-trivial fraction of the decline in the personal savings rate could
be attributed to middle-income households’ consumption response to rising top income levels.
       Another worthwhile back-of-the-envelope exercise is to relate our estimates to most
recent evidence on the relative rise in income and consumption inequality. The view that there
was no rise in consumption inequality over the last 3 decades (Krueger and Perry, 2006) appears
to have been somewhat undermined in light of the demonstration of non-classical measurement
error problems in the underlying data, and in particular, as we already discussed, the difficulty in
measuring consumption among rich and very rich households in the CEX (Aguiar and Bils,
2012). More recent attempts at quantifying the change in consumption inequality suggest that
consumption inequality may have increased by between 50 to 100 percent as much as income
inequality (Attanasio et. al., 2013). A simple back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that our
estimates are not inconsistent with this latest evidence. In columns 3 of Table 2, we estimate
about a .22 percent increase in consumption for the median-income household for every 1
percent increase in income at the 90th percentile. Given that median income household is
essentially stagnant over the period under study (see Appendix Table A1), this is the same a .22
percent increase in consumption for median-income household for every 1 percent increase in
the income gap between the 90th and 50th percentile households. If the elasticity of consumption
to income for upper decile households was 1, this would mean that a 1 percent increase in the
income gap between the 50th and 90th percentile would translate in a .78 percent increase in the
consumption gap between the 50th and 90th percentile. If the elasticity of consumption to income
for upper decile households was .75, this would mean that a 1 percent increase in the income gap
between the 50th and 90th percentile would translate in a .57 percent increase in the consumption
gap between the 50th and 90th percentile. In the CEX, we estimate an elasticity of consumption of
income for households above the 90th percentile of .7. However, this is an underestimate because
of under-reporting of consumption by the rich in the CEX. In fact, Maki and Palumbo (2001)
suggest strong consumption to income elasticities among the rich during the 1990s because of
wealth effects (such as those induced by the rise in the stock market over that period). For both
reasons, it is reasonable to expect that the elasticity of consumption to income above the 90th
percentile was above .75. Hence, our estimates are consistent, under reasonable assumptions,
with the current evidence on the relative rise of income and consumption inequality.



                                                    25
VII. Use and Supply of Credit
          The period under study, covering the early 1980s to the onset of the financial crisis and
the Great Recession, was a period of rapid expansion of credit supply, not just because of the
housing boom in the later part of the period, but also because of financial innovation and
financial liberalization (White (2007); Dynan and Kohn (2007); Mian and Sufi (2009)). Hence,
greater access to, and greater use of, credit might have enabled middle-income households to
stretch their personal finances, facilitating the trickling-down of consumption we have
documented. In this section, we provide two indirect sources of evidence consistent with this
hypothesis.
          In a state-year panel, we document a positive relationship between the number of
personal bankruptcy filings in a state and top income levels in that state. Complementing this
aggregate evidence, we also show in the Michigan Survey of Consumers systematic evidence of
greater financial duress self-reports for middle income households exposed to higher top income
levels. Finally, in the last part of this section, we suggest the possibility that lawmakers may have
internalized the trickle-down pressures and responded to these pressures by further easing credit
supply.


VII.A. Personal Bankruptcy Filings
          It is well-known that personal bankruptcy filings have increased dramatically over the
last few decades. A natural implication of our analysis is that the rise in top income levels, to the
extent that it triggered higher consumption-out-of-income among the non-rich, may have pushed
a greater share of the non-rich in financial distress. While the various micro datasets we have
exploited so far in our analysis do not allow us to directly study whether exposure to higher top
income levels predict a higher likelihood of filing for personal bankruptcy among otherwise
similar middle-income households, we can study the relationship between top income levels and
the rate of personal bankruptcies (e.g. number of personal bankruptcy filings/population) in a
state-year aggregates panel. This analysis is related to earlier work by Frank et al. (2010) who
explored this relationship in the 100 most populous U.S. counties between 1990 and 2000. We
expand on their analysis by studying a longer time period and investigating additional checks to
the robustness of this relationship.



                                                     26
         Specifically, we obtain information on annual number of personal bankruptcy filings by
state for the period 1980 to 2009.18 We then merge this data by state-year to the CPS measures of
income percentiles discussed above, and to Census information on the number of households by
state and decade.19 We are interested in whether higher top income levels in a state are predictive
of a higher rate of personal bankruptcy filings in that state going forward. We do not expect a
rise in top income levels in a given year in a state to immediately translate into a higher number
of bankruptcies. Unlike the consumption responses documented above, which could theoretically
take place quite rapidly, the bankruptcy response, if it exists, would likely be based on an
accumulation of past consumption responses. Therefore, we propose to use two-year lagged
Log(80thPercentileIncome) (or Log(90thPercentileIncome)) as our independent variable of
interest.20 The results of this analysis are presented in Table 10. We weight each observation by
population size (number of households in the state) and cluster standard errors at the state level.
         Perhaps not surprisingly given the already-well established trend up in top income levels
and trend up in the number of personal bankruptcies (e.g., Fay, Hurst and White (2002)), we find
a positive univariate correlation between top income levels and the number of personal
bankruptcy filings (columns 1 and 2 of Table 10). In columns 3 and 4, we add state and year
fixed effects to the specifications of columns 1 and 2, respectively. While the estimated R2
jumps from 0.04 (or .08 in column 2) to 0.87 in both columns 3 and 4, the estimated coefficients
on the top income variables remain of the same order of magnitude as in columns 1 and 2.
Specifically we find that a 10 percent increase in average income level at the 80th percentile
between t-2 and t-4 raises the rate of personal bankruptcy filings in that state in year t by 10
percent (column 3).
         In columns 5 and 6, we add a vector of controls to proxy for current economic conditions
in a given state in a given year. This includes the unemployment rate (from the March CPS) and
current income level at the 50th, 20th and 80th percentile. Not surprisingly, the current local
unemployment rate is a strong positive predictor of the bankruptcy rate. Also, a higher median



18
   This data can be found at www.abiworld.org, by clicking on the link "online resources" and then "bankruptcy statistics."
19
   We assign Census information from Census year T to years covering the first 5 years of a decade starting in year T and Census
information from Census year T+1 to the last five years of a decade starting in year T.
20
     Since Log(80/90thPercentileIncome) is based on averaging between year t and t-2, two-year lagged
Log(80/90thPercentileIncome) is based on averaging between year t-2 and t-4.


                                                                   27
income negatively correlates with bankruptcy filings. Adding these contemporaneous controls
however does not change our estimates of interest.21
         Because of the concern related to pinning down the right lag structure for this analysis,
we also re-estimated the specifications in columns 5 and 6 in lower frequency data, e.g. focusing
on longer differences. In columns 7 and 8, we restrict the sample to the years 1980, 1985, 1990,
1995, 2000, 2005 and 2009. Again, our estimates of interest remain qualitatively unchanged.
         Columns 9 and 11 present additional robustness analysis. For this, we focus on the
relationship between personal bankruptcy filings and income at the 80th percentile. In column 9,
we allow for differential year trend in the personal bankruptcy filing rate by state. The estimated
coefficient on Log(80th Percentile) goes from 1 (column 5) to .9 (column 9). In column 10, we
allow for differential time trend in the bankruptcy filing rate based on an initial value (1976-
1978)      of     Log(80thPercentileIncome)               in    a     state.     The      estimated       coefficient       on
Log(80thPercentileIncome) is the same as in column 5 (1). Finally, in column 11, we further
control for two-year lagged Log(50thPercentileIncome) and Log(20thPercentileIncome). While
statistical significance drops below the 5 percent level (p=.07), the point estimate on our main
variable of interest remains unchanged.


VII.B. Self-Reported Financial Duress
         A key limitation of the analysis in Table 10 is that, given its aggregate nature, it does not
allow us to “zoom in” on middle income households. In Table 11, we thus complement the
analysis from Table 10 with a look into household-level self-reports of financial well-being from
the University of Michigan Survey of Consumers. Included in that survey is the following
subjective financial well-being question: “We are interested in how people are getting along
financially these days. Would you say that you (and your family living there) are better off or
worse off financially than you were a year ago?” We create a dummy variable that equals 1 for
individuals who report getting along financially worse today than a year ago. Thirty-two percent
indicate being financially worse off today than a year ago (Appendix Table A3). We then ask
whether exposure to higher top income levels is associated with greater self-reported financial


21
   We also experimented with controlling for other time-varying state-level controls, such as the self-employment rate, age,
educational and racial composition. These variables do not predict the personal bankruptcy rate in a specification that includes
state and year effects.


                                                                    28
duress, holding household income and household characteristics constant. Specifically, we
estimate the following regression, which directly mirrors equation (4):


          Financial Worse Off Todayist  Log (80thPercentileIncome) st  IndividualControlsist
                                                                                                                   (6)
           Household Income Dummies  States  Yeart   ist



         Besides this general financial well-being question, survey respondents are also asked to
report up to two reasons for why they currently feel better off or worse off than a year ago. From
this list of possible reasons, we create a dummy variable that equals 1 if an individual mentions
increased expenses or higher debt, interest or debt payments today than a year ago. 22 About 7
percent of respondents indicate higher expenses and debt payments today than a year ago
(Appendix Table A3).
         Table 11 follows the same structure as Table 5. In particular, as in Table 5, we present
results for two subsamples of the data: all individuals whose household income is below the 80th
percentile in their state-year cell (columns 1 to 4), and those with household income between the
20th and 80th percentiles (columns 5 and 6). We also present results that further control for
income level at the 50th and 20th percentiles of the state-year income distribution.
         All regressions in Panel A of Table 11, where the dependent variable is “Financially
Worse Off Today” point towards more financial duress among non-rich households that are
exposed to higher top income levels. Consider column 1 for example. A 10 percent increase in
the income level at the 80th percentile increases the likelihood that a given individual reports
being worse off financially today than a year ago by a statistically significant 2.3 percentage
points. All the estimates in Panel B, where the dependent variable is “More Expenses/More
Debt, Interest and Debt Payments than a Year Ago” are also positive, but most are not
statistically significant at standard levels.
         In summary, the evidence in Tables 10 and 11 is consistent with the view that higher
income levels among the rich in a state are positively associated with both subjective and
objective measures of financial duress among the non-rich in the state. While this evidence is


22
   Specifically, we single out the two following reasons for the self-reported current financial well-being (based on variables
PAGOR1 and PAGOR2): 1. Increased expenses; more people to be supported by FU; spending more, not applicable if the
individual also mentioned higher prices or higher taxes; 2. Debt: interest, debt, or debt payments high or higher.


                                                                  29
only indirect, these results are consistent with greater reliance on credit, up to the point of
financial distress, among middle-income households exposed to higher top income levels.


VII.C. Political Economy of Credit Supply: Voting Patterns on the H.R. 5334
          Our results point to some possible political economy implications. In particular, political
representatives of areas where the median voter is exposed to higher top incomes may be
particularly favorable toward policies aiming to increase access to credit for this median voter. In
this last section, we provide some suggestive evidence of such political economy implications in
the context of the Federal Housing Enterprise Safety and Soundness Act (H.R. 5334), which
Congress passed in 1992.
          The Federal Housing Enterprise Safety and Soundness Act established the Office of
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO) within the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and put the government-sponsored enterprises Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac under its oversight. This Act also mandated that HUD set specific
affordable housing goals for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Some observers (see for example
Rajan (2010)) have argued that this Act was a key factor in the deterioration of credit quality in
the U.S. and ultimately contributed to the recent financial crisis.23
          With home ownership rates in the US being between 60 to 70 percent at the time this Act
was passed, it is reasonable to argue that the population that was targeted by this expanded
housing lending policy was not those with the lowest income but rather the politically more
influential set of middle income households. Based on our analysis so far, we predict that middle
income households and median voter’s demand for more credit would have been particularly
strong where middle income households and the median voter are exposed to higher top
incomes. Hence, if Congressmen are responsive to their constituents, we would expect a higher
likelihood of voting in favor of this new legislation among Congressmen representing districts



23
   Rajan (2010) refers to this 2004 HUD announcement: “Over the past ten years, there has been a ‘revolution in affordable
lending’ that has extended homeownership opportunities to historically underserved households. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
have been a substantial part of this ‘revolution in affordable lending’. During the mid-to-late 1990s, they added flexibility to their
underwriting guidelines, introduced new low-down-payment products, and worked to expand the use of automated underwriting
in evaluating the creditworthiness of loan applicants. HMDA data suggest that the industry and GSE initiatives are increasing the
flow of credit to underserved borrowers. Between 1993 and 2003, conventional loans to low income and minority families
increased at much faster rates than loans to upper-income and nonminority families.”




                                                                      30
with more income inequality, and in particular districts with a large gap between the middle and
the top of the income distribution.
       To perform this analysis, we obtained individual voting records on H.R. 5334. We then
mapped each congressional district from the 102nd Congress (which was in session when this bill
was passed in 1992) into the 1990 census tracts that cover this district. We use the 1990 Census
tract data to construct measures of family income at 80th, 50th and 10th percentile of the
distribution for each congressional district. We define income inequality within a congressional
district as the difference between log(family income) at the 80th (or 90th) percentile and
log(family income) at the median.
       Ideology was a clear determinant of voting on H.R. 5334. Among Democrat
Congressmen that expressed a vote, 257 voted in favor while only 2 voted against. There is
therefore essentially no variation to exploit among Democrats. However, voting was more
divided among Republican Congressmen. While 111 Republicans voted in favor of this new
legislation, 52 voted against. In Table 12, we therefore focus on Republican Congressmen and
asked whether their likelihood of supporting H.R. 5334 was systematically correlated to income
inequality in their congressional district.
       In column 1 of Table 12, we regress the likelihood of voting in favor of H.R. 5334 on
income inequality in the district. We absorb ambient differences in economic conditions across
states with state fixed effects. The estimated relationship between a yes vote and income
inequality is positive and statistically significant (p=0.04). A one standard deviation increase in
income inequality (0.08) increases the likelihood of a Republican voting in favor of H.R. 5334
by about 8 percentage points. When we measure inequality based on the gap between the 90th
and 50th percentile (column 2), we continue to find a positive relationship between district
inequality and a yes vote, but the relationship is no longer statistically significant.
       In columns 3, 4 and 5, we cumulatively augment the model in column 1 with controls for
log median income, lower tail inequality (gap between the 50th and 20th percentile), and log
(population) in the congressional district. The point estimate on the gap between the 80th and 50th
percentile remains virtually unchanged and statistically significant at the 10 percent level
(p=0.09 in column 5).
       While the evidence in Table 12 should only be viewed as suggestive, the associations
found in this table help in proposing an additional mechanism by which middle income

                                                      31
households with stagnating real income may have been made to keep up with the increasingly
rich: politically-mandated credit expansion. The preliminary evidence in this Table should
encourage further work on the political responses to rising inequality, especially with regard to
the regulation and deregulation of access to credit.


VIII. Conclusion
       The question that originally motivated this paper is whether rising income inequality and
the decline in the personal savings rate over the last 3 decades are related phenomena. We
proposed to exploit within state-year variation in income and consumption in the upper decile
and quintile of the distribution to inform our thinking about this question. The evidence we have
put together suggests that there might indeed be an economically relevant link. Holding income
constant, middle income households that are exposed to higher top income levels in their market
appear to spend a higher share of that income. Moreover, we failed to find support for more
traditional explanations for this fact (such as permanent income hypothesis, precautionary
savings motive or wealth effects).
       A more behavioral analysis of these middle-income households’ consumption patterns
instead suggested the possibility that the extra consumption might be related to an increase
supply of “rich” goods within their market, and maybe also a desire to keep up with richer co-
residents through more “visible” spending. We also found a large increase in the shelter budget
share with rising top income levels; because our data does not allow us to directly study the
quantity of housing that is demanded, we do not rule out that local upward housing price
pressures may have resulted in higher expenses for this quite rigid expenditure category.
       In future work, it would be worthwhile to follow through with the supply-driven demand
explanation by complementing this study with evidence from marketing databases to assess how
the composition of stores (as well as what is supplied in those stores), and the composition of
advertising, relate to top income levels in a market.
       Both our analysis of the personal bankruptcy data and of voting on federal policies to
expand credit supply suggest that the use of credit might have been particularly large for middle
income households living in proximity to the rich. If some of this credit translated in bad credit,
rising income inequality might have been a contributing factor in the recent financial crisis.



                                                        32
References
Aguiar, Mark and Mark Bils, 2012. “Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income Inequality.”
NBER WP #16807.

Attanasio, Orazio P., Laura Blow, Robert Hamilton, and Andrew Leicester, 2009. "Booms and
Busts: Consumption, House Prices and Expectations." Economica, Vol. 76(301), pp: 20-50.

Attanasio, Orazio, Erik Hurst and Luigi Pistaferri, 2013. "The Evolution of Income,
Consumption, and Leisure Inequality in the US, 1980-2010." NBER Chapters, in: Improving the
Measurement of Consumer Expenditures. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc.

Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney, 2008. “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality:
Revising the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 90(2), pp: 300–23.

Campbell, John Y., and João F. Cocco, 2007. “How Do House Prices Affect Consumption?
Evidence from Micro Data.” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 54(3), pp: 591-621.

Carroll, Christopher D., 1992. “The Buffer Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic
Evidence.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1992(2), pp: 61-156.

Carroll, Christopher D., Misuzu Otsuka, and Jiri Slacalek, 2011. “How Large Are Housing and
Financial Wealth Effects? A New Approach.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol.
43(1), pp: 55–79.

Case, Karl E., John M. Quigley, and Robert J. Shiller, 2005. "Comparing Wealth Effects: The
Stock Market versus the Housing Market." Advances in Macroeconomics, Vol. 5(1), pp: 1-32.

Charles, Kerwin, Erik Hurst, and Nick Roussanov, 2009. “Conspicuous Consumption and Race.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 124(2), pp: 42-67.
Chetty, Raj and Adam Szeidl, 2007. “Consumption Commitments and Risk Preferences.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 122(2), pp: 831-877.

Cutler, David M. and Lawrence F. Katz, 1991. “Rising Inequality? Changes in the Distribution
of Income and Consumption in the 1980s.” American Economic Review, Vol. 82, pp: 546–551.


                                                33
Diamond, Rebecca, 2013. “The Determinants and Welfare Implications of US Workers’
Diverging Location Choices by Skill: 1980-2000.” Working Paper.

Duesenberry, James S., 1949. Income, Saving, and the Theory of Consumer Behavior. Harvard
University Press: Cambridge, MA.

Dynan, Karen E. and Donald L. Kohn, 2007. “The Rise in U.S. Household Indebtedness: Causes
and Consequences,” in Christopher Kent and Jeremy Lawson, eds., The Structure and Resilience
of the Financial System. Reserve Bank of Australia: Sydney, Australia.

Fay, Scott, Erik Hurst, Michelle J. White, 2002. "The Household Bankruptcy Decision."
American Economic Review, Vol. 92(3), pp: 706-718.

Frank, Robert H., Adam Seth Levine and Oege Dijk, 2010. “Expenditure Cascades.” Working
Paper.

Friedman, Milton, 1957. A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton University Press:
Princeton, NJ.

Garner, Thesia I. , George Janini, William Passero, Laura Paszkiewicz, and Mark Vendemia,
2006. “The CE and the PCE: a comparison.” Monthly Labor Review, September Volume, pp: 20-
46.

Goldin Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz, 2007. “Long-Run Changes in the U.S. Wage Structure:
Narrowing, Widening, Polarizing.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Vol. 2007(2), pp:
135-165.

Handbury, Jessie, 2012. “Are Poor Cities Cheap for Everyone? Non-Homotheticity and the Cost
of Living Across U.S. Cities.” Working Paper.

Handbury, Jessie and David E. Weinstein, 2012. “Is New Economic Geography Right? Evidence
from Price Data.” Working Paper.

Harris, Ed and John Sabelhaus, 2000. “Consumer Expenditure Survey Family-Level Extracts,
1980:1–1998:2.” NBER website. (www.nber.org/data/ces cbo.html)


                                                34
Heffetz, Ori, 2011. “A Test of Conspicuous Consumption: Visibility and Income Elasticities.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 93(4), pp: 1101–1117.

Hurst, Erik and Frank Stafford, 2004. “Home is Where the Equity Is: Liquidity Constraints,
Refinancing and Consumption.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 36(6), pp: 985 -
1014.

Juster, F. Thomas, Joseph P. Lupton, James P. Smith, and Frank Stafford, 2006. "The Decline in
Household Saving and the Wealth Effect." Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 88(1), pp:
20-27.

Krueger, Dirk and Fabrizio Perri, 2006. “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption
Inequality? Evidence and Theory.” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 73(1), pp: 163–193.

Luttmer, Erzo F. P., 2005. “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 120(3), pp: 963–1002.

Matlack, Janna L. and Jacob L. Vigdor. 2008. "Do rising tides lift all prices? Income Inequality
and Housing Affordability." Journal of Housing Economics, Vol. 17(3), pp: 212-224.

Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan, 2010. “Five Decades of Consumption and Income.”
NBER Working Paper # 14827.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence
from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 124(4), pp: 1449-
1496.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, 2011. “House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the U.S.
Household Leverage Crisis.” American Economic Review, Vol. 101(5), pp: 2132-2156.

Moffitt, Robert A., and Peter Gottschalk, 2002. “Trends in the Transitory Variance of Earnings
in the United States.” Economic Journal, Vol. 112, pp: C68–C73.

Moretti, Enrico, 2012. The New Geography of Jobs. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing:
New York, NY.


                                                  35
Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez, 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States: 1913-
1998.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 118 (1), pp: 1–39.

Rajan, Raghuram, 2010. Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten the World Economy.
Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ.

Saiz, Albert, 2010. “The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 125(3), pp: 1253-1296.

Veblen, Thorstein, 1899. The Theory of the Leisure Class: an Economic Study of Institutions.
Reprinted 1994, Penguin Books: New York, NY.

White, Michelle J., 2007. “Bankruptcy Reform and Credit Cards.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Vol. 21(4), pp: 175-99.




                                                36
                         Table 1: Effect of Rich Consumption on Non-Rich Consumption
Panel A                                        (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)                 (5)          (6)
Dependent Variable:                                               Log(Consumption)
Sample:                                             All             Middle Income                    Low Income

Log(ConsumptionofRich)                         0.182                    0.215                     0.074
                                             [0.036]**                [0.036]**                  [0.064]
Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich)                                0.073                    0.100                      0
                                                        [0.026]**                [0.025]**                [0.043]
State and Year F.E.s                            Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
Household income F.E.s                          Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
Household controls                              Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes
Observations                                   78739      78161        60152       59720      18587        18441
R-squared                                       0.62       0.62         0.45        0.45       0.48         0.48
Panel B                                          (1)        (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)
Dependent Variable:                                             Ratio of Consumption to Income
Sample:                                              All                 Middle Income            Low Income

Log(ConsumptionofRich)                         0.206                    0.206                     0.165
                                             [0.044]**                [0.044]**                  [0.116]
Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich)                                 0.067                     0.091                    -0.001
                                                          [0.033]*                 [0.025]**                  [0.078]
State and Year F.E.s                            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Household income F.E.s                          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Household controls                              Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Observations                                   78739       78161        78739        59720        18587        18441
R-squared                                       0.5          0.5         0.5          0.38         0.32         0.32

Note: Data Source: CEX and the March CPS, 1980 to 2008. See text for details of sample construction. In columns 1
and 2, the sample includes all households whose real household income is below the 80th percentile in the state-year
cell. In columns 3 and 4 (Middle Income), the sample is restricted to households whose real income is between the
20th and 80th percentile in the state-year cell. In columns 5 and 6 (Low Income), the sample is restricted to household
whose real income is below the 20th percentile in the state-year cell. Income and consumption measures are in real
terms (1999=100). Log(Consumption) is the logarithm of total consumption for a given household in a given state and
year. Log(ConsumptionofRich) is the logarithm of average consumption among rich (e.g. above 80th percentile)
households in a given state in the current year and prior two years. Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich) is the logarithm of
average consumption among very rich (e.g. above 90th percentile) households in a given state in the current year and
prior two years. Household income F.E.s are are dummies for $2000 buckets of total household income. Household
controls include a quadratic in age of head, dummies for the head’s gender, race and education, and dummies for the
number of adults and children in the household. Each observation is weighted by the household head weight provided
in the CEX Surveys. All regressions are estimated using OLS. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. *
significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
                                 Table 2: Effect of Top Income Levels on Non-Rich Consumption
Panel A                                (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)                   (7)          (8)
Dependent Variable:                                                     Log(Consumption)
Sample:                                      All              Middle Income          Low Income                     Middle Income

Log(80thPercentileIncome)              0.234                       0.279                  0.112                   0.286
                                      [0.112]*                    [0.110]*               [0.139]                 [0.127]*
Log(90thPercentileIncome)                               0.184                  0.226                  0.078                     0.211
                                                       [0.093]                [0.096]*               [0.108]                   [0.109]
Log(20thPercentileIncome)                                                                                          -0.008       0.021
                                                                                                                  [0.065]      [0.065]
State and Year F.E.s                    Yes              Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Household income F.E.s                  Yes              Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Household controls                      Yes              Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Observations                           78739            78739      60152        60152      18587       18587       60152        60151
R-squared                               0.62             0.62       0.45         0.45       0.48        0.48        0.45         0.45
Panel B                                  (1)              (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)
Dependent Variable:                                                      Ratio of Consumption to Income
Sample:                                          All                 Middle Income            Low Income            Middle Income

Log(80thPercentileIncome)              0.316                        0.343                 0.174                    0.36
                                      [0.146]*                    [0.125]**              [0.249]                 [0.140]*
Log(90thPercentileIncome)                               0.254                  0.283                  0.122                     0.271
                                                       [0.120]*               [0.109]*               [0.193]                  [0.120]*
Log(20thPercentileIncome)                                                                                          -0.018       0.017
                                                                                                                  [0.066]      [0.067]
State and Year F.E.s                    Yes              Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Household income F.E.s                  Yes              Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Household controls                      Yes              Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Observations                           78739            78739      60152       60152      18587       18587        60152        60152
R-squared                               0.5              0.5        0.38        0.38       0.32        0.32         0.38         0.38

Note: Data Source: CEX and the March CPS, 1980 to 2008. See text for details of sample construction. In columns 1 and 2, the sample
includes all households whose real household income is below the 80th percentile in the state-year cell. In columns 3, 4, 7 and 8
(Middle Income), the sample is restricted to households whose real income is between the 20th and 80th percentile in the state-year
cell. In columns 5 and 6 (Low Income), the sample is restricted to household whose real income is below the 20th percentile in the state-
year cell. Income and consumption measures are in real terms (1999=100). Log(Consumption) is the logarithm of total consumption for
a given household in a given state and year. Log(80/90/20th PercentileIncome) is the logarithm of the average of the 80/90/20th
percentile of household income distribution in a given state in the current year and the prior two years. Household income F.E.s are are
dummies for $2000 buckets of total household income. Household controls include a quadratic in age of head, dummies for the head’s
gender, race and education, and dummies for the number of adults and children in the household. Each observation is weighted by the
household head weight provided in the CEX Surveys. All regressions are estimated using OLS. Standard errors are clustered at the state
level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
                                                           Table 3: Effect of Rich Consumption on Non-Rich Consumption: IV Regressions
                                                         (1)                  (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)             (6)                       (7)              (8)              (9)
                                             First Stage Regression for
                                                Columns (2) and (6)
Dependent Variable:                         Log(ConsumptionofRich)                          Log(Consumption)                                             Ratio of Consumption to Income
Sample:                                                  All                 All     Middle Income Low Income Middle Income          All                Middle Income Low Income Middle Income

Log(80thPercentileIncome)                              0.585
                                                     [0.199]**
Log(95thPercentileIncome)                               0.24
                                                      [0.201]
Log(ConsumptionofRich)                                                     0.282           0.339            0.138                            0.395           0.422             0.245
                                                                          [0.133]*        [0.139]*         [0.146]                          [0.175]*        [0.164]*          [0.266]
Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich)                                                                                                  0.213                                                              0.275
                                                                                                                           [0.097]*                                                           [0.108]*
State and Year F.E.s                                    Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes
Household income F.E.s                                  Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes
Household controls                                      Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes
Observations                                           78739               78739           60152           18587            59720             78739          60152            18587            59720
R-squared                                               0.81
First Stage F-Statistic                                20.72

Note: Data Source: CEX and the March CPS, 1980 to 2008. See text for details of sample construction. In columns 1, 2 and 6, the sample includes all households whose real household income is
below the 80th percentile in the state-year cell. In columns 3, 5, 7 and 9 (Middle Income), the sample is restricted to households whose real income is between the 20th and 80th percentile in the state-
year cell. In columns 4 and 8 (Low Income), the sample is restricted to household whose real income is below the 20th percentile in the state-year cell. Income and consumption measures are in real
terms (1999=100). Log(Consumption) is the logarithm of total consumption for a given household in a given state and year. Log(ConsumptionofRich) is the logarithm of average consumption among
rich (e.g. above 80th percentile) households in a given state in the current year and prior two years. Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich) is the logarithm of average consumption among very rich (e.g. above
90th percentile) households in a given state in the current year and prior two years. Log(80/95th PercentileIncome) is the logarithm of the average of the 80/95th percentile of household income
distribution in a given state in the current year and the prior two years. Household income F.E.s are dummies for $2000 buckets of total household income. Household controls include a quadratic in
age of head, dummies for the head’s gender, race and education, and dummies for the number of adults and children in the household. Each observation is weighted by the household head weight
provided in the CEX Surveys. All columns except column 1 report second-stage results. Column 1 is the first stage regression for the second stage regressions in columns 2 and 6. The first stage
regressions for the specifications in columns 3, 4, 7 and 8 is similar to that in Column 1 on the restricted samples. In columns 5 and 9, we use Log(90th PercentileIncome) and
Log(95thPercentileIncome) as instruments for Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich). Standard errors are clustered at the state level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
                                               Table 4: Do Higher Top Income Levels Today Predict Higher or More Stable Future Income for the Non-Rich?
Panel A                            (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)                           (12)           (13)         (14)
                                                                                                                                   Log (average HH income) Log (average HH income) S.D. of Log(HH income)
Dependent Variable:                 Log(HH income) in t+1                Log(HH income) in t+2           Log(HH income) in t+4
                                                                                                                                     between t+1 and t+2     between t+1 and t+4     between t+1 and t+4

Log(HH income)                    0.689        0.689      0.17     0.625            0.625     0.073    0.547              0.547        0.636         0.636          0.585         0.585         -0.102       -0.102
                                [0.007]**   [0.007]** [0.015]** [0.008]**        [0.008]** [0.015]** [0.009]**         [0.009]**    [0.007]**     [0.007]**      [0.007]**     [0.007]**      [0.006]**    [0.006]**
Log(80thPercentileIncome)         0.019        0.121     0.012    -0.116            0.021     0.016    -0.21             -0.095       -0.017        0.041          -0.056        0.027          0.161        0.112
                                 [0.096]     [0.159]   [0.213]   [0.083]          [0.147]   [0.176]   [0.122]           [0.126]      [0.080]       [0.139]        [0.084]       [0.114]       [0.042]**     [0.086]
Log(50thPercentileIncome)                     -0.047     0.223                     -0.066     0.126                      -0.095                     -0.009                       -0.048                       0.051
                                             [0.250]   [0.293]                    [0.186]   [0.246]                     [0.181]                    [0.185]                      [0.154]                     [0.106]
Log(20thPercentileIncome)                     -0.068    -0.023                     -0.089    -0.082                       -0.03                      -0.06                       -0.042                      -0.003
                                             [0.094]   [0.114]                    [0.087]   [0.109]                     [0.098]                    [0.073]                      [0.069]                     [0.043]
State and Year F.E.s              Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes              Yes       Yes      Yes                Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes
Household F.E.s                    No            No       Yes       No                No       Yes       No                 No          No             No           No             No            No            No
HH time-varying controls          Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes              Yes       Yes      Yes                Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes
Observations                     55870        55870     55870     55377            55377     55377     42293             42293        64993         64993         71596          71596          50468        50468
R-squared                         0.65          0.65      0.79     0.57              0.57      0.78     0.51               0.51        0.64           0.64         0.62           0.62           0.1           0.1
Panel B                            (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)          (8)           (9)          (10)          (11)           (12)           (13)         (14)
                                                                                                                                   Log (average HH income) Log (average HH income) S.D. of Log(HH income)
Dependent Variable:                 Log(HH income) in t+1                Log(HH income) in t+2           Log(HH income) in t+4
                                                                                                                                     between t+1 and t+2     between t+1 and t+4     between t+1 and t+4
Log (HH income)                   0.689        0.689      0.17     0.625            0.625     0.073    0.546              0.547        0.636         0.636          0.585         0.585         -0.102       -0.102
                                [0.007]**   [0.007]** [0.015]** [0.008]**        [0.008]** [0.015]** [0.009]**         [0.009]**    [0.007]**     [0.007]**      [0.007]**     [0.007]**      [0.006]**    [0.006]**
Log(90thPercentileIncome)         0.014        0.053     0.022    -0.116           -0.042    -0.027    -0.25             -0.217       -0.029        -0.024         -0.069        -0.045         0.139         0.065
                                 [0.095]     [0.126]   [0.167]   [0.084]          [0.126]   [0.178]   [0.132]           [0.147]      [0.082]       [0.107]        [0.086]       [0.094]       [0.046]**     [0.074]
Log(50thPercentileIncome)                      0.008     0.214                      -0.01     0.163                       0.006                      0.049                        0.014                       0.093
                                             [0.214]   [0.269]                    [0.173]   [0.258]                     [0.176]                    [0.153]                      [0.129]                     [0.090]
Log(20thPercentileIncome)                     -0.071    -0.021                     -0.102    -0.089                      -0.061                     -0.072                       -0.055                      -0.005
                                             [0.096]   [0.119]                    [0.091]   [0.116]                     [0.098]                    [0.073]                      [0.068]                     [0.042]
State and Year F.E.s              Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes              Yes       Yes      Yes                Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes
Household F.E.s                    No            No       Yes       No                No       Yes       No                 No          No             No           No              No           No            No
HH time-varying controls          Yes           Yes       Yes       Yes              Yes       Yes      Yes                Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes
Observations                     55870        55870     55870     55377            55377     55377     42293             42293        64993         64993         71596          71596          50468        50468
R-squared                         0.65          0.65      0.79     0.57              0.57      0.78     0.51               0.51        0.64           0.64         0.62            0.62          0.1           0.1

Note: Data source is the PSID, 1980 to 2006. The sample is restricted to those household-year observations where household income is below the 80th percentile in the state-year cell. See text for details.
Household time-varying controls include a quadratic in head's age, dummies for the head of household’s gender, race, education, and marital status, and dummies for the number of adults and children in the
household. Log(80/90/50/20th PercentileIncome) is the logarithm of the average of the 80/90/50/20th percentile of household income distribution in a given state in the current year and the prior two years.
Samples in columns 1 to 8 is restricted to observations for which the relevant future income variable is observed. Samples in columns 9 to 14 include all observations for which at least one of the future income
variable is observed; average is taken based on the number of observed values. All regressions are estimated using OLS. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
                                                     Table 5: Home Equity Channel
                                                                       (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)
Panel A:                                                                   Effect of Rich Consumption on Non-Rich Consumption
Dependent Variable:                                                                           Log(Consumption)
Sample:                                                                                         Middle Income
Log(ConsumptionofRich)                                               0.186                     0.168                 0.199
                                                                  [0.037]**                 [0.045]**             [0.037]**
Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich)                                                          0.08                   0.059                0.084
                                                                                [0.024]**                 [0.038]           [0.023]**
Log(ConsumptionofRich)*Homeowner                                     0.042
                                                                    [0.025]
Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich)*Homeowner                                               0.031
                                                                                  [0.021]
Log(ConsumptionofRich)*(Year<=1995)                                                            0.091
                                                                                             [0.037]*
Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich)*(Year<=1995)                                                                    0.077
                                                                                                          [0.045]
Log(ConsumptionofRich)*(Housing supply elasticity<1)
                                                                                                                     0.123
Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich)*(Housing supply elasticity<1)                                                          [0.035]**
                                                                                                                                0.093
                                                                                                                            [0.027]**
State and Year F.E.s                                                  Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
Household income F.E.s                                                Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
Household controls                                                    Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
Observations                                                         59139         58728       60152       59720     58434     58002
R-squared                                                             0.47          0.46        0.45        0.45      0.45      0.45
                                                                       (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)
Panel B:                                                                   Effect of Top Income Levels on Non-Rich Consumption
Dependent Variable:                                                                           Log(Consumption)
Sample:                                                                                         Middle Income
Log(80thPercentileIncome)                                            0.293                     0.224                 0.275
                                                                   [0.114]*                  [0.109]*              [0.113]*
Log(90thPercentileIncome)                                                          0.237                    0.16                0.225
                                                                                 [0.096]*                 [0.097]            [0.099]*
Log(80thPercentileIncome)*Homeowner                                   0.04
                                                                    [0.034]
Log(90thPercentileIncome)*Homeowner                                                0.031
                                                                                  [0.029]
Log(80thPercentileIncome)*(Year<=1995)                                                          0.09
                                                                                              [0.054]
Log(90thPercentileIncome)*(Year<=1995)                                                                     0.119
                                                                                                          [0.062]
Log(80thPercentileIncome)*(Housing supply elasticity<1)                                                              0.011
                                                                                                                    [0.082]
Log(90thPercentileIncome)*(Housing supply elasticity<1)                                                                        -0.006
                                                                                                                              [0.052]
State and Year F.E.s                                                  Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
Household income F.E.s                                                Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
Household controls                                                    Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes
Observations                                                         59139         59139       60152       60152     58434     58434
R-squared                                                             0.46          0.46        0.45        0.45      0.45      0.45

Note: Data Source: CEX and the March CPS, 1980 to 2008. See text for details of sample construction. In all regressions, the sample is restricted
to households whose real income is between the 20th and 80th percentile in the state-year cell (Middle Income). Income and consumption
measures are in real terms (1999=100). Log(Consumption) is the logarithm of total consumption for a given household in a given state and year.
Log(ConsumptionofRich) is the logarithm of average consumption among rich (e.g. above 80th percentile) households in a given state in the
current year and prior two years. Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich) is the logarithm of average consumption among very rich (e.g. above 90th
percentile) households in a given state in the current year and prior two years. Log(80/90th PercentileIncome) is the logarithm of the average of
the 80/90th percentile of household income distribution in a given state in the current year and the prior two years. Household income F.E.s are
dummies for $2000 buckets of total household income. Household controls include a quadratic in age of head, dummies for the head’s gender,
race and education, and dummies for the number of adults and children in the household. Also included in columns 1 and 2 is a dummy variable
for whether the CEX respondent is a homeowner. Each observation is weighted by the household head weight provided in the CEX Surveys. All
regressions are estimated using OLS.Standard errors are clustered at the state level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
              Table 6: Expectations about Future Income Growth and Top Income Levels
Panel A                                   (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)
Dependent Variable:                           Expect Real Income to Go Up in the Next Year (Y=1)

Sample:                                                            All                         Middle Income
Log(80thPercentileIncome)                     -0.054      -0.091                              -0.069
                                             [0.029]     [0.056]                             [0.065]
Log(90thPercentileIncome)                                                 -0.055    -0.071               -0.055
                                                                         [0.030]   [0.045]              [0.057]
Log(50thPercentileIncome)                                 0.025                     0.008     0.007      -0.005
                                                         [0.071]                   [0.065]   [0.074]    [0.071]
Log(20thPercentileIncome)                                 0.017                     0.017     0.017      0.017
                                                         [0.038]                   [0.039]   [0.045]    [0.046]

Household income F.E.s                         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
State and Year F.E.s                           Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
Individual controls                            Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
Observations                                 126177     126177    126177     126177     105748      105748
R-squared                                      0.1        0.1       0.1        0.1        0.1         0.1
Panel B                                        (1)        (2)       (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)
Dependent Variable:                           Expected Percent Change in Household Income in the Next Year

Sample:                                                            All                          Middle Income
Log(80thPercentileIncome)                     -3.015      -2.821                               -2.63
                                             [1.637]     [2.670]                             [2.809]
Log(90thPercentileIncome)                                                 -1.913    -0.589                 -0.12
                                                                         [1.609]   [2.003]               [2.264]
Log(50thPercentileIncome)                                 -0.713                     -2.44    0.372       -1.561
                                                         [2.714]                   [2.389]   [2.669]     [2.504]
Log(20thPercentileIncome)                                 0.547                     0.797     -0.226       0.08
                                                         [1.241]                   [1.289]   [1.473]     [1.524]

Household income F.E.s                        Yes         Yes             Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
State and Year F.E.s                          Yes         Yes             Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
Individual controls                           Yes         Yes             Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes
Observations                                 117534      117534          117534    117534     99629       99629
R-squared                                     0.07        0.07            0.07      0.07       0.06        0.06

Note: Data source is the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, 1980 to 2008. The sample is restricted
to those household-year observations where household income is below the 80th percentile in the state-year cell.
In columns 5 and 6 (Middle Income), the sample is restricted to households whose real income is between the
20th and 80th percentile in the state-year cell. See text for details. Log(80/90/50/20th PercentileIncome) is the
logarithm of the average of the 80/90/50/20th percentile of household income distribution in a given state in the
current year and the prior two years. Individual controls include a quadratic in age, dummies for the respondent’s
gender, race, education and marital status, and dummies for the number of adults and children in the household.
Household income fixed effects are dummies for $2000 buckets of total household income. Each observation is
weighted by the household head weight provided in the Surveys. All regressions are estimated using OLS.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
                                             Table 7: Local Price Channel
                                         (1)             (2)        (3)            (4)          (5)             (6)
Dependent Variable:                       Log(Local CPI)                          Log(Consumption)
Sample:                                   State-year panel                          Middle Income
Log(80thPercentileIncome)              0.528                                      0.239
                                     [0.110]**                                   [0.133]
Log(90thPercentileIncome)                              0.321                                                   0.184
                                                     [0.088]**                                                [0.111]
Log(50thPercentileIncome)              -0.217          -0.069
                                      [0.121]         [0.112]
Log(20thPercentileIncome)               0.08           0.067
                                      [0.062]         [0.062]
Log(ConsumptionofRich)                                            0.221
                                                                [0.041]**
Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich)                                                                      0.088
                                                                                              [0.029]**
Log(Local CPI)                                                      0.031         0.079         0.069          0.088
                                                                   [0.055]       [0.066]       [0.065]        [0.061]
State and Year F.E.s                   Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Household income F.E.s                  No             No            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Household controls                      No             No            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
Observations                           554            554           51911         51911         51617          51911
R-squared                              0.95           0.95           0.44          0.44          0.44           0.44

Note: Data Source: CEX, March CPS, and BLS (Local CPI), 1980 to 2008. See text for details of sample construction. In
columns 1 and 2, the sample is a state-year panel covering all the states and years included in the CEX sample.
Observations are equally weighted in columns 1 and 2. In columns 3 to 6, the CEX sample is restricted to households
whose real income is between the 20th and 80th percentile in the state-year cell (Middle Income). Income and
consumption measures are in real terms (1999=100). Log(Consumption) is the logarithm of total consumption for a given
household in a given state and year. Log(ConsumptionofRich) is the logarithm of average consumption among rich (e.g.
above 80th percentile) households in a given state in the current year and prior two years. Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich)
is the logarithm of average consumption among very rich (e.g. above 90th percentile) households in a given state in the
current year and prior two years. Log(80/90/50/20th PercentileIncome) is the logarithm of the average of the
80/90/50/20th percentile of household income distribution in a given state in the current year and the prior two years.
Household income F.E.s are dummies for $2000 buckets of total household income. Household controls include a
quadratic in age of head, dummies for the head’s gender, race and education, and dummies for the number of adults and
children in the household. Each observation in columns 3 to 6 is weighted by the household head weight provided in the
CEX Surveys. All regressions are estimated using OLS. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. * significant at
5%; ** significant at 1%.
   Table 8: Expenditure Share Sensitivities to Top Income Levels: Relationship to Income Elasticity and Visibility of the
                                                   Expenditure Category
                                    (1)          (2)       (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)         (7)          (8)
Panel A:                                                        Log(80thPercentileIncome)
                                               Estimated Coefficient on
                                                                                                 Estimated Coefficient on
Dependent Variable:                      Log(80thPercentileIncome) Relative to
                                                                                        Log(80thPercentileIncome) is Positive (Y=1)
                                                    Budget Share

Sample:                                         All              Exclude Shelter                   All             Exclude Shelter

Income elasticity                       0.709                   0.709                     0.386                   0.386
                                      [0.242]**               [0.246]**                  [0.277]                 [0.282]
Visibility                              1.306                    1.306                    1.039                    1.04
                                       [0.519]*                [0.529]*                  [0.595]                 [0.606]
More income elastic (Y=1)                            0.564                 0.565                0.382                          0.382
                                                  [0.144]**             [0.147]**             [0.169]*                       [0.172]*
More visible (Y=1)                                   0.361                  0.36                 0.36                          0.359
                                                   [0.164]*              [0.167]*              [0.192]                        [0.196]
Observations                              29           29         28         28       29          29               28            28
R-squared                                0.38         0.51       0.38       0.51     0.17        0.31             0.17          0.32
                                          (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)         (6)              (7)           (8)
Panel A:                                                              Log(90thPercentileIncome)
                                               Estimated Coefficient on
                                                                                                 Estimated Coefficient on
Dependent Variable:                      Log(90thPercentileIncome) Relative to
                                                                                        Log(90thPercentileIncome) is Positive (Y=1)
                                                    Budget Share

Sample:                                         All              Exclude Shelter                   All             Exclude Shelter


Income elasticity                       0.873                   0.873                     0.673                    0.673
                                      [0.241]**               [0.245]**                 [0.260]*                 [0.265]*
Visibility                              1.365                   1.366                     0.705                    0.706
                                       [0.529]*                [0.539]*                  [0.571]                  [0.582]
More income elastic (Y=1)                           0.594                   0.596                      0.524                   0.525
                                                  [0.160]**               [0.163]**                  [0.167]**               [0.170]**
More visible (Y=1)                                  0.303                   0.302                      0.082                   0.081
                                                   [0.184]                 [0.187]                    [0.192]                 [0.196]
Observations                              29          29          28          28           29            29        28            28
R-squared                                0.44        0.45        0.44        0.46         0.25          0.31      0.25          0.31

Note: Data Source: CEX, March CPS, and BLS (for Local CPI and category-specific CPI), 1980 to 2008. The unit of observation is
an expenditure category. The dependent variables are constructed based on the estimated coefficients on Log(80thPercentileIncome)
(Panel A) and Log(90thPercentileIncome) (Panel B) for each each expenditure category following the estimation of the demand
system equation (5) in the text on the sub-sample of middle income households (households whose real income is between the 20th
and 80th percentile in the state-year cell). The estimated coefficients for each expenditure category are reported in Appendix Table
A4. In all regressions, each observation is weighted by the inverse of the square of the standard error of the estimated coefficient.
Income elasticity and visibility index (from Heffetz 2011) for each expenditure category are reported in Appendix Table A4. "More
visible" equals 1 for the subset of expenditure categories with a visibility index larger or equal to .5. "Less income elastic" equals 1
for the subset of expenditure categories with an income elasticity of consumption of the category larger or equal to .75. For ease of
reading, see appendix Table A5 for lists of more/less visible and more/less income elastic categories under these definitions. *
significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
                                                                             Table 9: Counterfactual Analysis
                                         (1)                         (2)                     (3)                   (4)                             (5)                        (6)
Panel A:                                                                      Counterfactual Analysis for Column 3 of Table 2, Panel A
                                    Change in
                                                     Change in Consumption              Actual Personal         Additional Savings      Actual Personal Savings     Personal Savings Rate
           Variable:          Log(Consumption) under
                                                      under counterfactual              Savings (NIPA)         under counterfactual          Rate (NIPA)             under counterfactual
                                  counterfactual
1990                                   -0.008                     -307.560                276.700               13.312                           0.065                       0.068
2000                                   -0.021                     -805.440                213.100               52.688                           0.029                       0.036
2005                                   -0.026                    -1271.250                143.200               99.338                           0.015                       0.026
2008                                   -0.028                    -1295.670                592.300              115.003                           0.054                       0.064
                                         (1)                         (2)                    (3)                   (4)                             (5)                         (6)
Panel B:                                                                     Counterfactual Analysis for Column 4 of Table 2, Panel A
                                    Change in
                                                     Change in Consumption              Actual Personal         Additional Savings      Actual Personal Savings     Personal Savings Rate
           Variable:          Log(Consumption) under
                                                      under counterfactual              Savings (NIPA)         under counterfactual          Rate (NIPA)             under counterfactual
                                  counterfactual
1990                                  -0.011                -419.780                        276.700                  18.168                      0.065                       0.069
2000                                  -0.028               -1066.720                        213.100                  69.780                      0.029                       0.039
2005                                  -0.032               -1571.150                        143.200                  122.773                     0.015                       0.029
2008                                  -0.034               -1562.710                        592.300                  138.706                     0.054                       0.066
Notes: Source: Author's calculation, CEX, NIPA, and Census (for number of households). Reported in the Table are estimated changes in middle-income households' consumption
and the aggregate personal savings rate using the estimates of columns 2 and 3 of Table 2 under the counteractual assumption that income at the 80th Percentile (Panel A) or 90th
Percentile (Panel B) grew at the same rate as income at the 50th Percentile. See text for details. Figures in column (2) are in real dollars. Figures in columns (3) and (4) are in billions
of nominal dollars.
                                                    Table 10: Personal Bankruptcy Filings and Top Income Levels
                                    (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)        (7)          (8)         (9)                  (10)        (11)
Dependent Variable:                                                         Log (Number of Personal Bankruptcy Filings/Population)
                                                                                                               1980, 1985, 1990,
Sample:                                                    All years                                          1995, 2000, 2005 and                   All years
                                                                                                                      2009

Log(80thPercentileIncome)     1.06                          0.994                     1.018                     1.289                     0.896        1.024        1.167
(t-2)                       [0.406]*                      [0.365]**                 [0.343]**                 [0.474]**                 [0.261]**    [0.347]**     [0.639]
Log(90thPercentileIncome)                      1.321                     0.917                       0.839                    1.144
(t-2 )                                       [0.355]**                  [0.379]*                  [0.395]*                 [0.485]*
Log unemployment rate                                                                  0.176         0.183      0.164         0.168        0.217        0.171        0.171
(t)                                                                                 [0.048]**    [0.050]**     [0.088]      [0.090]     [0.047]**    [0.049]**    [0.049]**
Log(80thPercentileIncome)                                                             -0.209        -0.181      0.051         0.054       -0.414       -0.109       -0.045
(t)                                                                                  [0.286]       [0.300]     [0.535]      [0.535]      [0.258]      [0.320]      [0.298]
Log(50thPercentileIncome)                                                             -0.426        -0.398      -0.82        -0.735        -0.14       -0.573       -0.605
(t)                                                                                  [0.381]       [0.380]     [0.621]      [0.613]      [0.265]      [0.415]      [0.415]
Log(20thPercentileIncome)                                                             -0.145        -0.126      0.052         0.047       -0.361       -0.169       -0.218
(t)                                                                                  [0.238]       [0.235]     [0.337]      [0.333]     [0.131]**     [0.228]      [0.204]
Log(50thPercentileIncome)                                                                                                                                           -0.621
(t-2)                                                                                                                                                              [0.858]
Log(20thPercentileIncome)                                                                                                                                            0.514
(t-2)                                                                                                                                                              [0.489]
State F.E.s                    No               No          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes
Year F.E.s                     No               No          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes
State F.E.s*year               No               No           No           No           No           No            No         Yes          Yes           No             No
Log(1976-1978 average 80thPe No                 No           No           No           No           No            No          No           No          Yes            Yes
Observations                  1530             1530         1530         1530         1530         1530          357         357          1530         1530          1530
R-squared                     0.04             0.08         0.87         0.87         0.88         0.88          0.91        0.91         0.92         0.88           0.88

Note: Dataset is a state-year panel of number of personal bankruptcy filings (1980 to 2009). Datasource: www.abiworld.org<http://www.abiworld.org. The dependent
variable is the logarithm of the number of bankruptcy filings per capita. Population estimates by state and year are from the Census (1980-1984 : 1980 Census; 1985-
1994: 1990 Census; 1995-2004: 2000 Census; 2005-2009: 2010 Census). The mean of the number of bankruptcy filings per capita is .34 percent. Log(80/90/50/20th
PercentileIncome) (t) is the logarithm of the 80/90/50/20th percentile of household income distribution in a given state in the current year. Log(80/90/50/20th
PercentileIncome) (t-2 to t-4) is the logarithm of the average of the 80/90/50/20th percentile of household income distribution in a given state two to four years prior to
the current year.Unemployment rate by state and year is from the March CPS. Each observation is weighted by population in the state-year cell. All regressions are
estimated using OLS. Standard errors are clustered at the state level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
                                Table 11: Current Financial Well-Being and Top Income Levels
Panel A                                   (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)                   (6)
Dependent Variable:                                         Worse Off Financial than a Year Ago (Y=1)
                                                                   All                                        Middle Income
Sample:
Log(80thPercentileIncome)                 0.228          0.226                                            0.234
                                        [0.065]**       [0.090]*                                         [0.093]*
Log(90thPercentileIncome)                                                   0.25       0.244                        0.239
                                                                         [0.059]**  [0.076]**                     [0.074]**
Log(50thPercentileIncome)                               0.058                          0.049          0.031         0.032
                                                       [0.103]                        [0.100]        [0.107]       [0.100]
Log(20thPercentileIncome)                               -0.061                         -0.049         -0.06         -0.049
                                                       [0.056]                        [0.057]        [0.060]       [0.060]
Household income F.E.s                    Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
State and Year F.E.s                      Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
Individual controls                       Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes           Yes
Observations                             126551        126551        126551           126551        105985         105985
R-squared                                 0.07           0.07          0.07             0.07           0.06          0.06
Panel B                                    (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)            (5)           (6)
Dependent Variable:                            More Expenses/More Debt, Int. and Debt Payments than a Year Ago (Y=1)
                                                                   All                                        Middle Income
Sample:
Log(80thPercentileIncome)                 0.031           0.026                                            0.034
                                         [0.026]         [0.035]                                          [0.041]
Log(90thPercentileIncome)                                                  0.043          0.048                             0.061
                                                                          [0.022]        [0.027]                         [0.027]*
Log(50thPercentileIncome)                                  0.006                          -0.01            -0.022          -0.043
                                                         [0.038]                         [0.035]          [0.048]         [0.041]
Log(20thPercentileIncome)                                 -0.001                          0.004             0.02           0.027
                                                         [0.023]                         [0.023]          [0.028]         [0.027]
Household income F.E.s                    Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
State and Year F.E.s                      Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Individual controls                       Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Observations                             126701          126701           126701         126701           106090          106090
R-squared                                 0.01              0.01           0.01            0.01             0.01            0.01

Note: Data source is the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, 1980 to 2008. The sample is restricted to those household-
year observations where household income is below the 80th percentile in the state-year cell. In columns 5 and 6 (Middle
Income), the sample is restricted to households whose real income is between the 20th and 80th percentile in the state-year cell.
See text for details. Log(80/90/50/20th PercentileIncome) is the logarithm of the average of the 80/90/50/20th percentile of
household income distribution in a given state in the current year and the prior two years. Individual controls include a quadratic in
age, dummies for the respondent’s gender, race, education and marital status, and dummies for the number of adults and children in
the household. Household income fixed effects are dummies for $2000 buckets of total household income. Each observation is
weighted by the household head weight provided in the Surveys. All regressions are estimated using OLS. Standard errors are
clustered at the state level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
                             Table 12: Republican Congressmen's Voting on H.R. 5334
                                                                      Dependent Variable: Yes Vote
                                                             (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)                    (5)
Log(80thPercentileIncome)-Log(50thPercentileIncome)        1.077                  1.053         1                    0.961
                                                          [0.536]*               [0.564]    [0.564]                 [0.565]
Log(90thPercentileIncome)-Log(50thPercentileIncome)                    0.52
                                                                     [0.342]
Log(50thPercentileIncome)                                                         -0.03       0.028                   0.121
                                                                                 [0.206]    [0.211]                 [0.228]
Log(50thPercentileIncome)-Log(20thPercentileIncome)                                          -0.524                  -0.431
                                                                                            [0.420]                 [0.428]
Log(population)                                                                                                       0.471
                                                                                                                    [0.439]
Log(share finance)

State F.E.s                                                        Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
Observations                                                       163         163          163          163         163
R-squared                                                          0.33        0.32         0.33         0.34        0.34

Note: Included in the table are all Republican Congressmen that expressed a vote on H.R. 5334.
Log(80/90/50/20thPercentileIncome) refer to the 80/90/50/20th percentile of household income in each of these
Congressmen's Congressional District in the 1990 Census. These measures are obtained by mapping 102nd Congress'
Congressional District lines into 1990 Census information. Log(population) is also constructed at the Congressional District
level using the same mapping. Standard errors are in brackets. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
                      Appendix Table A1: Summary Statistics - CEX Sample, 1980 to 2008
Panel A: All Years

Variable:                                 N          Mean        Std. Dev.
Household income                        78739       31601.29     18549.47
Age of head of household                78739         49.34        18.10
Head of household is male               78739          0.55         0.50
Head of househols is white              78739          0.83         0.38
Head of household has bachelor or
graduate degree                         78739         0.21          0.41
Number of children in HH                78739         0.67          1.10
Number of adults in HH                  78739         1.83          0.83
Log(Consumption)                        78739         10.18         0.54
Log(ConsumptionofRich)                  78739         11.06         0.13
Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich)              78161         11.21         0.16
Log(80thPercentileIncome)               78739         11.15         0.12
Log(90thPercentileIncome)               78739         11.44         0.13
Log(95thPercentileIncome)               78739         11.68         0.14
Log(50thPercentileIncome)               78739         10.51         0.12
Log(20thPercentileIncome)               78739          9.65         0.14

Panel B: Means By Half-Decade
                                         1980-1984 1985-1989 1990-1994 1995-1999 2000-2004 2005-2008
Log(ConsumptionofRich)                      10.93         11.04        11.06         11.05        11.08        11.11
Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich)                  11.05         11.18        11.20         11.23        11.23        11.27
Log(80thPercentileIncome)                   11.04         11.11        11.14         11.17        11.20        11.20
Log(90thPercentileIncome)                   11.29         11.38        11.42         11.46        11.51        11.51
Log(95thPercentileIncome)                   11.50         11.60        11.65         11.71        11.76        11.76
Log(50thPercentileIncome)                   10.44         10.51        10.52         10.51        10.53        10.53
Log(20thPercentileIncome)                    9.59          9.64         9.65          9.63         9.67         9.67
Note: Data Source is the CEX and the March CPS, 1980 to 2008. The sample is restricted to households whose real
household income is below the 80th percentile in the state-year cell. See text for details of sample construction.
Income and consumption measures are reported in real terms (1999=100). Log(Consumption) is the logarithm of
total consumption for a given household in a given state and year. Log(ConsumptionofRich) is the logarithm of
average consumption among rich (e.g. above 80th percentile) households in a given state in the current year and prior
two years. Log(ConsumptionofVeryRich) is the logarithm of average consumption among very rich (e.g. above 90th
percentile) households in a given state in the current year and prior two years. Log(80/90/95/50/20th
PercentileIncome) is the logarithm of the average of the 80/90/95/50/20th percentile of household income
distribution in a given state in the current year and the prior two years. Each observation is weighted by the
household head weight provided in the CEX Surveys.
             Appendix Table A2: Summary Statistics - PSID Sample, 1980 to 2006

Variable:                                   N                   Mean                 Std. Dev.

Household income                         55627                28820.26               17784.39

Age of head of household                 55627                  43.17                  17.56

Head of household is male                55627                   0.65                  0.48

Head of househols is white               55627                   0.55                  0.50

Head of household is married             55627                   0.47                  0.50

Number of children in HH                 55627                   0.95                  1.26
Number of adults in HH                      55627                 2.71                   1.60
Note: Data Source is the PSID, 1980 to 2006. Summary statistics are reported for the sample in
columns (1) to (3) in Table 5, e.g. the sample of households with household income below the 80th
percentile in their state-year cell and households for which household income in t+1 is observed in
the data. Household income is reported in real terms (1999=100).
            Appendix Table A3: Summary Statistics - Michigan Surveys of Consumers, 1980 to 2008

Variable:                                                                         N          Mean       Std. Dev.
Household income                                                                126706     32183.01     17896.52
Age                                                                             126706       46.74       17.83
Male                                                                            126701        0.42        0.49
White                                                                           126706        0.82        0.38
Married (living with partner)                                                   126706        0.58        0.49
Number of children in HH                                                        126706        0.71        1.10
Number of adults in HH                                                          126706        1.82        0.73
Expect real income to go up in the next year (Y=1)                              126182        0.17        0.38
Expected percent change in household income in the next year                    117539        5.61       17.87
Worse off financially than a year ago (Y=1)                                     126556        0.32        0.47
More expenses/more debt, int. and debt payments than a year ago (Y=1)           126706        0.07        0.26
Note: Data Source is University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, 1980 to 2008. Sample is restricted to
respondents whose real household income is below the 80th percentile in the state-year cell. Household income is
reported in real terms (1999=100). Each obervation is weighted by the household head weight provided in the
Surveys.
                                                  Appendix Table A4: Effect of Rich Consumption and Top Income Levels on Non-Rich Expenditure Shares
                                        (1)               (2)             (3)                  (4)                           (5)                    (6)                             (7)
                                                                                                   Estimated Coefficient on:                 Estimated Coefficient Relative to Budget Share on:
Consumption Category:            Income Elasticity Visibility Index Budget Share Log(80thPercentileIncome) Log(90thPercentileIncome)   Log(80th PercentileIncome)        Log(90thPercentileIncome)
Food Away from Home                   1.241             0.620            0.05                 -0.01                         0.00                  -0.11                            -0.03
Food at Home                          0.234             0.510            0.24                 0.05                          0.05                   0.22                             0.21
Tobacco Products                      -0.240            0.760            0.01               -0.0067                       -0.0072                 -0.63                            -0.68
Alcohol Away from Home                1.148             0.600            0.00               0.0024                         0.0025                 0.53                              0.56
Alcohol at Home                       0.883             0.610            0.01               -0.0007                       -0.0019                 -0.12                            -0.36
Clothing                              0.748             0.710            0.03               0.0000                         0.0024                 0.00                              0.08
Jewelry                               0.788             0.670            0.00               0.0001                         0.0004                 0.04                              0.12
Salons, Fitness Clubs                 0.755             0.600            0.01                0.0047                        0.0047                  0.55                             0.55
Furniture                             1.006             0.680            0.02               -0.0067                       -0.0060                 -0.39                            -0.35
Health Insurance                      0.539             0.260            0.03               -0.0004                       -0.0052                 -0.01                            -0.18
Business Services                     0.957             0.260            0.01               -0.0006                       -0.0010                 -0.06                            -0.11
Recreation and Sports Eq.             1.153             0.660            0.02               -0.0106                       -0.0113                 -0.66                            -0.70
Other Recreation Services             0.982             0.580            0.03               -0.0030                        0.0021                 -0.11                             0.08
Charity                               0.865             0.340            0.02               0.0026                        -0.0030                 0.16                             -0.19
Interest Paid (non-durables)          0.396             0.260            0.00               -0.0022                       -0.0026                 -0.95                            -1.11
Home Improvement                      0.787             0.500            0.01               0.0011                        -0.0001                 0.12                             -0.01
Recre. Vehicles & Homes               0.256             0.660            0.00               0.0011                        -0.0016                 0.27                             -0.41
Appliances                            0.512             0.680            0.01               -0.0020                       -0.0019                 -0.38                            -0.36
Utilities                             0.482             0.310            0.06               -0.0282                       -0.0162                 -0.50                            -0.29
Health                                0.727             0.360            0.03               -0.0084                       -0.0092                 -0.28                            -0.31
Media                                 0.710             0.570            0.01               -0.0056                       -0.0044                 -0.49                            -0.38
Gas, Tolls, Mass Transit              0.510             0.390            0.05               -0.0234                       -0.0188                 -0.49                            -0.40
Travel                                1.084             0.460            0.01               -0.0008                        0.0005                 -0.10                             0.07
Education                             0.674             0.560            0.01               -0.0127                       -0.0154                 -1.11                            -1.35
Cars                                  1.129             0.730            0.11               -0.0456                       -0.0400                 -0.40                            -0.35
Domestic Services                     1.009             0.340            0.01               -0.0062                       -0.0051                 -0.50                            -0.41
Home Maintenance                      1.073             0.310            0.02               0.0089                         0.0046                 0.47                              0.24
Shelter                               0.661             0.500            0.18                0.1002                        0.0850                  0.54                             0.46
Phones                                0.393             0.470            0.03               -0.0024                       -0.0018                 -0.09                            -0.07

Note: "Budget Shares" are the mean budget shares for each expenditure category in the sample on middle income households across years (where each household is weighted using the CEX weight). "Estimated
Coefficients" refer to the estimated betas from the demand system in equation (5). See text for details. Estimated coefficients that are statistically significant at least at the 10 % level are reported in bold.
                   Appendix A5: Consumption Categories: More and Less Visible; More and Less Income Elastic
                  Less Visible                    More Visible             Less Income Elastic       More Income Elastic

          Interest Paid (non-durables)                        Shelter                  Tobacco Products             Salons, Fitness Clubs
                Health Insurance                       Home Improvement                  Food at Home                Home Improvement
               Business Services                          Food at Home             Recre. Vehicles & Homes                 Jewelry
                    Utilities                               Education                        Phones                        Charity
               Home Maintenance                               Media               Interest Paid (non-durables)        Alcohol at Home
                     Charity                        Other Recreation Services               Utilities                 Business Services
               Domestic Services                       Salons, Fitness Clubs        Gas, Tolls, Mass Transit      Other Recreation Services
                     Health                         Alcohol Away from Home                 Appliances                     Furniture
            Gas, Tolls, Mass Transit                     Alcohol at Home                Health Insurance              Domestic Services
                     Travel                          Food Away from Home                     Shelter                 Home Maintenance
                     Phones                         Recre. Vehicles & Homes                Education                        Travel
                                                    Recreation and Sports Eq.                Media                           Cars
                                                             Jewelry                         Health               Alcohol Away from Home
                                                            Appliances                      Clothing              Recreation and Sports Eq.
                                                             Furniture                                             Food Away from Home
                                                             Clothing
                                                               Cars
                                                        Tobacco Products

Note: Reported in the table are the groupings of consumption categories used for the analysis reported in Table 8. The categories listed
under "Less Visible" are those we mapped into a visibility index strictly less than .5 (using Heffetz 2011); the categories listed under "More
Visible" are those we mapped into a visibility index larger or equal to .5 (using Heffetz 2011). The categories listed under "Less Income
Elastic" are those for which we estimated an income elasticity of consumption of the category strictly less than .75; categories listed under
"Less Income Elastic" are those for which we estimated an income elasticity of consumption of the category larger or equal to .75.
