                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 EFFECTS OF WELFARE REFORM ON WOMEN’S CRIME

                                         Hope Corman
                                        Dhaval M. Dave
                                       Nancy E. Reichman

                                       Working Paper 18887
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18887


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2013




This research was funded in part by the Center for Health and Wellbeing at Princeton University. The
authors are grateful for helpful comments from Karen Conway, Anca Cotet, Donka Mirtcheva, Hani
Mansour, Michelle Phelps, Lucie Schmidt, and Anne Winkler, and participants at the 5th Transatlantic
Workshop on the Economics of Crime, and for valuable research assistance from Taána epková,
Dhiman Das, Farzana Razack, and Oliver Joszt. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Hope Corman, Dhaval M. Dave, and Nancy E. Reichman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Welfare Reform on Women’s Crime
Hope Corman, Dhaval M. Dave, and Nancy E. Reichman
NBER Working Paper No. 18887
March 2013, Revised June 2014
JEL No. H53,I3,J22,K42

                                             ABSTRACT

We investigate the effects of broad-based work incentives on female crime by exploiting the welfare
reform legislation of the 1990s, which dramatically increased employment among women at risk for
relying on cash assistance. We find that welfare reform decreased female property crime arrests by
4–5%, but did not affect other types of crimes. The effects appear to be stronger in states with lower
welfare benefits and higher earnings disregards, and in states with larger caseload declines. The findings
point to broad-based work incentives—and, by inference, employment—as a key determinant of female
property crime.


Hope Corman                                         Nancy E. Reichman
Department of Economics                             Robert Wood Johnson Medical School
Rider University                                    Department of Pediatrics
2083 Lawrenceville Road                             Child Health Institute of New Jersey
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648                             89 French St., Room 1348
and NBER                                            New Brunswick, NJ 08903
corman@rider.edu                                    reichmne@rwjms.rutgers.edu

Dhaval M. Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and NBER
ddave@bentley.edu
       Although crime is predominantly a male activity and the propensity to engage in crime is

much higher for males than for females with similar characteristics, females account for a non-

trivial proportion of arrests in the U.S. In 2011, females accounted for over 37% of arrests for

serious felony property crimes (burglary, larceny/theft, motor vehicle theft and arson) and almost

one fifth of arrests for the violent crimes of murder, manslaughter, rape, and felonious assault

(U.S. Department of Justice 2012). A large literature in economics, based on pioneering work by

Becker (1968) and Ehrlich (1973), has investigated determinants of crime. Most studies have

focused on reported crime rates, which do not provide information on the gender of the person

committing the crimes. Therefore, because most crimes are committed by males, the findings

from this literature do not necessarily apply to females.

       Many studies in the existing literature have investigated the effects of aggregate

employment variables on crime rates. Recent examples are studies by Raphael and Winter-

Ebmer (2001), Gould, Weinberg and Mustard (2002), Corman and Mocan (2005), Edmark

(2005), Ihlanfeldt (2006), and Lin (2008). All of these studies found that poor employment

prospects (such as high unemployment rates) are positively associated with property crime rates,

and—with the exception of the study by Ihlanfeldt, which focused on male youth in one city—

positively, but neither strongly nor consistently, related to violent crime rates. Overall, this

literature based primarily on males, suggests that the macro-level employment context could be

an important determinant of female crime.

       Sweeping policy changes in the 1990s dramatically altered work incentives for poor

women in the U.S. The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act

(PRWORA) of 1996, often referred to as “welfare reform,” ended entitlement to welfare benefits

under Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) and replaced AFDC with Temporary



                                                                                                   3
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) block grants to states. Features of the legislation included

work requirements as a condition for receiving benefits, time limits on cash assistance, and

increased state latitude in establishing program rules. Welfare reform has been considered a

success in that welfare rolls declined and employment rates of low-skilled mothers rose

dramatically after implementation and a good portion of those changes can be attributed to

welfare reform (Schoeni and Blank 2000; Ziliak 2006).

       In a recent comprehensive review, Bushway (2011) concluded that although there is a fair

amount of evidence that crime is related to employment-related factors, the large-scale policy

shift of welfare reform could potentially be leveraged to clarify the connections. Another

advantage to exploiting the welfare reform legislation in this way—not discussed by Bushway—

is that it would add to the almost non-existent literature on employment and crime among

women.

       Very few population-based studies have specifically focused on determinants of female

crime, with the most noteworthy analyses having been conducted over 25 years ago. Bartel

(1979) examined female arrests using a cross-section of states in 1970. She found that deterrence

variables were associated with arrest rates in the expected direction, and that marriage and labor

force participation rates, particularly of single women, were positively associated with arrest

rates for property crime. Phillips and Votey (1987) found that unemployment rates appeared to

be important in explaining increases in arrest rates of women between 1952 and 1979. Although

these studies were ground-breaking, labor force participation of women has increased, marriage

has decreased, female headship has increased, and birth rates have decreased over the past half

century (as described by McLanahan 2004). These sweeping changes, along with the availability

of new data and modern econometric techniques, call for a re-examination of the determinants of



                                                                                                     4
female crime.

       In this paper, we exploit welfare reform of the 1990s—a large-scale social experiment in

the U.S. that dramatically increased employment among women at risk for relying on public cash

assistance (i.e., generally, those with low human capital)—to investigate the effects of work

incentives on female crime. Exploiting changes in the implementation of welfare reform across

states and over time, we estimate the causal effects of the “work first” regime on adult women’s

arrests from 1992 to 2002, the period during which welfare reform unfolded. We consider

several different types of crime and investigate the extent to which the effects are stronger in

states with larger caseload declines, as economic theory would predict. We conduct a number of

specification and robustness checks. This study makes an important contribution to the virtually

non-existent literature on female crime by exploring the role of broad-based work incentives, and

by inference employment, in a contemporary context. It also adds to the economics of crime

literature by exploiting a human capital-related “natural experiment.” Finally, it provides

important information about potential secondary effects of an important large-scale policy shift

in the U.S.

Background

       Although welfare reform is often dated to the 1996 PRWORA legislation, there were two

distinct phases of implementation. The first phase started in the early 1990s when the Clinton

Administration greatly expanded the use and scope of “welfare waivers,” which allowed states to

implement experimental changes to their AFDC programs. Features of the various waivers, many

of which were implemented statewide, were increases the amount of earnings that recipients

were allowed to keep while maintaining welfare eligibility (earnings disregards), work

requirements as a condition for receiving cash assistance, time limits for the receipt of cash



                                                                                                   5
assistance, increased sanctions to recipients who failed to comply with work requirements or

other program rules, and/or elimination of increases in benefits to families who had additional

children while on welfare. The second phase of welfare reform was ushered in with the 1996

PRWORA legislation, which replaced the AFDC program with TANF block grants to states and

imposed a focused national “work first” regime with features including work requirements as a

condition of receiving welfare, stricter sanctions for non-compliance with program rules, a two-

year maximum length of a “welfare spell,” and notably, a lifetime limit of five years of welfare

benefits over a person’s lifetime. These “carrots and sticks” provide incentives for women at risk

for relying on public assistance (not just welfare recipients) to secure private sector employment,

as these policies reduce the benefits of welfare reliance compared to work and limit the practical

option of long-term reliance on public assistance.

       By most accounts, welfare reform has been deemed a great success. Bell (2001)

estimated that PRWORA reduced welfare caseloads by between 19 and 35% (Bell 2001), and

Dave, Corman and Reichman (2012) found using the 1992–2002 Current Population Survey in a

difference-in-difference framework that welfare reform overall raised the employment-to-

population ratio among at-risk women aged 21–49 years by about 7–8 percentage points. The

latter result is similar to estimates by other researchers (e.g., McKernan et al. 2000; Schoeni and

Blank 2000). Schoeni and Blank (2002) also found welfare reform led to increases in income

through legal employment in the early years of welfare reform, and Meyer and Sullivan (2004)

found that the consumption of most single mothers increased 1996 to 2000, as PRWORA

unfolded. The authors’ arguments for focusing on consumption rather than income were that

consumption is the more direct measure of economic well-being and that there is significant

underreporting of income among transfer recipients (particularly in-kind benefits).



                                                                                                      6
Effects of welfare on crime

       There have been few population-based studies on the effects of welfare policies or

participation on crime. One exception is a comprehensive report by Hill and O’Neill (1993) that

examined the effects of being on welfare, living in a neighborhood with a high welfare

participation rate, and welfare generosity (among many other variables) on a broad range of

“underclass behaviors.” Although this study has been cited as evidence by “welfare as a root

cause” proponents, the authors themselves are cautious about drawing conclusions from their

results, which they considered preliminary. In their analysis of males aged 22–29 from the 1979

National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, they found no significant effects of family welfare

participation or state welfare generosity on crime (measured as self-reported ever incarcerated).

They did, however, find a significant and positive association between living in a zip code with a

high level of welfare participation and crime, although causal inferences cannot be drawn and the

potential mechanisms between welfare and male crime are not obvious.

       Three of four existing published studies (all cross-sectional) of the effects of welfare

generosity on crime have produced consistent findings. Fishback, Johnson and Kantor (2010),

studying a panel of 83 cities between 1930 and 1940, found that New Deal relief decreased

property crime during the Great Depression. Zhang (1997) examined states in 1987 and found a

negative association between state AFDC generosity and property crime. Hannon and DeFronzo

(1998) studied urban counties in 1990 and found that welfare generosity was negatively related

to both violent and property crimes. In contrast, Niskanen (2006) found that AFDC benefits are

positively related to violent crime. All of these studies grouped adult men, adult women, and

minors together, potentially masking variation across those groups for whom the hypothesized

mechanisms would be quite different (potential mechanisms linking adult male crime to welfare



                                                                                                    7
are the least obvious). Additionally, all of these studies were based on data from before

implementation of PRWORA or AFDC waivers.

          We know of only two (very recent) studies that specifically examined effects of welfare

reform on crime. Monte and Lewis (2011) examined a cohort of about 1,400 female welfare

recipients in Illinois in 1998 and found that leaving welfare without employment was associated

with subsequent arrest. This study focused on a select sample of women who were on welfare

post-reform, did not disaggregate by type of crime, and did not address the endogeneity of

welfare/employment status.

          Corman et al. (2013) investigated the impact of welfare reform on women’s illicit drug

use, drug-related arrests, and imprisonment for drug-related crimes from 1992 (the beginning of

welfare reform) to 2002. Exploiting changes in welfare reform across states and over time, they

examined the impact of welfare reform using a difference-in-differences (DD) methodology. The

authors found consistent evidence from multiple nationally-representative data sets that welfare

reform reduced illicit drug use and drug crime among women at risk of welfare receipt. They

also found some evidence that the effects operate, at least in part, through work incentives under

TANF as opposed to bans from welfare participation imposed under PRWORA for individuals

with convictions for drug felonies. In addition, they found that DD was an appropriate and useful

methodology for investigating the policy effects of welfare reform on crime.

Theoretical Framework

          Bartel (1979) applied the human capital model formulated by Becker (1968) and

extended by Ehrlich (1973) to study determinants of women’s criminal behavior. In this model,

individuals maximize the following expected utility function:

(1) E (U )  (1  p )U ( X 1 , t c )  pU ( X 2 , t c )



                                                                                                    8
X1 is income when not apprehended, X2 is income when apprehended, tc is consumption (or

household) time, and p is the probability of being apprehended. If T is the total amount of time

available, then a woman must allocate her time between legal (tl), illegal (ti), and consumption or

household production (tc) activities. The woman’s income equations are:

(2)   X 1  W i (t i )  W l (t l )  W o


(3)   X   2
               W i ( t i )  W l ( t l )  Fi ( t i )  W o


Income if not apprehended is equal to the wages from illegal (Wi) and legal (Wl) activities times

the amount of time spent in each activity, plus other income (Wo). If apprehended, the woman

faces a penalty (Fi), which is a function of the amount of time she spends in illegal activities.

Zhang (1997) specifically includes welfare payments in the model, such that Wo has 2

components: welfare payments and other non-welfare income such as child support payments or

other family financial support.

              This model implies that a woman will be more likely to engage in crime the greater the

difference between her illegal and legal wage, the lower her other income, the lower the

probability of apprehension, and the lower the penalty if apprehended. Additionally, women who

have a high level of risk preference (or low level of risk aversion) or low level of disutility from

criminal behavior will be more likely to commit crimes. Welfare reform could affect specific

arguments in this system of equations or possibly even lead to a shift in tastes. For example, a

decrease in Wo (perhaps through reaching a time limit or banking one’s lifetime allotment of

welfare benefits) would make a woman more likely to engage in both legal and illegal work and

spend less time in consumption or household production. However, legal work would reduce the

time available for illegal work; for example, Jacob and Lefgren (2003) found that juvenile crime

is lower on days when school is in session and that the effects appear to operate through an


                                                                                                       9
“incapacitation effect.” It is also possible that the demands of work requirements increase stress

which could lead to anti-social behavior including violent crime (e.g., if some individuals relieve

their stress through physical aggression); in our model, this would reflect a taste shift toward

aggression.

       Given the large reductions in welfare caseloads and increases in employment attributed to

welfare reform, discussed earlier, and that legal and illegal work are, to some extent, substitutes

according to this model, we expect that welfare reform affected women’s crime primarily by

altering the tradeoffs between legal and illegal work. As such, we also expect that welfare reform

affected income-generating (property) crimes more strongly than violent crime, which would be

consistent with the empirical literature on the effects of employment on crime.

       The welfare-reform induced changes in tradeoffs between legal and illegal work could

play out in different ways. First, the relative returns to legal versus illegal work are likely to be

different under the “work first” regime. Work requirements could result in increased legal wages

(as a result of more work experience), which would increase the gains from legal work versus

illegal income-generating activities. If women expect to rely on welfare less and to work more,

the mark of a criminal record would be more consequential (in terms of worse employment

opportunities and lower wages). Additionally, working in the legal sector could potentially serve

to “mainstream” women who were previously “marginalized”—by lowering their rate of time

preference, increasing their disutility from engaging in illegal activities, or both. However, it is

possible that women who find themselves unable to support their families through legal work

and welfare payments or have difficulty complying with program rules under the new regime

turn to illegal work to make ends meet.

       If welfare reform led to increases in income through legal employment, as findings by



                                                                                                        10
Schoeni and Blank (2000) and Meyer and Sullivan (2004) suggest was the case, we expect that

the new regime led to reductions in illegal income-generating activities (property crimes). If, on

the other hand, welfare reforms led to net decreases in income among poor women—e.g., if

increased legal earnings did not offset decreased welfare payments—then the “work first” regime

may have led to increases in property crimes. Overall, the effects of welfare reform on women’s

crime will depend on strength of the various countervailing forces and the type of crime.

Data

         The two main sources of data for this study are: (1) Uniform Crime Reporting Program

arrests from the Monthly Master Files from the U.S. Department of Justice Federal Bureau of

Investigation (FBI) for 1992 through 2002, which provide the number of arrests by age and

gender for each month/offense category/reporting agency; and (2) implementation dates of

welfare reform at the state level during the same time period. The former is used to create

measures of arrests and the latter is used to characterize welfare reform, as described below.

Measures of Arrests

         Virtually all studies of crime in the economics literature use measures of reported crime

rates or actual arrests as proxies for crime. The sex of the person committing the crime is not

available for the former, so for our analyses of the effects of welfare reform on female crime we

rely on the latter. Specifically, we use the monthly data on arrests by sex, age, and type of

offense from the FBI crime reports to construct month/year/state measures of arrests.1 Although

individual level surveys that ask about crime commission include more detailed characteristics of



1
  State prison admission data from the National Corrections Reporting System (NCRP) are also available by sex,
age, and type of crime. However, a major limitation of the NCRP data for our purposes is that many individuals who
are arrested for felonies end up being convicted of misdemeanors and never serve in a prison facility (because of
pleas bargaining). For example, in 2002, although there were about 1.6 million arrests for serious property crimes in
the U.S., fewer than 140,000 individuals were sent to state prison facilities for such crimes that year (authors’
calculations using NCRP and FBI arrest data).

                                                                                                                  11
perpetrators and may include crimes not reported to the police or that did not result in arrests,

crime is likely to be underreported, information is rarely available for different offense types, and

criminal activity in large geographic areas over time cannot be covered in that mode.

Comprehensive reviews have found that Uniform Crime Reports are valid indicators of serious

crimes (Gove, Hughes and Geerken 1985) and that both aggregate and individual level studies of

crime often lead to similar conclusions—e.g., that criminal justice sanctions deter crime (Nagin

1998).

         The FBI data include a record for each criminal justice agency in the U.S. for each

month. Each agency’s monthly record includes the number of arrests by crime category, age

category, and sex. To obtain reasonably representative information, we limit our sample to

agencies that cover at least 50,000 individuals. In 1996, the year that PRWORA was enacted,

agencies with populations of 50,000 or more people covered approximately 55% of the total U.S.

population (147 million/268 million, calculated by the authors from the FBI and U.S. Census

data). From these agency-based observations, we aggregated the data to the month/year/state

level. Even among large criminal justice agencies, not all agencies report in all months. For

example, in 1996, of the total 147 million people in the U.S. residing under the jurisdiction of

agencies of 50,000 people or more, about 106 million people (about 72%) were covered by

agencies that reported arrests to the FBI in all 12 months.2 We include both the total population

in all agencies covering populations of at least 50,000 in the given state/month/year and the total

state population on the right-hand side in our models. These population measures account for

differences in the size of the underlying population that is represented or covered by the FBI


2
 We also dropped state/month observations for which fewer than 50% of the state’s population (residing in agencies
of 50,000 or more people) was represented. This resulted in a loss of about 450 state/month observations, or about
7% of all relevant state/month cells). In robustness checks, discussed later, we explore alternative cut-off
percentages.

                                                                                                               12
reports.3

         We consider different types of crimes, using the classifications provided by the FBI (see

Appendix Table A-1 for a list of the crime categories and their codes). Categories 1 through 4

(murder/manslaughter, rape, robbery, and assault) are “violent index crimes.” Categories 5

through 7 (burglary, larceny/theft (except motor vehicle), and motor vehicle theft) are “property

index crimes.” We consider both property index crimes overall as well as the disaggregated

category of larceny/theft (Category 6). Categories 8 through 19 are a variety of other serious

offenses, while categories 20 through 29 are more minor offenses.

         Table 1 presents annualized arrest rates for each of the 6 crime categories of interest. For

each rate, the numerator is the total number of arrests for each sex/age/crime category/year in

reporting agencies of 50,000 or greater, and the denominator is the total population of reporting

agencies (>50,000) times the proportional representation of that population in the entire U.S. for

that age/sex/year.4 Our arrest rates for males are about twice those for the U.S. overall in 1996

(mid-sample) (second set of columns), which is to be expected because: (1) Men 21–49 years old

represent a high risk group compared to males of all ages. (2) Males have higher crime rates than

females. (3) Our data cover only urban areas (population at least 50,000) which have higher

crime rates than non-urban areas.

Characterizing welfare reform

         As discussed earlier, welfare reform was implemented in two general phases. The first

phase consisted of pre-PRWORA waivers. Although not federally mandated, pre-PRWORA


3
  The (monthly) population data for each reporting agency are provided in the FBI data set. There is no double-
counting in either the arrest or population data. A given arrest occurs only in one agency. For each arrest, only the
most serious offense is reported. Population figures are not included for agencies such as State Highway Patrol,
since the same population was included for a specific law enforcement agency.
4
  State-level population data by age group/sex/year were obtained from the Census as follows:
https://www.census.gov/popest/data/intercensal/st-co/characteristics.html and
https://www.census.gov/popest/data/intercensal/state/ST-EST00INT-02.html

                                                                                                                        13
waivers were implemented in the majority of states by the time the federal PRWORA was

enacted in 1996 (Schoeni and Blank 2000). The second phase of welfare reform came with the

enactment of PRWORA. States were required to submit plans for and—once approved,

implement—TANF programs subject to federal guidelines and have been required to submit

changes to their programs to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. States

implemented their approved TANF programs between September 1996 (Massachusetts,

Michigan, and Vermont) and January 1998 (California) (USDHHS 1999).

          Table 2 presents the implementation dates for both AFDC waivers and TANF for all

states in the U.S. 5 The waivers were introduced in 29 states over a period of 53 months, and

TANF was implemented in all states over a period of 17 months. Combining both waivers and

TANF, states implemented any welfare reform over a period of 64 months, spanning from

October 1992 (MI and NJ being the earliest states to implement waivers) through January 1998

(CA being the last state to implement TANF).

          Following the convention in the welfare reform literature (reviewed in Blank 2002), we

exploit differences in the timing of both AFDC waivers and TANF implementation across states.

In most models, we use separate measures for AFDC waiver and TANF implementation. For

waivers, we consider whether, in a given month, a given state had a statewide AFDC waiver in

place that substantially altered the nature of AFDC with regard to time limits, work

requirements, earnings disregards, sanctions, and/or family caps. For TANF, we consider

whether, in a given month, the state had implemented TANF post-PRWORA. Most studies

consider AFDC waivers and TANF separately, since they represent distinctly different phases of

welfare reform. In other specifications, we include a single indicator for any welfare reform


5
    Data on timing of state implementation of major AFDC waivers and TANF were obtained from USDHHS (1999).

                                                                                                         14
(AFDC waiver or TANF).6

Method

         We employ a quasi-experimental DD research design, which exploits variation in the

timing of the implementation of welfare reform across states and over time, to estimate the

following baseline model which relates changes in the arrest rate to welfare reform:

(4)      Ln Asmt = α + Welfaresmt Π + Zst β + States Ω + Monthm Φ + Yeart Ψ + εsmt

Specifically, we estimate semi-log models relating the natural log of the arrest rate, measured as

the number of arrests per 1000 females, to a vector of covariates.7

         In Equation 4, the female arrest rate (Ln A)—measured for specific offense categories, in

state s, during month m and year t—is a function of welfare policy (Welfare), characterized

separately by the implementation of AFDC waivers and TANF in the given state during the

specific month and year, or alternatively, as any welfare reform (AFDC waiver or TANF). The

arrest rate is also a function of a vector of time-varying state-specific factors (Z), including

measures of the state’s economy and labor market conditions, relevant population base, and

enforcement. The parameters of interest are the vector Π, which represents the “reduced form” or

total effect of welfare reform on crime, operating through a variety of potential (and possibly

competing) mechanisms. The parameter  represents a state-time error term. In all

specifications, we include state fixed effects (State), which account for all unobserved time-

invariant state specific factors, month fixed effects (Month), which account for any seasonal




6
  We acknowledge that differences across state welfare programs are more nuanced and dynamic than what is
captured by our measures. However, the current approach represents a broad first look at the effects of welfare
reform on women’s crime and is consistent with the literature on the effects of welfare reform on other outcomes.
7
  The log transformation adjust for the skewness of the distribution of state-level female arrest rates, and also
facilitates comparison of the estimates across models and outcomes in terms of relative percent change in the arrest
rate.

                                                                                                                  15
factors affecting criminal behavior, and year (Year) fixed effects, which account for national

trends in criminal activity and the arrest rate.

        Ideally, we would estimate models of the effects of welfare reform on the female arrest

rate using data on the population of women most likely to be welfare recipients—low-educated

unmarried mothers. However, the FBI arrest data do not allow us to identify educational

attainment, marital status, or motherhood of arrestees, as the only available demographics are sex

and age. We restrict our analyses to women aged 21–49 years, since women in this age group are

most likely to be mothers. This is less of a limitation than it may seem because: (1) We would

not want to restrict the sample to current welfare recipients, since potential welfare recipients are

shown to behave strategically in their use of welfare benefits when faced with time limits and

other regulatory constraints (DeLeire et al. 2006; Grogger 2004). (2) Our sample consists

exclusively of women who have been arrested, and female arrestees are typically low-educated

and thus at high risk of being former, current, or future welfare recipients. Data from the

National Survey of Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) show that, among women aged 21–49 who

have ever been arrested or booked for an offense, the vast majority (84%) have less than a

college education, 66% are unmarried, 61% have minor children, and 42% currently receive

some form of government assistance (authors’ own calculations based on the 2010 NSDUH).

        We do not compare target and comparison groups in a difference-in-difference-in-

differences (DDD) framework because a valid and suitable comparison group to female arrestees

is not available. As indicated above, there is limited individual-level information about arrestees

in the FBI data. Males are not a fully-equivalent comparison group for studying female crime

because of substantial segmentation of offense types by gender as well as differential trends in

arrest rates by gender over the past five decades (Steffensmeier and Schwartz 2004). The use of



                                                                                                   16
males as a comparison group would assume that, in the absence of welfare reform, for every one-

percentage point change in arrests among men there would be an equal change in arrests among

women—an assumption that is not supported by the time trends and (later) explicitly rejected in

all of our models. We do use males to conduct “placebo tests.” That is, when we find significant

effects of welfare reform on crime for females, we run equivalent models for males. We would

expect welfare reform to have much weaker impacts criminal behavior for males than for

females because the policies most directly targeted females. Finding that this is the case would

lend validity to our results for females.

       A key methodological challenge lies in disentangling the effects of welfare reform from

those of other time-variant factors that may be related to female arrests. Whole volumes edited

by Blumstein and Wallman (2006) and Goldberger and Rosenfeld (2008) and written by Zimring

(2007) explored why crime rates dramatically, unexpectedly, and systematically plunged in all

areas of the U.S. in the 1990s, right as welfare reform unfolded. The bottom line from this body

of work is that there is no one reason for the dramatic shift, but key factors appear to be the

decline in crack cocaine use, better policing, increased imprisonment, demographic shifts,

legalized abortion in the 1970s, and economic expansion.

       To the extent that the decline in crime in the 1990s was uniform across the nation, the

common trend would be captured by the time fixed effects. However, the concern is that while

overall crime rates were declining in the 1990s, the rates of decline varied across states owing to

differential shifts in important trends such as economic conditions, enforcement, and other state-

specific changes in the costs and benefits of engaging in criminal activity.

       We address this specter of confounding state-specific trends in a number of ways. First,

all specifications explicitly control for a large vector of concurrent state-specific time-varying



                                                                                                     17
factors (Z) that may impact the female arrest rate, including measures of the state’s economy

(real personal income per capita, poverty rate), labor market conditions (unemployment rate,

minimum wage), relevant population base (total state population; covered population of

reporting FBI agencies) and criminal justice system (criminal justice expenditures, state block

grants on substance abuse prevention and treatment). We further include both the natural log of

the total arrest rate and the natural log of the arrest rate for the specific offense category being

modeled, among males, in all specifications. These measures capture overall shifts in crime in a

given state due to unobserved time-varying state characteristics.8 This strategy follows Dave et

al. (2011), who employed controls for trends in male insurance coverage when estimating

insurance rates among pregnant women. In alternate specifications, we also add state-specific

linear trends to further account for any other systematically-varying state-level factors that may

have coincided with welfare reform.

         Another important methodological challenge is the potential endogeneity of the timing of

welfare reform. It is possible that state experimentation with welfare reform through waivers and

the timing of TANF implementation are related to prior increases in welfare caseloads and prior

economic conditions. We address this possibility by controlling for lagged state-level economic

indicators (state-level unemployment rate and personal income per capita) and lags of the state’s

welfare caseloads. The specifications with the state-specific time trends also help to address the

possibility that policy implementation may be otherwise endogenous to the state’s history and

thus alleviate this concern. We also explore the extent to which the implementation of welfare

reform was associated with the state’s pre-reform history by estimating models predicting


8
  Note that there is no restriction in this case that the unobserved factors affect both male and female crime
identically. This is the assumption that is typically made in a DD framework if males were used as a direct control
group. Instead, by controlling for male arrest rates, we are able to flexibly control for all common unmeasured
factors that may be affecting male and female crime (even if differentially) as long as the effect is proportional.

                                                                                                                  18
whether and when a state implemented an AFDC waiver, and alternately, any welfare reform, as

a function of either the lagged level of female crime (total arrests or total arrests for property

crime) or prior annual trends in female crime in the state, as well as estimating lead effects in

variants of our main analyses. Finding such associations and significant lead effects would

weaken our inferences about the effects of welfare reform on female crime.

         When we find credible reduced-form effects of welfare reform on crime, we conduct

additional analyses. First, we consider that there could be a time lag between the implementation

of welfare reform and behavioral responses that result in arrests. It may take time for women to

understand the implications of the new regime for their ability to make ends meet, or it could

take a number of crimes over months for an individual to be caught and arrested. We explore the

possibility of lagged effects of welfare reform on the female arrest rate by estimating models

with one, 12- and 24-month lags of the welfare reform measures. Second, as mentioned earlier,

we assess the plausibility of our estimates by conducting placebo tests using corresponding male

arrests as the outcome. Given that welfare reform policies mostly impact women, we do not a

priori expect large or significant effects on male crime.9 Any finding to the contrary would

indicate that any observed effects of welfare reform on female crime are likely confounded by

unobserved state-specific trends.

         We estimate all models using Ordinary Least Squares and adjust standard errors on the

conservative side to account for arbitrary correlation within state cells over time. The inclusion

of state-specific linear trends in most of our models, along with corresponding arrest measures

for males in all of our models, confines the variation we exploit to yield plausibly causal


9
 This assumes that there is no spillover to the market for male criminal activity. However, even if there are such
spillovers (for instance, if male crime responded to shifts in household income or household time constraints), these
second-order effects are likely to be much smaller than the first-order effects on female crime. Hence, we expect
weak or null effects of welfare reform policies on male criminal activity.

                                                                                                                   19
estimates. While these strategies reduce statistical power, we draw inferences from the weight of

the evidence generated by our various specifications, patterns across estimates, and multiple

robustness and consistency checks.

Results

       As discussed earlier, welfare reform has stronger conceptual and empirical links to

property crime than to other types of crime. Table 3 presents estimates from models

corresponding to Equation (4) for property crime—for all index property crimes (Codes 5–7 in

Appendix Table A1) and specifically for larceny/theft (Code 6). The latter constitutes the largest

single category of serious arrests for women. Specification 1 considers the separate effects of

each phase of welfare reform (AFDC Waivers and TANF) on the female arrest rate, controlling

for the relevant monthly male arrest rates; state, month, and year fixed effects; the annual state

unemployment rate; state per capita real personal income; the logs of relevant populations (see

table notes); the logs of state criminal justice expenditures and drug abuse prevention and

treatment block grant; state minimum wage; and state poverty rate. In Specification 2, we add

state-specific linear trends to account for residual unobserved state-specific time-varying

confounders. In Specification 3—our preferred specification—we add lagged economic

conditions and welfare caseloads (see table notes) to address potential endogeneity of policy

implementation. Specification 4 includes the same right-hand variables as Specification 3, but

uses a single indicator for any welfare reform (AFDC waiver or TANF) in order to maximize

precision. Thus, Specification 4 is a variant of our preferred specification.

       The estimates from Specification 1 suggest that AFDC waivers and TANF reduced the

arrest rate for serious property offenses by 2.5 and 2.9%, respectively, among women ages 21–

49, although the effects are not statistically significant at conventional levels. However, in



                                                                                                     20
Specification 2, which adds state-specific linear trends to further account for time-varying state-

specific unobserved factors, and Specification 3, which also includes lagged measures of the

state’s economy and welfare caseloads in order to address potential policy endogeneity, we find

that welfare reform significantly decreased women’s arrest rate for serious property crime by

4.5–5.0%. Thus, while the estimated effects of welfare reform on property arrests become

stronger and more significant when accounting for state-specific linear trends, they are

insensitive to the inclusion or exclusion of lagged state economic conditions and welfare

caseloads. The estimated effect of welfare reform on the property crime arrest rate when using a

single measure of welfare reform that combined AFDC waivers and TANF (Specification 4) was

very similar to the estimated effect from the corresponding model that included separate

indicators for AFDC waivers and TANF (Specification 3).10 The estimated effects of welfare

reform on the arrest rate for larceny/theft in particular, using either separate indicators of AFDC

waivers and TANF or the combined measure of any welfare reform (Specifications 5 and 6,

respectively), are very similar to those from the corresponding models for property arrests

overall (Specifications 3 and 4, respectively). These results are consistent with the hypothesized

scenario that welfare reform increased the returns to legal work compared to illegal income-

generating activity.

        The estimates in Table 3 reflect “intent-to-treat” (ITT) effects, since not all women

arrestees are at risk of welfare receipt and consequently impacted by the policy shifts. As

indicated earlier, data from the NSDUH (authors’ own calculations, not shown) indicate that

among women ages 21–49 who were ever arrested or booked, about 40% are currently on some

form of governmental assistance. Pre-TANF data from the Survey of Income and Program


10
  We cannot reject the null hypothesis of statistically similar effects of AFDC waivers and TANF on property
crime.

                                                                                                               21
Participation (SIPP) indicate that 44% of female-headed families and over 60% of poor families

participated in a means-tested public assistance program in any given month.11 Lifetime

participation rates are higher. Interpreting these prevalence rates (40–60%) as a conservative

proxy for the fraction of women arrestees who are at lifetime risk of welfare receipt, the ITT

effect can be scaled up by a factor of about 2 in order to arrive at an estimate of the “treatment-

on-the-treated” (TOT) effect—that is, the effect of welfare reform on crime among women who

are impacted by shifts in welfare policy. Using the scale factor, estimates from Table 1 suggest

that welfare reform is associated with a 9–10% decrease in property crime among those female

arrestees who are directly affected by the policy. Implicit TOT effects rescaled in this manner

should be interpreted with caution since small changes in the denominator (in this case, the

fraction of the sample that is at risk of welfare receipt) and the underlying estimates can lead to

relatively large differences. Nevertheless, the point stands that the impact of welfare reform

among those who are actually at-risk of current or future welfare receipt is likely somewhat

larger than the estimated intent-to-treat effects. In order to maintain consistency with the results

presented in the tables, we do not scale up the estimates in the ensuing discussion.

           Estimates in Table 4 are based on our preferred specifications (those corresponding to

Specifications 3 and 4 in Table 1) for violent index crimes (Codes 1–4), other serious offenses

ranging from simple assault to gambling (Codes 8–19), and other, more minor offenses such as

driving under the influence of alcohol and vagrancy (Codes 20–29). Although the signs of the

welfare reform coefficients are generally negative as they were for property crime, the

magnitudes are quite low and estimates never approach statistical significance (i.e., the t-values

are uniformly less than 1). We thus conclude that welfare reform did not have appreciable effects

on violent crime, other serious offenses, or minor offenses committed by women. The weaker
11
     See http://www.census.gov/sipp/p70s/p70-77.pdf (Appendix Table A-1).

                                                                                                    22
effects for these other types of crimes than for property crime are consistent with our expectation

that the effects of welfare reform on crime would operate largely by changing relative returns to

legal and illegal work.

        In the models summarized in Tables 3 and 4, the estimated effects of the covariates

(shown for Model 3, a typical—and preferred—specification in Appendix Table A2) are

generally consistent with the literature. Criminal activity tends to be countercyclical—positively

associated with the state unemployment rate. States with higher minimum wages tend to have

fewer arrests. Increases in substance abuse prevention and block grant spending are associated

with lower crime rates and criminal justice expenditures are associated with higher crime rates,

but both effects are statistically insignificant. For the latter, the positive sign may reflect greater

resources allocated to criminal justice systems in states with higher crime rates. The coefficients

for some of these other covariates are not statistically significant partly due to the inclusion of

the state fixed effects and the state-specific trends. The coefficients for measures of the male

arrest rate are positive and statistically significant in all models, indicating that these controls are

addressing important potentially confounding factors within states over time. The coefficients,

however, are significantly and uniformly less than one, suggesting that trends in female and male

crime are not commensurate and underscoring our rationale for not using males as a direct

comparison group for female crime within a DDD framework.

        We conducted further analyses for property crime, the category of arrests for which it

appears that welfare reform had an effect. In Table 5, we consider potential lagged effects, and

present estimated effects of welfare reform on all index property crimes (Panel A), and for

larceny/theft in particular (Panel B), from models corresponding to Specifications 3 and 4 of

Table 3 but that include 1-, 12-, and 24-month lags of the welfare reform measures. We find that



                                                                                                      23
the estimated effects of welfare reform are quite similar when using 1-month lags as when

considering contemporaneous effects in Table 3 and lead to the same inferences (Specifications 1

and 2). Specifications (3) and (4) introduce 12-month lags in welfare reform implementation to

the model. The 12-month lagged effects for both phases of welfare reform are negative,

suggesting that welfare reform is associated with a relatively concurrent decline in female arrest

rates for serious property crime, including larceny and theft, and also appears to have a

cumulative effect over the next 12 months.12 Specifications (5) and (6) further consider longer

24-month lags, which are statistically and economically insignificant. Combining the coefficients

of the 1-month and the 12-month lags (Specification 4), we find an overall negative response in

female property crime rates over 12 months following implementation of welfare reform, on the

order of about 7%. This response is about 40% larger than the contemporaneous effect (5%)

identified in Table 3, which is reflective of a stronger cumulative effect of welfare reform likely

due to time limits and lags in the timing of the work-related activity requirements in relation to

benefit receipt for certain states.13 We note, however, that even if the time limit for receiving

welfare has not been exhausted, the woman is still required to participate in work-related

activities while collecting benefits; hence there are potential immediate as well as lagged effects

on criminal behavior.

Dose-response Associations

        The above models are consistent in their finding that welfare reform is associated with a

decrease in property crime among women. If this effect is driven by a substitution of market

12
   The longer-lagged effects for AFDC Waivers are smaller than the one-month lagged effect or even the
contemporaneous effects estimated in Table 3. This may partly be mechanical because the average state that had
instituted major changes to their AFDC program did so in mid- to late-1994 and all states implemented TANF
starting in 1996. Thus, there is not enough time lapse post-AFDC waivers but prior to TANF to be able to identify
relatively long lagged effects of the waivers.
13
   The majority of states (36) and D.C. required work participation to be immediate. The remaining 14 states allowed
a lag of 1 to 24 months (Source: Urban Institute’s Welfare Rules Database
(http://anfdata.urban.org/wrd/WRDCategoryList.cfm ; accessed 12/4/12).

                                                                                                                 24
work for non-market income-generating activities due to the reduction in welfare caseloads

induced by welfare reform, then we would expect a dose-response relationship—that is, a larger

decline in property crime being realized in those states where there were larger reductions in the

caseload. We therefore test for differential effects of welfare reform on property crime based on

the percentage reduction in the welfare caseloads realized over the sample period for each state.

The methodology and findings are presented in Appendix Table A3. The estimates are

suggestive of welfare reform leading to a larger drop in female property crime in states with

larger welfare-reform-induced declines in welfare caseloads and therefore consistent with our

expectations.

Exogeneity of Variation in Welfare Reform

         The identifying assumption underlying the DD methodology is that crime rates in states

had not yet implemented welfare reform provide a valid counterfactual for states that

implemented welfare reform earlier. Another (related) assumption underlying our analyses is that

the implementation of policy is not correlated with unobserved state characteristics—i.e., that

conditional on observed state characteristics, state and time fixed effects, and state-specific linear

trends, the variation in the timing of welfare reform across states is plausibly exogenous.14 In our

main models, we controlled for a number of lagged covariates related to the state’s economy and

prior experience with welfare caseloads in our main models. In addition, we conducted a number

of specification checks to explore these issues of potential endogeneity.

         First, we exploit the timing of implementation to investigate the plausibility of the

identifying variation in our welfare reform measures. Table 6 details these specification checks,

14
  Policy is deemed to be endogenous, and hence “treatment” effects would be biased, if policy implementation in
some time period T is correlated with the state-specific error terms at time t<T. In this case, the policy measure is
“predetermined” and not strictly exogenous. For instance, policy endogeneity may result if a state’s implementation
of welfare reform in a given period is correlated with past trends in female crime rates or factors correlated with
crime.

                                                                                                                   25
which essentially amount to testing for lead effects. Models (1) and (2), akin to a within-state

event study, separate the timing and effects of welfare reform into three periods for each state—

post welfare reform (which represents all periods subsequent to the implementation of welfare

reform), 2 or more years pre-reform (which represents all periods two or more years prior to

implementation), and the reference category (one year prior to implementation). If changes in

crime are caused by changes in welfare policy, as opposed to changes in policy being caused by

shifts in crime rates, then negative effects on crime should not occur until after any

implementation of policy. It is validating that the coefficients on the post indicator are quite

similar to those in our main models (welfare reform is associated with an approximate 5%

reduction in the female arrest rate for property crime, relative to the year prior to

implementation). In contrast, the coefficient on the pre indicator is insignificant and close to

zero, suggesting that there is no change in the trend in the arrest rate for those states/periods that

have yet to implement welfare reform.

       In Specifications 3-8, we more directly assess whether the pre-policy trends in crime rates

are similar across states that are early versus later adopters of welfare reform. These models

inform the validity of using changes in crime rates in states which have not yet implemented

welfare reform as a counterfactual for those that have. The sample is limited to states and periods

prior to the implementation of welfare reform, and models control only for state and time fixed

effects in order to conservatively check for unconditional differences in crime trends prior to

policy implementation. Models 3–5 test whether the number of years until welfare reform

implementation in a given state is associated with prior crime rates in that state, and Models 6–8

test for differential trends based on a binary indicator for 4 or more years prior to implementation

relative to 1–3 years pre-implementation. The magnitudes for these “lead” effects are all close to



                                                                                                    26
zero and statistically insignificant, again suggesting that there are no discernible differences in

trends in arrests rates related to female property crime (Models 3 and 6), larceny and theft

(Model 4 and 7), and total female crime (Models 5 and 8) based on when the state implemented

welfare reform.

       Supplemental models predicting whether and when a state implemented an AFDC

waiver, and alternately any welfare reform, based on either the lagged level of female crime

(total arrests or total arrests for property crime) or prior annual trends in female crime in the

state, also confirm that policy endogeneity is not a concern (results not shown). For models

predicting AFDC waiver implementation, the sample period was by definition restricted to

periods prior to TANF implementation. For models predicting any welfare reform

implementation (AFDC waiver or TANF), the full sample period was utilized. We employed

alternate lag structures ranging from 1 to 24 months. The findings from these analyses suggest

states’ decision with regards to the timing of the implementation of welfare reform were not

driven by their prior crime history, either in levels or trends, and are thus exogenous to crime.

Additional Specification and Robustness Checks

       We implemented several additional checks to verify that the results in Tables 3 and 4 are

robust to alternate specifications and adjustments for sampling issues, and to assess plausibility

(results not shown unless indicated otherwise). First, we confirmed that our results are not

sensitive to alternate functional forms or model specifications that, alternatively: (1) expressed

the outcome in level terms, as the natural log of arrests and controlling for the state’s female

population; (2) changed the outcome to a logistic transformation based on the natural log of the

odds of arrest [ln((Asmt/Populationst)/(1-( Asmt/Populationst)]; (3) used non-logged measures of

the arrest rate or total arrests as outcomes; (4) controlled for additional unobserved state-specific



                                                                                                      27
variation through state-specific quadratic trends; and (5) were much more parsimonious than

Specification 2 in Table 3.

       Second, we assessed sensitivity to how we treated agencies that were small or had limited

coverage. Given that not all criminal justice agencies provide complete reports on the number of

arrests by month and offense type, our main analyses were based on agencies that covered at

least 50,000 individuals and agencies with a reported coverage of at least 50% in order to

minimize measurement error and maximize data consistency. In supplementary analyses, we

ascertained that our estimates are insensitive to both cut-offs.

       Third, we re-implemented all analyses by aggregating the monthly arrest data to the

annual level. While annual aggregation may smooth idiosyncratic variation in the number of

criminal agencies reporting each month as well as any state-specific seasonal variation in crime

rates, such aggregation also excludes potentially meaningful month-specific variation in the

implementation of AFDC waivers and TANF. We found that the direction and magnitude of the

crime responses in the models that used annual arrest data were similar to those reported on here

based on monthly data.

       Fourth, we further explored the finding of no significant effects of welfare reform on

female arrests for the category of “other serious non-violent offenses.” About 35% of these

offenses constitute drug-related offenses, which Corman et al. (2013) found were negatively

affected by welfare reform. Thus, it is possible that drug-related arrests offset opposing effects

for other types of arrests in this category. We estimated models for other serious non-violent

crimes that excluded drug-related offenses and continued to find insignificant effects of welfare

reform with similar magnitudes as in the models for other serious non-violent offenses in Table

4.



                                                                                                     28
        Fifth, we considered the potential confounding effects of expansions of the federal earned

income tax credit (EITC), which is a refundable tax credit for low- and middle-income families

with qualifying children. An EITC expansion that passed in 1993 and became effective in tax

year 1995 raised the maximum credit for all qualifying families and further increased the

differential in maximum benefits between families with two or more children relative to those

with only one child. In 2001, the income level at which the EITC began to phase out for couples

was further increased. These EITC expansions have been linked to shifts in labor supply,

especially at the extensive margin (e.g., Eissa and Hoynes 2006; Hotz and Scholz 2003; Meyer

2002). The inclusion of the fixed time effects in our models should account for these EITC-

induced trends in employment, labor supply, and income. We found that our results were fully

robust, in terms of direction, magnitude, and statistical significance, when the sample was

limited to the years 1995–2001 (results not shown).15 In addition, some states offer an earned

income tax credit through their state income tax systems, although in 2001 only 14 states and

D.C. did so and the average benefit level was only about 16% of the federal level (Hotz and

Scholz 2003).16 We found that the estimates and conclusions were not materially altered when

separately controlling for the presence of state-level EITC programs and the average benefit

level (as a percent of the federal level) among states that have such programs.

        Sixth, we conducted placebo tests using the male property arrest rates as the outcome

measure. Finding that welfare reform has similar or larger effects for males, for whom changes

in incentives as a result of the policy shift should be much smaller and less direct than for

females, would suggest that the observed associations between welfare reform and arrests for

15
   Eleven states had already implemented major waivers to their AFDC programs between 1992–1994, an additional
8 states implemented major waivers in various months of 1995, and 10 states implemented waivers in 1996 prior to
TANF implementation. Thus, there is still considerable variation in AFDC waivers across states and over time to
identify the effects of waivers over this more limited time period.
16
   The average federal credit in 2001 was approximately $1600 for a family claimant.

                                                                                                             29
females are spurious. These results are presented in Table 7. Specifications 1 through 4 present

estimates from our preferred models (corresponding to Specifications 3 and 4 in Table 3) for all

property arrests and Specifications 5 through 8 present estimates from our preferred models for

larceny/theft. For each outcome, models in the first two columns control for female arrests,

whereas the models in the third and fourth columns do not. As we expected, welfare reform had

uniformly insignificant (and small magnitude) effects on adult male arrests for property crime.

       Finally, we explored the sensitivity of our findings to the years studied. Our main

analyses were limited to an observation window of 1992–2002, the period which enveloped

welfare reform. Using 2000 or 2005 as the endpoint or expanding the sample to 1988 or 1990 did

not materially change the results, which were driven by the period of maximum variation in

welfare reform, the 1990s.

Effects in Context

       In this section, we project the numbers of property arrests and crimes that were prevented

as a result of the work incentives underlying welfare reform. In 1992, the first year of welfare

reform, 4.61 million less-than-college-educated single mothers were employed (according to

Current Population Survey data) and 376,333 property crime arrests of women ages 21–49 took

place (according to FBI data). Given that welfare reform increased employment among these

women by about 12–14% (599,300 additional women employed), and that welfare reform led to

a 4.9% decrease in property crime arrests (18,440 fewer arrests), assuming a stable population

base, we can estimate the change in employment that would lead to one less arrest. Specifically,

we find that for each 33 additional at-risk women employed, one property-related arrest appears




                                                                                                   30
to have been averted.17 We use this estimate to project how many actual crimes were prevented.

According to U.S. Department of Justice (2003), approximately 11% of reported crimes result in

arrests, and according to the U.S. Department of Justice (2004), about 40% of victims of

property crime report their crime to police. Thus, for each property arrest, about 9 property

crimes are reported, and for each 9 crimes reported, about 23 crimes actually occurred. Overall,

we estimate that for each at-risk woman who became employed as a result of welfare reform,

about 0.03 property crime arrests and 0.75 actual property crime (reported or unreported) were

averted.

           While these imputed estimates help to frame the potential importance of welfare reform

overall in affecting women’s property crime, they should be interpreted with caution. Welfare

reform consisted of several elements, including lifetime limits, term limits, earnings disregards,

work requirements as a condition for receiving welfare benefits, sanctions for non-compliance,

family caps, and various other components. Different states chose to focus on different subsets of

these features in waivers and all states were given substantial latitude under PRWORA in

designing their TANF plans (e.g., states were allowed to impose stricter lifetime and term limits

than the national guidelines). It is not possible to disentangle the specific contributions of various

components of welfare reform. Nevertheless, the general thrust of these policy components is

clear – they were designed to reduce dependence on welfare and promote employment. Hence,

we interpret the reduced-form effects as being primarily driven by the rise in employment and

reduction in welfare caseloads. Unfortunately, with available data it is not possible for us to

definitively rule in or out the various hypothesized scenarios, such as income or incapacitation

effects.

17
  Thus, the marginal effect of employment on property crime arrest is 0.03 (which is 1 divided by 33); this
compares to the average probability of a property crime arrest relative to employed at-risk women of 0.08
(376,333/4,610,000).

                                                                                                              31
       Finally, we note that our treatment-on-the-treated estimates are based on the margin of

women who are likely to be arrested for property crime. It is possible that hardcore active

offenders are less deterred by losing welfare benefits or less able to find work due to poor human

capital skills, which is consistent with our null findings for felony and violent arrests.

Conclusion

       As far as we know, this is the first study of employment context on female crime in

several decades as well as the first study of the effects of the welfare reform in the 1990s on

female crime. We found suggestive but very robust evidence that welfare reform led to a

decrease in female arrests for serious property offenses by 4.4–4.9%, but had no significant

effects on arrests for violent offenses, other serious crimes, or minor offenses. The negative

effects of welfare reform on property crime appeared to be stronger in states with larger caseload

declines, suggesting that welfare reform led women to substitute legal work for illegal income-

generating activities. Extrapolating from our results, we estimate that for each at-risk woman

who became employed as a result of welfare reform, about 0.030 property crime arrests and 0.75

actual property crimes (reported or unreported) were averted.

       The findings from this study are important for understanding the role of employment as a

determinant of female crime and for ascertaining the full effects of a major policy shift that is

still playing out to this day. In addition, this study contributes more generally to the human

capital and crime literature by exploiting a natural experiment. We offer the caveat that we have

estimated average effects that coincided, for the most part, with a strong economy. Schoeni and

Blank (2000) and Meyer and Sullivan (2009), for example, show that the gains from welfare

reform were not uniformly distributed across all at-risk women. Thus, the overall effects could




                                                                                                    32
mask considerable heterogeneity within the population of low-educated women and might look

very different during periods of economic recession.

       More generally, this study represents an important, broad, and initial investigation of the

effects of a very substantial employment-related policy shift on crime. Future research is needed

to replicate and further explore the findings, particularly in terms of elucidating the underlying

pathways, identifying the specific components of state welfare packages that appear to be salient,

and determining the extent that our findings for females also apply to males.




                                                                                                     33
References

Bartel, Ann P. 1979. “Women and Crime: An Economic Analysis." Economic Inquiry, 17(1),

     29–51.

Becker, Gary S. 1968. "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach." Journal of Political

     Economy, 76(2), 169–217.

Bell, Stephen H. 2001. “Why are Welfare Caseloads Falling?” Urban Institute, Assessing the

     New Federalism Discussion Paper 01–02. Accessed 2/29/12 from:

     http://www.urban.org/UploadedPDF/discussion01-02.pdf.

Blank, Rebecca M. 2002. "Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States." Journal of

     Economic Literature, 40(4), 1105–66.

Blumstein, Alfred, and Joel Wallman, Eds. 2006. The Crime Drop in America, Revised Edition.

     New York: Cambridge University Press.

Bushway, Shawn D. 2011. Labor markets and crime. In James Q. Wilson and Joan Petersilia,

     (eds.), Crime and Public Policy. New York: Oxford University Press.

Butcher, K. F., and Piehl, A. M. (2007). Why are immigrants' incarceration rates so low?

     evidence on selective immigration, deterrence, and deportation (No. w13229). National

     Bureau of Economic Research.

Corman, Hope, Dhaval M. Dave, Nancy E. Reichman and Dhiman Das. 2013. “Effects of

     Welfare Reform on Illicit Drug Use of Adult Women.” Economic Inquiry, 51, 653–74.

Corman, Hope, and Naci Mocan. 2005. “Carrots, Sticks, and Broken Windows.” Journal of Law

     and Economics, 48(1), 235–66.




                                                                                             34
Dave, Dhaval M., Hope Corman and Nancy E. Reichman. 2012. “Effects of Welfare Reform on

     Educational Acquisition of Young Adult Women,” Journal of Labor Research, 33(2), 251–

     282.

Dave, Dhaval M., Sandra Decker, Robert Kaestner and Kosali Simon. 2011. “The Effect of

     Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance Coverage of Pregnant Women: An Analysis

     Using Deliveries.” Inquiry, 47(4), 315–30.

DeLeire, Thomas., Judith A. Levine and Helen Levy. 2006. “Is Welfare Reform Responsible for

     Low-Skilled Women's Declining Health Insurance Coverage in the 1990s?” Journal of

     Human Resources, 41(3), 495–528.

Edmark, Karin. 2005. “Unemployment and Crime: Is There a Connection?” Scandinavian

     Journal of Economics, 107(2), 353–73.

Ehrlich, Isaac. 1973. "Participation in Illegitimate Activities: A Theoretical and Empirical

     Investigation." Journal of Political Economy, 81(3), 521–65.

Eissa, Nada and Hilary Hoynes. 2006. Behavioral Responses to Taxes: Lessons from the EITC

     and Labor Supply." In Tax Policy and the Economy, ed. James Poterba, 20, 74–110.

     Cambridge MA: MIT Press.

Fishback, Price V., Ryan S. Johnson and Shawn Kantor. 2010. "Striking at the Roots of Crime:

     The Impact of Social Welfare Spending on Crime During the Great Depression." Journal of

     Law and Economics, 53(4): 715–40.

Goldberger, Arthur S., and Richard Rosenfeld, Eds. 2008. Understanding Crime Trends:

     Workshop Report. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.




                                                                                               35
Gould, Eric D., Bruce A. Weinberg and David B. Mustard. 2002. “Crime Rates and Local Labor

     Market Opportunities in the United States: 1979–1997.” Review of Economics and

     Statistics, 84(1), 45–61.

Gove, Walter, Michael Hughes and Michael Geerken. 1985. “Are Uniform Crime Reports a

     Valid Indicator of the Index Crimes? An Affirmative Answer with Minor Qualifications.”

     Criminology, 23(3), 451–502.

Grogger, Jeffrey. 2004. “Time Limits and Welfare Use.” Journal of Human Resources, 39(2),

     405–24.

Hannon, Lance, and James Defronzo. 1998. "The Truly Disadvantaged, Public Assistance, and

     Crime." Social Problems, 45(3), 383–92.

Hill, Anne M. and June O'Neill. 1993. "Underclass Behaviors in the United States: Measurement

     and Analysis of Determinants." New York, NY: Center for the Study of Business and

     Government, Baruch College. Unpublished manuscript.

Hotz, Joseph V. and John K. Scholz. 2003. "The Earned Income Tax Credit." In Means-Tested

Transfer Programs in the United States, Robert Moffitt, ed. Chicago: The University of Chicago

     Press and the NBER, 141–197.

Ihlanfeldt, Keith. R. 2006. “Neighborhood Crime and Young Males’ Job Opportunity.” Journal

     of Law and Economics, 49(1), 249–83.

Jacob, Brian A. and Lars Lefgren. 2003. “Are Idle Hands the Devil's Workshop? Incapacitation,

     Concentration, and Juvenile Crime. American Economic Review, 93(5), 1560–1577.

Katz, Michael B. 2001. The Price of Citizenship: Redefining the American Welfare State. New

     York, NY: Metropolitan Books, Henry Holt & Co., 2001.




                                                                                              36
Lin, Ming-Jen. 2008. “Does Unemployment Increase Crime? Evidence from U.S. Data 1974–

     2000.” Journal of Human Resources, 43(2), 413–36.

McKernan, Signe-Mary, Robert Lerman, Nancy Pindus, and Jesse Valente. 2000. The

     relationship between metropolitan and non-metropolitan locations, changing welfare

     policies, and the employment of single mothers. Washington, D.C.: Urban Institute.

     Mimeograph.

McLanahan, Sara. 2004. “Diverging Destinies: How Children are Faring under the Second

     Demographic Transition.” Demography, 41(4): 607–27.

Meyer, Bruce. 2002. "Labor supply at the extensive and intensive margins: The EITC, welfare,

     and hours worked," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 92, pp.

     373–379.

Meyer, Bruce, and James X. Sullivan. 2004. “The Effects of Welfare and Tax Reform: The

     Material Well-being of Single Mothers in the 1980s and 1990s.” Journal of Public

     Economics, 88(7), 1387-1420.

Monte, Lindsay M., and Dan A. Lewis. 2011. “Desperate or Deviant? Causes of Criminal

     Behavior among TANF Recipients.” Poverty & Public Policy 3(3), Article 6.

Nagin, Daniel. 1998. "Criminal Deterrence Research at the Outset of the Twenty-First Century."

     Crime and Justice, (23), 1–42.

Niskanen, William A. 2006. "Welfare and the Culture of Poverty." The Cato Journal, 16(1), 1–

     15.

Phillips, Llad, and Harold Votey, Jr. 1987. “Women’s Changing Involvement with Crime: A

     Labor Force Participation Perspective.” Eastern Economic Journal, 13(3), 233–42.




                                                                                               37
Raphael, Steven, and Rudolf Winter-Ember. 2001. “Identifying the Effect of Unemployment on

     Crime.” Journal of Law and Economics, 44(1), 259–83.

Schoeni, Robert F., and Rebecca Blank. 2000. "What Has Welfare Reform Accomplished?

      Impacts on Welfare Participation, Employment, Income, Poverty, and Family Structure."

     National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #7627.

Steffensmeier, Darrell, J. and Jennifer Schwartz. 2004. “Trends in Female Criminality: Is Crime

     Still a Man's World?” In B. Raffel Price, & N.J. Sokoloff (eds.), The Criminal Justice

     System and Women (pp. 95–111). New York, NY: McGraw Hill.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 1999. “State Implementation of Major Changes

     to Welfare Policies, 1992–1998.” Washington, D.C.: Office of the Assistant Secretary for

     Planning and Evaluation. Accessed 2/29/12 from: http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/waiver-

     policies99/Table_A.htm.

U. S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation. (September 2012). Crime in the

     United States, 2011. Accessed 7/19/13, from: http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-

     in-the-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/tables/table-35.

U. S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation. (September 1997). Crime in the

     United States, 1996. Accessed 7/19/13, from: http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-

     in-the-u.s/1996/96sec4.pdf.

U. S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation. (October 2003). Crime in the

     United States, 2002. Accessed 7/19/13, from:

     http://www2.fbi.gov/ucr/cius_02/html/web/arrested/04-table29.html.




                                                                                               38
U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics. (March 2004). Criminal Victimization in

     the United States, 2002. Statistical Tables, NCJ 200561, Table 91. Accessed 7/19/13 from:

     http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs/pub/pdf/cvus02.pdf.

Zhang, Junsen.1997. "The Effect of Welfare Programs on Criminal Behavior: A Theoretical and

     Empirical Analysis." Economic Inquiry, 35(1), 120–37.

Ziliak, James P. 2006. "Taxes, Transfers, and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers," Unpublished

     working paper. Available at: http://www.nber.org/~confer/2006/URCf06/ziliak.pdf.

Zimring, Franklin E. 2007. The Great American Crime Decline. New York: Oxford University

     Press.




                                                                                              39
                                           Table 1
                                    Annual Arrest Statistics
                                        FBI Arrests

                                                   (1)                                (2)
                                         Arrest Rate Per 100,000
                                               population                     U.S. Arrest Rate
                                               1992–2002                      per 100,000, 1996
Age Range (years)                        21–49             21–49                     All
                                                                                  Males and
                                         Female                Male                Females

Property index                             516.911             1304.91                 793.2
Larceny/theft                              449.917            883.8672                 577.3
Violent index                             164.4585            837.5871                 288.6
Other serious crimes                      1207.411            4191.577                1685.5
Other serious crimes (no
drugs)                                     790.725            2446.678                1091.3
Minor offenses                            1491.863            7163.218                3073.5
(1) Arrest rates were calculated as total number of arrests for each crime category summed over
    months, years, and reporting agencies. These arrests represent agencies with a size of 50,000
    or greater who reported arrests for each month/year. The denominator is the total population
    of the reporting agencies multiplied by the percent of the US population which is female 21-
    49 and male 21-49 in each year.
(2) U.S. arrest rates (column 4) were obtained from U.S. Department of Justice (1997).




                                               40
                                                                  Table 2
                                               Implementation Dates of Welfare Reform by State

                10/92 to 2/97   9/96 to 1/98      10/92 to 1/98                           10/92 to 2/97     9/96 to 1/98       10/92 to 1/98
                                                  Any Welfare                                AFDC                              Any Welfare
                AFDC Waiver       TANF              Reform                                  Waiver            TANF               Reform
Alabama                           Nov-96             Nov-96              Montana             Feb-96           Feb-97              Feb-96
Alaska                            Jul-97             Jul-97              Nebraska            Oct-95           Dec-96              Oct-95
Arizona           Nov-95          Oct-96             Nov-95              Nevada                               Dec-96              Dec-96
Arkansas          Jul-94          Jul-97             Jul-94              New Hampshire                        Oct-96              Oct-96
California        Dec-92          Jan-98             Dec-92              New Jersey          Oct-92           Jul-97              Oct-92
Colorado                          Jul-97             Jul-97              New Mexico                           Jul-97              Jul-97
Connecticut        Jan-96         Oct-96             Jan-96              New York                             Nov-97              Nov-97
DC                                Mar-97             Mar-97              North Carolina       Jul-96          Jan-97              Jul-96
Delaware           Oct-95         Mar-97             Oct-95              North Dakota                         Jul-97              Jul-97
Florida                                              Oct-96              Ohio                 Jul-96          Oct-96              Jul-96
Georgia            Jan-94         Jan-97             Jan-94              Oklahoma                             Oct-96              Oct-96
Hawaii             Feb-97         Jul-97             Feb-97              Oregon              Feb-93           Oct-96              Feb-93
Idaho                             Jul-97             Jul-97              Pennsylvania                         Mar-97              Mar-97
Illinois          Nov-93          Jul-97             Nov-93              Rhode Island                         May-97              May-97
Indiana           May-95          Oct-96             May-95              South Carolina                       Oct-96              Oct-96
Iowa              Oct-93          Jan-97             Oct-93              South Dakota        Jun-94           Dec-96              Jun-94
Kansas                            Oct-96             Oct-96              Tennessee           Sep-96           Oct-96              Sep-96
Kentucky                          Oct-96             Oct-96              Texas               Jun-96           Nov-96              Jun-96
Louisiana                         Jan-97             Jan-97              Utah                Jan-93           Oct-96              Jan-93
Maine                             Nov-96             Nov-96              Vermont             Jul-94           Sep-96              Jul-94
Maryland          Mar-96          Dec-96             Mar-96              Virginia            Jul-95           Feb-97              Jul-95
Massachusetts     Nov-95          Sep-96             Nov-95              Washington          Jan-96           Jan-97              Jan-96
Michigan          Oct-92          Sep-96             Oct-92              West Virginia                        Jan-97              Jan-97
Minnesota                         Jul-97             Jul-97              Wisconsin            Jan-96          Sep-97              Jan-96
Mississippi        Oct-95         Jul-97             Oct-95              Wyoming                              Jan-97              Jan-97
Missouri           Jun-95         Dec-96             Jun-95
                                                                                     Source: US Department of Health and Human Services (1999)


                                                                    41
                                                                                     Table 3
                                                                        Welfare Reform and Property Crime
                                                                                   FBI Arrests
                                                                         Females, Ages 21–49, 1992–2002

  Outcome                                                     Ln Arrest Rate – Property “Index” Criminal Offenses                                       Ln Arrest Rate – Larceny / Theft
  Specification                                    (1)                     (2)                   (3)                             (4)                       (5)                    (6)

  AFDC Waiver                                  -0.02477                 -0.04848***               -0.04962***                                         -0.04819***
                                               (0.01630)                  (0.01638)                 (0.01615)                                           (0.01596)
  TANF                                         -0.02941                  -0.04780*                 -0.04497*                                           -0.04767*
                                               (0.02587)                  (0.02502)                 (0.02453)                                           (0.02392)
  Any Welfare Reform                                                                                                        -0.04858***                                         -0.04808***
                                                                                                                              (0.01521)                                           (0.01496)

  Measures of Male Arrests                        Yes                        Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes
  State-specific Linear Trends                    No                         Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes
  Lagged Economic Conditions                      No                         No                        Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes
  & Welfare Caseloads
  Adjusted R-squared                            0.93824                   0.94514                     0.94519                  0.94520                   0.94050                   0.94051
  Observations                                   5656                      5656                        5656                     5656                      5656                      5656
Notes: Coefficients from OLS semi-log models are presented. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within state cells, and reported in parentheses. All models control for indicators
for state, month, and year, in addition to the state unemployment rate, state real per capita personal income, log of total state population, log of the agency population for months with arrest
reports, log state criminal justice expenditures, log state substance abuse prevention and treatment block grant, state minimum wage, and state poverty rate. Measures of male arrests include the
log of the male arrest rate for all criminal offenses and the log of male arrest rate for outcome-specific offenses. Lagged covariates include one-year lags of the state unemployment rate and real
personal income per capita, and one- and two-year lags of the state welfare caseloads. Sample is limited to agencies with a reported coverage of at least 50%.




                                                                                                 42
                                                                                      Table 4
                                                                          Welfare Reform and Other Crime
                                                                                    FBI Arrests
                                                                          Females, Ages 21–49, 1992–2002

  Outcome                                 Ln Arrest Rate – Violent “Index” Criminal            Ln Arrest Rate – Other Serious Criminal              Ln Arrest Rate – Other Minor Criminal
                                                          Offenses                                            Offenses                                             Offenses
  Specification                                  (1)                    (2)                          (3)                    (4)                           (5)                   (6)

  AFDC Waiver                                   0.00240                                            -0.00448                                             -0.01130
                                               (0.03486)                                           (0.01583)                                            (0.01604)
  TANF                                         -0.02742                                            -0.01288                                              0.01566
                                               (0.04191)                                           (0.02411)                                            (0.02077)
  Any Welfare Reform                                                     -0.00430                                             -0.00635                                            -0.00523
                                                                         (0.03304)                                            (0.01587)                                           (0.01600)

  Measures of Male Arrests                        Yes                        Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes
  State-specific Linear Trends                    Yes                        Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes
  Lagged Economic Conditions                      Yes                        Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes
  & Welfare Caseloads
  Adjusted R-squared                            0.89933                   0.89933                     0.96811                  0.96811                   0.97558                   0.97557
  Observations                                   5644                      5644                        5668                     5668                      5656                      5656
Notes: Coefficients from OLS semi-log models are presented. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within state cells, and reported in parentheses. All models control for indicators
for state, month, and year, in addition to the state unemployment rate, state real per capita personal income, log of total state population, log of the agency population for months with arrest
reports, log state criminal justice expenditures, log state substance abuse prevention and treatment block grant, state minimum wage, and state poverty rate. Measures of male arrests include the
log of the male arrest rate for all criminal offenses and the log of male arrest rate for outcome-specific offenses. Lagged covariates include one-year lags of the state unemployment rate and real
personal income per capita, and one- and two-year lags of the state welfare caseloads. Sample is limited to agencies with a reported coverage of at least 50%.




                                                                                                 43
                                                                              Table 5
                                                                 Welfare Reform and Property Crime
                                                                           Lagged Effects
                                                                  Females, Ages 21–49, 1992–2002

 Panel A                                                                                   Ln Arrest Rate – Property “Index” Criminal Offenses
 Specification                                                 (1)                   (2)                  (3)                (4)               (5)                          (6)

 AFDC Waiver (Lag 1 month)                               -0.04905***                                 -0.04062***                                 -0.03840**
                                                           (0.01551)                                   (0.01513)                                  (0.01445)
 AFDC Waiver (Lag 12 month)                                                                            -0.02503                                   -0.03225*
                                                                                                       (0.01947)                                  (0.01849)
 AFDC Waiver (Lag 24 month)                                                                                                                        0.01839
                                                                                                                                                  (0.01985)

 TANF (Lag 1 month)                                       -0.05100**                                  -0.04233*                                   -0.04274*
                                                           (0.02393)                                  (0.02283)                                   (0.02237)
 TANF (Lag 12 month)                                                                                  -0.05322*                                  -0.05918**
                                                                                                      (0.02826)                                   (0.02808)
 TANF (Lag 24 month)                                                                                                                               -0.01429
                                                                                                                                                  (0.03104)

 Any Welfare Reform (Lag 1 month)                                              -0.04949***                                 -0.03854***                                -0.03707***
                                                                                 (0.01521)                                   (0.01435)                                  (0.01381)
 Any Welfare Reform (Lag 12 month)                                                                                            -0.03084                                 -0.03505*
                                                                                                                             (0.01943)                                  (0.01771)
 Any Welfare Reform (Lag 24 month)                                                                                                                                       0.01157
                                                                                                                                                                        (0.01902)

 Measures of Male Arrests                                     Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 State-specific Linear Trends                                 Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Lagged Economic Conditions &                                 Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Welfare Caseloads
 Adjusted R-squared                                         0.94520               0.94521              0.94525               0.94525               0.94520               0.94519
 Observations                                                5656                  5656                 5656                  5656                  5656                  5656
Notes: Coefficients from OLS semi-log models are presented. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within state cells, and reported in parentheses. All models
control for indicators for state, month, and year, in addition to the state unemployment rate, state real per capita personal income, log of total state population, log of the agency
population for months with arrest reports, log state criminal justice expenditures, log state substance abuse prevention and treatment block grant, state minimum wage, and state
poverty rate. Measures of male arrests include the log of the male arrest rate for all criminal offenses and the log of male arrest rate for outcome-specific offenses. Lagged
covariates include one-year lags of the state unemployment rate and real personal income per capita, and one- and two-year lags of the state welfare caseloads. Sample is limited
to agencies with a reported coverage of at least 50%.


                                                                                            44
 Panel B                                                          Ln Arrest Rate – Larceny / Theft
 Specification                           (1)           (2)            (3)                (4)            (5)          (6)

 AFDC Waiver (Lag 1 month)           -0.04742***                   -0.03865**                        -0.03552**
                                       (0.01541)                    (0.01550)                         (0.01468)
 AFDC Waiver (Lag 12 month)                                         -0.02617                          -0.03605*
                                                                    (0.01983)                         (0.01888)
 AFDC Waiver (Lag 24 month)                                                                            0.02525
                                                                                                      (0.02144)

 TANF (Lag 1 month)                  -0.05414**                    -0.04508**                        -0.04526**
                                      (0.02317)                     (0.02210)                         (0.02178)
 TANF (Lag 12 month)                                                -0.05787*                        -0.06603**
                                                                    (0.03177)                         (0.03234)
 TANF (Lag 24 month)                                                                                  -0.01544
                                                                                                      (0.03244)

 Any Welfare Reform (Lag 1 month)                  -0.04892***                       -0.03732**                   -0.03518**
                                                     (0.01518)                        (0.01481)                    (0.01423)
 Any Welfare Reform (Lag 12 month)                                                     -0.03269                   -0.03875**
                                                                                      (0.02037)                    (0.01912)
 Any Welfare Reform (Lag 24 month)                                                                                  0.01666
                                                                                                                   (0.02060)

 Measures of Male Arrests               Yes           Yes             Yes                Yes            Yes          Yes
 State-specific Linear Trends           Yes           Yes             Yes                Yes            Yes          Yes
 Lagged Economic Conditions &           Yes           Yes             Yes                Yes            Yes          Yes
 Welfare Caseloads
 Adjusted R-squared                    0.94051      0.94052         0.94058            0.94057        0.94054      0.94051
 Observations                           5656         5656            5656               5656           5656         5656
Notes: See Panel A.




                                                             45
                                                                               Table 6
                                                                 Welfare Reform and Property Crime
                                                              Lead Effects & Pre-Welfare Reform Trends
                                                                         Females, Ages 21–49

Outcome                                         Ln Arrest          Ln Arrest        Ln Arrest          Ln Arrest          Ln Arrest        Ln Arrest          Ln Arrest          Ln Arrest
                                                  Rate –            Rate –            Rate –            Rate –             Rate –            Rate –            Rate –             Rate –
                                                 Property          Larceny /         Property          Larceny /          All Crime         Property          Larceny /          All Crime
                                                 “Index”            Theft            “Index”            Theft                               “Index”            Theft
                                                 Criminal                            Criminal                                               Criminal
                                                 Offenses                            Offenses                                               Offenses
Specification                                       1                 2                 3                  4                 5                 6                  7                 8
Sample                                          1990-2002         1990-2002         1990-1996          1990-1996         1990-1996         1990-1996          1990-1996         1990-1996

Welfare Reform - Post                          -0.05496***       -0.05204***
                                                 (0.01544)         (0.01497)

Welfare Reform – 2 or more years Pre             -0.00076           -0.00914
                                                (0.01915)          (0.01825)

Years to Welfare Reform                                                               0.00460           0.00076            0.03190
                                                                                     (0.01403)         (0.01480)          (0.01914)

Welfare Reform – 4 or more years Pre                                                                                                         -0.01409          -0.00188           0.00167
                                                                                                                                            (0.04230)         (0.04093)          (0.03669)

Measures of Male Arrests                            Yes               Yes                No                No                 No                No                No                 No
State-specific Linear Trends                        Yes               Yes                No                No                 No                No                No                 No
Lagged Economic Conditions &                        Yes               Yes                No                No                 No                No                No                 No
Welfare Caseloads
Adjusted R-squared                               0.94310            0.93922           0.88291           0.87171            0.92028           0.88288           0.87166            0.92025
Observations                                      6663               6663              2804              2804               2804              2804              2804               2804
  Notes: Coefficients from OLS semi-log models are presented. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within state cells, and reported in parentheses. All models
  control for indicators for state, month, and year. Specifications 1-2 also control for state unemployment rate, state real per capita personal income, log of total state population, log
  of the agency population for months with arrest reports, log state criminal justice expenditures, log state substance abuse prevention and treatment block grant, state minimum
  wage, and state poverty rate. Measures of male arrests include the log of the male arrest rate for all criminal offenses and the log of male arrest rate for outcome-specific offenses.
  Lagged covariates include one-year lags of the state unemployment rate and real personal income per capita, and one- and two-year lags of the state welfare caseloads. Sample is
  limited to agencies with a reported coverage of at least 50%.




                                                                                              46
                                                                                       Table 7
                                                                          Welfare Reform and Property Crime
                                                                                     FBI Arrests
                                                                            Males, Ages 21–49, 1992–2002
Outcome                                         Ln Arrest Rate – Property “Index” Criminal Offenses                                             Ln Arrest Rate – Larceny / Theft
Specification                                (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)                            (5)                (6)               (7)                        (8)

AFDC Waiver                               0.01297                                   0.01933                                    0.00131                                   0.00828
                                         (0.02079)                                 (0.02078)                                  (0.03157)                                 (0.03235)
TANF                                      0.00068                                   0.00928                                   -0.01670                                  -0.00872
                                         (0.01860)                                 (0.01845)                                  (0.02780)                                 (0.02622)
Any Welfare Reform                                             0.01021                                    0.01708                                   -0.00273                                   0.00447
                                                              (0.01848)                                  (0.01848)                                 (0.02878)                                  (0.02907)

Measures of Female Arrests                  Yes                  Yes                   No                   No                   Yes                  Yes                   No                    No
State-specific Linear Trends                Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
Lagged Economic Conditions                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes                   Yes
& Welfare Caseloads
Adjusted R-squared                        0.96821              0.96821              0.96262              0.96262               0.95536              0.95536              0.94813              0.94814
Observations                               5656                 5656                 5656                 5656                  5656                 5656                 5656                 5656
         Notes: Coefficients from OLS semi-log models are presented. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation within state cells, and reported in parentheses. All models
         control for indicators for state, month, and year, in addition to the state unemployment rate, state real per capita personal income, log of total state population, log of the agency
         population for months with arrest reports, log state criminal justice expenditures, log state substance abuse prevention and treatment block grant, state minimum wage, and state
         poverty rate. Measures of female arrests include the log of the female arrest rate for all criminal offenses and the log of the female arrest rate for outcome-specific offenses.
         Lagged covariates include one-year lags of the state unemployment rate and real personal income per capita, and one- and two-year lags of the state welfare caseloads. Sample is
         limited to agencies with a reported coverage of at least 50%.




                                                                                                   47
Appendix A1: Crime categories and codes in FBI crime reports

                              Serious Criminal Offenses
UCR Code
Violent “Index” Crimes
01          Murder and Non-Negligent Manslaughter, Manslaughter by Negligence
02          Forcible Rape
03          Robbery
04          Aggravated Assault
Property “Index” Crimes
05          Burglary - Breaking or Entering
06          Larceny/Theft (except motor vehicle)
07          Motor Vehicle Theft
Other Serious Criminal Offenses
08          Other Assault
09          Arson
10          Forgery and Counterfeiting
11          Fraud
12          Embezzlement
13          Stolen Property - Buying, Receiving, Possession
14          Vandalism
15          Weapons - Carrying, Possessing, etc.
16          Prostitution and Commercialized Vice
17          Sex Offenses (except Forcible Rape and Prostitution)
18          Drug Abuse Violations
19          Gambling

                                        Other Offenses
UCR Code
20         Offenses Against Family and Children
21         Driving Under the Influence
22         Liquor Laws
23         Drunkenness
24         Disorderly Conduct
25         Vagrancy
26         All Other Offenses (except traffic)
27         Suspicion
28         Curfew and Loitering Law Violations
29         Runaways




                                                  48
Appendix Table A2: Parameter estimates for Model 3 in Table 3

Outcome: Ln Arrests – Property “Index” Criminal Offenses for Females Ages 21-49
AFDC Waiver                                                                   -0.04962***
                                                                                (0.01615)
TANF                                                                            -0.04497*
                                                                                (0.02453)
State Unemployment Rate                                                         0.01753**
                                                                                (0.00856)
Unemployment Rate: 1-year Lag                                                     0.01473
                                                                                (0.01020)
State Real Personal Income Per Capita                                             0.00002
                                                                                (0.00001)
Income: 1-year Lag                                                               -0.00001
                                                                                (0.00001)
Log Total State Population                                                        1.47572
                                                                                (1.29052)
Log Agency Population                                                             0.04482
                                                                                (0.07729)
Log State Criminal Justice Expenditures                                           0.00543
                                                                                (0.12833)
State Minimum Wage                                                              -0.03274*
                                                                                (0.01633)
State Poverty Rate                                                                0.00399
                                                                                (0.00282)
Log State Substance Abuse Prevention & Treatment Block Grant                     -0.05008
                                                                                (0.07358)
State Welfare Caseloads (1000s): 1-year Lag                                      -0.00003
                                                                                (0.00004)
State Welfare Caseloads (1000s): 2-year Lag                                       0.00006
                                                                                (0.00005)
Log Arrests for Property Index Crimes for Males Ages 21–49                     0.46743***
                                                                                (0.07687)
Log Total Arrests for Males Ages 21–49                                         0.32562***
                                                                                (0.05535)
State Fixed Effects                                                                 Yes
Month Fixed Effects                                                                 Yes
Year Fixed Effects                                                                  Yes
State-specific Linear Trends                                                        Yes

Adj-R2                                                                          0.980
Observations                                                                    5656
Notes: See Table 3




                                                49
Appendix Table A3: Testing for dose-response associations for property crime

       First, we estimated the following model separately for each state, as part of a two-step

procedure, in order to quantify the effects of welfare reform on each state’s welfare caseloads

conditional on the state’s economy.

       (5)     Ln Caseloadt = δ + Λ Welfaret + Economyt Γ + δ1 Trend + δ2 Trend2 + νt

       The parameter Λ, which is estimated separately for each state, represents the percent

reduction in welfare caseloads associated with welfare reform (defined as the implementation of

an AFDC waiver or TANF, whichever occurred first), conditioning on the state’s economic

conditions (proxied by the unemployment rate and real personal income per capita) and linear

and quadratic trend terms. We find that across all states the average Λ is estimated to be about

25%, suggesting that welfare reform is responsible for a 25% decline in caseloads over our

sample period. This average reduction is consistent with literature cited earlier that TANF

reduced caseloads by between 19% and 35%.

       Second, we modified the baseline model (Equation 4) to allow an interaction between the

main effect of welfare reform and the welfare reform-induced percent reduction in caseloads for

each state:

       (6)     (Ln A)smt = α + λ1Welfaresmt+ λ 2(Welfaresmt * Λs)

                                       + Zst β + States Ω + Monthm Φ + Yeart Ψ + εsmt

       The parameter λ1 represents the effect of welfare reform on crime, among those states

which had no reductions in welfare caseloads attributed to welfare reform; hence, we expect λ1 to

be insignificant and close to zero if our estimates are truly reflective of a causal effect. Similarly,

λ2 represents the effect of welfare reform on crime for a 100% reduction in caseloads (unit

change in Λs), among those states which experienced reduction in caseloads attributed to welfare




                                                  50
reform. If there is a dose-response effect based on strictness of state policies, we would expect

the magnitude of λ2 to be substantially larger than that of λ1. Indeed we find that the main effect

of welfare reform (λ1) is statistically insignificant and much reduced in magnitude (-0.022 for

property index crime; -0.016 for larceny/theft); the effect of interaction term (λ2) is negative with

a high magnitude (-0.064 for property index crime; -0.077 for larceny/theft) and statistically

significant at the 10 percent level. Specifically, a 100% reduction in caseloads that can be

attributed purely to welfare reform is associated with about a 6.4% reduction in serious property

crime and 7.7% reduction in larceny and theft.




                                                 51
