                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    SMOKESCREEN: HOW MANAGERS BEHAVE WHEN THEY HAVE SOMETHING
                             TO HIDE

                                        Tanja Artiga González
                                           Markus Schmid
                                           David Yermack

                                        Working Paper 18886
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18886


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2013




We are grateful to Martin Bugeja, Mike Burkhart, Ettore Croci, Daniel Ferreira, Paul Gilgen, Robert
Guerrero, Simi Kedia, Peter Limbach, Daniel Metzger, Shiva Rajgopal, Daniel Sokol, and seminar
participants at Catholic University of Milan, Cyprus University of Technology, University of Melbourne,
New York University, University of Queensland, University of Technology Sydney, Warwick Business
School, University of Western Australia, and the German Finance Association Annual Meeting in
Wuppertal for helpful comments and suggestions. We thank John Connor for generously providing
his extensive dataset of worldwide cartels, Jongsub Lee for generously providing his dataset of political
contributions, and Ronald Masulis for generously providing his dataset of foreign independent directors.
Part of this research was completed when David Yermack was a visiting professor at Erasmus University
Rotterdam and Tanja Artiga González was a visiting researcher at NYU Stern School of Business.
Financial support from the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) and the German Academic
Exchange Service (DAAD) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Tanja Artiga González, Markus Schmid, and David Yermack. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Smokescreen: How Managers Behave When They Have Something To Hide
Tanja Artiga González, Markus Schmid, and David Yermack
NBER Working Paper No. 18886
March 2013, Revised December 2013
JEL No. D43,G34,L40

                                               ABSTRACT

We study financial reporting and corporate governance in 218 companies accused of price fixing. These
firms engage in evasive financial reporting strategies, including earnings smoothing, segment reclassification,
and restatements. In corporate governance, cartel firms favor outside directors likely to monitor inattentively
due to low attendance, other board seats, and overseas residence. When directors resign, they are often
not replaced, and auditors are rarely switched. Cartel firms have unusually low CEO turnover and
rely on internal management promotions. Their managers exercise stock options faster than managers
of other firms. Cartel firms are large donors to political candidates. While our results are based only
upon firms engaged in price fixing, we expect that they should apply generally to all companies in
which managers seek to conceal poor performance or wrongdoing.


Tanja Artiga González                                  David Yermack
Swiss Institute of Banking and Finance                 Stern School of Business
Rosenbergstrasse 52                                    New York University
CH-9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland                        44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-160
tanja.artigagonzalez@unisg.ch                          New York, NY 10012
                                                       and NBER
Markus Schmid                                          dyermack@stern.nyu.edu
Swiss Institute of Banking and Finance
Rosenbergstrasse 52
CH-9000 St. Gallen, Switzerland
markus.schmid@unisg.ch
                      Smokescreen:
               How managers behave when
               they have something to hide



1.     Introduction

       In most financial frauds, a company tries to make its performance appear better

than it really is, hoping to achieve a valuation that wouldn’t be supported by its true cash

flows. This paper looks at the opposite case. We investigate the disclosure and

governance practices of more than 200 U.S. companies accused by government

authorities of participating in price-fixing cartels. These firms earn strong cash flows,

and continuation of their schemes requires obfuscation of the windfalls from regulators,

analysts, customers, and at times, even their own boards of directors.

       Connor and Helmers (2007) define a cartel as “an association of legally

independent firms that aims to raise their joint profits through explicit agreements. Hard-

core cartels aim to control prices or restrict supply (or both).” Decisions to join cartels

are typically taken by a firm’s very top managers and then implemented by the

intermediate management (Harrington, 2006). The role of top management suggests that

corporate governance may affect formation and continuation of a cartel. For example,

cartels may occur more readily in firms with a high concentration of power at the top

level, a weak or inattentive board of directors, or strong pay-for-performance incentives




                                              2
(Spagnolo, 2005).1 In addition, financial reporting strategies that cause signal-jamming,

such as earnings smoothing and suspicious accrual patterns, might be expected to occur

frequently with cartels. Cartelists have an ongoing need to deter both cheating and the

entry into the industry of new firms (Levenstein and Suslow, 2006). If a cartel member

deviates from a collusive agreement, its sudden jump in earnings might be detected by

co-conspirators, who could start a price war that could destroy the cartel. Therefore, we

would expect cartels to use financial reporting strategies that obscure year-to-year swings

in profitability.

        This paper investigates how cartel firms attempt to cover up their conspiracies.

We use an empirical framework similar to that of Kedia and Philippon (2009), who

investigate cover-up actions by firms involved in fraudulent accounting. We study a

sample of 1,569 firm-years from 218 U.S. companies participating in hard-core cartels

between 1986 and 2010. We define a cartel firm-year as year in which the given cartelist

has been involved in price fixing. The starting point and duration of the cartels in our

sample are identified by enforcement actions brought by government antitrust authorities.

We compare these cartel firm-year observations to observations from a set of control

firms matched on size and industry. As in other empirical studies on cartels, our sample

is subject to a selection bias as we are only able to consider discovered and indicted



1 Theoretical research shows that cartel formation may be motivated not only by the potential profits from
price-fixing, but also by management incentives (e.g., Levenstein and Suslow, 2006). Spagnolo (2005)
adds managerial incentives schemes to a supergame-theoretic model of dynamic competition and shows
that when managers have a preference for smooth time paths, collusion with other firms becomes more
likely. This could be caused by management bonus contracts that have capped incentive provisions. His
model shows that even though income smoothing is costly, shareholders tolerate the cost in return for the
higher collusive profits. Buccirossi and Spagnolo (2008) show in a classical model of repeated oligopoly
that the stability of tacit collusive agreements is positively correlated with performance-based incentives
provided to top management.

                                                      3
cartels, which are believed to represent only a minority of the price-fixing conspiracies

that occur worldwide (see Connor, 2010).

       We document a range of accounting and governance strategies that cartel firms

adopt in systematic patterns, apparently with an eye toward prolonging their conspiracies

and evading legal liability. To mislead readers of financial statements, companies engage

in earnings smoothing and frequently reclassify the industrial segments for which they

report line-of-business results. They file abnormally large numbers of financial

restatements. In corporate governance, cartel firms favor outside directors who are likely

to be inattentive monitors due to their status as foreign or “busy” (belonging to a large

number of boards) and their low rates of meeting attendance. When directors resign, they

are often not replaced, and new auditing firms are engaged significantly less often than

expected. Since stability of the management team probably represents a necessary

condition for continuing a conspiracy, cartel firms tend to promote CEOs from within,

rather than hiring them from outside. They exhibit lower than expected rates of CEO

replacement, controlling for performance, and feature abnormally large numbers of other

managers who are chosen by the incumbent CEO. Cartel managers exercise their stock

options faster than managers of other firms. We also find a pronounced pattern of

political donations by cartel firms, as their political action committees (PACs) donate

more frequently to political candidates and in larger amounts than firms in a matched

control sample. While our results are based only upon firms engaged in price fixing, we

expect that they should apply generally to all companies in which the managers seek to

conceal poor performance or personal wrongdoing.




                                              4
       As an example, the pharmaceutical company Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. is one of

the more prominent firms in our sample. It was charged with participating in cartels in

three different countries between 1999 and 2004. During this cartel period, Bristol-

Myers engaged in many of the practices described in our analysis below. The company

reclassified its line-of-business segments nearly every year, constantly reorganizing them

into different subcategories and at one point eliminating them altogether for a two-year

period. Five years of earnings results were restated, including two years that were

restated twice. The company was sued twice during this period for securities fraud. It

retained the same auditing firm for the entire cartel period despite the outward signs of

financial reporting problems. Two new outside directors joined the Bristol-Myers board

between 1998-2004. One fell into the “busy” category, with three or more board

memberships, and the other was based in a foreign country. Five of the incumbent

outside directors from the start of the cartel period also had busy status. Both CEOs who

served during this period had been promoted internally. At the end of its cartel period in

2006, soon before it agreed to plead guilty to federal criminal charges arising from an

antitrust investigation, Bristol-Myers appears to have undergone a governance and

financial reporting overhaul. The CEO was replaced by an outside board member who

had not previously worked for the company. The firm changed auditors, replacing

PricewaterhouseCoopers with Deloitte & Touche, and added a law-and-order

independent outsider to its board, the former FBI Director and federal judge Louis Freeh.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the

sample and variables. Section 3 reports the results from the empirical analysis. Section 4

concludes.



                                             5
2.         Sample selection

2.1        Cartel firms

           We use the U.S. firms included in an extended version of Connor’s (2010) hand

collected Private International Cartel dataset, which covers private cartels discovered,

disclosed and sanctioned by regulators around the world between January 1986 and

December 2010.2 The dataset omits cartels protected by sovereignty or multilateral

treaties, as well as those for which no sanctions were imposed within five years of the

authorities’ discovery. A total of 648 cartels involving 2,115 companies appear in the

dataset, although in certain cases many more firms are sanctioned anonymously. Many

companies are repeat offenders and participate in multiple cartels. The median cartel

involves eight companies and lasts five years before discovery by regulators; the

maximum values are considerably higher, with some cartels lasting for decades and

involving dozens of companies or more.3

           The dataset includes each firm’s name, country of incorporation, the market(s)

and continent(s) where collusion took place, the duration of the collusive agreement, and

if known, the fines imposed, leniency granted by regulators, and estimated overcharges to

consumers. Information is collected mainly from filings, documents, reports, and press

releases from the antitrust authorities in different countries, as well as newspaper and

magazine articles retrieved through search engines like Factiva or Lexis-Nexis. The

sample generally includes more observations in recent years, with between 300 and 400


2
    The dataset in Connor (2010) covers the time period from January 1990 to December 2009.
3
  Connor (2010) reports one case of more than 2,000 unnamed construction companies accused of price
fixing by authorities in the Netherlands.

                                                     6
companies in each of the years 2005-2009. We do not know whether this pattern occurs

due to better enforcement, more disclosure by regulators, more coverage by the press, or

a greater tendency by companies to collude in price fixing or bid rigging, though Connor

and Helmers (2007) estimate that only 10% to 30% of all price-fixing conspiracies are

ever discovered. European companies comprise the majority of observations in the

dataset, although many cartels are global in nature and involve multinational firms

operating on several continents. Connor and Helmers (2007) estimate that by the early

2000s, worldwide corporate penalties for firms participating in cartels stabilized at or

above $2 billion per year, with approximately 60% due to government fines (mainly from

U.S. and European regulators) and 40% paid to settle private litigation.

       To select our sample, we begin with 819 U.S. companies included in the

international dataset. We exclude all cartels which started before 1986 and all firms not

covered by Compustat, which substantially reduces the sample size to 218 firms that are

involved in a total of 185 conspiracies (certain conspiracies concern more than one

sample company). We obtain data for 1,569 cartel company-year observations (including

part-years) for these 218 firms over the 1986-2010 period, with 67 of the 218 companies

participating in more than one cartel. The mean and median cartel period is six years for

our sample, and the maximum value is 22 years for a marine hose cartel involving the

rubber manufacturers Goodyear and Parker Hannifin. ExxonMobil is involved in 13

individual cartels, the most of any company in the sample, followed by Johnson &

Johnson with nine.

       We augment the financial statement data from Compustat for our 218 firms with

information from other financial and governance sources, including the Center for



                                             7
Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) stock price database, the RiskMetrics Governance

and Directors databases, Standard and Poor’s ExecuComp database, and the

AuditAnalytics database. Missing values in these datasets reduce the observations

available for some of our analysis below.

       Figure 1 displays the mean and median return on assets (ROA) for our sample

companies over a symmetric window of three years around the starting point of each

cartel. ROA is calculated throughout the paper as the ratio of earnings before interest and

taxes (EBIT) divided by total assets. Figure 1, which provides a reality check on the

accuracy of regulators’ identification of the cartels, shows that profitability decreases

until the last year before a firm enters into a cartel, and then increases steadily over the

subsequent four years, beginning in year 0, the first cartel year. In our regression analysis

below, we generally pool together the 1,569 cartel-firm observations with a much larger

control sample of 12,041 observations described below, and we test the significance of an

indicator variable for the cartel firm-year observations.



2.2.   Control sample of matched firms

       We construct a control sample of comparable companies matched on size and

industry. For every cartelist, we identify the Compustat firms with the same two-digit

primary SIC code in the year before the first collusive agreement starts. We then take the

five firms with firm size, measured by total assets, closest to the size of the cartel firm. If

a conspiracy was already active in 1986, the beginning of our sample period, we use the




                                               8
first cartel firm-year in our sample to form the corresponding control group. No cartel

firm is permitted also to enter the control sample.4

         Our final sample includes 1,569 cartel firm-years for 218 offending companies

and a control group of 12,041 firm-years for 721 companies matched on size and

industry. Table 1 presents summary statistics comparing the means and standard

deviations across these two subsamples for all the variables used in our analysis below.

The table shows that cartel firms are larger and more profitable than their counterparts in

the control sample, and they also exhibit sharply higher rates of accounting problems

such as restatements, securities fraud litigation, and discretionary accruals. Cartelists

often are the largest firms in their industries, which seems logical since substantial market

power would be required to fix prices successfully, but also creates an issue in attempting

to construct an appropriate control sample. Due to this pattern, we include a measure of

firm size, or board size where appropriate, in virtually all regressions.

         Table 2 studies the growth of important financial variables for cartel firms

compared to the control group. We use the methods in Kedia and Philippon’s (2009)

study of firms committing financial fraud, regressing the growth rates of different

quantities against indicator variables that equal one for three periods that we label Before,

During, and After. The Before variable equals 1 in the two years prior to initiation of a

cartel, the During variable equals 1 while the cartel is active, and the After variable

equals 1 for the two years subsequent to the cartel. For firms with multiple conspiracies


4
  We experiment with a number of alternative control samples and find that other matching procedures
make little difference in the size and significance of the regression estimates reported in the paper. For
example, we replicate our results following the approach used in Kedia and Philippon’s (2009) study of
financial fraud, creating a group of non-cartelists including all companies that operate in the same two-digit
SIC industry and are located in the same total assets quintile of Compustat in the year before each collusive
agreement starts. Although this procedure results in a much larger control sample of more than 50,000
company-year observations, it has little impact on our results.

                                                      9
in the sample, we delete observations that represent “overlap” years, within two years

after one cartel but also within two years before the start of another.5 In contrast to the

remainder of the paper, we also follow Kedia and Philippon (2009) in the construction of

the control sample. Specifically, for every cartelist, we create a group of non-cartelists

including all companies that operate in the same two-digit SIC industry and are located in

the same total assets quintile of Compustat in the year before each collusive agreement

starts. This approach ensures that the mean value of the control group is based on a

sufficiently large number of firms at the cost of having some size disparity between the

cartel sample and control sample. We estimate ordinary least squares panel regressions

in which the dependent variable equals the change in growth rates of variables such as

sales, from which we subtract the mean change in growth rates for the same variable in

the corresponding control group for each cartel firm. We winsorize all these relative

growth variables to limits of -1 and 1. We delete observations for which ROA exceeds

10 or is less than -10. To control for the dependence of the disturbance terms, we

calculate standard errors using the cluster-robust variant of the Huber-White sandwich

estimator.

        Results in Table 2 show that cartel firms thrive during the periods of their

conspiracies, as estimates for the During variable indicate that sales grow 2.3% faster,

return on assets grows 0.2% faster, and market capitalization rises 3.3% faster than the

comparable growth rates for the control sample. These results are all significant at

conventional levels. In contrast, profitability falls significantly faster than expected

during the Before and After years, sales growth is slower than expected during the Before

5
  We relax this assumption by including these overlap years in both the Before and After samples, and also
by counting the overlap years as cartel years. Neither of these changes has any discernable effect on the
size and significance of the estimates reported in Table 2.

                                                    10
years, and market capitalization falls faster than expected during the After years,

reversing the shareholder gains from the cartel periods. Cartel firms seem to respond to

their strong profits by hiring more workers and increasing their bases of fixed assets, as

we also observe significant growth in both employment and property, plant and

equipment. The bottom rows of the table report Wald F-tests for differences in

coefficient estimates for each variable in the Before vs. During subperiods as well as

During vs. After. The majority of these estimates are significant at conventional levels,

and most of the others come close.

       It is not clear why firms would systematically expand employment and fixed

assets during the cartel period, especially since price-fixing strategies often involve

restriction of output to maintain high prices. Many cartel firms agree either explicitly or

implicitly not to encroach upon the market shares of rivals. These firms may expand to

create a diversion for regulators, in line with many of the results found below, or they

may use their cash flows to enter other lines of business as part of an empire building

strategy, rather than returning the profits to stockholders. Expanding employment and

assets may also represent a strategy to curry favor with regulators, who may tend to

protect firms that add jobs and capital spending to the economy.



3.    Empirical results

      We study the behavior of cartel firms in two broad areas: corporate governance and

financial reporting. Our analysis in each subsection below investigates a variety of

strategies that these firms may use to evade scrutiny from internal and external monitors,

including changes in board composition, selection of the management team, changes in



                                              11
auditors, and various financial reporting strategies such as restatements and earnings

smoothing. We also investigate top managers’ exercises of stock options and the

frequency with which cartel firms become targets of class action shareholder litigation for

securities fraud.



3.1.   Director turnover and replacement

       A company could participate in a cartel either with or without the knowledge of

its board of directors, and for research purposes it may be difficult to predict which types

of boards are more likely to be associated with collusive behavior. However, we can

make more straightforward predictions about changes in the board. Companies should be

reluctant to replace directors who resign or retire, because recruiting a new monitor from

outside the company creates a risk of the cartel being exposed or halted.

       Table 3 presents an analysis of board turnover and changes in board size for our

cartel firms compared to companies in the control sample. We collect data on individual

directors from the RiskMetrics database, and the limited coverage of this source causes a

large reduction in our sample size. Our regressions include control variables for

institutional investor ownership, board size, Tobin’s Q, the growth rate of ROA, industry

fixed effects, and year fixed effects. As an alternative specification, we drop the year

fixed effects in columns 2 and 4 and instead use an indicator variable that equals one

beginning in 2002, the first-year in which the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and other regulations

required companies to begin implementing changes in board structure.

       Table 3 shows two clear patterns. Directors resign or retire more frequently in

cartel firms compared to companies in the control sample, and when they leave, cartel



                                             12
firms are more likely to allow the board to shrink rather than replacing them. Reasons for

director resignations are not clear, but one possibility is that board members who become

aware of wrongdoing leave quietly to evade future legal liability or to signal

disagreement with management’s actions (see Fahlenbrach, Low, and Stulz, 2012). The

motive for cartel firms not to replace exiting directors seems more plain: by leaving a

board seat vacant, the company avoids the possibility of being monitored by a new

individual from outside the firm.

       Table 4 analyzes the monitoring capacity of directors appointed to the boards of

cartel firms compared to board appointees by companies in the control sample. We study

directors in three categories: those who are busy, those who have poor attendance

records, and those who reside in foreign countries. These types of directors have been

shown in recent papers to perform poorly as monitors, due to such factors as distraction,

distance, fatigue, and their unfamiliarity with U.S. accounting rules. Busy directors,

defined as those serving on three or more boards simultaneously, are studied by Fich and

Shivdasani (2006). Directors with attendance problems are those who miss more than

25% of the board and committee meetings in a given year. Foreign independent directors

are the subject of a recent paper by Masulis, Wang, and Xie (2012), who kindly shared

their sample with us for use in this study.

       We estimate a Poisson maximum likelihood model of busy director appointments

in column 1 of Table 4. In column 2, we study the appointment of directors with

attendance problems, but we use a binary probit dependent variable instead of a Poisson

count data model since there are almost no cases in which companies appoint more than

one director with attendance problems in the same year. For the same reason, we



                                              13
continue using the probit framework in models of foreign director appointments in

columns 3 and 4 of Table 4. Estimates in Table 4 indicate that when appointing new

directors, cartel firms are more likely to select outsiders in each of these three categories,

consistent with a conjecture that management nominates new board members who are

unlikely to monitor aggressively. The result for foreign directors continues to hold when

we augment the regression with a control variable for the fraction of the firm’s sales that

occur outside the U.S., since foreign directors are expected to be more valuable in

multinational firms.



3.2.   Management turnover and replacement

       Because most cartels are likely initiated by managers without the knowledge of

the board of directors, we can make certain predictions about CEO selection and retention

in companies involved in price fixing. Controlling for performance and other relevant

factors, we expect cartel firms to exhibit less CEO turnover than other companies, since it

should be risky for the CEO to recruit a successor and entrust that person with the

continuation of a conspiracy. For similar reasons, when a new CEO is selected, we

would expect that person to come from within the company rather than from outside.

       Table 5 presents estimates from a probit model in which we study these

relationships. In the first column, we model CEO replacement as a function of standard

control variables such as firm size, growth, profitability, industry and year fixed effects,

and an indicator for CEO ages 66 through 72, when many planned retirements take place.

Estimates for this model have the expected signs and significance – for instance, CEO

replacement occurs less often when a firm is growing and is profitable. The model also



                                              14
includes an indicator variable for cartel membership. As expected, it has a negative

estimate and is statistically significant at the 10 percent level.

       In the second and third columns we study whether a CEO is slected internally or

externally. The model in the second column is restricted to those company-years (about

10.5% of the observations) in which a CEO turnover occurs. The model in the third

column is a cross sectional study of whether the firm’s current CEO was selected from

inside the firm, regardless of his tenure in office. In both columns we obtain positive and

significant estimates for the cartel firm indicator variable, consistent with these firms

choosing their leaders from inside the company.

       A line of recent papers begun by Landier et al. (2013) examines the role of the

CEO in hand-picking his own management team. In our setting, we would expect cartel

firms to have a relatively large fraction of top managers chosen personally by the CEO,

since maintaining a price-fixing conspiracy should require close personal relationships

among the company’s leaders. We study the two measures of the fraction of top

managers appointed to the executive board after the selection of the incumbent CEO.

These measures, following definitions in Landier et al. (2013), rely on the tenure of the

other top 5 managers included in the ExecuComp database. The FTA1 variable used in

regressions in the left two columns of Table 6 counts a manager as having been appointed

by the current CEO if he has served strictly less time in office than the CEO. The FTA2

variable in the right two columns is less restrictive, counting a manager as having been

chosen by the current CEO if both took office in the same year. The table presents Tobit

estimates of these variables as a function of various CEO and company characteristics.

Across all four models shown, we obtain a robust result that cartel firms have more top



                                               15
managers appointed by the incumbent CEO, after controlling for whether the CEO

himself was chosen from inside the firm, the CEO’s age, firm size, firm age, and other

variables. Our findings are consistent with the idea that inside cartel firms, CEOs place a

premium on personal relationships with other top managers, and are less likely to work

with executives whose tenure predates theirs.



3.3.   Changes in auditors

       We investigate cartel firms’ changes in auditors to explore whether a pattern

exists similar to that for boards of directors, with management exhibiting reluctance to

bring in new outsiders who might monitor aggressively and become aware of the firm’s

illegal conduct. We use Compustat to identify changes in auditors and create an indicator

variable that equals one for years in which the database reports a different auditor than

the previous year. We restrict the sample to observations in which firms have a Big 4

auditor and change from one Big 4 auditing firm to another. Only 22 observations, or

less than 2%, for the cartel firm sample are associated with smaller auditing firms, and

the fraction is significantly higher for firms in the control sample. A limited number of

auditing firms exit the industry due to mergers or liquidation (including, most famously,

Arthur Andersen). In these cases, when an auditor change is mandatory and beyond the

control of the firm, we set the auditor change indicator equal to missing.

       Summary statistics in Table 1 indicate that auditor changes occur far less

frequently for cartel firms than for companies in the control sample, with annual

frequencies of 2.4% vs. 3.6%, respectively. In Table 7 we report estimates for probit

regressions in which the auditor change indicator is regressed against the cartel indicator



                                             16
as well as control variables for firm size, growth and profitability; these controls are used

because larger firms are known to change auditors less often than smaller ones, and

successful firms are also likely to change less often than unsuccessful ones for whom

audit conflicts may occur with greater frequency. We include year fixed effects in the

model on the left side of the table, and both year and industry fixed effects in the model

shown on the right side.

       Estimates for the cartel firm indicator confirm the results found in the simple

comparison of sample means: cartel firms change auditors significantly less often than

other companies, controlling for company size, performance, industry membership, and

time period. The results are consistent with those found above documenting unusually

slow replacement of directors and CEOs for cartel companies, and they suggest that

management attempts to reduce external scrutiny by restricting access by new monitors.



3.4.   Contributions to political candidates

       We study contributions by the sample of cartel companies to U.S. federal political

candidates, using Federal Election Commission data for annual donations by political

action committees (PACs). We conjecture that the cartel firms will be unusually heavy

donors, since political contributions may be viewed as a strategy for pre-empting future

enforcement activity. Some basic descriptive statistics seem to bear out this hypothesis.

Of the ten largest overall donors in the Federal Election Commission dataset, four are

cartel firms in our sample, and eight of the ten largest one-year contribution totals come

from cartel firms. As shown in the descriptive statistics in Table 2, cartel firms are more

than twice as likely to be donors as firms in the control sample.



                                              17
        In Table 8, we examine three dependent variables: the total dollar value of

donations, if any, by each company’s PAC each year; a binary (0, 1) indicator variable

for whether a firm’s PAC reports any political activity, and the “political index” of

Cooper et al. (2010) based upon the number of candidates receiving donations from a

company’s PAC over the previous five years.6 As control variables, we include firm size

(the log of assets), employees, Tobin’s Q, leverage, and industry and year fixed effects.

        Results in the table indicate that cartels are significantly more likely to donate, to

donate larger amounts, and to donate to more candidates. These findings are consistent

with the hypothesis that cartel firms actively support political candidates as part of a

strategy of seeking future forbearance should the firm’s behavior become a target of

government regulators.



3.5.    Accounting restatements

        We investigate the propensity of cartel firms to engage in misleading financial

reporting by analyzing their patterns of financial restatements. We use the Audit

Analytics database to download information about restatements filed by all of our sample

firms between 2000 and 2010. The database covers restatements filed electronically with

the SEC since January 1, 2001, including restatements for past years filed since that date.

We exclude years earlier than 2000, because the database’s coverage of their entire

restatement history is likely to be incomplete.



6
  Matching PAC donations with the sample companies is difficult, since some PACs use the names of
corporate subsidiaries, and the Federal Election Commission does not provide an index number that can be
matched with Compustat and other research databases. We are grateful to Jongsub Lee for providing a link
table and assisting us with the data merge. A few companies report negative values for total political
contributions in certain years as a result of donations that are returned; our results are robust to deleting
these observations.

                                                     18
       Table 9 presents our regression analysis of restatements for cartel firms and the

matched sample. In columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable is a binary indicator for

whether a fiscal year’s results are eventually restated. These models are estimated in a

probit framework, and column 2’s specification includes industry and year fixed effects.

In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is the number of times that a given year’s

results are restated, with the models estimated in a Poisson maximum likelihood

framework. Although the entire sample includes only 152 firm-years with more than one

restatement, the analysis indicates a strong association between these cases and cartel

participation. The control variables in all models follow those used by Larcker,

Richardson, and Tuna (2007). They include the book-to-market ratio of common equity

lagged one year, the log of the market value of equity lagged one year, a measure of

external financing equal to net equity plus net debt issued deflated by the lagged market

value of equity, acquisition spending over the lagged market value of equity, and a

measure of free cash flow calculated as the difference of operating cash flow and average

capital expenditure over the three prior years, deflated by lagged market value of equity.

All control variables are winsorized at the 2nd and 98th percentiles.

       Consistent with the summary statistics in Table 1 showing an almost 50% higher

incidence of restatements among cartel firms, the estimates for the cartel firm indicator

are positive and strongly significant in every column. The evidence shows that cartel

firms are more likely to file restatements than firms in the control sample, consistent with

a strategy of using misleading accounting in order to conceal the firm’s true operating

performance. As a robustness test, we re-estimate Table 9 with an alternative definition

of the dependent variable: whether the firm restates any prior year’s financials during the



                                              19
current year (left two columns), and the number of prior years’ financials restated during

the current year (right two columns). We obtain estimates quite similar to those shown in

Table 9, with the cartel indicator variable always positive and significant.



3.6.    Earnings management

        We expect cartel firms to engage in abnormally high levels of accounting earnings

management. This strategy might serve either of two purposes: it could conceal the

firm’s rising profits from regulators and analysts, and it may signal to competing firms a

desire to promote stable profits in the industry. We begin by investigating whether

cartels are unusually active in smoothing earnings. Our measure for earnings smoothing

is based on the variability of the change in net income scaled by total assets (e.g., Leuz,

Nanda, and Wysocki, 2003; Barth, Landsman, and Lang, 2008). A smaller variance of

the change in net income is considered evidence of earnings smoothing.

       As the change in net income is likely to be sensitive to various other factors, we use

the variance of the residuals from a regression of the change in net income scaled by total

assets on several explanatory variables identified in previous research as relevant controls

for the change in net income (e.g., Lang, Raedy, and Wilson, 2006; Barth, Landsman, and

Lang, 2008). We estimate the following pooled regression for a sample including all

cartel and matched firm-years:

   ∆NI it = α0 + α1SIZEit + α2 ∆GROWTH it + α3 ∆EQUITYit + α4 LEVit + α5 ∆LIABILITYit
                                                                                          (1)
           + α6TURN it + α7 CFit + α8 ∆CFit + εit

where ∆NI is the change in net income scaled by total assets, SIZE is the natural

logarithm of the market value of equity, ∆GROWTH is the percentage change in sales,

∆EQUITY is the percentage change in common equity, LEV is total liabilities divided by

                                                20
book value of equity, ∆LIABILITY is the percentage change in total liabilities, TURN is

sales over total assets, CF is the annual net cash flow from operating activities divided by

total assets, and ∆CF is the change in annual net cash flow from operating activities

divided by total assets. The regression also includes year and industry fixed effects.

Analysis in the left column of Table 10 is based on the residuals obtained from estimating

this model. In the right column of Table 10, we repeat the analysis using a regression

model augmented with interaction terms between all independent variables and an

indicator variable that equals one for cartel firm-years. These interaction terms allow for

different regression slopes for cartel firms and matched control firms, as the relation

between the change in net income and the control variables may be affected by the cartel

agreement itself.

      To investigate earnings smoothing, we use a variance ratio test to compare the

standard deviations of the residuals from regression (1), ∆NI*, between the observations

for cartel firms and the observations for the sample of matched control firms. Although

the test is commonly referred to as a “variance ratio test,” the calculations are actually

based on the ratio of the standard deviations of residuals in the relevant subsamples. This

test design is valid provided that the mean level of the residuals does not significantly

differ between cartel firms and control firms (Barth, Landsman, and Lang, 2008). As

shown in Table 10, the mean residuals exhibit a statistically significant difference across

the two groups for the simpler model in the left column, but the means are not

significantly different for the richer model in the right column.

      Although we focus on the results in the right column, both models in Table 10

indicate that the variance of the residuals, ∆NI*, is significantly lower for the



                                              21
observations for cartel firms compared to the observations for control firms. This is

consistent with more earnings smoothing by cartels.

        To understand firms’ earnings smoothing more fully, we investigate two strategies

for earnings management, the manipulation of discretionary accruals and deferred

revenue. Our study of discretionary accruals follows the approach of Bergstresser and

Philippon (2006) and Klein (2002). We estimate a firm’s discretionary accruals with a

version of the Jones (1991) and modified Jones (Dechow, Sloan, and Sweeney, 1995)

models, which estimate nondiscretionary accruals as the fitted value from a regression.

Discretionary accruals are then calculated as the residual difference of total accruals less

nondiscretionary accruals.

        Our methodology uses annual data from Compustat to calculate total accruals for

firm i in year t as:


        TAi ,t =
                   ( ∆CA
                       i ,t   − ∆CLi ,t − ∆Cashi ,t + ∆STDi ,t − Depi ,t )
                                                                                          (2)
                                             Ai ,t −1



        where

        ∆CA = the change in current assets

        ∆CL = the change in current liabilities

        ∆Cash = the change in cash holdings

        ∆STD = the change in long term debt in current liabilities

        ∆Dep = the depreciation and amortization expense of the firm

        ∆A = firm size (in assets)




                                                        22
       We follow Klein (2002) by estimating expected accruals at the industry level by

fitting the following regression each year across all Compustat firms in each two-digit

SIC industry:

                              1
        TAi,t = α0 + α1 ∗             + α2 ∗ ∆ Re vi ,t + α3 ∗ PPEi ,t + εi,t                     (3)
                             Ai ,t −1

where ∆ Re v is the change in sales and PPE is gross property, plant and equipment, both

deflated by lagged assets. We require a minimum of 12 observations per regression.

Nondisicretionary accruals are then calculated for every firm-year observation as:

                                 1
        NDAi ,t = α%0 + α%1 ∗            + α% 2 ∗ ∆ Re vi ,t + α%3 ∗ PPEi ,t                      (4)
                                Ai ,t −1

where α%0 ,α%1 ,α%2 ,α%3 are the estimated parameters from equation (3). This leads to the

calculation of discretionary accruals:

        DAi ,t = TAi ,t − NDAi ,t                                                                 (5)

       As an alternative, we use the modified Jones model. Instead of deriving the fitted

values used to calculate NDA in equation (4) from the regression in equation (3), we

estimate the following regression which substitutes the change in sales less the change in

receivables for the change in sales, i.e.,

                              1
        TAi ,t = α0 + α1 ∗            + α2 ∗ ( ∆ Re vi ,t − ∆ Re ci ,t ) + α3 ∗ PPEi ,t + εi ,t   (6)
                             Ai ,t −1

where ∆ Re c is the change in receivables deflated by lagged assets.

       In Table 11 we present least-squares estimates of discretionary accruals for our

cartel firms and the control sample. Other explanatory variables, following Klein (2002)

and Bergstresser and Philippon (2006), include firm size (the log of total assets),

leverage, Tobin’s Q, the absolute value of the change in return on assets, and the natural

                                                          23
log of firm age (based on the company’s first inclusion in the CRSP database). Both

models include year and industry fixed effects. Estimates for the cartel firm indicator in

the left two columns of Table 11 are both positive indicating that cartel firms are more

aggressive about using accruals. However, only the coefficient in the first column when

the Jones measure is the dependent variable is significant at the 5% level. The coefficient

for the Modified Jones measure in the second column is (borderline) insignificant.

         In the third and fourth columns of Table 11, we change the dependent variable to

equal the absolute value of discretionary accruals. This allows us to obtain a measure of

cartel firms’ accounting aggressiveness without reference to whether the accruals tend to

increase or reduce reported earnings. As in the first two columns of the table, we again

find strong evidence that cartel firms are more likely to avail themselves of accruals,

whatever the direction of the impact on earnings.

         Table 11 continues with two regressions estimating cartel firms’ propensity to

record deferred revenue, an accounting entry that essentially pushes profits into a future

period by balancing an increase in cash received with an entry on the liability side of the

balance sheet; the liability is then converted into shareholders’ equity, an act that

increases the firm’s profits, during the future period when the income is deemed to be

earned. We calculate deferred revenue as the sum of the Compustat variables DRC

(revenue that has not been earned but is expected to be recognized in the current year)

and DRLT (revenue that has not been earned and will be recognized in more than one

year).

         We present a Tobit analysis in column 5 of Table 11, with the dependent variable

equal to deferred revenue scaled by net sales. In column 6, we estimate a binary probit



                                              24
model in which the dependent variable equals one if the firm has positive deferred

revenue on its balance sheet in that year. We use the same explanatory variables that

appear in our models of discretionary accruals. For either model, the estimate for the

cartel firm indicator is negative and significant. The result is quite similar to that found

for discretionary accruals, implying that cartel firms tend to report higher earnings in

current periods.

       Interpreting the results in Table 11 seems challenging. Our main thesis in this

paper is that cartel firms actively try to conceal the extent of their success in order to

prolong the benefits from collusion. This might suggest less aggressive earnings

management and slower revenue recognition, but we find the opposite. This may occur

for a number of reasons. Cartel firms may be confident that profits will rise in the future

and see little need for establishing accounting reserves and delaying revenue recognition.

Alternatively, cartelists may feel vulnerable to outside scrutiny if revenue deferrals and

slow accruals lead to an overwhelming delay of profit reporting, and they may make no

effort to delay favorable accounting news in order to keep the pipeline clear of future

positive news that could raise a red flag for regulators. Finally, cartel managers may be

inherently unethical. They may inflate current-period earnings for reasons that are

similar to, but not dependent upon, their tendency to engage in collusive behavior with

rival firms.



3.7.   Segment reclassification

       Diversified companies are required to report line-of-business financial data in

industry segments, providing information about key aggregates such as sales, operating



                                              25
profit, capital spending, and assets invested. However, companies have discretion to use

their own judgment when setting the boundaries between their business entities. The

financial statements of major conglomerates routinely exhibit year-to-year changes in the

number and relative size of business segments. These could occur due to acquisitions

and divestitures, changes in operating performance, or accounting decisions made by

management. Regardless of the motivation for segment reclassifications, they tend to

obscure the clarity of a firm’s financial results by making year-over-year performance

comparisons difficult.

       We study the extent to which the cartel firms in our sample reclassify their

industrial segments on a year-to-year basis, since these accounting adjustments represent

a further strategy for concealing the firm’s financial results from external audiences. For

our cartel firms and the control sample, we study annual changes in the intra-firm

Herfindahl Hirschman Index as a way to infer segment reclassifications. We construct

the index for each firm-year using data from the Compustat Segments database. We use

total assets as a measure of the size of each industrial segment. The Herfindahl

Hirschman Index is computed as the sum of the squares of each segment’s assets as a

proportion of the square of total assets for the company. For example, if a firm has only

one segment, its index equals 1.0, and if it has 10 segments that each contribute 10% of

its assets, its index equals 0.1. Hence, the index’s value decreases as the degree of

diversification increases.

       In Table 12 we report results from regression estimations in which the dependent

variable equals the absolute value of the annual change in the Herfindahl Hirschman

Index. We use the absolute value because we are concerned only with whether cartel



                                             26
firms adjust the relative sizes of their reporting segments on a year-to-year basis, rather

than whether they increase or decrease their degree of diversification. As control

variables, the model includes a specification based on Berger and Ofek’s (1995) study

that uses segment financial data to calculate value losses from diversification, including

the log of total assets, ROA (EBIT over total assets), and capital spending (CAPX over

total assets). We also include intangible assets over total assets as a control variable.

Year fixed effects are included in both columns of the table, and the second column also

includes industry fixed effects. We use a Tobit specification since the absolute value of

the dependent variable is left-censored at zero.

       Results shown in Table 12 indicate that cartel firms change the distribution of

assets across segments more than matched control firms, as the cartel indicator variable

has a positive and significant estimate in both models. These estimates confirm our

hypothesis that frequent segment reclassification helps these companies diminish the

clarity of their performance by making more difficult year-over-year comparisons at the

industry level. As a robustness check, we reestimate Table 12 after dropping

observations for the year 1998, when the reporting standards changed for disclosure of

segment results, causing a large number of companies to reclassify their businesses.

Deleting the 1998 observations has very little impact on the results.



3.8.   Mangers’ exercise of stock options

       In Kedia and Philippon’s (2009) study of companies that commit financial fraud,

the authors document an abnormally rapid exercise of in-the-money stock options by

those firms’ managers. The obvious interpretation of their results is that managers



                                              27
attempt to withdraw equity compensation from the company when the per-share price is

inflated above its likely long-term value. We investigate stock option exercises by cartel

firms. If these managers also exercise stock options rapidly, the motivation may be more

subtle than for executives in companies that commit fraud. A successful cartel may

expect its stock price to rise over time, suggesting that the managers would be patient

about withdrawing equity compensation. However, they may have concerns about

whether the cartel can be sustained, and they may wish to withdraw their compensation

before regulators discover the scheme; this would accord with our estimates in Table 2,

showing that cartel firms rise quickly in value during the cartel period but fall very

quickly after the cartel ends. In addition, rapid stock option exercises may play a

diversionary role, by communicating to outsiders that the managers do not expect future

abnormal increases in the stock. It may also serve as a communication device by sending

signals to managers of other firms in the cartel.

       In Table 13 we present an analysis of stock option exercises by the CEO and the

top five managers in our cartel firms and our control sample. Our data source for option

exercises is the S&P ExecuComp database, and relying on this database greatly reduces

our sample size since it covers only about one-quarter of the companies on Compustat.

Our regressions follow those reported by Kedia and Philippon (2009). We use two

dependent variables: (i) the dollar value of option profits realized by managers, divided

by the total amount by which options are in-the-money (their intrinsic value) at the start

of the year, and (ii) a more simple calculation of the ratio between number of options

exercised and the number that are vested and could theoretically have been exercised,

whether in-the-money or not. Control variables include the size of the firm’s total



                                             28
inventory of outstanding employee stock options, the exercise rate for all firms in the

two-digit SIC industry, Tobin’s Q, and the firm’s stock return in the past year, along with

fixed effects for year and industry.

       Results of these estimations appear in Table 13. In every model estimates

indicate that managers from cartel firms exercise their stock options more rapidly than

managers from firms in the control sample, although the estimate in the right column is

not statistically significant. As noted above, these patterns of early option exercise could

occur for a number of reasons, but they are consistent with an interpretation that

managers wish to withdraw their equity compensation before some future date at which

the cartel might be exposed and the firm’s stock price could drop.

       We investigate other forms of executive compensation to see whether the

managers of cartel firms benefit from other strategies in additional to their early

liquidation of stock-based compensation. For instance, the strong cash flows and

earnings smoothing exhibited by cartel firms may help their managers obtain higher cash

bonuses. However, we find little evidence of other patterns of abnormal compensation in

these companies. The overall level of CEO pay, the strength of pay-performance

sensitivity, and the fraction of top management pay attributable to the CEO is not

significantly different in cartel firms compared to companies in the control sample.



3.9.   Securities fraud litigation

       We use the Stanford Law School Securities Class Action database to identify

companies accused of financial fraud in class action civil litigation brought by

shareholders. Ultimately 45 of our 218 cartel firms are sued for securities fraud one or



                                             29
more times (for a total of 61 fraud firm-years) during the sample period, which does not

begin until 1996, the starting date of the Stanford database. When scaled by the number

of observations in the sample, the lawsuit frequency for the cartel firms exceeds 5 percent

per year, almost three times higher than the frequency for companies in the control

sample, as shown by the sample means reported in Table 1.

       In Table 14 we present regression analysis of the incidence of securities fraud

lawsuits. A binary probit model appears in the left column, with the dependent variable

equal to one if the firm is sued in a given year. A Poisson maximum likelihood model in

the right column is based on the number of lawsuits filed per year. As in our other

regressions, control variables include firm size, ROA, and fixed effects for years and

industries. We obtain strongly positive and significant estimates for the cartel indicator

variable, confirming the result that these firms attract shareholder litigation for fraud at

unusually high frequencies.

       We reviewed many of the cases in the Stanford database and found that price

fixing is rarely, if ever, the basis of shareholders’ complaints. Cartel membership is not

by itself an act of fraud, and shareholders may have difficulty arguing that they sustain

damages when a firm successfully conspires to fix prices. Instead, the shareholder

litigation may be a byproduct of the other signal-jamming strategies related to financial

reporting that are illuminated by the regression results above, such as frequent earnings

restatements, segment reclassifications, or abnormally high discretionary accruals.



4.    Conclusions




                                              30
      We study the behavior of 218 U.S. public companies that are accused by

governments of illegal cartel activity. We find that the sample firms engage in a range of

practices designed to obscure their behavior from both internal and external audiences.

Compared to a control sample of firms with similar size and in the same industries, cartel

firms appear to avoid new outside monitoring by not replacing board members who

resign and changing auditors infrequently. When new directors are appointed to cartel

firms, they tend to be busy or foreign-based directors who are known to be inferior

monitors. Management teams are very stable and insular, exhibiting low CEO turnover,

internal promotion of new CEOs, and recruitment of much of the management team by

the incumbent CEO. In financial reporting, cartel firms engage in unusually high levels

of earnings smoothing and file high numbers of financial restatements for the cartel years.

They also frequently reclassify their industrial segments year-to-year when reporting line-

of-business data in annual financial statements, making annual comparisons of financial

results more difficult. Top managers of cartel firms exercise stock options more

frequently than executives in the control sample, perhaps attempting to withdraw their

equity compensation before the cartel is exposed and the firm’s stock price falls. Cartel

firms are also sued at high rates for securities fraud, although this litigation is rarely

connected to the price-fixing activity itself. Finally, cartel firms make large and frequent

donations to candidates for federal political office, perhaps as part of a strategy to induce

regulatory forbearance.

      We believe our results create a template for understanding how companies behave

when they wish to conceal aspects of their financial performance. The firms in our

sample engage in a range of signal-jamming strategies when preparing their annual



                                               31
financial statements, and they appear to avoid inviting scrutiny from new directors, new

auditors, or new CEOs hired from outside. Managers try to cash out their performance-

based compensation earlier than would be expected. Multiple explanations may apply to

some of our results. For example, earnings smoothing or a certain timing of the exercise

of stock options may be a communication device to other firms in a cartel.

      Our results may extend to other situations, both benign and malign, in which

companies actively try to conceal information from their own monitors and from outside

audiences. Firms may not want to give clear pictures of their capital investment or new

product development spending, for instance, and may seek to obscure unusual spending

patterns through strategies such as segment reclassification or earnings smoothing. More

concerning would be cases in which managers scheme to embezzle funds or mislead

creditors about the firm’s financial health. By understanding the playbook of strategies

outlined in this paper, these and other problems might become apparent earlier to

shareholders, analysts, and regulators.




                                            32
References

Barth, M.E., Landsman, W.R., and M.H. Lang, 2008, International accounting standards
and accounting quality, Journal of Accounting Research 46, 467-498.

Berger, P.G., and E. Ofek, 1995, Diversification’s effect on firm value, Journal of
Financial Economics 37, 39-65.

Bergstresser D., and T. Philippon, 2006, CEO incentives and earnings management,
Journal of Financial Economics 80, 511-529.

Buccirossi, P., and G. Spagnolo, 2008, Corporate governance and collusive behavior in
Collins, W.D., ed., Issues in Competition Law and Policy 1, American Bar Association.

Connor, J.M., 2001, “Our customers are our enemies:” The lysine cartel of 1992-1995.
Review of Industrial Organization 18, 5-21.

Connor, J.M., 2010, Recidivism revealed: Private international cartels 1990-2009.
Competition Policy Journal 6, 101-127.

Connor, J.M., and C.G. Helmers, 2007, Statistics on modern private international cartels,
1990-2005. Unpublished manuscript, Purdue University.

Cooper, M.J., Gulen, H., and A.V. Ovtchinnikov, 2010, Corporate political contributions
and stock returns. Journal of Finance 65, 687-724.

Dechow, P., Sloan, R., and A. Sweeney, 1995, Detecting earnings management.
Accounting Review 170, 193-225.

Fahlenbrach, R., Low, A., and R. Stulz, 2012, The dark side of outside directors: Do they
quit ahead of trouble? Unpublished manuscript, Ohio State University.

Fich, E.M., and A. Shivdasani, 2006, Are busy boards effective monitors? Journal of
Finance 61, 689-724.

Harrington, J.E., 2006, How do cartels operate? Foundations and Trends in
Microeconomics 2, 1-105.

Jones, J., 1991, Earnings management during import relief investigations. Journal of
Accounting Research 29, 193-228.

Kedia, S., and T. Philippon, 2009, The economics of fraudulent accounting. Review of
Financial Studies 22, 2169-2199.

Klein, A., 2002, Audit committee, board of director characteristics, and earnings
management. Journal of Accounting and Economics 33, 375-400.


                                            33
Landier, A., Sauvagnt, J., Sraer, D., and D. Thesmar, 2013, Bottom-up corporate
governance, Review of Finance 17, 161-201.

Lang, M., Raedy, J.S., and W. Wilson, 2006, Earnings management and cross listing: Are
reconciled earnings comparable to US earnings?, Journal of Accounting and Economics
42, 255-283.

Larcker, D.F., Richardson, S.A., and I. Tuna, 2007, Corporate governance, accounting
outcomes, and organizational performance. Accounting Review 82, 963-1008.

Leuz, C., Nanda, D., and P.D. Wysocki, 2003, Earnings management and investor
protection: An international comparison, Journal of Financial Economics 69, 505-527.

Levenstein M.C., and V.Y. Suslow, 2006, What determined cartel success? Journal of
Economic Literature 44, 43-95.

Masulis, R.W., Wang, C., and F. Xie, 2012, Globalizing the boardroom – The effects of
foreign directors on corporate governance and firm performance. Journal of Accounting
and Economics 53, 527-554.

Spagnolo, G., 2005, Managerial incentives and collusive behavior. European Economic
Review 49, 1501-1523.




                                           34
Table 1
The table shows descriptive statistics for a sample of 1,569 annual observations for 218 cartel participants and a control sample of 12,041 observations for 721 Compustat
control firms matched on size and industry. Cartel firms are identified from the dataset of Connor (2010). Board of directors data is tabulated from the RiskMetrics Directors
database, and busy independent directors are those serving on three of more boards. Foreign independent directors are identified from the sample of Masulis, Wang, and Xie
(2012). The fraction of executives appointed by the current CEO is calculated following Landier et al. (2013). The political index is calculated according to Cooper et al.
(2010). Financial statement data is obtained from Compustat, which is also used to identify auditor changes. Stock option exercise data is obtained from ExecuComp,
securities fraud lawsuits are tabulated from the Stanford securities clearinghouse website, and financial restatements are reported on the Audit Analytics database.
 Variable                                                                                  Cartel firms                      Control sample
                                                                                                                                                       Difference
                                                                                    Mean       Std.Dev.       Obs.      Mean Std.Dev.          Obs.     In Means
 Board becomes smaller (indicator)                                                  0.328          0.470       723      0.261       0.439     2,798        0.067 a
 Fraction of directors leaving the board                                            0.105          0.105       769      0.090       0.107     2,846        0.014 a
 Newly appointed directors that are busy                                            0.464          0.742       425      0.353       0.599     1,488        0.110 a
 Newly appointed directors with attendance problems                                 0.044          0.207       180      0.020       0.139        657       0.025 c
 Newly appointed directors that are foreign and independent                         0.053          0.224       380      0.031       0.174     1,148        0.021 c
 Auditor change (indicator)                                                         0.024          0.154     1,445      0.036       0.186    10,225       -0.012 b
 Value realized / intrinsic value of exercisable options (CEO)                      0.207          0.294       748      0.173       0.276     3,137        0.034 a
 Option exercised / exercisable options (CEO)                                       0.106          0.191       846      0.108       0.207     3,519         -0.002
 Value realized / intrinsic value of exercisable options (top 5 executives)         0.238          0.267       808      0.220       0.261     3,465        0.018 c
 Option exercised / exercisable options (top5 executives)                           0.117          0.156       864      0.131       0.188     3,722       -0.014 c
 Restatement filed for current year (indicator)                                     0.160          0.367       906      0.116       0.320     4,737        0.044 a
 Number of restatements for current year                                            0.206          0.518       906      0.138       0.418     4,737        0.068 a
 Discretionary accruals (Jones)                                                     0.008          0.138     1,290     -0.001       0.140     9,412        0.010 b
 Discretionary accruals (Modified Jones)                                            0.001          0.158     1,290     -0.004       0.152     9,404          0.005
 Absolute discretionary accruals (Jones)                                            0.076          0.115     1,290      0.078       0.116     9,412         -0.002
 Absolute discretionary accruals (Modified Jones)                                   0.083          0.134     1,290      0.082       0.128     9,404          0.000
 Deferred revenues                                                                  0.014          0.055       690      0.034       0.133     3,587       -0.020 a
 Deferred revenue dummy                                                             0.242          0.429       690      0.348       0.476     3,587       -0.106 a
 Change in Herfindahl Hirschman Index                                               0.043          0.101     1,008      0.036       0.089     8,014        0.007 b
 Securities fraud lawsuit for current year (indicator)                              0.053          0.224     1,155      0.018       0.133     7,061        0.035 a
 Number of securities fraud lawsuits for current year                               0.060          0.268     1,155      0.018       0.136     7,061        0.042 a
 Fraction of top executives picked by current CEO (FTA1)                            0.368          0.323       659      0.331       0.307     2,747        0.037 a
 Fraction of top executives picked by current CEO (FTA2)                            0.507          0.318       659      0.472       0.303     2,747        0.035 a
 CEO promoted from inside firm (indicator)                                          0.875          0.332       128      0.780       0.414        592       0.095 b
 CEO turnover in current year (indicator)                                           0.118          0.323     1,076      0.123       0.329     4,792         -0.005


                                                                                       35
Board size                                                      11.263     2.936     803   10.261     2.682    3,188    1.002 a
Fraction of board that is independent                            0.708     0.160     723    0.695     0.183    2,798    0.013 c
Fraction of shares held by institutional investors               0.616     0.205   1,274    0.527     0.287    7,723    0.089 a
Total assets ($ millions)                                       62,270   192,205   1,568   17,487    75,424   11,856   44,783 a
Growth in total assets, prior three years                        0.283     1.149   1,483    0.513     7.171   10,461     -0.230
Market capitalization ($ millions)                              27,568    55,965   1,473    6,321    18,778   10,644   21,247 a
Sales ($ millions)                                              19,183    37,452   1,565    5,059     9,693   11,824   14,124 a
Foreign sales ($ millions)                                       0.311     0.236   1,379    0.233     0.268     8974    0.078 a
Growth in sales, prior three years                               0.215     0.513   1,478    0.638    14.583   10,396     -0.423
Return on assets                                                 0.095     0.081   1,563    0.076     0.128   11,746    0.019 a
Growth in return on assets, prior three years                   -0.041     5.287   1,477   -1.891   157.269   10,355      1.851
Book-to-market ratio                                             0.492     0.523   1,473    0.549     0.665   10,610   -0.057 a
Tobin's Q                                                        1.864     1.350   1,475    1.788     1.542   10,617    0.077 c
Leverage                                                         0.669     0.216   1,559    0.643     0.297   11,828    0.026 a
Options outstanding                                             55.670   101.537     954   24.014    88.017    4,595   31.660 a
Return to shareholders                                           1.642    56.081   1,436    0.737    28.922   10,056      0.905
External financing (indicator)                                   0.015     0.271     820    0.004     0.278    4,512      0.011
Acquisitions / market capitalization                             0.028     0.073   1,270    0.035     0.088    9,219   -0.007 a
Free cash flow                                                   0.019     0.255   1,301    0.016     0.263    8,334      0.003
Firm age in years                                               35.684    24.666   1,369   23.081    20.383    8,712   12.600 a
Absolute value of change in EBIT                                 1.026     9.155   1,519    1.565    36.223   11,065     -0.539
Capital expenditures / total assets                              0.051     0.040   1,520    0.060     0.067   11,492   -0.009 a
Intangible assets / total assets                                 0.130     0.155   1,423    0.117     0.169   10,482    0.013 a
CEO tenure with firm, based on ExecuComp appearances             4.123     2.787     668    3.970     2.789    2,809      0.153
Mean executive tenure with firm                                  4.710     1.794     668    4.801     1.964    2,804     -0.092
CEO age in years                                                57.359     6.835   1,136   56.187     7.258    5,139    1.172 a
CEO tenure in years                                              6.373     6.710   1,095    6.378     7.126    4,802     -0.005
Fraction of top executives picked in the CEO’s first year        0.175     0.193     668    0.168     0.183    2,809      0.008
Number of business segments reported in financial statements     2.769     1.759   1,197    2.155     1.458    9,520    0.614 a
CEO aged between 66 & 72, prior year (indicator)                 0.049     0.216   1,139    0.048     0.215    5,180      0.001
Annual spending by political action committees ($ millions)       70.3     160.0   1,569     16.6      70.1   12,041      53.7 a
Indicator for nonzero spending by political action committees    0.494     0.500   1,569    0.228     0.419   12,041    0.266 a
Political index                                                  101.0     143.2   1,569     28.0      74.5   12,041      73.0 a
Change in growth rate of market capitalization                   0.033     0.337   1,262


                                                                    36
Change in growth rate of sales                           0.023   0.175   1,357
Change in growth rate of employees                       0.015   0.171   1,275
Change in growth rate of property, plant and equipment   0.032   0.204   1,325
Change in growth rate of return on assets                0.002   0.064   1,357
Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.




                                                            37
Table 2
Growth dynamics for cartel firms and matched sample
The table reports OLS regression results of adjusted growth dynamics for a variety of financial and employment data. The sample includes 218
U.S. firms identified by regulators as cartel participants between 1986-2010. Each dependent variable in Columns 1-4 is a growth rate (one year log
differences) relative to the mean growth rate of a control group of Compustat firms matched on size and industry, and in Column 5, the dependent
variable is the one-year difference in return on assets (ROA) relative to the mean first difference of ROA for the control group. The indicator
variable Before equals 1 for the two years preceding each cartel, During equals 1 during the cartel period, and After equals 1 for the two years after
the cartel ends. t-statistics in parentheses are based on the cluster-robust variant of the Huber-White sandwich estimator. The table reports p-values
of Wald tests for the hypotheses that βDuring equals βBefore and βDuring equals βAfter.

 Dependent variables                            Market           Sales   Employment         Property,     Return on
(annual growth rates):                           value                                      plant and         assets
                                                                                           equipment
Before                                            0.006       -0.032 a         -0.003          -0.013       -0.006 c
(indicator for two years prior to cartel)       (0.274)       (-3.000)        (0.301)        (-0.963)       (-1.696)

During                                          0.033 a        0.023 a        0.015 a         0.032 a        0.002 c
(indicator for years in cartel period)          (3.727)        (4.162)        (2.939)         (4.786)        (1.966)

After                                          -0.035 b         -0.016          -0.002         -0.007       -0.010 b
(indicator for two years following             (-2.032)       (-1.364)        (-0.201)       (-0.551)       (-2.416)
cartel)

Observations                                        1,895       2,036           1,907           1,985          2,041
r-squared                                           0.008       0.018           0.005           0.017          0.006

Wald test: βDuring = βBefore                     0.199         0.000 a         0.094 c        0.001 a        0.029 b
Wald test: βDuring = βAfter                     0.001 a        0.003 a          0.142         0.005 a        0.004 a
Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.




                                                                         38
Table 3
Retention and replacement of directors
The first two columns reports results from probit regressions in which the dependent variable
equals 1 if board size decreases in a given year. The right two columns report the results from
Tobit regressions of the percentage of directors leaving the board in a given year. The sample
includes 218 U.S. firms identified by regulators as cartel participants between 1986-2010, as
well as a control sample of Compustat firms matched on size and industry. ln(board size) is the
natural log of the number of directors on the board. Board of directors data is obtained from
the RiskMetrics Directors database. Tobin’s Q is defined as total assets minus the book value
of equity plus the market value of equity over total assets. Past growth in return on assets
(ROA) is the three-year growth rate in return on assets. SOX is an indicator variable which
equals for the years after enactment of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (2002 and after). z-statistics
and t-statistics appear in parentheses.

Dependent variable:                Board becomes smaller         Percentage of directors
                                          (Probit)                   leaving (Tobit)
Cartel firm indicator                  0.205 a        0.221 a       0.015 b         0.022 a
                                       (3.502)        (3.860)       (2.117)         (3.052)

% Institutional ownership               -0.204        -0.264 b        0.012          -0.002
                                      (-1.476)        (-1.985)      (0.701)        (-0.103)

ln(board size)                        -0.273 a        -0.292 a       0.126 a        0.120 a
                                      (-2.764)        (-2.986)     (10.191)         (9.674)

Tobin’s Q                             -0.045 a        -0.045 a     -0.009 a        -0.009 a
                                      (-2.750)        (-2.767)     (-4.527)        (-4.253)

Past growth in ROA x 10-2              1.225 b        1.201 b        -0.097          -0.088
                                       (2.134)        (2.157)      (-1.502)         (1.374)

SOX                                                     -0.068                       -0.008
                                                      (-1.345)                     (-1.230)

Year fixed effects                        Yes              No           Yes             No
Industry fixed effects                    Yes             Yes           Yes            Yes
Observations                            3,354           3,354        10,046         10,046
Pseudo r-squared                        0.020           0.026
LR Chi-squared                                                     235.65 a        172.30 a
Prob > Chi-squared                                                   0.000           0.000

Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.




                                                 39
Table 4
Characteristics of new outside directors
The table shows Poisson and probit regression estimates of models of the probability that new
outside board members have certain characteristics. While the dependent variable is a count
variable, it has too little variation to justify the estimation of Poisson models in columns 2 to 4
(in only two cases more than one director with attendance problems is appointed and in 4 cases
more than one foreign independent director). The sample includes all new outside board
appointments by 218 U.S. firms identified by regulators between 1986-2010 as cartel
participants, as well as a control sample of Compustat firms matched on size and industry.
Observations are restricted to the firms and period covered by the RiskMetrics Directors
database (1996-present). Busy directors are defined as those holding three or more board seats.
Directors with attendance problems are those who attend fewer than 75% of all board and
committee meetings. The observations for attendance problems are stopped after 2001, when
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act took effect and director attendance improved markedly. Data on
foreign outside directors is obtained from Masulis et. al (2012). ln(board size) is the natural log
of the number of directors on the board. t-statistics appear in parentheses.

                                                       Attendance
Dependent variable:                  Busy               problem       Foreign        Foreign
                                   (Poisson)            (Probit)      (Probit)       (Probit)
Cartel firm indicator                   0.231 a             0.547 b       0.275 c        0.259 c
                                        (2.580)             (2.221)      (1.890)        (1.675)

% Institutional ownership                 0.178            -0.928 c       -0.529         -0.512
                                        (0.719)            (-1.791)     (-1.338)       (-1.218)

Return on assets                          0.189            -4.054 a       -0.491         -0.240
                                        (0.344)            (-2.812)     (-0.550)       (-0.256)

ln(board size)                          0.995 a               0.273      0.590 c        0.606 c
                                        (5.528)             (0.540)      (1.898)        (1.838)

% Independent directors                   0.273               0.579        0.063          0.007
                                        (1.114)             (0.884)      (0.162)        (0.018)

Foreign sales %                                                                         0.900 a
                                                                                        (2.907)

Year fixed effects                          Yes                Yes           Yes            Yes
Industry fixed effects                      Yes                Yes           Yes            Yes
Observations                              1,849                725         1,349          1,115
Pseudo r-squared                          0.035              0.127         0.056          0.071
Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.




                                                  40
Table 5
Retention and replacement of CEOs
The table shows probit regression estimates for models of CEO turnover of replacement. The sample
includes 218 U.S. firms identified by regulators as cartel participants between 1986-2010, as well as a
control sample of Compustat firms matched on size and industry. The first column presents a model of
CEO replacement with the dependent variable equal to 1 if a new CEO takes office. The second column
shows estimates for a model in which the dependent variable equals 1 if the new CEO is promoted from
within the firm. This estimation is restricted only to those firm-years in which a CEO replacement
occurs. The third column presents a model for whether the incumbent CEO, regardless of length of
tenure, was originally promoted from within the firm. t-statistics appear in parentheses.

Dependent variable:                            CEO                  New CEO          Current CEO was
                                             replaced            promoted inside     promoted inside
Cartel firm indicator                               -0.103 c               0.391 b             0.413 a
                                                    (-1.650)               (1.984)             (4.413)

ln(CEO age)                                                               -0.856 c              -0.082
                                                                           (1.649)             (0.324)

CEO tenure, as of prior year                        0.016 a
                                                    (4.986)

CEO aged 66 to 72 (indicator)                       0.494 a
                                                    (5.457)

ln(total assets)                                    0.069 a                  0.049               0.008
                                                    (4.123)                (0.993)             (0.356)

Growth in sales, prior three years                  -0.203 a                -0.024               -0.030
                                                    (-3.923)              (-0.220)             (-0.603)

Return on assets, prior year                        -0.606 b                -0.562             1.201 a
                                                    (-2.018)              (-0.772)             (3.172)

Book-to-market, prior year                            0.009                 -0.122               -0.026
                                                    (0.208)               (-1.276)             (-0.510)

Number of business segments                                                 -0.026               0.020
                                                                          (-0.596)             (0.946)

Year fixed effects                                         Yes                Yes                  Yes
Industry fixed effects                                     Yes                Yes                  Yes
Observations                                             5,354                568                2,732
Pseudo r-squared                                         0.050              0.077                0.035
Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.




                                                    41
Table 6
Managers appointed by incumbent CEO
The table shows Tobit regression estimates of models in which the dependent variable equals
the fraction of the top management team appointed by the incumbent CEO. The two alternative
definitions of this variable are calculated following Landier et al. (2013) and are based upon
how many of the firm’s managers appear in the ExecuComp database no earlier than the
appointment of the incumbent CEO. The FTA1 measure in the left two columns counts a
manager as appointed by the CEO if he has served strictly less time in office than the CEO,
which the FTA2 measure in the right two columns counts a manager as appointed by the CEO
if his first appearance in ExecuComp coincides with the CEO’s first year. The control variable
for the fraction of top executives picked in the CEO’s first year is based on the number of top
managers appointed in the CEO’s first year, and it always equals zero by construction for the
FTA1 measure. z-statistics appear in parentheses.

 Dependent variable:                               FTA1                        FTA2
 Cartel firm indicator                        0.028 b   0.039 b           0.027 a   0.034 b
                                              (2.210)   (2.252)           (2.847)   (2.525)

 Inside CEO                                  -0.075 a      -0.166 a      -0.065 a      -0.128 a
                                             (-5.710)      (-9.386)      (-6.661)      (-9.246)

 CEO tenure with firm                          0.138 a       0.118 a       0.106 a       0.088 a
                                             (58.028)      (41.645)      (63.538)      (40.718)

 ln(CEO age)                                   -0.055      -0.120 b        -0.007      -0.075 c
                                             (-1.254)      (-2.039)      (-0.217)      (-1.665)

 Mean executive tenure with firm              -0.121 a                    -0.111 a
                                            (-36.884)                   (-45.568)

 Fraction of top executives picked in                                      0.646 a       0.966 a
 the CEO’s first year                                                    (30.135)      (32.290)

 ln(Firm age)                                 0.019 a         0.005       0.019 a         0.008
                                              (3.414)       (0.702)       (4.713)       (1.307)

 ln(Total assets)                             0.011 a       0.023 a       0.007 b       0.015 a
                                              (2.989)       (4.544)       (2.410)       (3.845)

 Return on assets                               0.026      -0.128 c         0.057        -0.060
                                              (0.459)      (-1.681)       (1.403)      (-1.029)

 Number of business segments                    -0.004       -0.003        -0.002        -0.002
                                              (-1.051)     (-0.638)      (-0.971)      (-0.459)
 Year fixed effects                                Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
 Industry fixed effects                            Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes
 Observations                                    2,526        2,526         2,526         2,526
 LR Chi-squared                            3225.938 a    2040.732 a    3968.948 a    2340.568 a
 Prob > Chi-squared                              0.000        0.000         0.000         0.000
 Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.

                                              42
Table 7
Changes in auditors
The table reports the results from probit regressions of a dummy variable that equals 1 when
the firm changes auditors in a given year. The sample includes 218 U.S. firms identified by
regulators as cartel participants between 1986-2010, as well as a control sample of Compustat
firms matched on size and industry. Auditor changes are identified from Compustat. The
sample excludes a small number of observations for firms that do not have Big 4 auditors. z-
statistics appear in parentheses.


Dependent variable:                                      Company changes auditor

Cartel firm indicator                                        -0.196 b     -0.164 c
                                                             (-2.232)     (-1.806)

Growth in ROA, prior three years, x 10-2                       0.278        0.268
                                                             (0.870)      (0.848)

Growth in total assets, prior three years, x 10-2              0.102        0.051
                                                             (0.361)      (0.171)

ln(Total assets)                                             -0.039 a     -0.068 a
                                                             (-2.839)     (-3.783)

Year fixed effects                                               Yes          Yes
Industry fixed effects                                            No          Yes
Observations                                                  10,308       10,213
Pseudo r-squared                                               0.111        0.134
Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.




                                                    43
Table 8
Contributions to political candidates
The table reports regression estimates of models of contributions to political candidates by
corporate political action committees (PACs). In the left column, the dependent variable
equals the log of the total dollar value contributed per year by each company. In the center
column, the dependent variable is a binary indicator for nonzero political contributions by the
company. In the right column, the dependent variable is the log of the political index, defined
by Cooper et al. (2010) to equal the total number of supported candidates over the previous
five years. The sample includes 218 U.S. firms identified by regulators as cartel participants
between 1986-2010, as well as a control sample of Compustat firms matched on size and
industry. .t-statistics appear in parentheses.

Dependent variable:                            Ln (annual       Contribution     Ln (political
                                               spending)         indicator         index)
                                                 (OLS)            (Probit)         (OLS)
Cartel dummy                                         1.119 a          0.223 a          0.579 a
                                                    (2.842)           (5.065)          (3.170)

ln (Total assets)                                    0.595 a           0.224 a         0.269 a
                                                     (4.329)         (11.035)          (4.455)

ln (Employees)                                       1.057 a           0.306 a         0.510 a
                                                     (5.233)         (12.013)          (5.723)

Growth in ROA, prior three years, x 10-2              -0.002            0.002           -0.002
                                                    (-0.265)          (0.129)         (-0.607)

Tobin's Q                                            0.185 a          0.055 a          0.081 a
                                                     (3.113)          (5.701)          (3.104)

Leverage                                               0.036            0.074            0.077
                                                     (0.095)          (1.092)          (0.457)
Year fixed effects                                      Yes              Yes              Yes
Industry fixed effects                                  Yes              Yes              Yes
Observations                                         10,332           10,153           10,349
r-squared                                             0.292                             0.317
Pseudo r-squared                                                        0.222
Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.




                                              44
Table 9
Restatements
The table reports probit regression estimates for whether a firm restates its audited financial
statements for a given year and Poisson regression estimates of the number of restatements
per year. The sample includes 218 U.S. firms identified by regulators as cartel participants
between 1986-2010, as well as a control sample of Compustat firms matched on size and
industry. Regressions include control variables following the definitions in Larcker,
Richardson and Tuna (2007). Data for restatements is obtained from the Audit Analytics
database, which covers restatements disclosed since January 1, 2001, and due to the coverage
of this database we use observations only for the years 2000-2010. z-statistics appear in
parentheses.

Dependent variable:                            Restatement             Number of times
                                                                          restated
                                                    (Probit)             (Poisson)

Cartel firm indicator                         0.335 a      0.245 b     0.628 a    0.371 b
                                              (3.717)      (2.426)     (4.494)    (2.509)

Book-to-market ratio (lagged)                 0.114 b      0.127 b     0.230 b    0.220 b
                                              (2.067)      (2.012)     (2.406)    (2.261)

Ln(market capitalization) (lagged)             -0.007       -0.026       -0.017     -0.022
                                             (-0.335)     (-0.948)     (-0.441)   (-0.512)

External financing                             -0.096       -0.230       -0.163     -0.353
                                             (-0.619)     (-1.292)     (-0.633)   (-1.280)

Acquisitions / market capitalization           -0.211       -0.072       -0.698     -0.215
                                             (-0.393)     (-0.125)     (-0.733)   (-0.225)

Free Cash Flow                                  0.063       -0.157       0.246      -0.167
                                              (0.441)     (-0.917)     (1.040)    (-0.669)

Year fixed effects                                No             Yes        No        Yes
Industry fixed effects                            No             Yes        No        Yes
Observations                                   2,164           1,911     2,164      2,164
Pseudo r-squared                               0.013           0.096     0.016      0.135

Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.




                                               45
Table 10
Earnings smoothing
The table reports the results from a variance ratio test that compares the standard deviations of
regression residuals for subsamples of observations used to estimate earnings smoothing
models. In the left column, statistics are based on residuals from the model shown in equation
(1), with observations for 218 cartel firms pooled together with observations from a control
sample of Compustat firms matched on size and industry. In the right column, statistics are
based on residuals from a similar regression that also includes interaction terms between all
control variables and an indicator that equals one for cartel firms. Results in the fourth line of
the table show the outcome of F-tests for the null hypothesis that the variance ratios equal
one. Rejection of the null hypothesis in both is robust to the use of alternative Levene and
Brown-Forsythe test statistics.

                                                     Pooled regression      Pooled regression
                                                                              with interaction
Control firm observations’ residual std. dev.                    0.119                   terms
                                                                                        0.119
Cartel firm observations’ residual std. dev.                     0.109                  0.061
Ratio                                                            1.089                  1.960
F-test p-value for H0: Ratio = 1                                0.000 a                0.000 a
t-test p-value for equality of means                            0.035 b                 0.389
Observations                                                    10,589                 10,589
Leven and Brown-Forsythe test statistics:
W0                                                               0.003                   0.000
W50                                                              0.001                   0.000
W10                                                              0.001                   0.000

Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.




                                                46
Table 11
Earnings management
The table reports ordinary least squares regression estimates of discretionary accruals and revenue recognition. The sample includes 218 U.S.
firms identified by regulators as cartel participants between 1986-2010, as well as a control sample of Compustat firms matched on size and
industry. Following Bergstresser and Philippon (2006) and Klein (2002), the discretionary accruals are constructed according to the cross-
sectional Jones (Column 1) and the cross-sectional modified Jones models (Column 2). The measure of deferred revenue is the ratio of Compustat
items DRC+DRLT divided by net sales. DRC is revenue which has not yet been earned, but is expected to be classified as earned during the
current year, while DRLT is revenue which has not yet been earned. The model in the sixth column uses a binary dependent variable that equals 1
if the sum of the sum of DRC+DRLT is greater than zero. t-statistics appear in parentheses and in the first two columns are based on the cluster-
robust variant of the Huber-White sandwich estimator.




                                                                       47
Dependent variable:                     Discretionary accruals        Abs(discretionary accruals)       Deferred revenue
                                        Jones       Modified Jones      Jones       Modified Jones    Amount       Indicator
                                       (OLS)            (OLS)          (Tobit)          (Tobit)       (Tobit)       (Probit)
Cartel firm indicator                      0.010 a            0.007         0.07 b          0.012 a     -0.073 a       -0.350 a
                                           (2.319)          (1.606)        (2.115)          (3.120)     (-4.511)       (-4.799)

ln(total assets)                           -0.001            -0.002         -0.009 a       -0.010 a     -0.012 a          0.008
                                         (-1.073)          (-1.168)         (-9.992)     (-10.375)      (-3.107)        (0.406)

Leverage                                    0.008            0.003             0.009         0.009      -0.118 a       -0.899 a
                                          (1.137)          (0.356)           (1.634)       (1.594)      (-4.811)       (-7.202)

ln(firm age)                              0.003 c            0.001          -0.006 a       -0.006 c     -0.030 a       -0.124 a
                                          (1.734)          (0.361)          (-5.011)       (-4.923)     (-4.898)       (-4.359)

Tobin's Q                                   0.000          0.003 c           0.003 a       0.004 a       0.010 b          0.032
                                          (0.184)          (1.928)           (4.553)       (5.470)       (2.264)        (1.494)

Absolute value of change in                 -0.003           -0.003           -0.001         -0.001        0.006          0.507
EBIT x 10-2                               (-1.340)         (-1.517)         (-0.272)       (-0.341)      (0.878)        (1.416)
Year fixed effects                             Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes
Industry fixed effects                         Yes              Yes              Yes            Yes          Yes            Yes
Observations                                 8,008            8,002            8,008          8,002        3,349          3,250
r-squared                                    0.026            0.022                                                       0.189
Pseudo r-squared
LR Chi-squared                                                             961.387 a     949.056 a     756.859 a
Prob > Chi-squared                                                            0.000         0.000         0.000
Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.




                                                                      48
Table 12
Change in Herfindahl Hirschman Index
The table reports the results from tobit regressions of the absolute value of the annual change
in the intra-firm Herfindahl Hirschman Index based on total assets. The sample includes 218
U.S. firms identified by regulators as cartel participants between 1986-2010, as well as a
control sample of Compustat firms matched on size and industry. The index is calculated
from annual industry segment data reported by each company. t-statistics appear in
parentheses.

Dependent variable:                                                 Change in HHI
                                                                     (total assets)

Cartel firm indicator                                              0.014 a       0.010 b
                                                                   (2.928)       (2.206)

Growth rate of return on assets, prior three years x 10-3           -0.002         0.001
                                                                  (-0.220)       (0.160)

Leverage                                                           0.027 a       0.039 a
                                                                   (4.905)       (7.027)

Intangible assets / total assets                                   0.040 a       0.029 a
                                                                   (4.045)       (2.860)

Capital expenditures / total assets                               -0.091 a      -0.115 a
                                                                  (-3.333)      (-3.834)

ln(Total assets)                                                   0.006 a       0.009 a
                                                                   (7.085)       (9.299)

Year fixed effects                                                   Yes           Yes
Industry fixed effects                                                No           Yes
Observations                                                       7,275         7,275
LR Chi-squared                                                  341.987 a     517.885 a
Prob > Chi-squared                                                 0.000         0.000

Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.




                                               49
Table 13
Stock option exercises by top executives
The table reports Tobit regression estimates for the value realized from options exercised over the intrinsic value of exercisable options (Columns 1 and 3) and the
number of options exercised over total exercisable options (Columns 2 and 4). In the right two columns, the dependent variables are calculated as the mean within the
group of top five executives for each company. The sample includes 218 U.S. firms identified by regulators as cartel participants between 1986-2010, as well as a control
sample of Compustat firms matched on size and industry. Option exercise data is obtained from ExecuComp, while information about the inventory and value of
exercisable options is obtained from Compustat. Regressions include control variables for options outstanding, past stock performance, Tobin’s Q and average industry
exercises, which is calculated as the average value of the dependent variable for all firms in the same two-digit SIC industry with data on ExecuComp in that year. All
control variables are lagged by one year. All regressions include year fixed effects. t-statistics appear in parentheses.

                                                        CEO only                                   Top 5 executives
                                           Value realized /                               Value realized /
Dependent variable:                       intrinsic value of   Options exercised /       intrinsic value of   Options exercised /
                                        exercisable options    exercisable options     exercisable options    exercisable options
Cartel firm indicator                                0.086 a               0.032 c                  0.033 b                 0.002
                                                     (3.549)               (1.889)                  (2.401)               (0.228)

Average industry exercises                           0.349 a               0.605 a                 0.241 a                 0.523 a
                                                     (2.617)               (4.636)                 (3.088)                 (7.674)

Options outstanding x 10-2                             0.010                 -0.009                  0.006                -0.013 a
                                                     (1.083)               (-1.253)                (1.134)                (-3.486)
Prior year return to shareholders                      0.002                 0.004                  -0.003                  -0.000
                                                     (0.386)               (1.446)                (-1.033)                (-0.021)
Tobin’s Q
                                                     0.024 a               0.037 a                 0.013 a                 0.026 a
                                                     (4.189)               (8.973)                 (3.993)               (11.851)

 Year fixed effects                                     Yes                   Yes                    Yes                     Yes
 Industry fixed effects                                 Yes                   Yes                    Yes                     Yes
 Observations                                         3,230                 3,629                  3,532                   3,788
 LR Chi-squared                                     93.948 a             170.407 a              175.685 a               336.669 a
 Prob > Chi-squared                                   0.000                 0.000                  0.000                   0.000

Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.




                                                                                      50
Table 14
Securities fraud litigation
The table reports the results from regressions for the incidence of securities fraud lawsuits filed
during the period 1996-2010, based on the Stanford Law School Securities Class Action
Clearinghouse. The sample includes 218 U.S. firms identified by regulators as cartel
participants between 1986-2010, as well as a control sample of Compustat firms matched on
size and industry. t-statistics appear in parentheses.

Dependent variable:          Fraud lawsuit indicator     Number of fraud lawsuits
                                     (Probit)                  (Poisson)
Cartel firm indicator                         0.311 a                       0.809 a
                                              (3.674)                       (4.695)

Return on assets                              -0.801 a                     -1.518 a
                                              (-3.903)                     (-4.226)

ln(Total assets)                            0.167 a                         0.345 a
                                            (6.639)                         (6.376)
Year fixed effects                              Yes                             Yes
Industry fixed effects                          Yes                             Yes
Observations                                  6,897                           8,115
Pseudo r-squared                              0.090                           0.130
Significant at 1% (a), 5% (b) and 10% (c) levels.




                                                 51
Figure 1
Return on assets around the year of cartel formation
The figure shows mean annual return on assets for 218 U.S. companies participating in price-
fixing cartels. Year 0 represents the beginning of each cartel according to government antitrust
regulators. The sample is identified by Connor (2010) from government filings, press releases,
and news reports.
                     12%


                     10%


                     8%
  Return on Assets




                     6%
                                             Mean            Med ian

                     4%


                     2%


                     0%
                           -3   -2     -1           0              1    2   3
                                     Year Relative to Start of Cartel




                                                        52
