NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE THEORY WITH NUMBERS:
QUANTIFYING THE CONSEQUENCES OF GLOBALIZATION
Arnaud Costinot
Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
Working Paper 18896
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18896
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013

This is a draft of a chapter to appear in the Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 4, eds. Gopinath,
Helpman and Rogoff. We thank Rodrigo Rodrigues Adao, Jakub Kominiarczuk, Mu-Jeung Yang,
and Yury Yatsynovich for excellent research assistance. We thank Costas Arkolakis, Edward Balistreri,
Dave Donaldson, Jonathan Eaton, Keith Head, Elhanan Helpman, Rusell Hillberry, Pete Klenow, Thierry
Mayer, Thomas Rutherford, Robert Stern, Dan Trefler, and Jonathan Vogel for helpful discussions
and comments. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Arnaud Costinot and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying the Consequences of Globalization
Arnaud Costinot and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
NBER Working Paper No. 18896
March 20135HYLVHG-XQH
JEL No. F11,F12,F13,F15,F17,F60,F62
ABSTRACT
We review a recent body of theoretical work that aims to put numbers on the consequences of globalization.
A unifying theme of our survey is methodological. We rely on gravity models and demonstrate how
they can be used for counterfactual analysis. We highlight how various economic considerations—
marketstructure, firm-level heterogeneity, multiple sectors, intermediate goods, and multiple factors
of production—affectthe magnitude of the gains from trade liberalization. We conclude by discussing
a number of outstandingissues in the literature as well as alternative approaches for quantifying the
consequences of globalization.
Arnaud Costinot
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-243B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge MA 02142-1347
and NBER
costinot@mit.edu
Andrés Rodríguez-Clare
University of California at Berkeley
Department of Economics
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
andres1000@gmail.com

1

Introduction

The theoretical proposition that there are gains from international trade, see Samuelson (1939), is
one of the most fundamental result in all of economics. Under perfect competition, opening up
to trade acts as an expansion of the production possibility frontier and leads to Pareto superior
outcomes. The objective of this chapter is to survey a recent body of theoretical work that aims
to put numbers on this and other related comparative static exercises, which we will refer to as
globalization.
A unifying theme of our chapter is methodological. Throughout we rely on multi-country
gravity models and demonstrate how they can be used for counterfactual analysis. While so-called
gravity equations have been estimated since the early sixties, see Tinbergen (1962), the widespread
use of structural gravity models in the field of international trade is a fairly recent phenomenon, as
also discussed by Head and Mayer (2013) in this volume. The previous handbook of international
economics is a case in point. In his opening chapter, Krugman (1995) notes: “the lack of a good
analysis of multilateral trade in the presence of trade costs is a major gap in trade theory.” This
view is echoed by Leamer and Levinsohn (1995) who argue that: “The gravity models are strictly
descriptive. They lack a theoretical underpinning so that once the facts are out, it is not clear what
to make of them.” But the times they are a-changin’.
The last ten years have seen an explosion of alternative microtheoretical foundations underlying gravity equations; see Eaton and Kortum (2002), Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003), Bernard,
Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003), Chaney (2008), and Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011). While
new gravity models encompass a large number of market structures—from perfect competition
to monopolistic competition with firm-level heterogeneity à la Melitz (2003)—and a wide range
of micro-level predictions, they share the same macro-level predictions regarding the structure of
bilateral trade flows as a function of bilateral costs. It is this basic macro structure and its quantitative implications for the consequences of globalization that we will be interested in this chapter.
Recent quantitative trade models based on the gravity equation share the same primary focus as older Computational General Equilibrium (CGE) models; see Baldwin and Venables (1995)
for an overview in the previous handbook. The main goal is to use theory in order to derive
numbers—e.g., explore whether particular economic forces appear to be large or small in the
data—rather than pure qualitative insights—e.g., study whether the relationship between two economic variables is monotone or not in theory. There are, however, important differences between
old and new quantitative work in international trade that we will try to highlight throughout this
chapter. First, new quantitative trade models have more appealing micro-theoretical foundations.
One does not need to impose the somewhat ad-hoc assumption that each country is exogenously
endowed with a distinct good—the so-called “Armington” assumption—to do quantitative work
in international trade. Second, recent quantitative papers offer a tighter connection between theory and data. Instead of relying on off-the-shelf elasticities, today’s researchers try to use their own
model to estimate the key structural parameters necessary for counterfactual analysis. Estimation
and computation go hand in hand. Third, new quantitative trade models put more emphasis on
1

transparency and less emphasis on realism. The idea is to construct middle-sized models that are
rich enough to speak to first-order features of the data, like the role of country size and geography,
yet parsimonious enough so that one can credibly identify its key parameters and understand
how their magnitude affects counterfactual analysis.
Section 2 starts by studying the simplest gravity model possible, the Armington model. Building on Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012), we highlight two basic results. First we
show that the changes in welfare associated with globalization, modelled as a change in iceberg
trade costs, can be inferred using two variables: (i ) changes in the share of expenditure on domestic goods; and (ii ) the elasticity of bilateral imports with respect to variable trade costs, which we
refer to as the trade elasticity. Second we show how changes in bilateral trade flows, in general,
and the share of domestic expenditure, in particular, can be computed using only information
about the trade elasticity and easily accessible macroeconomic data. We refer to this approach
popularized by Dekle, Eaton, and Kortum (2008) as “exact hat algebra.”
Armed with these tools, we illustrate how gravity models can be used to quantify the gains
from international trade defined as the (absolute value of) the percentage change in real income
that would be associated with moving one country from the current, observed trade equilibrium
to a counterfactual equilibrium with no trade, i.e. an equilibrium with infinite iceberg trade costs.
Since the share of domestic expenditure on domestic goods under autarky is equal to one, the
welfare consequences associated with this counterfactual exercise are easy to compute. Although
this is obviously an extreme counterfactual scenario that is (hopefully) not seriously considered by
policymakers, we view it as a useful benchmark that can shed light on the quantitative importance
of the various channels through which globalization affects the welfare of nations.
Section 3 extends the simple Armington model along several directions. First, we relax the
assumption that each country is exogenously endowed with a distinct good and provide alternative assumptions on technology and market structure under which the counterfactual predictions derived in Section 2 remain unchanged. Second, we introduce multiple sectors, intermediate goods, and multiple factors of production and discuss how these considerations affect the
consequences of globalization. Third, we briefly discuss other extensions including alternative
demand systems—that generate variable markups under monopolistic competition—and multinational production. Although one can still use macro-level data and a small number of elasticities
to compute the gains from trade in these richer environments, the results of Section 3 illustrate that
some realistic departures from the one-sector benchmark, such as the existence of multiple sectors
and tradable intermediate goods tend to increase significantly the magnitude of the gains from
trade.
Section 4 focuses on evaluating trade policy. Instead of considering the welfare consequences
of a move to autarky, we study counterfactual scenarios in which countries raise their import
tariffs, either unilaterally or simultaneously around the world, using the simple Armington model.
We then study again how these counterfactual predictions vary across different gravity models.
We conclude by discussing how to measure the restrictiveness of trade policy when tariffs are

2

heterogeneous across sectors.
Section 5 reviews a number of outstanding issues in the literature. Since the main output of
quantitative trade models are numbers, a fair question is: Are these numbers that we can believe
in? To shed light on this question, we first discuss the sensitivity of the predictions of gravity
models to auxiliary assumptions on the nature of trade imbalances and the tradability of capital
goods. We then turn to the goodness of fit of gravity models in the cross-section and time series.
We conclude by discussing how elasticities, i.e., the main inputs of quantitative trade models, are
calibrated.
Sections 6 and 7 discuss other approaches to quantifying the consequences of globalization in
the literature. Section 6 focuses on recent empirical studies that have used micro-level data, either
at the product or firm-level, to estimate gains from new varieties and productivity gains from
trade. We discuss how such empirical evidence, i.e., “micro” numbers, relate to the predictions
of gravity models reviewed in this chapter, i.e., “macro” numbers. Section 7 turns to structural
approaches to quantifying the consequences of globalization that are not based on gravity models.
Due to space constraints, we do not review reduced-form evidence on the gains from openness;
see e.g. Frankel and Romer (1999), Feyrer (2009a), and Feyrer (2009b). Readers interested in this
important topic are referred to the recent survey by Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare (2010).
Section 8 offers some concluding remarks on the current state of the literature and open questions for future research. Additional information about theoretical results and data can be found
in the online Appendix.

2

Getting Started

We start this chapter by describing how to perform counterfactual analysis in the simplest quantitative trade model possible: the Armington model. A central aspect of this model is the gravity
equation; see e.g. Anderson (1979) and Anderson and Van Wincoop (2003). As we will see in the
next section, there exists a variety of microtheoretical foundations that can give rise to a gravity
equation, and in turn, a variety of economic environments in which the simple tools introduced
in this section can be applied.

2.1

Armington Model

Consider a world economy comprising i = 1, ..., n countries, each endowed with Qi units of a
distinct good i = 1, ..., n.
Preferences. Each country is populated by a representative agent whose preferences are represented by a Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) utility function:
(1 σ)/σ

Cj = ∑in=1 ψij

(σ 1)/σ σ/(σ 1)

Cij

,

(1)

where Cij is the demand for good i in country j; ψij > 0 is an exogenous preference parameter;
3

and σ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution between goods from different countries. The associated
consumer price index is given by
Pj = ∑in=1 ψ1ij

1/(1 σ)

σ 1 σ
Pij

,

(2)

where Pij is the price of good i in country j.
Trade Costs. International trade between countries is subject to iceberg trade costs. In order to
sell one unit of a good in country j, firms from country i must ship τ ij

1 units, with τ ii = 1. For

there to be no arbitrage opportunities, the price of good i in country j must be equal to Pij = τ ij Pii .
The domestic price Pii of good i, in turn, can be expressed as a function of country i’s total income,
Yi , and its endowment: Pii = Yi /Qi . Combining the two previous expressions we get
Pij = Yi τ ij /Qi .

(3)

Trade Flows. Let Xij denote the total value of country j’s imports from country i. Given CES
utility, bilateral trade flows satisfy

Xij =
where Ej

ψij Pij
Pj

!1

σ

Ej ,

(4)

∑in=1 Xij is country j’s total expenditure. Combining Equations (2)-(4), we obtain
Xij =

Yi τ ij

1 σ

∑nl=1 Yl τ lj

χij
1 σ

Ej ,
χlj

( Qi /ψij )σ 1 . In order to prepare the general analysis of Section 3, we let ε
∂ ln Xij /X jj /∂ ln τ ij denote the the elasticity of imports relative to domestic demand, Xij /X jj ,
with respect to bilateral trade costs, τ ij , holding income levels fixed. In the rest of this chapter we
will refer to ε as the trade elasticity. In the Armington model it is simply equal to σ 1. Using the
previous notation, we can rearrange the expression above as

where χij

Xij =

ε

Yi τ ij
∑nl=1

χij

Yl τ lj

ε

Ej .

(5)

χlj

Equation (5) is what we will refer to as the gravity equation.
Competitive Equilibrium. In a competitive equilibrium, budget constraint and good market
clearing imply Yi = Ei and Yi = ∑nj=1 Xij , respectively, for all countries i. Together with Equation (5), these two conditions imply
Yi =

∑nj=1

Yi τ ij
∑nl=1
4

Yl τ lj

ε

χij
ε

Yj .
χlj

(6)

This provides a system of n equations with n unknowns, Y

fYi g. By Walras’ Law, one of these
equations is redundant. Thus income levels are only determined up to a constant. Once income
levels are known, expenditure levels, E f Ei g, can be computed using budget constraint and
bilateral trade flows, X
Xij , can be computed using the gravity equation. This concludes the
description of the Armington model.

2.2

Counterfactual Analysis

We now illustrate how the gravity equation can be used to quantify the welfare consequences
n o
of globalization. For simplicity, we focus on a shock to trade costs from τ
τ ij to τ 0
τ ij0 .
The same analysis generalizes in a straightforward manner to preference and endowment shocks.

To quantify the welfare consequences of a trade shock in a given country j, we proceed in two
steps. First, we show how changes in real consumption, Cj Ej /Pj , can be inferred from changes
in macro variables, X and Y. Second, we show how to compute changes in macro variables.
Welfare. In this chapter, whenever we refer to welfare changes in country j, we refer to percentage
changes in real consumption. Such changes correspond to the equivalent variation associated
with a foreign shock (expressed as a share of expenditure before the shock). Namely, percentage
changes in real consumption measures the percentage change in income that the representative
agent would be willing to accept in lieu of the shock to happen.
The first result that we establish is that changes in real consumption can be inferred using only
two statistics: (i ) observed changes in the share of expenditure on domestic goods, λ jj

X jj /Ej ;

and (ii ) the trade elasticity in the gravity equation, ε.
Let us start by considering an infinitesimal change in trade costs from τ to τ + dτ. By Shephard’s Lemma, we know that
d ln Pj = ∑in=1 λij d ln Pij ,
where λij Xij /Ej denotes the share of expenditure on goods from country i in country j. Since
consumption is chosen to minimize expenditure, changes in consumption levels, Cij , only have
second-order effects on the consumer price index in country j. Under the assumption of CES
utility, changes in the consumer price index in country j can be rearranged further into changes
into domestic and import prices
d ln Pj = λ jj d ln Pjj + 1

λ jj d ln PjM ,

i1/(1 σ)
is the component of the price index associated with imports. By
∑i6= j Pij1 σ
differentiating Equation (4), one can also show that
where PjM

h

d ln 1

λ jj

d ln λ jj = (1

5

σ) d ln PjM

d ln Pjj .

Combining the fact that λ jj d ln λ jj =

1

λ jj d ln 1

d ln Pj = d ln Pjj

λ jj with the two previous, we get

d ln λ jj / (1

σ) .

(7)

Thus, changes in real consumption, Cj Ej /Pj , in country j are given by
d ln Cj = d ln Ej

d ln Pjj + d ln λ jj / (1

σ) .

(8)

Since there are no domestic trade costs, τ jj = τ 0jj = 1, and trade is balanced, Yj = Ej , Equation

(3) implies that the first term is equal to zero. In the simple Armington model, changes in real
consumption only depends on the change in the relative price of imported versus domestic goods,
PjM /Pjj , which depends on the share of expenditure on domestic goods, λ jj , and the elasticity of
substitution, σ. Using Equations (8) and the definition of the trade elasticity ε σ 1, we get
d ln Cj =

d ln λ jj /ε.

Since the previous expression holds for any infinitesimal shock, the welfare consequences of large
changes from τ to τ 0 can be inferred by integrating the previous formula:
Ĉj = λ̂ jj
where v̂

1/ε

,

(9)

v0 /v denotes the proportional change in any variable v between the initial and coun-

terfactual equilibria. This establishes that for any change in trade costs, two statistics—the trade
elasticity, ε, and the changes in the share of expenditure on domestic goods, λ jj —are sufficient to
infer welfare changes.1
Macroeconomic variables. At this point, we have shown that conditional on the trade elasticity,
ε, changes in real consumption are exclusively determined by changes in λ jj . We now describe
how one can use gravity models to predict how trade shocks affect trade flows, in general, and the
share of expenditure on domestic goods, λ jj , in particular. The approach that we will describe has
been popularized recently by Dekle, Eaton, and Kortum (2008). One can think of this approach as
an “exact” version of Jones’ hat algebra for reasons that will be clear in a moment.2
Let λij Xij / ∑l Xlj denote the share of expenditure on goods from country i in country j. Since
the gravity equation holds both in the initial and the counterfactual equilibria, we have
λ̂ij =

Ŷi τ̂ ij

ε

∑nl=1 λlj Ŷl τ̂ lj

ε.

(10)

1 Since the previous result is based on Shepard’s Lemma and the fact that domestic prices are unaffected by the
shock, d ln Pjj = 0, Equation (9) would also hold in the case of a shock to foreign preferences or endowments.
2 Application of this approach can also be found in the older CGE literature; see e.g. Rutherford (2002).

6

In the counterfactual equilibrium, Equation (6) further implies
Yj0 = ∑in=1 λ0ji Yi0 .
Combining the two previous expressions, we then get
Ŷj Yj = ∑in=1

λ ji Ŷj τ̂ ji

ε

Ŷi Yi

∑nl=1 λli Ŷl τ̂ li

ε.

(11)

Although trade costs, endowments, and preference shifters affect bilateral trade flows, as captured
by τ ij and χij in equation (5), Equation (11) shows that we can compute counterfactual changes in
income, Ŷ

Ŷi , as the solution of a system of non-linear equations without having to estimate

any of these parameters. All we need to determine changes in income levels (up to normalization)
are the initial expenditure shares, λij , the initial income levels, Yi , and the trade elasticity, ε. Given
changes in income levels, changes in the shares of expenditure on goods from different countries,
λ̂ij , and changes in real consumption, Ĉj , can then be computed using Equations (9) and (10).

2.3

Trade Theory with Numbers: A Preview

In order to illustrate the usefulness of the simple Armington model, we focus on a very particular,
but important counterfactual exercise: moving to autarky. Formally, we assume that variable trade
costs in the new equilibrium are such that τ ij0 = +∞ for any pair of countries i 6= j. All other
structural parameters are the same as in the initial equilibrium. For this particular shock, we do

not need to solve any non-linear system of equations to do counterfactual analysis. Since the share
of expenditure on domestic goods must be equal to 1 in the counterfactual equilibrium, λ0jj = 1,
we immediately know that λ̂ jj = 1/λ jj .
Throughout this chapter we define the gains from international trade in country j, Gj , as the
absolute value of the percentage change in real income that would be associated with moving to
autarky in country j. Using Equation (9) and the fact that λ̂ jj = 1/λ jj , we get
Gj = 1

λ1/ε
jj .

(12)

In order to compute Gj we need measures of the trade elasticity, ε, and the share of expenditure
on domestic goods, λ jj . There are many econometric issues associated with estimating ε; see e.g.
Hummels and Hillberry (2012). A simple way to estimate the trade elasticity ε is to take the log of
the gravity equation (5) and run a cross-sectional regression of the following form
ln Xij = δiX + δ jM

ε ln τ ij + δij ,

(13)

where the first term
δiX
ln χi i ε ln Yi is treated as an exporter fixed-effect; the second term
h
ε
M
n
δj
ln Yj ln ∑l =1 χl Yl τ lj
is treated as an importer fixed-effect; and the third term δij is
7

treated as measurement error in trade flows that is orthogonal to ln τ ij . At this point we set ε = 5,
which is a typical value used in the literature; see e.g. Anderson and Van Wincoop (2004) and
Head and Mayer (2013). We will come back to the sensitivity of our quantitative results to values
of the trade elasticity in Section 5.
∑i6= j Xij / ∑in=1 Xij . We can
measure ∑i6= j Xij as total imports by country j, whereas ∑i Xij is total expenditure by country j.
In order to measure λ jj in the data, recall that λ jj

X jj /Ej = 1

In this exercise as well as all subsequent exercises, we use data from the World Input-Output
Database (WIOD) in 2008. The database covers 27 EU countries and 13 other major countries; see

Timmer (2012).3 The first column of Table 1 reports the gains from trade Gj for these countries
using Equation (12). According to the simple Armington model, we see that gains from trade
are below 2% for three countries: Brazil (1.5%), Japan (1.7%), and the United States (1.8%). Not
surprisingly, gains from trade tend to be larger for smaller countries. The largest predicted gains
are for Slovakia (7.6%), Ireland (8.0%) and Hungary (8.1%). Given the strong assumptions that
have been imposed in Section 2.1, these numbers, of course, should be taken with more than a
grain of salt. We now discuss how richer and more realistic models would affect the magnitude of
the gains from trade.

3

Beyond Armington

The Armington model is very tractable, which has made it the go-to trade model for quantitative
work in policy institutions for more than forty years. This is also a very stylized model, which has
lead to quite a bit of skepticism about the robustness of its counterfactual predictions in academic
circles for about as many years. Fortunately, one can maintain the tractability of the Armington
model, without maintaining the somewhat ad-hoc assumption that each country is exogenously
endowed with a distinct good. As discussed below, the gravity equation (5), which is the basis for
counterfactual analysis in the Armington model, can be shown to hold under various assumptions
about technology and market structure. While each gravity model remains special, in the sense
that strong functional form assumptions are required for a gravity equation to hold, the ability of
these new models to match a large number of micro-level facts, together with the elegance of their
microtheoretical foundations, has lead to an explosion of quantitative work in international trade
over the last ten years.
In this section we explore how various features of more complex gravity models—market
structure, firm-level heterogeneity, multiple sectors, intermediate goods, and multiple factors of
production—affect the gains from trade as defined in Section 2.3. Throughout our analysis we
3 The mapping between the simple Armington model presented here and the data is not trivial for two reasons: (i )
it assumes the share of expenditures on intermediate goods is zero and (ii ) it assumes that trade is balanced. This
implies that GDP is equal to gross output and that total expenditure is equal to GDP. Neither is true in the data. We
will deal with intermediate goods and trade imbalances explicitly in Sections 3.4 and 5.1, respectively. Here, as well as
in Section 3, we derive and apply our formulas for gains from trade ignoring trade imbalances. If moving to autarky
also implies the closing of trade imbalances, our formulas capture the change in real income rather than the change in
real expenditure. See online Appendix for details.

8

calibrate different models to match the same moments in the macro-data, including bilateral trade
flows and trade elasticities. Thus different models may lead to different predictions about the
magnitude of the gains from trade because they predict different counterfactual autarky equilibria, not because they predict different trade volumes in the initial equilibrium. In short, trade
volumes are taken as data that discipline the behavior of all models, irrespectively of what their
particular micro-theoretical foundations may be.4
As explained in the Introduction, although a move to autarky is an extreme comparative statics
exercise, it should be viewed as a useful benchmark to study the importance, in a well-defined
welfare sense, of various economic channels discussed in the literature. We leave the evaluation
of trade policy to Section 4 in which we show how to use the exact hat algebra to conduct richer
comparative static exercises.

3.1

Many Models, One Equation

The gravity equation (5) has been shown to hold under perfect competition, as in Eaton and Kortum (2002); under Bertrand competition, as in Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003); under
monopolistic competition with homogeneous firms, as in Krugman (1980); and under monopolistic competition with firm-level heterogeneity, as in Chaney (2008), Arkolakis (2010), Arkolakis,
Demidova, Klenow, and Rodríguez-Clare (2008), and Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011). Our
goal in this subsection is not to describe each of these models in detail, but rather highlight the
common features that will lead to a gravity equation as well as the key differences that may affect
the magnitude of the gains from trade. Detailed discussions of the microfoundations and functional form assumptions leading to gravity equations can be found in Anderson (2010), Arkolakis,
Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012), Head and Mayer (2013), as well as in our online Appendix.
Like the simple Armington model, the alternative gravity models mentioned above assume
the existence of a representative agent with CES utility in each country as well as balanced trade,
Ei = Yi .5 The representative agent, however, now has preferences over a continuum of goods or
varieties ω 2 Ω:
Cj =

Z

σ/(σ 1)
ω 2Ω

c j ( ω )(σ

1)/σ

dω

,

with σ > 1. In equilibrium, each good ω is only imported from one country so that Equation (1)
still holds with the aggregate consumption of goods from country i in country j being given by
R
Cij = ω 2Ω c j (ω )(σ 1)/σ dω, where Ωij
Ω denotes the set of goods that country j buys from
ij

country i, and ψij = 1 for all country pairs due to the symmetry across varieties. For the same
reason, Equation (2) holds as well with the aggregate price of goods from country i in country j
1/(1 σ)
R
being given by Pij = ω 2Ω p j (ω )1 σ dω
and ψij = 1 for all i and j.
ij

4 In

order to match the same cross-section of trade flows, different gravity models may implictly rely on different
values of bilateral trade costs as well as other structural parameters.
5 In recent work, Arkolakis, Costinot, Donaldson, and Rodriguez-Clare (2012) have developed a gravity model without CES utility. We discuss the implications of such a model in Section 3.6.

9

A key difference between the simple Armington model and the alternative gravity models
mentioned above is that, due to different assumptions on technology and market structure, Ωij is
no longer exogenously given. In these richer models, firms from country i may now decide to stop
producing and selling a subset of goods in country j if it is not profitable for them to do so. Hence
changes in prices, Pij , may reflect both: (i ) changes at the intensive margin, i.e., changes in the
price of goods imported in country j, p j (ω ), and (ii ) changes at the extensive margin, i.e., changes
in the set of good imported in country j, Ωij , due either to the selection of a different subset of
firms from i in j or the entry of a different set of firms in i. Mathematically, these new economic
considerations lead to the following generalization of Equation (3):
0

p

Pij =

τ ij ci
|{z}

Intensive Margin

Ej
@
cijx
|

1η
p
τ ij ci
A
Pj
{z
}

! 1 δσ

Extensive Margin: Selection

p

Ri
ce
| i{z

δ
1 σ

ξ ij ,

(14)

}

Extensive Margin: Entry

where ci , cie , and cijx are endogenous variables that capture how input prices affect variable costs
∑in=1 Xij still denotes
∑ j Xij denotes total sales or revenues for producers; and ξ ij >

of production, fixed entry costs, and fixed exporting costs, respectively; Ej
total expenditure in country j; Ri

0 is a function of structural parameters distinct from variable trade costs, τ ij , such as endowments
or fixed exporting costs. The last two parameters, δ and η, will play a central role in our analysis.
The parameter δ is a dummy variable that characterizes the market structure: it is equal to one
under monopolistic competition with free entry and zero under perfect or Bertrand competition.6
The parameter η

0 is related to the extent of heterogeneity across varieties as we discuss more

formally below.
In the rest of this chapter we will use Equation (14) to organize the literature and explain
how different assumptions about technology and market structure—namely, different assumpp

tions about ci , cie , cijx , δ, and η—may lead to different macro-level predictions without getting lost
into the algebra through which Equation (14) comes about. At this point, it is therefore important
to clarify how each term in Equation (14) relates to previous work in the literature.
p

The first term, τ ij ci , captures price changes at the intensive margin. This is the only active
p

margin in the Armington model. In that model, ci = Yi , δ = 0, and η = 0; see Equation (3).
p
This intensive margin will remain active in all models that we study. In most of these models, ci
will also remain equal to total income Yi in country i. This is the case, for instance, if labor is the
only factor of production. In this situation, production costs are proportional to wages, which are
proportional to countries’ total income.
The second term,

Ej /cijx

δ
1 σ

p
τ ij ci /Pj

η

, captures changes at the extensive margin due to

selection effects. If η = 0, then this term is equal to one and there are no selection effects. This
occurs in models of monopolistic competition without firm-level heterogeneity and fixed export6 For

expositional purposes, we often abuse terminology in this chapter and simply refer to the case δ = 1 and δ = 0
as “monopolistic competition” and “perfect competition,” respectively.

10

ing costs, like Krugman (1980), in which all firms always export. The case η > 0 captures instead
situations in which a subset of firms from country i may start or stop exporting when market conditions change in country j. Specifically, in models of perfect competition, like Eaton and Kortum
(2002), Bertrand competition, like Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003), or monopolistic
competition à la Melitz (2003), like Chaney (2008), Arkolakis, Demidova, Klenow, and RodríguezClare (2008), Arkolakis (2010), and Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011), if firms from country i are
p

less competitive relative to other firms serving market j, i.e., τ ij ci /Pj is high, then less firms from
country i will serve this market, which will lead to a decrease in the number of varieties from i
available in j and an increase in Pij . In the previous models, the magnitude of selection effects
is formally determined by η

θ
σ 1

1+

1 σ
θ

, where θ > σ

1 is the shape parameter of the

distribution of productivity draws across varieties. Under perfect and Bertrand competition, this
distribution is Fréchet. Under monopolistic competition, it is Pareto. In both cases, θ measures the
elasticity of the mass of goods produced domestically with respect to their relative cost; 1/ (1
measures the elasticity of the price index with respect to new goods; and 1 +

1 σ
θ

σ)

corrects for

the fact that the marginal variety has a higher price than the average variety. In models of monopolistic competition with firm-level heterogeneity à la Melitz (2003) (δ = 1,η > 0), selection also
depends on the size of market j relative to the fixed costs of exporting from i to j, which is reflected
in Ej /cijx

δ
1 σ

. The nature of cijx depends on where fixed exporting costs are paid. If they are paid

in the exporting country, then cijx is proportional to total income, Yi , in country i. If they are paid
in the importing country, then cijx is proportional to total income, Yj , in country j.
The third term, Ri /cie

δ
1 σ

, captures changes at the extensive margin due to entry effects. This

last channel is specific to models with monopolistic competition and free entry (δ = 1), whether
or not they feature firm-level heterogeneity à la Melitz (2003).7 In such environments, countries
in which entry is more profitable, i.e., Ri /cie is high, export more varieties to all countries, which
decreases the price index with an elasticity 1/ (σ
in Krugman (1980) or Melitz (2003),

cie

1). If entry costs are paid in terms of labor, as

is simply proportional to total income Yi in country i.

To sum up, starting from Equation (14), we can turn off and on the selection effects associated
with heterogeneity across varieties by setting η to 0 or not. Similarly, we can turn off and on
the scale effects associated with monopolistic competition and free entry by setting δ to 0 or 1.
In the next subsections, we study how much these considerations—as well as the introduction
of multiple sectors, tradable intermediate goods, and multiple factors of production—affect the
overall magnitude of the gains from trade.
δ

free entry, Ri /cie 1 σ would be absent from Equation (14) and one would need, in general, to take into
account the effect of trade on profits; see e.g. Ossa (2011a). In the one-sector case reviewed in the next subsection,
this distinction turns out to be irrelevant, as shown in Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012). With multiple
sectors, however, free entry leads to home market effects, with implications for the magnitude of the gains from trade.
7 Without

11

3.2

One Sector

It is standard to interpret models with CES utility, such as those presented in Section 3.1, as onesector models with a continuum of varieties; see e.g. Helpman and Krugman (1985). Here we
focus on such models since they are the closest to the Armington model described in Section 2.1.
Later we will consider multi-sector extensions of these models as well as incorporate tradable
intermediate goods and multiple factors of production.
In line with the existing literature, we assume that, in addition to Equation (14), the two folp
lowing conditions hold: (i ) ci = ciim = cie = Yi , which reflects the fact that all factors of production
are used in the same proportions to produce, export, and develop all varieties; and (ii ) Ri = Yi ,
which reflects the fact that trade in goods is balanced.8 Under these two conditions, Equation (14)
simplifies into

0

Ej
Pij = τ ij Yi @ x
cij

! 1 δσ

1η
τ ij Yi
A ξ ij ,
Pj

(15)

Note that Ri = Yi = cie implies that, like in the Armington model, there are no entry effects
associated with changes in trade costs, even under monopolistic competition. Since Equation (1)
still holds, bilateral trade flows between country i and country j are still given by Equation (4).
Combining this observation with Equation (15), the gravity equation generalizes to

Xij =

ε

Yi τ ij
∑nl=1

Yl τ lj

δη

cijx
ε

χij
cljx

Ej .

δη

(16)

χlj

Compared to the Armington model, here ε = (1 + η ) (σ 1) and χij
ξ 1ij σ . Thus if there are
selection effects, i.e., if η 6= 0, the structural interpretation of the trade elasticity is no longer
the same as in the Armington model. This reflects the fact that changes in variable trade costs
now affect both the price of existing varieties (intensive margin) and the set of varieties sold from
country i to country j (extensive margin). Nevertheless, we can still take the logs of both sides
of Equation (4) and estimate the trade elasticity ε as we did in Section 2.3. In other words, the
mapping between bilateral trade data, X, and the trade elasticity, ε, remains unchanged.9 Finally,
we see that changes in the magnitude of fixed exporting costs, as captured by cijx

δη

, now affect

bilateral trade flows under monopolistic competition with firm-level heterogeneity à la Melitz
(2003), i.e., if δ = 1, η > 0.10 This extra term—which depends on whether fixed exporting costs
8 Since some of the models that we consider involve fixed exporting costs paid in the importing country, i.e. trade in
exporting services, the assumption that overall trade is balanced, Ei = Yi , is different from the assumption that trade
in goods is balanced, Ri = Yi . The latter condition corresponds to the macro-level restriction R1 in Arkolakis, Costinot,
and Rodríguez-Clare (2012).
9 This assumes that measures of trade costs are invariant across models. This is a reasonable assumption in the case
of import tariffs, but not in the case of price gaps; see Simonovska and Waugh (2012). We come back to the specific
issues associated with import tariffs in Section 4.
10 Equation (16) is a special case of the macro-level restriction R3 in Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012).
Compared to Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012), we no longer need to impose explictly that profits are

12

are paid in the importing country, the exporting country, or both—opens up the possibility of
different predictions across gravity models, as we explain below.
Like in Section 2.2, consider a change in variable trade costs from τ

τ ij to τ 0

n

o
τ ij0 ,

though the same
easily extends to shocks to foreign endowments or technology, i.e.,
n analysis
o
changes in χ
χij . Given CES utility, Equation (8) still holds. The key difference compared
to our previous analysis is that d ln Ej

d ln Pjj is no longer equal to zero. Because of selection

effects, a change in variable trade costs may lead to a change in the set of goods produced domestically, Ω jj , and so to a change in the aggregate price index associated with these goods, Pjj ,
relative to total expenditure in country j. Specifically, since Ej = Yj and cm
jj = Yj , Equation (15)
implies
d ln Pjj = (1 + η ) d ln Yj

ηd ln Pj .

Using the previous expression with Equation (7), which still holds because of CES utility, and the
trade balance condition, Ej = Yj , we then get
d ln Ej

d ln Pjj =

(η/ (η + 1))

d ln λ jj / (1

σ) .

(17)

In models featuring selection effects (η > 0), a positive terms-of-trade shock, d ln λ jj / (1
is accompanied by a negative shock to real consumption of domestic goods, d ln Ej

σ) > 0,

d ln Pjj < 0.

Intuitively, a positive terms-of-trade shock tends to decrease the profitability of domestic firms on
the domestic market, which leads to a decrease in the number of goods produced domestically,
and, given the love of varieties embedded in CES utility functions, an increase in the aggregate
price index associated with these goods.
Together with ε = (1 + η ) (σ 1), Equations (8) and (17) imply d ln Cj = d ln λ jj /ε. Like in
the Armington model, the previous expression can be integrated to get Equation (9).11 Thus, as
established in Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012), changes in the share of expenditure on domestic goods, λ jj , and the trade elasticity, ε, remain two sufficient statistics for welfare
analysis. In particular, gains from trade remain given by Equation (12). In short, conditional on
observed trade flows and the trade elasticity, selection and scale effects have no impact on the
overall magnitude of the gains from trade.
The fact that λ jj remains the only macro variable that matters for welfare is intuitive enough:
it measures the magnitude of the terms-of-trade effect and changes in real output themselves
are function of changes in the overall price index, which also depends on the magnitude of the
terms-of-trade effect. The fact that the only structural parameter that matters can be recovered as
the trade elasticity ε from a gravity equation, by contrast, heavily relies on the fact that selection
effects, as captured by η, are identical across countries. It is this assumption that simultaneously
generates a gravity equation and guarantees that the trade elasticity in that equation is the relevant
proportional to revenues. This restriction is implicit in Equation (15).
11 A more direct, though perhaps less illuminating way of establishing Equation (9) consists in computing P from
jj
Equation (15) and substituting for it in λ jj = Pjj /Pj

1 σ

.

13

elasticity for welfare analysis. It is worth noting that this result does not rely on the fact that new
varieties have zero welfare effects. In the models with monopolistic competition considered here,
a shock to trade costs, foreign endowments, or foreign technology, may very well increase welfare
through its effects at the extensive margin. The point rather is that these effects, no matter how
large they are, can always be inferred from changes in aggregate trade flows.
The previous equivalence only establishes that conditional on a change in λ jj and ε, alternative
gravity models must predict the same welfare change as the Armington model, but, in principle,
they may predict different changes in the share of domestic expenditure for a given trade shock.
Under the additional assumption that fixed exporting costs (if any) are paid in the destination
country—cijx = cm
j , as in Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011)—one can show a stronger equivalence result. In that case, cijx drops out of Equation (16). Thus the counterfactual changes in trade
flows and income levels associated with changes in variable trade costs can still be computed using the exact hat algebra of Section 2.2, i.e. Equations (10) and (11). Given observable macro
variables in the initial equilibrium, X and Y, and a value of the trade elasticity, ε, this implies that
counterfactual predictions for macro variables and welfare are exactly the same as in the Armington model.12 This stronger equivalence result, however, is very sensitive to the assumption that
fixed exporting costs are paid in the importing country. If fixed exporting costs are partly paid in
the origin country, then one-sector gravity models with monopolistic competition and firm-level
heterogeneity à la Melitz (2003) generally predict different changes in relative factor prices, i.e.,
relative wages if labor is the only factor of production. This leads to different changes in the share
of expenditure on domestic goods and, in turn, different welfare changes for a given change in
trade costs (moving to autarky being a notable exception).13

3.3

Multiple Sectors

Gravity models can be extended to multiple sectors, s = 1, ..., S, by assuming a two-tier utility
function in which the upper-level is Cobb-Douglas and the lower-level is CES; see e.g. Anderson
and Yotov (2010), Donaldson (2008), Caliendo and Parro (2010), Costinot, Donaldson, and Komunjer (2010), Hsieh and Ossa (2011), Levchenko and Zhang (2011), Ossa (2012), Shikher (forthcominga), and Shikher (forthcomingb). Formally let us assume that the representative agent in
12 In this special case, one can show that the welfare impact of changes in the number of domestic varieties (if any)
exactly compensates the welfare impact of changes in the number of foreign varieties (if any), as emphasized in Feenstra
(2010). In general, i.e., if fixed costs are partly paid in the origin country, these exact offsetting effects no longer hold,
though the welfare change associated with a shock to variable trade costs remains given by Equation (9), as discussed
above. Similarly, in the case of shocks to foreign endowments or technology, these exact offsetting effects no longer
hold, though welfare changes remain given by Equation (9), as shown in Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare
(2012). In short, the main equivalence result in Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012) does not hinge on these
exact offsetting effects.
13 For finite changes in trade costs, different counterfactual predictions do not arise from selection effects per se, but
rather from the fact that fixed exporting costs, if paid at least partly in the origin country, can affect relative demand
for factors of production in different countries and so relative factor prices. To see this, note that in a symmetric world
economy in which relative factor prices are constant, cijx would be constant across countries as well. Thus, in spite of
selection effects, cijx would again drop out of Equation (16), leading to the same counterfactual predictions as in the
Armington model.

14

each country aims to maximize
Cj =
where β j,s

S

∏s=1 Cj,s ,
β j,s

(18)

0 are exogenous preference parameters satisfying ∑Ss=1 β j,s = 1 and Cj,s is total con-

sumption of the composite good s in country j,
Cj,s =

Z

ω 2Ω

c j,s (ω )(σs

1)/σs

σ s / ( σ s 1)

dω

,

(19)

where σs > 1 is the elasticity of substitution between different varieties, which is allowed to
vary across sectors. In multi-sector gravity models, each variety remains sourced from only one
1)/σs σs /(σs 1)

(σ

country so that a sector level version of (1) still holds, Cj,s = ∑in=1 Cij,ss
R
Cij,s = ω 2Ω c j,s (ω )(σs 1)/σs dω. The associated consumer price index is Pj =
ij,s

∏

1 σs
sector-specific price indices given by a sector level version of (2), Pj,s = ∑in=1 Pij,s
1/(1 σs )
R
.
Pij,s = ω 2Ω p j,s (ω )(1 σs ) dω

, with

β j,s
S
P
,
j,s
s =1
1/(1 σs )

with

, with

ij,s

In line with the literature, we assume that our reduced-form assumption on price indices,

Equation (14), now holds sector-by-sector; that factors of production are used in the same way
p
m = ce = Y ; and that trade in goods is balanced,
across all activities in all sectors, so that ci,s = cii,s
i
i,s
Ri = Yi .14 Combining these assumptions, we get

Pij,s
where e j,s

2

Ej
= τ ij,s Yi 4 e j,s x
cij,s

! 1 δsσ

s

3η s
δs
τ ij,s Yi
5 r 1 σs ξ ij,s .
i,s
Pj,s

(20)

Ej,s /Ej denotes the share of total expenditure in country j allocated to sector s and

ri,s = Ri,s /Ri denote the share of total revenues in country i generated from sector s. All other
variables have the same interpretation as in Section 3.1, except that they are now free to vary across
sectors. Compared to Equation (15), Equation (20) allows for scale effects in monopolistically
competitive sectors both through selection,

x
e j,s Ej /cij,s

δs
1 σs

δs

1 σs
, and entry, ri,s
. In the one-sector

case, the latter effect is necessarily absent because ri,s = 1. Here an expansion of production in a
monopolistically competitive sector, i.e. a higher value of ri,s , leads to entry and gains from new
varieties, i.e. a lower value of Pij,s , with the standard “love of variety” elasticity of 1/ (σs

1).15

We now focus on the gains from international trade, as defined in Section 2.3, and discuss how
they are affected by the introduction of multiple sectors under the assumption that Equation (20)
holds. Bilateral trade flows at the sector-level satisfy Xij,s = Pij,s /Pj,s
14 The assumption,

1 σs

e j,s Ej . Together with

Ri = Yi , is stronger than in the one-sector case. In Section 3.2, it holds in models with monopolistic
competition and firm-level heterogeneity independently of where fixed exporting costs are paid, as long as productivity
distributions are Pareto. In a multi-sector environment, this may no longer be true even under Pareto if fixed exporting
costs are partly paid in the importing country and sectors differ in the share of revenues associated with fixed exporting
costs. Such considerations lead to a slight change in the present analysis, which we come back to below.
15 Similar scale effects can be introduced in the one sector case by allowing factor supply to be elastic; see Balistreri,
Hillberry, and Rutherford (2009). The magnitude of such effects then crucially depends on the elasticity of factor supply.

15

Equation (20), this implies the sector-level gravity equation:
τ ij,s Yi

Xij,s =

∑l τ lj,s Yl
where εs = (1 + η s ) (σs

1) and χij,s

εs

cijx

εs

δs η s

δs
ri,s
χij,s

δs η s

x
clj,s

e j,s Ej ,

(21)

δs
rl,s
χlj,s

ξ 1ij,s σs . As in Section 3.1, one can combine Equation (20),
1 σs

Equation (21), and the fact that λ jj,s = Pjj,s /Pj,s
associated with a trade shock are now given by:

to show that changes in real consumption

Ĉj = ∏Ss=1 λ̂ jj,s ê j,ss r̂ j,s
η

δs

β j,s /εs

.

(22)

Under Cobb-Douglas preferences, we know that e j,s = e0j,s = β j,s . Thus the previous expression
β j,s /εs

can be simplified further into Ĉj = ∏Ss=1 λ̂ jj,s r̂ j,sδs
.16 To compute the gains from trade, we
only need to solve for r̂ j,s when the counterfactual entails autarky. Since r 0j,s = e0j,s under autarky
and e j,s = e0j,s = β j,s , we must have r̂ j,s = e j,s /r j,s . Using the fact that λ̂ jj,s = 1/λ jj,s for all s, we
then get
Gj = 1

∏Ss=1

λ jj,s

e j,s
r j,s

δs

! β j,s /εs

.

(23)

Since δs appears in Equation (23), gains from trade predicted by multi-sector gravity models with
monopolistic competition differ from those predicted by models with perfect competition because
of scale effects, as discussed in Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012). In contrast, selection effects still have no impact on the overall magnitude of the gains from trade. Since η s does
not appear in Equation (23), conditional on observed trade flows and the trade elasticity, the gains
from trade predicted by monopolistically competitive gravity models with and without firm-level
heterogeneity are the same, even with multiple sectors.
r j,s

To compute the gains from trade using Equation (23), we need measures of λ jj,s , e j,s , β j,s and
as well as sector-level trade elasticities εs for s = 1, ..., S. To compute λ jj,s , e j,s , β j,s and r j,s , we

use data on 35 sectors from the WIOD in 2008.17 Sector-level trade elasticities are from Caliendo
and Parro (2010).For the purposes of this chapter, the main advantage of the estimation procedure
in Caliendo and Parro (2010) is that it is consistent with all quantitative trade models satisfying
the sector-level gravity equation (21).18
16 Without
17 In

balanced trade in goods, R j 6= Yj , this would generalize to Ĉj = ∏Ss=1 λ̂ jj,s r̂ j,s R̂ j /Ŷj

δs

β j,s /εs

.

theory, since the models that we consider do not feature intermediate goods, we have e j,s = β j,s . In the data,
however, gross expenditure shares, e j,s , differ from final demand shares, β j,s . In the analysis that follows we let β j,s be
different from e j,s when computing gains from trade using Equation (23).
18 Caliendo and Parro (2010) use COMTRADE data from 1993. They assume that iceberg trade costs can be decomposed into τ ij,s = tij,s dij,s µij,s where tij,s is one plus the ad-valorem tariff applied by country j on good s imported
from i and dni is a symmetric component of the iceberg-trade cost, i.e., dij,s = d ji,s . Taking a triple log-difference of

16

Columns 2 and 3 in Table 1 reports the gains from trade Gj for the same set of countries as
in Section 2.3, but using Equation (23) rather than Equation (12). In Column 2, all sectors are
assumed to be perfectly competitive, δs = 0 for all s, while in column 3, all sectors are assumed
to be monopolistically competitive, δs = 1 for all s. Two features of these results stand out. First,
even in an environment with active entry effects, such as the one considered here, there are no
systematic differences between the gains from trade predicted by multi-sector models with perfect
competition, Column 2, and those predicted by models with monopolistic competition, Column
3. For some countries the gains under monopolistic competition are larger than under perfect
competition (e.g., gains in Germany increase from 12.7% to 17.6%), while for other countries the
opposite holds (e.g., gains for Greece decrease from 16.3% to 4.7%). Second, the gains from trade
predicted by multi-sector models under both market structures, Columns 2 and 3, are significantly
larger than those predicted by one-sector models, Column 1. For example, moving from Column
1 to Column 2 increases Gj for Belgium from 7.5% to 32.7%, while it increases Gj for Canada from
3.8% to 17.4%. The average among all the countries in Table 1 more than triples, increasing from
4.4% (Column 1) to 15.3% (Column 2), a point also emphasized in Ossa (2012).
The fact that models with perfect and monopolistic competition predict, on average, similar
gains reflect the opposite consequences of entry effects—∏Ss=1 e j,s /r j,s

β j,s δs /εs

in Equation (23)—

on countries with a comparative advantage and a comparative disadvantage in sectors with strong
scale effects. If e j,s /r j,s is negatively correlated with δs /εs , then country j tends to be a large exporter of goods with strong scale effects. For such a country, the gains from trade tend to be larger
than in the absence of scale effects since trade allows specialization in the sectors characterized by
strong returns to scale. The converse is true, however, for a country in which e j,s /r j,s is positively
correlated with δs /εs , i.e., a country with a comparative disadvantage in sectors with strong scale
effects. In theory, such a country may even lose from opening up to trade. This idea is the basis
of Frank Graham’s argument for protection; see Ethier (1982a) and Helpman and Krugman (1985)
for a general discussion.
Why do multi-sector gravity models predict much larger gains than their one-sector counterparts? Part of the answer is: Cobb-Douglas preferences. This assumption implies that if the price
of a single good gets arbitrarily large as a country moves to autarky—because it cannot produce
that good—then gains from trade are infinite. According to Equation (23), this will happen either
if the share of expenditure on domestic goods, λ jj,s , is close to zero—which implies arbitrarily
large costs of production for that good at home—or if the trade elasticity, εs , is close to zero—
which implies that foreign varieties are essential. We come back to this issue when discussing the
more general case of nested CES utility functions in Section 5.3.
Equation(21) with δs = 0 yields
ln

Xij,s X jl,s Xli,s
Xil,s Xlj,s X ji,s

= εs ln

tij,s t jl,s tli,s
til,s tlj,s t ji,s

+ µijl,s .

εs
εs
s
s
where the error-term µijl,s = ln µij,s
χij,s + ln µεjl,s
χ jl,s + ln µεli,s
χli,s ln µil,s
χil,s
how we map WIOD and COMTRADE data in the online Appendix.

17

s
ln µεlj,s
χlj,s

s
ln µεji,s
χ ji,s . We discuss

3.4

Tradable Intermediate Goods

We now enrich the supply-side of gravity models by introducing tradable intermediate goods and
input-output linkages as in the early work of Krugman and Venables (1995), Eaton and Kortum
(2002), Alvarez and Lucas (2007), and more recently Di Giovanni and Levchenko (2009), Caliendo
and Parro (2010), and Balistreri, Hillberry, and Rutherford (2011). Formally, we maintain the same
preference structure as in the previous section and introduce intermediate goods parsimoniously
by assuming that, in each sector s, they are produced in the exact same way as composite goods
for final consumption:
Ij,s =

Z

ω 2Ω

i j,s (ω )

(σs 1)/σs

σ s / ( σ s 1)

dω

,

(24)

where i j,s (ω ) denote the amount of variety ω used in the production of intermediate goods in
country j and sector s. Accordingly, the sector-level price index Pj,s defined in Section 3.3 now
measures the aggregate price of sector s goods in country j for both final consumption and production.
As we did in the previous section, and in line with the existing literature, we assume that
sector-level price indices satisfy Equation (14) and that trade in goods is balanced so that, together
with the overall trade balance, we have total expenditure equals total producer revenues, Ei =
p

Ri , in each country. Compared to Section 3.3, we allow ci,s to vary across sectors to reflect the
differential effect of intermediate goods on unit costs of production in different sectors:
1 αi,s

p

ci,s = Yi

i,ks
∏Sk=1 Pi,k ,

α

(25)

∑ αi,ks 2 [0, 1]. As in the
previous section, we assume that all sectors use primary factors in the same way, hence the term
where αi,ks

0 are exogenous technology parameters such that αi,s

Yi in Equation (25). In line with the existing literature, we also assume that entry and exporting
e = c x = c p .19
activities also use intermediate goods in the same proportion as production, ci,s
ii,s
i,s
Under the previous assumptions, Equation (14) now implies

Pij,s
p

2

e j,s Yj
= τ ij,s ci,s 4
x
v j cij,s

! 1 δsσ

where ci,s = ci,s as given by Equation (25); vi

s

3η s
τ ij,s ci,s
5
Pj,s

ri,s Yi
vi ci,s

δs
1 σs

ξ ij,s ,

(26)

Yi /Ri is the ratio of total income to total revenues

in country i; and ei,s and ri,s still denote expenditure and revenue shares, the difference being
that expenditure and revenue are now “gross,” as they include the purchases and sales of both
consumption and intermediate goods. In the absence of intermediate goods we have αi,s = 0 and
vi = 1 for all i and s, so the previous equation reduces to (20).
19 Alternatively

one could assume that entry and exporting activities only use primary factors of production:
x = Y . This assumption, however, immediately creates inconsistencies between the predictions of models
= cii,s
i
of monopolistic competition and our dataset. Given our estimates of the trade elasticities εs , the factor costs associated
with fixed entry and exporting activities is sometimes higher than the total factor costs observed in the data.
e
ci,s

18

Bilateral trade flows now include trade in consumption and intermediate goods. But since both
are combined using the same CES aggregator, Equations (19) and (24), trade flows still satisfy
1 σs
Xij,s = Pij,s /Pj,s
e j,s Ej . Together with Equation (26), this implies the following sector-level
gravity equation:

Xij,s =

τ ij,s ci,s
∑nl=1 τ lj,s cl,s

εs

δs η s

x
cij,s
εs

x
clj,s

ri,s Yi
vi ci,s

δs η s

δs

χij,s

rl,s Yl
vl cl,s

e j,s Ej ,

δs

(27)

χlj,s

ξ 1ij,s σs . One can now follow a similar strategy as in previous sections to show

where again χij,s

that welfare changes associated with a foreign shock are given by

Ĉj =

∏Ss,k=1

λ̂ jj,k

ê j,k
v̂ j

ηk

r̂ j,k
v̂ j

δk

!

β j,s e
a j,sk /εk

,

(28)

where e
a j,sk is the elasticity of the price index in sector s with respect to changes in the price index in

sector k. These price elasticities are given by the elements of the “adjusted Leontief inverse” of the
1

ej
e j matrix given
S) matrix Id A
, with the elements of the A
by the adjusted technology parameters e
α j,sk
α j,sk (1 + δk (1 + η k ) /εk ). Under perfect competi-

input-output matrix, i.e., the (S
ej
A

1

ej
A

1

1

= Id A j
where
A j is the matrix with typical element α j,sk . Under monopolistic competition with intermediate
goods used in entry and exporting activities, however, we need to adjust the technology parameters α j,sk by 1 + (1 + η k ) /εk = 1 + 1/ (σk 1) to take into account that a decline in the price
index of sector s not only decreases the price index of sector k through the standard input-output
channels, but also by lowering fixed entry and exporting costs, thereby increasing the number of
available varieties.
In addition, intermediate goods affects the results derived in Section 3.3 in two important
ways. First, expenditure shares, e j,s , are no longer equal to exogenous consumption shares, β j,s .
Hence, ê j,s may be different from one, which implies that the use of the formula given in Equation
(28) requires either observing ê j,s , after the shock, or predicting it, before the shock. Second, the
η
scale effect term, ê j,k /v̂ j k r̂ j,k /v̂ j , now depends on the change in the ratio of value added to
gross output, v̂ j . Intuitively, under monopolistic competition, welfare depends on entry, which
itself depends on the ratio of revenues to factor prices, v j .
The associated formula for the gains from international trade is obtained from (28) by setting
η k r̂
ê
j,k
λ̂ jj,k = 1/λ jj,k and by solving for v̂j,kj
as we move to autarky. Since e j,k and r j,k are data
v̂ j
tion, Id

is the standard Leontief inverse matrix, i.e., Id

A = r A in autarky, then we just need to solve for e A /v A . In the online Appendix we show
while e j,k
j
j,k
j,k
A /v A = S β a , where a
that this is given by e j,k
∑l =1 j,l j,kl
j,kl are now the elements of the Leontief inverse
j

19

Id

Aj

1

. The gains from trade are then

Gj = 1

∏Ss,k=1

λ jj,k

e j,k
b j,k

ηs

r j,k
b j,k

δk

! β j,s ea j,sk /εk

,

(29)

v j ∑Sl=1 β j,l a j,kl summarizes how intermediate goods affect the magnitude of scale
effects in models with monopolistic competition.

where b j,k

To implement the previous formula using the WIOD data, we compute λ jj,s , R j,s , Ej,s , r j,s , e j,s ,
and β j,s in the exact same way as in Section 3.3. In the raw data, we also observe purchases, Xij,ks ,
of intermediate goods from sector k and country i in sector s and country j. Using those, we can
then compute shares of intermediate purchases α j,ks = ∑i Xij,ks /R j,s and value added by sector as
Yj,s = R j,s ∑k ∑i Xij,ks . In a number of simulations below, we also follow Balistreri, Hillberry,
and Rutherford (2011) and use an alternative measure of shares of intermediate goods, α j,ks =
Ej,k /Ej , when computing gains from trade using Equation (29). Compared
∑k ∑i Xij,ks /R j,s
to the true share, α j,ks , this alternative measure, α j,ks , counterfactually assumes that firms allocate
expenditure on intermediate goods from different sectors in the same proportions, Ej,k /Ej , though
some sectors may have higher shares of intermediate goods, ∑k ∑i Xij,ks /R j,s . We come back to the
benefit of this simplification in a moment.
Columns 4-7 of Table 1 report the gains from trade Gj under different market structures using
Equation (29). Column 4 corresponds to gains from trade under perfect competition, δs = 0 for
all s, using the true intermediate good shares, α j,ks = ∑i Xij,ks /R j,s . We see that predicted gains
from trade are much higher than those predicted by the same models without intermediate goods
(Column 2). For example, the gains from trade for the United States and Spain in Column 4 are
twice as high as those in Column 2, while for Japan the gains increase by a factor of five. One can
think about these results in two ways. First, trade in intermediates leads to a decline in the price of
domestic goods, which implies additional welfare gains. If domestic goods are used as inputs in
domestic production, this triggers additional rounds of productivity gains, leading to even larger
gains; this is the input-output loop often mentioned in the literature.20 Second, for given data on
the share of expenditure on domestic goods, λ jj,s , models featuring intermediate goods necessarily
predicts more trade relative to total income. So, perhaps, it should not be too surprising that the
same models predict that real income increases by more because of trade.
Ideally, one would like to study the predictions of models of monopolistic competition using
the same data on intermediate good shares, α j,ks . Unfortunately, this is not possible in the context
of our dataset since it would lead some of the elements of the adjusted Leontief matrix to become
negative, in which case gains from trade Gj are not well-defined. To understand why this issue
arises, consider a simpler model with monopolistic competition, δs = 1, intermediate goods, αs >
20 A

simple way to illustrate this mechanism is to return to the one-sector model. In the case of perfect competition,
1/ε(1 α)

the formula above becomes Gj = 1
λ jj
; see Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Alvarez and Lucas (2007). Thus
a higher share of intermediate goods, α, leads to higher gains from trade.

20

0, but only one sector, S = 1. In that environment, Equation (29) simplifies to Gj = 1
where e
aj = 1

αj 1 +

1
σ 1

1

. As α j 1 +

1
σ 1

e
a /ε

λ jjj ,

gets close to one, e
a j goes to infinity and real

(σ 1) /σ then the price index, real consumption
and of course Gj are not well-defined. Intuitively, a given increase in the number of varieties leads
to a decline in the price index, which triggers a decline in the cost of entry, which, in turn, leads to a
further increase in the number of varieties. We obtain infinite amplification whenever the share of
intermediates in production, α j , is high relative to the love of variety, 1/ (σ 1). This is precisely
what happens when any of the elements of the adjusted Leontief matrix becomes negative.
To get around this issue, Columns 5-7 report gains from trade using the alternative measure of
intermediate good shares, α j,ks , as in Balistreri, Hillberry, and Rutherford (2011). To make sure that
the difference between models of perfect and monopolistic competition is not being driven by a
different treatment of intermediate goods, Column 5 again reports the gains from trade under perfect competition. The results are very similar whether we use true shares (Column 4) or alternative
shares (Column 5). Column 6 reports gains from trade under monopolistic competition without
firm-level heterogeneity, δs = 1 and η s = 0, whereas Column 7 reports gains under monopolistic
competition with firm-level heterogeneity, δs = 1 and η s > 0. Following Balistreri, Hillberry, and
Rutherford (2011), we set η s = 0.65 for all s.21 In general, gains from trade are slightly higher with
monopolistic than perfect competition. For example, the gains for the US increase from 8% to 8.6%
as we move from Column 5 to Column 6 in Table 1. Across all countries, the average gains increase
from 27.1% to 32.3%. The intuition is simple. When entry activities use intermediate goods, trade
leads to a decline in the cost of entry and hence to an expansion in the variety of goods produced
domestically, bringing about additional welfare gains.
As shown by the results in Column 7, the gains from trade are even higher when we allow
for firm-level heterogeneity. To see why, recall that εs = (σs 1) (1 + η s ), hence if εs = 3.2 (as in
the Chemicals sector), then η s = 0.65 implies σs = 2.9, whereas under the assumption η s = 0 we
would have concluded σs = 4.2. The difference in the implied elasticity of substitution σs between
models with and without firm-level heterogeneity leads to large differences in the magnitude of
the scale effects arising from love of variety. We come back to this issue in more detail in Section
5.3. For now, we merely want to point out that: (i ) welfare calculations are highly sensitive to the
value of this parameter; and (ii ) the reason behind this sensitivity is that conditional on the value
of the trade elasticity εs , the value of η s pins down σs and, in turn, the magnitude of scale effects.
In summary, the introduction of tradable intermediate goods dramatically increases the magnitude of the gains from trade, both under perfect and monopolistic competition. Under the latter
market structure, the scale effects associated with decreases in the price of intermediate goods
are so large that if one were to use the true shares of intermediate purchases across countries and
sectors, α j,ks , rather than a made-up average, α j,ks , one would conclude that for all countries in our
consumption in autarky goes to zero. If α j

21 Balistreri,

Hillberry, and Rutherford (2011) use non-linear least squares to estimate the trade elasticity for manufacturing as a whole (as well as other parameters). Their preferred estimate is ε = 4.58. Following Bernard, Eaton, Jensen,
and Kortum (2003), they set σ = 3.8. Since ε = (σ 1) (1 + η ), these two values imply that η = 0.65. In Section 5.3 we
discuss more direct ways to estimate η s across sectors using firm-level data.

21

dataset, gains from trade cannot be finite.

3.5

Multiple Factors of Production

So far, we have restricted ourselves to gravity models featuring only one factor of production,
or equivalently multiple factors of production that are used in the same proportions in all sectors.
This assumption is formally reflected in the fact that producer prices are proportional to GDP, Yi , in
Equations (20) and (25). In this section we introduce differences in factor intensity across sectors,
as in the extensions of Eaton and Kortum (2002), Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003), and
Melitz (2003) considered by Chor (2010), Burstein and Vogel (2010), and Bernard, Redding, and
Schott (2007), respectively.
For expositional purposes, we restrict ourselves to an economic environment in which there
are only two factors of production, skilled labor and unskilled labor, and no intermediate goods.
Throughout this subsection, we assume that aggregate production functions are CES in all countries and sectors and given by
h
Q j,s = µsH Hj,s

(ρ 1)/ρ

+ µsL L j,s

i
(ρ 1)/ρ ρ/(ρ 1)

,

where Hj,s and L j,s denote total employment of skilled and unskilled workers, respectively, in
country j and sector s; ρ > 0 is the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled labor;
f

H + µ F = 1. In line with
and µ j > 0 determines the intensity of factor f = H, L in sector s, with µ j,s
j,s

the existing literature, we also assume that factors of production have the same share in variable
p

e = cm = c
costs of production as in entry and exporting costs (if any): ci,s
ii,s
i,s

ci,s . Assuming as

above that trade in goods is balanced, Yi = Ri , Equation (20) then generalizes to

Pij,s

2

Ej
= τ ij,s ci,s 4 e j,s x
cij,s

! 1 δsσ

s

3η s
τ ij,s ci,s
5
Pj,s

Yi
ri,s
ci,s

δs
1 σs

ξ ij,s .

(30)

All variables have the same interpretation as in previous sections, except for the fact that unit costs
are now proportional to
ci,s =

µsH

ρ

wiH

1 ρ

+ µsL

ρ

wiL

1 ρ 1/(1 ρ)

,

(31)

where wiH and wiL are the wages of skilled and unskilled workers, respectively, in country i.
As in previous sections, if lower-level utility functions are CES, then gravity holds in this environment. Combining Equations (19) and (30), we get

Xij,s =

τ ij,s ci,s
∑nl=1

τ lj,s cl,s

εs

x
cij,s
εs

x
clj,s

22

δs η s

ri,s cYi,si

δs η s

δs

rl,s cYl,sl

χij,s
δs

χlj,s

e j,s Ej .

For any trade shock, we can normalize factor prices such that Yj = Yj0 . Using this normalization,
we can then express welfare changes as
Ĉj = ∏Ss=1 ĉ j,s

β j,s

β j,s /εs

δs

(1+ η s ) η s
ê j,s r̂ j,s

ĉ j,s

λ̂ jj,s

.

Gains from trade, in turn, are given by
∏Ss=1

Gj = 1

β j,s

A
ĉ j,s

λ jj,s

e j,s
r j,s

(1+ η s )

A
ĉ j,s

δs

! β j,s /εs

,

(32)

A denote the change in production costs between the initial equilibrium and autarky.
where ĉ j,s

Compared to one-factor models, changes in real consumption now also depend on changes in
A . Unrelative factor prices, which affects production costs across sectors, as reflected in ĉ j,s and ĉ j,s

der perfect competition, such changes only affect variable costs of production, whereas under
monopolistic competition, they also affect the fixed costs of exporting and entry and so, the number of available varieties in country j and sector s, as reflected in the extra terms ĉ j,s
A
ĉ j,s

(1+ η s )

(1+ η s )

and

.

In order to compute changes in production costs, one can again use the exact hat algebra introduced in Section 2.2. We illustrate here how this can be done as we move from the initial
equilibrium to autarky, though the same methodology can be applied to any shock. Equation (31)
implies
A
ĉ j,s
f

where ϕ j,s

f

µs

ρ

f

wj

=

1 ρ

H
ϕ j,s

ŵiA,H

1 ρ

+

ϕ Lj,s

ŵiA,L

1 ρ 1/(1 ρ)

,

(33)

1 ρ

/c j,s is the share of total factor spending going to factor f in country

j and sector s in the initial equilibrium. Changes in factor prices, in turn, can be computed by
manipulating the two factor-market clearing conditions:

ŵ jA,H

= ∑Ss=1 h j,s

ŵ jA,L =

S

∑ l j,s

k =1

where h j,s

Hj,s /H and l j,s

0

e j,s
y j,s
e j,s
y j,s

0
B
@

B
@

ŵ jA,H
H
ϕ j,s

H
ϕ j,s

ŵ jA,H

1 ρ

ŵ jA,L
ŵ jA,H

1 ρ

+

+

1

1 ρ

ϕ Lj,s

ŵ jA,L

1 ρ

ϕ Lj,s

ŵ jA,L

C

1 ρA

1
C

1 ρA

,

,

(34)

(35)

L j,s /L denote the share of skilled and unskilled workers, respec-

tively, employed in sector s in country j in the initial equilibrium, and y j,s

Yj,s /Yj denotes the

share of total income earned in sector s in country j. Combining Equations (32)-(35), we can
compute the gains from trade in the multi-factor case.
To implement this new formula, we need additional data on the elasticity of substitution be-

23

tween skilled and unskilled workers, ρ, the share of employment of skilled and unskilled workf

ers across sectors, h j,s and l j,s , and the factor cost shares, ϕ j,s . For simplicity, we assume Cobbf

f

Douglas technologies, i.e., ρ = 1, and common cost shares across countries, i.e., ϕ j,s = ϕs .22
We compute factor cost shares from the NBER manufacturing database that contains information
about employment and average wages for both production and non-production workers in the
United States between 1987 and 2005. Following Berman, Bound, and Griliches (1994), we treat
skilled workers in the model as non-production workers in the data and unskilled workers in the
model as production workers in the data. Given cost shares, employment shares are computed
as h j,s =

ϕsH y j,s
∑k ϕkH y j,k

and l j,s =

ϕsL y j,s
.
∑k ϕkL y j,k

Since we do not have data on cost shares for sectors outside

of manufacturing, we aggregate all non-manufacturing sectors into a single sector which we assume is non-tradable and which has factor cost shares equal to the overall factor cost shares in
manufacturing.
When computing the gains from trade using Equation (32) under the assumption of perfection
competition, δs = 0 for all s, we find gains from trade that are virtually the same as those presented
in Column 2. This reflects the fact that the factor content of trade for skilled and unskilled labor
is basically zero in our dataset. In particular, one can check that under the assumption that proA, f

duction functions are Cobb-Douglas (ρ = 1), we have ŵ j

f

=

∑s e j,s µs

f

∑s y j,s µs

1. At this point, thus, it

does not appear that, conditional on observed trade flows, allowing for standard Heckscher-Ohlin
forces has large effects on the magnitude of the gains from trade.
An attractive feature of multi-factor gravity models is that they provide a theoretical framework to explore quantitatively the distributional consequences of globalization. Using Equations

(34) and (35), one could easily compute the change in the skill premium associated with international trade. One caveat, however, is that multi-factor gravity models considered here implicitly
rule out differences in factor intensity across firms within the same sector. As discussed in Burstein
and Vogel (2010), more productive firms tend to be more skill intensive in practice, which opens
up a new channel through which trade liberalization may contribute to an increase in inequality
by leading to the exit of the least efficient firms. Burstein and Vogel (2010) find that this “skillbiased” mechanism is quantitatively more important than the Heckscher-Ohlin mechanism. Another caveat is that models in this section abstract from trade in capital goods. Given the existence
of capital-skill complementarity, this is another channel through which trade may affect inequality.
This issue is explored quantitatively in Burstein, Cravino, and Vogel (2011) and Parro (2012).

3.6

Other Extensions

Non-CES Utility. Although gravity models reviewed so far differ in terms of their supply-side
assumptions, they all share the same demand structure. Starting with the Armington model presented in Section 2, all models features representative agents with (nested) CES utility. A non22 We have explored the sensitivity of our results to the assumption of Cobb-Douglas technologies for the United
States. Following Katz and Murphy (1992), we have set ρ = 1.4 rather than ρ = 1 and recomputed Gj using Equation
(32). The results are basically unchanged.

24

trivial cost of this assumption is that implies constant markups across firms under monopolistic
competition. Hence, the “pro-competitive” effects of trade under this market structure, namely the
idea that welfare gains from trade may be larger because of their effects on firm-level markups, are
de facto ruled out. In this final subsection, we briefly discuss recent work that has tried to incorporate these considerations into otherwise standard quantitative trade models with monopolistic
competition.
The three main alternatives to CES utility in trade models are: (i ) separable, but non-CES
utility functions, as in the pioneering work of Krugman (1979); (ii ) a quadratic, but non-separable
utility function, as in Melitz and Ottaviano (2008); and (iii ) a translog expenditure function, as in
Feenstra (2003). In Arkolakis, Costinot, Donaldson, and Rodriguez-Clare (2012), the authors start
from a general demand system that encompasses all three alternatives.
Under the assumptions that there exists a finite reservation price for all varieties; that there
are no fixed exporting costs; and that the distribution of firm-level productivity is Pareto, they
show that, in spite of variable markups, trade flows satisfy the same gravity equation (16) as in
models with CES utility. In this situation, one can use the exact hat algebra to show that the macrolevel predictions of non-CES models regarding the consequences of trade liberalization—namely,
the predictions regarding the effects of changes in trade costs on wages and trade flows—are the
same as in quantitative trade models with CES utility functions discussed in Section 3.1.
Although the predictions regarding trade flows and wages of CES and non-CES model considered in Arkolakis, Costinot, Donaldson, and Rodriguez-Clare (2012) are equivalent, their welfare
predictions are not. The gains from trade liberalization, in particular, may be larger or smaller
depending on whether they trigger factor reallocations towards goods exhibiting larger or smaller
markups, respectively. In the data, the authors find slightly smaller gains from trade liberalization
using models with variable markups.
A potentially fruitful alternative to studying the pro-competitive effects of trade consists in
departing from monopolistic competition, while maintaining CES. As already discussed in Section 3.1, the model with Bertrand competition developed by Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum
(2003) leads to the exact same predictions as one-sector gravity models with perfect and monopolistic competition, though alternative assumptions about the distribution of firm-level productivity may lead to different results; see de Blas and Russ (2010) and Holmes, Hsu, and Lee (2010).
In recent work, Edmond, Midrigan, and Xu (2011) have used the model with Cournot competition developed by Atkeson and Burstein (2008) to study the magnitude of the gains from trade
in economies with variable markups. When calibrating this model using data on manufacturing
Taiwanese firms, they find large gains from trade, though the numbers vary depending on assumptions made on the correlation of productivity between Taiwanese and non-Taiwanese firms.
Multinational Production. In all the models reviewed so far, firms serve foreign markets exclusively through exports. In practice, however, a large share of foreign sales are done by foreign
affiliates of multinational firms.
Ramondo and Rodríguez-Clare (2013) extend the perfectly competitive framework of Eaton
25

and Kortum (2002) so that the technological know-how from a given country can be used to produce elsewhere, albeit perhaps at a cost. The cost of using local technologies abroad limits the
extent of multinational production in the same way as iceberg trade costs limits the extent of international trade in gravity models. They explore how the substitutability and complementarity
forces between trade and multinational production affect the magnitude of the gains from trade
and the gains from openness more broadly defined. Their calibrated model implies that the gains
from trade can be twice as high as the gains calculated in trade-only models.23
Arkolakis, Ramondo, Rodriguez-Clare, and Yeaple (2012) extend the monopolistically competitive framework of Melitz (2003) to allow firms to serve foreign markets by exporting from their
home country or by setting up foreign affiliates. In this environment, a gravity equation akin to
Equation (5) still holds for the sales by firms from a particular origin, i.e., for the sales in country j of goods produced in country i by affiliates of firms from country l. Given data on bilateral
trade and multinational production flows (i.e., the value of production by firms from i in country
l, independently of where the goods are sold), they show how their model can be used to conduct
counterfactual experiments using the exact hat algebra of Section 2.2.

4

Evaluating Trade Policy

In this section we go from changes in iceberg trade costs to changes in trade policy, namely import
tariffs. For expositional purposes, we first go back to the simple Armington model presented in
Section 2 and describe the welfare implications of tariff changes in that environment. Like in Section 3, we then study how these predictions vary across different gravity models. We conclude by
discussing issues of aggregation in the presence of heterogeneous tariffs across sectors. Throughout this section we modify our WIOD data such that, in line with the static models that we study,
overall trade is balanced country-by-country; see online Appendix for details. We tackle the issue
of trade imbalances explicitly in Section 5.1.

4.1

Back to Armington

Consider a world economy similar to the one presented in Section 2.1. Compared to our earlier
analysis, trade flows may now be subject to import tariffs so that Equation (3) generalizes to
Pij = Yi τ ij 1 + tij /Qi ,
where Yi denotes factor income in country i, i.e. GDP net of tariff revenues, and tij

(36)
0 denotes the

ad-valorem tariff imposed by country j on goods from country i. In the rest of this section, we let
φij

τ ij 1 + tij denote the total trade costs between country i and j. Given CES utility, the value

23 In

related work, Ramondo (2012) adapts the framework of Eaton and Kortum (2002) to environments with multinational production but no trade. She derives a gravity equation for multinational production flows and computes the
associated gains. Burstein and Monge-Naranjo (2009), Prescott and McGrattan (2010), and Garetto (2012) also quantify
the gains from multinational production, albeit in models without a gravity equation for multinational production.

26

of bilateral trade flows (inclusive of tariffs) are thus given by the following gravity equation:
ε

Yi φij

Xij =

χij

Ej .

ε

∑nl=1 Yl φlj

(37)

χlj
t

ij
∑in=1 1+tij Xij
denotes total tariff revenues in country j, whereas the good market clearing condition requires

In the presence of import tariffs, budget balance now requires Ej = Yj + Tj , where Tj

Yi = ∑nj=1 1+1tij Xij . Together with Equation (37), these two conditions lead to the following generalization of Equation (6):
Yi = ∑nj=1

ε

Yi φij
∑nl=1

χij

Yj
,
1 πj

ε

Yl φlj

χlj

(38)

ε

(Yi φij ) χij
where π j
2 (0, 1) denotes the share of tariff revenues in country j’s total
ε
n
∑l =1 (Yl φlj ) χlj
expenditure. This completes the description of a competitive equilibrium withnimport
o tariffs.
0
0
Now consider an arbitrary change in import tariffs from t
tij to t
tij . To compute
tij
∑in=1 1+tij

proportional changes in factor income, Ŷ

Ŷi , we can again use the exact hat algebra. Following

the same steps as in Section 2.2, we get

Ŷj Yj = ∑in=1

ε

λ ji Ŷj φ̂ ji
∑nl=1 λli Ŷl φ̂li

ε

Ŷi Yi
,
1 π i0

(39)

where the share of tariff revenues in the counterfactual equilibrium is itself given by

π i0 = ∑nj=1

t0ji

λ ji Ŷj φ̂ ji

1 + t0ji ∑n

l =1

λli Ŷl φ̂li

Combining the two previous expressions we can solve for Ŷ

ε
ε.

(40)

Ŷi (up to a normalization). Al-

though the previous system of equations is not quite as compact as Equation(11), it still does not
depend directly on preference shifters, endowments, or trade costs. All we need to determine
changes in factor income levels, Ŷi , are the initial expenditure shares, λij , the initial factor income
levels, Yi , and the trade elasticity, ε. Like in Section 2.2, once changes in tariff income are known,
we can compute changes in expenditure shares using the gravity equation (37),

λ̂ij =

Ŷi φ̂ij

ε

∑nl=1 λlj Ŷl φ̂lj

ε.

Finally, to compute the welfare change caused by the change in import tariff, we can start from

27

Equation (9). Integrating and taking into account the fact that Ej = Yj / 1
Ĉj =

1
1

πj
π 0j

!

λ̂ jj

1/ε

π j , we obtain

.

(41)

where the share of tariff revenues in the initial and counterfactual equilibria are given by π j =
∑in=1

tij
1+tij λij

and π 0j = ∑in=1

tij0
λ λ̂ ,
1+tij0 ij ij

respectively.24 Like in Section 2.2, welfare changes can

be computed using only a few sufficient statistics. One does not need to estimate all structural
parameters of the model to estimate the welfare effect of an arbitrary tariff change.
We start by considering the welfare effects of a change in tariffs imposed by a single country,
i.e., a unilateral change in tariffs. For simplicity, we assume that import tariffs are equal to zero
in the initial equilibrium, tij = 0 for all i and j. This is not a bad approximation for most OECD
countries today, where tariff revenues are a negligible share of GDP.25 We consider a counterfactual
equilibrium in which a single country j imposes a uniform tariff on all its trading partners, i.e. tij0 =
t > 0 for all i 6= j. All other structural parameters are held fixed between the initial equilibrium

and the counterfactual equilibrium.

In Figure 1, we plot the welfare change associated with a unilateral tariff of t% for j =United
States, France, Portugal, and Ireland under the assumption that the trade elasticity ε is equal to 5.
For each counterfactual exercise, we first compute proportional income changes using Equation

(39) and (40) and then, for each country j, welfare changes using Equation (41).
A few features of Figure 1 stand out. First, we see that for all countries, the optimal tariff is
around 20%. This should not be surprising. In the two-country case, we know from the work of
Gros (1987)—see also Helpman and Krugman (1989), Chapter 7—that the optimal tariff in country j is equal to t j = 1/ ελ jj , where λ jj denotes the share of expenditure in the rest of the world
on goods produced in the rest of the world. For all countries, one should expect λ jj to be very
close to one in practice. So 1/ε = 20% provides a good approximation of what the optimal tariff
should be. Second, we see that the potential gains from trade protection are modest, but nontrivial. At the optimal tariff, they range from 0.3% for the United States to 1.3% for Ireland. To put
these numbers in perspective, note that the overall gains from trade predicted by the Armington
model for these two countries are 1.8% and 8%, respectively; see Table 1 Column 1. Third, smaller
countries that gain more from trade also gain more from optimal trade protection. Here, although
smaller countries have less ability to manipulate their terms-of-trade, they benefit disproportionately more from an improvement in their terms-of-trade.26 Finally, we see that the range over
1 π j λ1/ε
(41) implies that, with tariffs, the gains from trade are given by Gj = 1
jj . This generalizes Equation (12) to environments in which the share of tariff revenues in total expenditure, π j , is non-zero. See
Felbermayr, Jung, and Larch (2013) for a discussion of the role of tariff revenues on the gains from trade.
25 For example, in 2005 revenues as a share of GDP were 0.25%, 0.20%, and 0.36% for Canada, the United States and
Mexico, respectively. Developed countries in general have tariff revenue shares of 0.2% or less. Tariff revenues are more
important for developing countries. For example, they were 1.8% of GDP in India in 2004. Other prominent examples
of high tariff revenues are Russia (3.16%) and China (0.84%), both in the year 2000 – before they joined the WTO.
26 In general, one would expect gains from trade protection to have an inverted-U shape as a function of country size,
since gains from applying an optimal tariff must go to zero as countries become either infinitesimally small or infinitely
24 Equation

28

1.015
USA
France
Portugal
Ireland

Welf are changes relat ive t o 0% t arif f regime

1.01

1.005

1

0.995

0.99

0.985

0.98

0.975

0

10

20

30

40

50
Tariff, %

60

70

80

90

100

Figure 1: Welfare changes associated with a unilateral tariff in the country imposing the tariff.
Trade elasticity ε = 5. Data are from WIOD in 2008.
which trade protection is welfare-improving is large. For all four countries, import tariffs up to
50% are found to increase real consumption relative to free trade.
Up to this point, we have only focused on welfare changes in the country imposing the import
tariff. We now turn to the effects on the rest of the world. We restrict ourselves to a counterfactual
scenario in which the United States unilaterally imposes an import tariff of 40% on all its trading
0
partners, tiUS
= 0.4 for all i 6=United States. This is close to the tariff level observed in the United

States in the late 19th and early 20th century; see e.g. Irwin (1998). The welfare changes caused
by the 40% tariff in each trading partner of the United States are reported in Column 1 of Table 2.
The striking feature of these numbers is that in spite of the fact that the United States is the largest
country in the world (in terms of GDP) and that 40% is a large tariff by historical standards, the
impact on the rest of the world is small. On average, real consumption goes down by 0.2%. The
only two exceptions are Canada and Mexico, which incur loses of 1.2% and 1.1%, respectively.

The previous counterfactual exercise may mask the true cost of trade protection if other countries retaliate by increasing their own import tariffs. A very crude way to assess the quantitative
importance of trade wars is to consider a counterfactual scenario in which all countries, rather
than one, impose a 40% import tariff on all their trading partners. The associated welfare changes
are reported in Column 5 of Table 2. On average, countries experience losses of 2.3%. The biggest
loser is Ireland ( 4.4%) while the country that loses the least is the United States ( 0.8%). In this
particular counterfactual scenario, no country wins the trade war, though the largest country in
the world is the one that loses the least.
While the previous numbers are illustrative, a more satisfactory way to study the consequences
large. Figure 1 suggests that countries in our dataset are sufficiently large that they are on the declining segment of this
curve.

29

of trade wars is to solve for the Nash equilibrium of a non-cooperative tariff game. As demonstrated in Ossa (2011b), one can still do so using the exact hat algebra. The only difference between
this analysis and the one presented in this section is that proportional changes in trade costs, φ̂ij ,
are no longer exogenously given, but correspond to the best-response of each country to the vector
of import tariffs chosen by its trading partner. Using a multi-sector gravity model with monopolistic competition and estimates of trade elasticities from Broda and Weinstein (2006), Ossa (2011b)
finds Nash tariffs around 60% around the world. Ossa finds that the associated welfare loss associated with going from the current, observed equilibrium to the counterfactual Nash equilibrium
is equal to 3.5% on average.

4.2

Alternative Gravity Models Revisited

In the previous subsection we have focused on the predictions of a simple Armington model. We
now go back the main gravity models considered in Sections 3.2, 3.3, and 3.4 to see how multiple
sectors, intermediate goods, and monopolistic competition affect these predictions. For expositional purposes, we restrict ourselves to counterfactual scenarios in which tariffs are common
across sectors. We discuss the specific issues associated with heterogeneity in tariffs in the next
subsection.
We start by allowing for multiple sectors and intermediate goods, in the exact same way as in
Sections 3.3 and 3.4, while retaining the assumption of perfect competition, δs = 0 for all s. As in
Section 4.1, we assume that all tariffs are zero in the initial equilibrium. Columns 2 and 4 in Table
2 report the welfare effects of a unilateral 40% tariff imposed by the United States on all its trading
partner in all sectors. Column 2 corresponds to the predictions of the multi-sector model without
intermediate goods, α j,s = 0, whereas Column 4 corresponds to the predictions with intermediate
goods, α j,s > 0.27 Columns 6 and 7 show the analogous results when the 40% tariff is imposed
uniformly by all countries around the world. For both counterfactual scenarios, welfare changes
are computed using the exact-hat algebra as we did in the case of the simple Armington model.
Moving from a one-sector to a multi-sector model has ambiguous effects on the welfare losses
from a tariff; for many countries we actually see smaller losses. For example, the welfare losses in
China from the 40% worldwide tariff fall from 1.6% in the one-sector model (Column 5) to 0.4% in
the multi-sector model (Column 6). On average, welfare losses go from 2.3% (Column 5) to 1.4%
(Column 6). Although we know from the results of Section 3.3 that a prohibitive tariff should lead
to higher welfare losses when there are multiple-sectors, we see that even for tariffs as high as 40%
worldwide, this is not the case. Thus one should be careful when extrapolating from the autarky
exercises of Section 3 to richer comparative static exercises. Models that point towards larger gains
from trade liberalization for one counterfactual scenario may very well lead to smaller gains from
trade liberalization for another.
In contrast, allowing for intermediate goods significantly amplifies the losses generated by
27 In

the latter case, shares of intermediate goods are computed as α j,ks = ∑k ∑i Xij,ks /R j,s

30

Ej,k /Ej .

tariffs for all countries, echoing the results of Section 3.4. Canada now experiences a welfare loss
of 2.2% (Column 4) rather than 1.2% (Column 2) as a consequence of the 40% tariff imposed by
the United States, while average losses are now 0.33% (Column 4) rather than 0.14% (Column 2).
A worldwide tariff of 40% now leads to losses in Belgium of 6.8% (Column 7) rather than 2.63%
(Column 6). On average, allowing for intermediate goods leads to welfare losses of 3.5% (Column
7) rather than 1.4% (Column 6).
We next study how market structure affects the welfare effects of a worldwide tariffs of 40%.
As explained in Section 3, moving from perfect to monopolistic competition introduces scale effects, which complicates the computation of counterfactual equilibria with tariffs. To ease the
computational burden, we use a coarser version of our dataset in all the exercises that follow.
Specifically, we aggregate the set of countries in the WIOD into 10 regions and 16 sectors (15 tradable sectors and 1 non-tradable sector). Using this coarser dataset, we compare the predictions of
gravity models under the assumption of: (i ) perfect competition; (ii ) monopolistic competition
without firm-level heterogeneity, as in Krugman (1980); and (iii ) monopolistic competition with
firm-level heterogeneity, as in Melitz (2003).28 In the case of models with monopolistic competition with firm-level heterogeneity, counterfactual predictions depend on whether fixed exporting
costs are paid in the importing country or exporting country and whether import tariffs are imposed before or after firm-level markups. In what follows we assume that fixed exporting costs
are paid in the exporting country, cijx = Yi , and that tariffs are imposed before markups; see online
Appendix for details.29
Columns 1 to 3 of Table 3 present results for the model without intermediates, as in Section 3.3,
while Columns 4 to 6 present results for the model with intermediates, as in Section 3.4. Under
perfect competition without intermediate goods (Column 1 in Table 3), the welfare losses associated with a 40% worldwide tariff are lower than before (Column 6 in Table 2). This reflects the
fact that, by construction, tariffs are now forced to be zero within regions. Column 2 of Table
3 shows the analogous results under monopolistic competition without firm-level heterogeneity.
As in Section 3.3, the differences between perfect and monopolistic competition arise because of
sector-level scale effects triggered by trade protection. All regions now have larger losses from
the tariffs, except Eastern Europe and the Rest of the World. Finally, Column 3 of Table 3 shows
the results under monopolistic competition with firm-level heterogeneity. We see that all regions
have slightly lower welfare losses than in the absence of firm-level heterogeneity. One potential
explanation is that the introduction of tariffs leads to an increase in the ratio of expenditures—
which include tariff revenues—to factor prices. This tends to increase the set of varieties available
28 For

computational reasons, we assume that the petroleum sector (s = 8) is perfectly competitve in all three cases.
Formally, in case (ii ) we set η s = 0 for all s and δs = 1 for all s 6= 8 and δs = 0 for s = 8, whereas in case (iii ) we set
η s = 0.65 for all s and δs = 1 for all s 6= 8 and δs = 0 for s = 8.
29 When tariffs are imposed before markups, they act as “cost-shifters.” Under this assumption, the elasticity of bilateral trade flows with respect to tariffs and iceberg trade costs coincide. When tariffs are imposed after markups, they
act as “demand-shifters.” Under this assumption, the elasticity with respect to tariffs is equal to ε + η rather than ε; see
online Appendix and Felbermayr, Jung, and Larch (2013). Since there is little empirical evidence to help us discriminate
between these two cases, we prefer working under the assumption that there is only one elasticity.

31

to consumers when a tariff is imposed in models with firm-level heterogeneity through selection
effects. Since consumers love variety, this tends to reduce the welfare losses associated with a tariff
in such models.
How are the previous results affected by the introduction of intermediate goods? We again
find that tariffs lead to larger welfare losses in models with monopolistic competition. Moving
from Column 4 to Column 5 in Table 3, the losses from the tariff for Western Europe and North
America increase from 1.7% to 10.0% and from 1.2% to 1.7%, respectively. Allowing for firm-level
heterogeneity (Column 6 in Table 3) leads to even larger welfare losses. The effect is particularly
pronounced for China, whose losses almost triple from 14.5% to 40%. The average welfare losses
without China increase from 6.3% to 7.9%. Like in Section 3.4, this reflects stronger scale effects
under models of monopolistic competition with firm-level heterogeneity.
In recent work Balistreri, Hillberry, and Rutherford (2011) have compared the predictions of
a multi-sector Armington model with intermediate goods to those of a multi-sector Melitz (2003)
model with intermediate goods. To compare the two models, they first estimate the structural
parameters of the Melitz (2003) model using non-linear least squares and investigate the welfare
consequences of a 50% reduction in observed tariffs. They then ask what the welfare consequences
of the same tariff change would have been in an Armington model calibrated using the same
elasticity of substitution between goods (but different trade elasticities) and the same variable
trade costs. They find gains from 50% reduction in tariffs that are four times larger according
to the Melitz (2003) model and conclude that it is important to add firm-level heterogeneity to
standard quantitative trade models.
The similarity between the quantitative results of Balistreri, Hillberry, and Rutherford (2011)
and those presented in Table 3 notwithstanding, there are some important methodological differences. In order to demonstrate the importance of firm-level heterogeneity, Balistreri, Hillberry,
and Rutherford (2011) compare Armington to Melitz (2003). Here we compare Krugman (1980) to
Melitz (2003). To us the latter comparison is preferable to the former since comparing Armington
and Melitz (2003) makes it impossible to separate the role of monopolistic competition from the
role of firm-level heterogeneity. The results of Table 3 illustrate the importance of this distinction
both qualitatively and quantitatively. When comparing Columns 1 and 3, one would conclude
that gains from trade liberalization are larger in models with firm-level heterogeneity. Yet comparing Columns 2 and 3, we see that the average welfare loss would be even higher in the absence
of firm-level heterogeneity. Similarly, when comparing Columns 4 and 6, one would conclude that
average welfare losses are four times as large. Yet the relevant comparison, Column 5 to Column
6, suggests less dramatic differences, with average welfare losses going from 7.1% to 11.1%.
The more substantial methodological difference comes from how we calibrate the models
whose predictions we want to compare. In Balistreri, Hillberry, and Rutherford (2011), different models do not match the same set of moments, including the trade elasticity. In this chapter,
they do. Our view is that whether or not one wants to “recalibrate” models depends on why one
is interested in comparing the predictions of different models in the first place.

32

The thought experiment that motivates us can be sketched as follows. Consider two trade
economists trying to predict the welfare effects of the same tariff change. Both economists have
access to the same trade data in 2008, but the first-one has been trained in the 1980s and thinks
that Krugman (1980) is a useful approximation of the world economy, whereas the second has
been trained in the 2000s and thinks that Melitz (2003) is. We want to know whether conditional on
the same trade data, the forecasts of the first and second economists would differ. When comparing
one model to another, we therefore recalibrate all structural parameters so that each models fits
the same cross-section of bilateral trade flows and trade elasticity.
The thought experiment behind the results of Balistreri, Hillberry, and Rutherford (2011) is
implicitly different. The idea is to start with one economist, trained in the 2000s, ask for her forecast of the effects of trade policy in 2008 and then ask whether she would have made a different
forecast in a counterfactual world without firm-level heterogeneity. This is why Balistreri, Hillberry,
and Rutherford (2011) first structurally estimate a Melitz (2003) model and then “turn off” heterogeneity across firms (among other things).
So which of these two thought experiments is more useful? If the question is how the Melitz
(2003) model has changed the evaluation of trade policy, we think that the first thought experiment
is the appropriate one and that comparing Column 2 to Column 3 or Column 5 to Column 6
in Table 3 is the right way to go. In contrast, if one is interested in decomposing the results of
Columns 3 or 6 so that one can quantify the role of heterogeneity for welfare within the Melitz
(2003) model, then the second thought experiment is more useful.

4.3

Heterogeneous Tariffs

In practice, tariffs are not uniform across sectors within the same country. This raises a number of
questions: Does heterogeneity in tariffs raise the cost of trade protection in the country imposing
the tariffs? If so, is this also true in the countries facing the tariffs? In theory, what is the “right”
way to measure the restrictiveness of trade policy when trade policy is a multi-dimensional object?
Let us start by focusing on the first two questions. We use the simplest model in which these
questions can be addressed: a multi-sector gravity model without intermediate goods and with
perfect competition. Thus the assumptions are the same as in Section 3.3 with δs = 0 for all s. We
again consider the counterfactual scenario in which only one country, the United States, imposes
0
the same tariffs, tiUS,s
= ts , on all its trading partners. But we now allow tariffs to vary across

sectors s. Namely, we assume that ts = t + ∆s , where ∆s 2 f a, ag is randomly drawn across
sectors. Draws of a and a have equal probabilities so that the expected value of the tariff is t
in each sector. In the simulations below we draw the vector ∆

(∆1 , ∆2 , ..., ∆S ) 1,000 times and

report the average results for Ĉj across all these draws.
In Columns 2 and 3 of Table 2 we report the welfare change associated with a counterfactual
scenario in which t = 0.4 and a = 0 and a = 0.2, respectively. Thus, the expected tariff is 40% in
both cases, but there is dispersion in the U.S. tariff across sectors in Column 3 and no dispersion
in Column 2. Specifically, in Column 3, some sectors face a 20% import tariffs, whereas others face
33

1.005
Uniform US tariff
Heterogeneous US tariffs around 40% mean

Welf are changes relat ive t o 0% t arif f regime

1.004

1.003

1.002

← 8.5%

1.001

← 69%

1

0.999

0.998

0.997

0

20

40

60

80

100
US tariff, %

120

140

160

180

200

Figure 2: Welfare changes in the United States associated with a unilateral U.S. tariff with and
without dispersion across sectors. ∆ = 0.4 in the case with dispersion. Sector-level trade elasticities are from Caliendo and Parro (2010). Data are from WIOD in 2008.
a 60% tariff. Comparing Columns 2 and 3 we see that introducing dispersion leads to a decline
in the welfare gain from imposing tariffs in the United States from 0.4% to 0.3%. Although there
is no systematic relationship between tariff dispersion and welfare, as discussed in Anderson and
Neary (2005), these two numbers resonate well with a simple partial equilibrium intuition. If the
welfare distortions associated with a tariff are given by the “triangle” below the import demand
curve, then holding the average import tariff fixed, an increase in dispersion should tend to lower
welfare, which is what happens in this example. By comparing Columns 2 and 3 in Table 2, we
also see that other countries are actually better off when the there is dispersion in the US tariff. For
example, Canada’s welfare loss from the U.S. tariff falls from 1.2% to 1%, while Mexico’s losses
fall from 0.9% to 0.7%. Intuitively, expenditure functions are concave in prices. So if dispersion in
U.S. tariffs also increases dispersion in the price of U.S. goods abroad, this should tend to reduce
expenditure and, in turn, increase welfare abroad.
To conclude, let us go back to the issue of how to measure the restrictiveness of trade policy when trade policy is a multi-dimensional object. Anderson and Neary (2005) propose the
following two-step approach. First, ask: What is the welfare loss associated with a vector of heterogeneous tariffs in the country imposing those tariffs? Second, compute the uniform tariff across
sectors that would lead to the same welfare loss. This number is what Anderson and Neary (2005)
refer to as the Trade Restrictiveness Index (TRI). One way to compute this index is to estimate import demand elasticities and use linear approximations; see e.g. Feenstra (1995) and Kee, Nicita,
and Olarreaga (2008). An alternative is to use the full structure of the model. We now do so again
for the case above with t = 0.4 and a = 0.2. From Table 2 Column 2, we know that the welfare
change in the United States is 0.27%. The Trade Restrictiveness Index can then be read off Figure
34

2, which is the counterpart of Figure 1 in the multi-sector case. In this particular example, there
are two values of the TRI: 8.5% and 69%. The non-uniqueness of the TRI reflects the importance
of general equilibrium effects in gravity models.

5
5.1

Numbers We Can Believe In?
Sensitivity to Auxiliary Assumptions

In Sections 3 and 4 we have studied how different assumptions about technology and market
structure may affect the welfare consequences of trade liberalization. This exercise already gives
us a sense of the sensitivity of the counterfactual predictions of gravity models to a set of key
economic assumptions. Here we go one step further by exploring how apparently innocuous
auxiliary assumptions may also have large implications for counterfactual analysis.
Nature of Trade Imbalances. All models reviewed in this chapter are static models that aim
to capture the long-run consequences of trade liberalization. Given their static nature, all these
models predict that trade should be balanced country-by-country. In practice, it is not. Volumes
of intertemporal trade are substantial: some countries, like the United States, run large currentaccount deficits, whereas others, like China, run large current-account surpluses. To deal with
trade imbalances in the context of a static model, the standard approach consists in modelling
trade deficits and surpluses as lump-sum transfers between countries; see e.g. Dekle, Eaton, and
Kortum (2008). Short of a dynamic theory of trade imbalances, in which today’s trade deficits are
paid back by future trade surpluses, the researcher interested in the effects of a change in trade
policy has to assume that these lump-sum transfers remain “unchanged” between the initial and
the counterfactual equilibrium.
An obvious question when adopting the previous approach is: “unchanged” compared to
what? When thinking about the U.S. deficit, for instance, should one hold its value fixed relative
to U.S. GDP or World GDP to mention only two of the most natural alternatives? To get a sense of
the importance of these considerations, let us go back to the Armington model with import tariffs
considered in Section 4.1. In the presence of trade imbalances across countries, the equilibrium
condition (38) generalizes to

Yi = ∑nj=1

where D j

Ej

Yi φij
∑nl=1

Yl φlj

ε

χij
ε

χlj

Yj + D j
,
κj

(42)

Yj + Tj denotes the trade deficit in country j. The two assumptions mentioned

above about the nature of trade imbalances correspond to D j = { j Yj and D j = { j ∑in=1 Yi , respectively, where { j is treated as an exogenous structural parameter that determines the magnitude of
lump-sum transfers across countries.
Starting from Equation (42) and some assumption about how trade deficits relate to factor
35

Welf are Changes wit h Deficits Proport ional t o Domestic GDP

1.06

GRC

1.04

ROM
PRT
ESP
TUR
USA

1.02

IND

1

FRA
MEX
ITA
BRA
JPN
POL
GBR

CHN

0.98

0.96

RUS

AUS
SVN
IDN
CAN
KOR

ROW

FIN
HUN
SVK
CZE
DEUSWE AUT
DNK
BEL
TWN

NLD
IRL

0.94

0.94

0.96
0.98
1
1.02
Welfare Changes with Deficits Proportional to World GDP

1.04

1.06

Figure 3: Welfare changes associated with a 40% tariff around the world when deficits are proportional to World GDP (x-axis) and domestic GDP (y-axis). Trade elasticity ε = 5. Data are from
WIOD in 2008.
incomes, either D j = { j Yj or D j = { j ∑in=1 Yi , one can conduct counterfactual analysis using the
exact hat algebra, as we did in Section 4.1. In Figure 3, we plot the welfare changes associated
with 40% import tariffs imposed around the world under the assumption that D j = { j Yj (x-axis)
and D j = { j ∑in=1 Yi (y-axis). The correlation between the two measures is equal to 0.86. Not surprisingly, the biggest discrepancies between the two numbers come from countries running large
trade deficits, like Greece or Romania, or large trade surpluses, like Ireland and the Netherlands.30
It is worth pointing out, however, that both sets of results differ from the numbers presented
in Section 4.1 in which we had removed trade imbalances before analyzing the consequences of
a worldwide tariff. The correlation between either one of the two measures presented here and
the results of Section 4.1 is 0.57. This discrepancy is caused by larger terms-of-trade improvements for countries that maintain large trade deficits. Intuitively, as tariffs increase, consumers
have incentives to substitute away from foreign goods towards domestic goods. Thus, in order
to maintain trade deficits “unchanged” in the counterfactual equilibrium, domestic prices must
increase relative to the price of foreign goods.
Nature of Physical Capital. In earlier sections we have implicitly treated physical capital as a
primary factor of production whose endowment is fixed and unaffected by trade. Alternatively,
one could think of physical capital as capital goods that, like other intermediate goods, are traded
internationally; see e.g. Eaton and Kortum (2001). To get a sense of how important this assumption
30 While

this example illustrates the potential sensitivity of quantitative predictions to ad-hoc assumptions about
the nature of trade imbalances, it should be clear that the importance of these considerations depends, in general,
on the variable of interest, the underlying model, and the nature of the counterfactual exercise. For instance, when
the counterfactual exercise consists in moving to autarky under perfect competition, changes in real factor income are
unaffected by the size and nature of transfers across countries.

36

on the nature of physical capital could be, we come back to the model of Section 3.4 with multiple
sectors, tradable intermediate goods, and perfect competition. Compared to the analysis of Section
3.4, the only difference is that we adjust value-added shares in the data so that the (presumed) one
third share of capital in value added is distributed proportionally among intermediate goods from
0
all industries. Formally, we adjust shares by setting αi,ks
= αi,ks 1 +

1 1 αi,s
3 αi,s

. By construction, the
0 =
αi,s

2
3

(1 αi,s ).
When physical capital is treated as another tradable intermediate goods, the amplification effect
from the input-output loop discussed in Section 3.4 is now stronger, and the gains are larger. Using
again WIOD data from 2008, we find that average gains from trade are equal to 34.6% compared
to 26.9% when physical capital is assumed to be immobile across countries. For example, gains
from trade in Canada are now 36.9% rather than 30.2%, and in the United States they are 11.3%
rather than 8.3%.
new value added share is therefore two thirds of the one reported in the data: 1

5.2

Goodness of Fit

One way to try to build confidence in the predictions of gravity models is to assess whether they
can match cross-sectional or time-series evidence on bilateral trade flows.
Cross-sectional Evidence. A standard practice in the literature consists in assuming first that iceberg trade costs τ are deterministic functions of various observables such as physical distance
between country i and country j, whether country i and j share a common border or language,
or whether they are part of a regional trade agreement or a monetary union. Once trade cost
functions—together with other structural parameters of the model—have been estimated or calibrated, one can assess the goodness of fit of the gravity model by comparing trade flows predicted
by the model to those that are observed in the data; see e.g. Di Giovanni and Levchenko (2009),
Waugh (2010), and Fieler (2011).
The empirical fit of gravity models tends to be very good; see Anderson (2010). It is not clear,
however, whether this should make us very confident in the counterfactual predictions of these
models. If iceberg trade costs τ are used as free parameters, then gravity models can replicate
any cross-section of bilateral trade flows, X. Thus, one way to interpret the good fit of the gravity
models under particular restrictions on the structure of iceberg trade costs is that these restricted
trade costs are good proxies of the “wedges” that are necessary for the model to match the data.
An alternative strategy, in the spirit of the test of Heckscher-Ohlin-Theorem in Trefler (1993), is
to infer from the trade data the iceberg trade costs such that gravity models fit perfectly and then
check whether the inferred iceberg trade costs match observable measures of trade costs such as
tariffs and freight costs or price gaps (which should reflect trade costs under perfect competition).
An issue with this approach is that one cannot separately identify iceberg trade costs from countryspecific biases in preferences in the model. If “wedges” only match observed measures of trade
costs very imperfectly, should we conclude that there is a problem with the model or that biases
in preferences are important?

37

In recent work, Anderson and Yotov (2012) propose to test gravity models by focusing on
the restrictions that it imposes on the relationship between exporter- and importer-fixed effects
in equation (13), whatever the structure of iceberg trade costs may be. Another possible strategy
to assess the goodness of fit of quantitative trade models consists in using other, i.e. non-trade,
data sources. For instance, since gravity models offer a mapping between trade data and consumer price indices, one could compare the prices predicted by the model to those observed in
the data. Waugh (2010) and Fitzgerald (forthcoming) offer two examples of papers exploring the
implications of gravity models for prices.
Time Series Evidence. Perhaps the most direct way to test the predictions of a gravity model is to
calibrate the model in a baseline year t, consider a change in trade costs between the baseline year
t and some other year t0 , and report the “distance” between the predictions of the model and the
data at date t0 .
A natural candidate for large changes in trade costs are regional trade agreements like the
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Caliendo and Parro (2010) use a multi-sector
version of Eaton and Kortum (2002) with intermediate goods calibrated to match trade data from
1993 to study the effects of NAFTA. This model is a special case of the models considered in Section
3.4 in that it does not feature any scale effects: δs = 0 for all s. After feeding tariff changes caused
by NAFTA between 1993 and 2005, they find that the simulated changes can account for 93% of
the observed change in Mexico’s total trade over GDP, 58% for Canada, and 55% for the United
States.
The relatively good fit of their model contrasts with the fairly poor performance of earlier CGE
models reviewed in Kehoe (2005). He evaluates the performances of three of the most prominent multisectoral applied general equilibrium models used to predict the impact of NAFTA:
the Brown-Deardorff-Stern model of all three North American economies (Brown, Deardorff, and
Stern (1992)), the Cox-Harris model of Canada (Cox and Harris (1992)) and the Sobarzo model of
Mexico (Sobarzo (1992)). He finds that each of these models drastically underestimated the impact
of NAFTA on trade volumes. For instance, the Brown-Deardorff-Stern model predicts changes in
exports relative to GDP between 1988 and 1999 equal to 50.8% for Mexico, 4.3% for Canada, and
2.9% for the United States. In the data, these changes are equal 140.6%, 52.9%, and 19.1%, respectively.
It is not entirely clear, however, what accounts for the difference in the performance between
more recent and older CGE models. Caliendo and Parro (2010) emphasize the importance of
input-output linkages for their results, but such linkages are already present in older CGE models. One economically meaningful difference is that the previous CGE models feature imperfect
competition and scale effects, whereas Caliendo and Parro (2010) does not. But there are many
other potential sources of discrepancies, from the calibration of the trade elasticities (more on that
below) to the choice of the baseline year. Indeed, although the predictions of the models reviewed
in Kehoe (2005) are compared with changes in the data over the period 1988-1999, the BrownDeardorff model was calibrated to a 1976 input-output matrix for Canada, a 1980 input-output
38

matrix for Mexico, and a 1977 input-output matrix for the United States. The good fit of gravity
models in the time-series is also called into question by the results of Lai and Trefler (2002) who
find that changes in tariffs between 1972 and 1992 fed into a simple model à la Krugman (1980)
can explain little of the variation in bilateral trade flows over this time period.
A poor fit of a quantitative trade model may always reflect the fact that the trade shock under
study is small compared to other unobserved shocks—e.g. technology, factor endowments—that
may have been occurring over the same time period. This generates a tension. One would want to
focus on shorter time periods around a particular episode of trade liberalization to exclude other
shocks, but quantitative trade models are static models that are better equipped to capture the
long-run consequences of trade liberalization than short-term dynamics. In the case of NAFTA,
for instance, would quantitative trade models perform better when the final year is 1995, 2000, or
2005?
Donaldson (2008) offers an innovative way to test the predictions of gravity models. He focuses on one of history’s great transportation projects: the network of railroads built in colonial
India from 1870 to 1930. He first estimates the impact of the railroad on trade costs using information about price gaps across Indian districts. He then feeds the observed changes in trade costs
into a multi-sector version of Eaton and Kortum (2002)—a special case of the models considered
in Section 3.3 without scale effects: δs = 0 for all s—to predict the changes in real income across
Indian districts. The test of the model comes from comparing changes in real income predicted
by the model to the reduced-form estimates of changes in real income caused by the railroad. He
finds that 86% of the total impact of the railroads on real income in an average district can be
explained by the model.

5.3

Calibrating Elasticities

The key parameters for counterfactual analysis using gravity models, like other CGE models, are
elasticities. We conclude this section by discussing some of the issues arising when calibrating
elasticities.
Trade Elasticities. As can already be seen from the counterfactual analysis carried in the context
of the Armington model in Section 2, the single most important structural parameter in gravity
models is the trade elasticity. Conditional on observed trade shares, it determines both the response of bilateral trade flows and real consumption. In more general environments such as those
considered in Section 3, it remains one of the key statistics required to estimate the gains from
international trade; see Equations (23), (27), and (32). So, how large are trade elasticities?
This question is an old one. It is as important for recent gravity models reviewed in this chapter
as for earlier CGE models. The broad consensus in the CGE literature is, in the words of Dawkins,
Srinivasan, and Whalley (2001), that “the quantity and quality of literature-based elasticity parameters for use in calibrated models is another Achilles’ heel of calibration.” As John Whalley notes
“It is quite extraordinary how little we know about numerical values of elasticities [...] In the international trade area researchers commonly use import price elasticities in the neighborhood of
39

unity, even for small economies, even though elasticity estimates as high as nine appear in the
literature.” The same pessimism can be found in the review of trade elasticities by McDaniel and
Balistreri (2003): “The estimates from the literature provide a wide range of point estimates, and
little guidance on correct estimates to apply to a given commodity in a given model for a given
regional aggregation. Most of the controversy surrounding the [trade] elasticities reduces to a
general structural inconsistency between the econometric models used to measure the response
and the simulation models used to evaluate policy.”
Part of the success of new quantitative work in international trade lies in the tight connection
between the structural estimation of the trade elasticity and the underlying economic model. In
their seminal work, Eaton and Kortum (2002) offer multiple ways to estimate structurally the trade
elasticity using a gravity equation akin to Equation (16). Their estimates range from ε = 3.60 to
ε = 12.86 with a preferred value of ε = 8.28 when using price gaps as a measure of trade costs.
While the range is wide, it remains in the range of elasticities used in earlier CGE models; see
Hertel (1997). In recent work, Simonovska and Waugh (2011) refine Eaton and Kortum (2002)’s
preferred estimation strategy to take into account the fact that price gaps are only lower-bounds
on trade costs. Simonovska and Waugh (2011) propose a simulated method of moments to correct
for the fact that trade elasticities using price gaps tend to overestimate the sensitivity of trade
flows to trade costs. Their preferred estimate of ε is 4.12.
The merits of a tight connection between theory and data notwithstanding, the state of affairs
remains far from ideal. An issue with simulation using earlier CGE models, such as those used
in the evaluation of NAFTA, is that they require a very large number of elasticities. Many recent
papers, following Eaton and Kortum (2002), side-step this issue by assuming that all goods enter
utility functions through a unique CES aggregator. But empirically, there is ample evidence of
significant variation in the trade elasticity across sectors; see e.g. Feenstra (1994), Broda and Weinstein (2006), and Hummels and Hillberry (2012). If so, why should we be more confident in the
counterfactual predictions of simpler gravity models that abstract from this heterogeneity? Given
the heterogeneity in the trade elasticity across sectors, is the trade elasticity estimated from an
aggregate gravity equation like (16) the “right” trade elasticity to calibrate a one-sector model?31
A natural way to address the previous concerns is to write down multiple-sector models, such
as those considered in Section 3.3, and incorporate formally the heterogeneity in trade elasticities
across sectors. But this raises new issues. As the number of elasticities that needs to be estimated increases, the precision with which each of those elasticities is estimated tends to decrease.
Accordingly, results become much more sensitive to the presence of outliers. To take a concrete
example, the sector-level elasticities from Caliendo and Parro (2010) used in Section 3.3 are around
8 on average. But for some sectors, like automobiles, trade elasticities are not statistically different
31 Imbs

and Mejean (2011) argue that such aggregate trade elasticities suffers from heterogeneity bias and that one
should instead use a properly weighted average of sector-level trade elasticities to calibrate one-sector models. Yet if
the true model is indeed a multi-sector model, it is not a priori obvious that there exists a single weighted average—
independently of how weights are defined—that can be used to predict both changes in trade flows and welfare.

40

from zero. An elasticity of zero would imply infinite gains from trade.32
Upper-level Elasticities (I): Substitution Across Sectors. Going from a one-sector to a multisector model raises another question: How large is the elasticity of substitution between sectors?
All papers referenced in Section 3.3 follow what Dawkins, Srinivasan, and Whalley (2001) refer
to as the “idiot’s law of elasticities”: all elasticities are equal to one until shown to be otherwise.
How important is the assumption that upper-level utility functions are Cobb-Douglas for the predictions of multi-sector quantitative trade models?
To shed light on this question, let us make the same assumptions as in Section 3.3, expect for
the fact the upper-level utility function is now given by
(γ 1)/γ γ/(γ 1)

Cj = ∑Ss=1 β j,s Cj,s

,

(43)

where γ > 0 denotes the upper-level elasticity of substitution between goods from different sec0 are exogenous preference parameters, which we normalize such that ∑Ss=1 β j,s = 1
for all j; and Cj,s still denotes total consumption of the composite good s in country j. The Cobbtors; β j,s

Douglas case studied in Section 3.3 corresponds to γ = 1.
For simplicity let us focus on the case of perfect competition, δs = 0 all s. Following a procedure similar to that in Section 3.1, one can show that if sector-level price indices are given by
Equation (20), then the welfare impact of a shock generalizes to
Ĉj =

1 (γ 1)/εs

∑Ss=1 e j,s λ̂ jj,s

1/(γ 1)

.

(44)

Gains from trade are thus given by
Gj = 1

∑Ss=1 e j,s λ jj,s

(γ 1)/εs 1/(γ 1)

.

(45)

In Section 3.3, we have pointed out that multi-sector models with Cobb-Douglas preferences predict significantly larger gains than one-sector models. Using Equation (45), we can now quantify
the importance of the Cobb-Douglas assumption for this prediction. In Figure 4 we plot Gj as a
function of γ using (45) for several countries—the United States, Canada, France, Germany, and
Japan—as well as the average Gj for all countries considered in Table 1. We see that the value of the
upper-level elasticity γ—for which the existing empirical literature provides little guidance—has
large effects on the magnitude of the gains from trade. As we go from the Leontief case, γ = 0, to
the Cobb-Douglas case, γ = 1, to an upper-level elasticity equal to the average of lower-level elasticities, γ = 8, average gains from trade decrease from 45% to 15% to 3%.33 The intuition is simple.
32 The

existing literature rarely reports confidence intervals. Two notable exceptions are Lai and Trefler (2002) and
Shapiro (2012) who use the standard errors of the trade elasticities that they have estimated to compute, and report, the
standard errors for the gains from trade liberalization.
33 In the particular case in which all lower-level trade elasticities are equal to the upper-level trade elasticity, ε = γ 1
s
for all s, the discrepancy between the predictions of multi-sector and one-sector models disappears: Equation (45)

41

50
Canada
G ermany
F rance
Japan
USA
Average for the W orld

45

40

Gains from trade, %

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

0

1

2

3
4
5
Elasticity of substitution across sectors, γ

6

7

8

Figure 4: Gains from Trade computed according to Equation (45) for different levels of γ. Sectorlevel trade elasticities are from Caliendo and Parro (2010). Data are from WIOD in 2008.
If the elasticity of substitution between sectors is high, then the consequences of autarky are mitigated by consumers’ ability to substitute consumption away from the most affected sectors,i.e.,
s
those with lowest values of λ1/ε
jj,s , towards the least affected sectors, i.e., those with highest values
s
of λ1/ε
jj,s . By the same token, however, the gains from further trade liberalization would tend to be

higher with a higher γ, since consumers could more easily reallocate their consumption towards
goods that experience larger price declines.34
Upper-level Elasticities (II): Domestic versus Foreign. Another, and perhaps deeper issue regarding gravity estimates of the trade elasticity is that they capture the elasticity of substitution
between foreign sources of imports. Yet, the elasticity that one needs, for instance, for measuring the gains from trade is the elasticity of substitution between home and import goods. To see
this formally, let us go back to the simple Armington model presented in Section 2.1, but let us
reduces to Equation (12).
34 The value of the upper-level elasticity of substitution also has more subtle implications for quantitative trade models with monopolistic competition. Away from Cobb-Douglas preferences, expenditure shares e j,s are no longer constant, which may lead to multiple equilibria. Intuitively, a higher expenditure share in a given sector lead to more
entry, which reduces the price index in that sector, thereby leading to a higher expenditure share. Thus, one may obtain
different estimates of the gains from trade—or the effect of trade policy—depending on the counterfactual equilibrium
one focuses on. Another issue concerns the difference between the predictions of models with firm-level heterogeneity,
like Melitz (2003), and those without, like Krugman (1980). In Section 3.3, we have shown that in the Cobb-Douglas
case, entry effects lead to a distinction between the predictions of models with perfect and monopolistic competition,
but not between models with and without firm-level heterogeneity. This is no longer true in the case of general CES
utility functions.

42

generalize Equation (1) so that
Cj =

(γ 1)/γ

Cjj

+ CjM

(γ 1)/γ γ/(γ 1)

,

where CjM measures total consumption of imported goods,
σ/(σ 1)

CjM = ∑i6= j ψij

(σ 1)/σ σ/(σ 1)

Cij

.

The upper-level elasticity γ > 1 now represents the elasticity of substitution between the domestic good and the composite of the foreign goods, whereas the lower-level elasticity σ > 0 still
represents the elasticity of substitution between foreign goods. The simple Armington model corresponds to the special case, γ = σ. Under this new demand system, bilateral trade flows still
satisfy a gravity-like equation:

Xij =

PjM
Pj

!1

γ

Pij
PjM

!1

σ

Ej , for all i 6= j,

where Pij = τ ij Pii is the price of goods from country i in country j; PjM
is the import price index; and Pj =

Pjj

1 γ

+ PjM

1 γ

1/(1 γ)

(46)

∑i6= j ψ1ij

σ 1 σ
Pij

1/(1 σ)

is the consumer price index in

country j. In this more general environment, one can still rearrange bilateral trade flows as we did
in Equation (13) and use the cross-sectional variation in trade flows and trade costs to estimate
1 σ.
Now, like in Section 2.2, consider a small change in trade costs that affects country j. The
change in the consumer price index is still given by
d ln Pj = λ jj d ln Pjj + 1

λ jj d ln PjM .

But our new demand system now implies
d ln 1

λ jj

d ln λ jj = (1

γ) d ln PjM

d ln Pjj .

Following the same strategy as in Section 2.2, one can therefore show that
d ln Cj = d ln λ jj / (1

γ) .

(47)

While gravity estimates can uncover the lower-level elasticity, σ, Equation (47) shows that the
upper-level elasticity, γ, i.e., the elasticity of substitution between domestic and foreign goods, is
the relevant elasticity for welfare analysis.35
35 In

more general gravity models, this upper-level elasticity γ would remain a key determinant for welfare analysis,

43

In standard gravity models, it is only the assumption of symmetric CES utility that allow researchers to go from the commonly estimated elasticity, σ, to the welfare-relevant elasticity, γ.
When estimated, does the elasticity of substitution between home and import goods, γ, look similar to the elasticity of substitution between foreign goods, σ? Head and Ries (2001) suggest that
the answer is yes. They measure the average of the elasticity of demand for Canadian goods in
Canada relative to U.S. goods and the elasticity of demand for U.S. goods in the United States
relative to Canadian goods. If all trade was U.S.-Canada trade, their estimate would therefore
provide an estimate of γ. They find an average elasticity equal to 7.8, quite in line with previous
gravity estimates of σ. Likewise, using the methodology of Feenstra (1994) to estimate both γ and
σ, Feenstra, Obstfeld, and Russ (2013) cannot reject the null that γ and σ are equal.
Factor Supply Elasticities. The multi-sector gravity models that we have reviewed assume a
perfectly-elastic factor supply to each sector. Thus, except for the case with sector-level differences
in factor intensities considered in Section 3.5, the aggregate production possibilities frontier (PPF)
is linear. In practice one may expect factors to be imperfect substitutes across sectors. For instance
some workers may have a comparative advantage in particular sectors, as in a Roy-type model, or
some natural resources may be critical inputs to production in some sectors and not others. Such
considerations would lead to more “curvature” in the PPF and, conditional on observed trade
flows, larger gains from trade.
To take an extreme example, consider the petroleum sector. The trade elasticity, εs , for this
sector estimated by Caliendo and Parro (2010) is around 70. The formula presented in Section 3.3
would therefore predict very small gains from trade in this sector. Yet, of course, one would expect
many oil importing countries to face enormous losses from moving to autarky. One simple way to
capture such considerations would be to go back to the multi-factor model presented in Section 3.5
and assume factors employed in the petroleum sector are specific to that sector, effectively making
petroleum an endowment. To explore the quantitative importance of this type of considerations,
we have recomputed the gains from trade in the multi-factor model under the assumption that
all sectors are perfectly competitive and all factors are sector-specific.36 In line with the previous
discussion, we find larger gains from trade under the assumption that factors are sector-specific,
with the cross-country average for Gj going from 15.3% to 17.2%.
Other Elasticities: Love of Variety and Extensive Margin. We conclude by discussing the calibration of the elasticity of substitution, σ, and the extensive margin elasticity, η, introduced in
Equation (15) and its sector-level counterparts, Equations (20), (26), and (30). Given estimates of
the trade elasticity, ε, these two elasticities are irrelevant for welfare analysis under perfect competition. Under monopolistic competition, however, we have seen that in the presence of intermediate goods, as in Section 3.4, or in multi-sector models with general CES preferences, as discussed
above, the values of σ and η do matter above and beyond the value of the trade elasticity, ε. In
though not the only one.
36 Formally, this amounts to using the formula for gains from trade given by Equation(32) under the assumption that
A = e /r for all s.
δs = 0 and ĉ j,s
j,s j,s

44

these richer environments, the predictions of models with and without firm-level heterogeneity
are different and the magnitude of the difference crucially depend on how σ and η are calibrated.
As shown in Section 3.2, the three elasticities ε, σ, and η are not independent of one another.
In gravity models, ε determines the overall response of trade flows to changes in trade costs,
whereas σ

1 determine their responses at the intensive margin and η =

ε ( σ 1)
σ 1

determines

(σ 1), weighted by the love of variety, σ 1. Given an
estimate of the trade elasticity, ε, one therefore only needs an estimate of σ to compute η and vice
versa. The most direct way to estimate σ or η is to use firm-level trade data; see e.g. Crozet and
Koenig (2010) and Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011). When available, they offer a simple way to
estimate the intensive margin elasticity, i.e., by how much the sales of a given set of firms respond
to changes in trade costs, and the extensive margin elasticity, i.e., by how much the number of
firms responds to changes in trade costs.37 Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2011) estimate a value
of 1.5 for η in a one sector model, whereas Crozet and Koenig (2010) obtain estimates of εs and η s
for several sectors. Interestingly, the average η s across s estimated by Crozet and Koenig (2010) is
also 1.5, with little variation across sectors.38
Balistreri and Rutherford (2012) nicely illustrates the issues inherent to the calibration of models of monopolistic competition. The authors compare the predictions of a model without firmheterogeneity, like Krugman (1980), to those of a model with firm-heterogeneity, like Melitz (2003),
in a model with identical countries, three sectors, nested CES preferences, but no inter-industry
trade, e j,s = r j,s . Changes in real consumption are given by Equation (22). Using the fact that
their response at the extensive margin, ε

ηs =

ε s ( σ s 1)
σs 1

η

, one can show that the overall scale effects, ê j,ss r̂ j,s

δs /εs

, are equal to r̂ j,s

1/(σs 1)

in the two models. Thus the only difference between the predictions of the two models comes
from the different values of σs used in the calibration of the two models. In their calibration, Balistreri and Rutherford (2012) assume that εs is equal to 4.6 in both models, but that η s is equal
to 0 in the Krugman-version and 0.65 in the Melitz-version. This implies calibrated values of
σs = εs / (1 + η s ) + 1 equal to 5.6 in the Krugman-version and 3.8 in the Melitz-version. This leads
to stronger love of variety and, in turn, larger entry effects and gains from trade liberalization in
the latter model. The question, of course, is whether one should take seriously that love of variety is much stronger than previously thought because the intensive margin is only one particular
margin of adjustment of trade flows, σs

1 < εs , in models with firm-level heterogeneity.

37 A related, though distinct way to estimate the relative importance of the intensive margin, σ
1, consists in using
the prevalence of zeros in aggregate trade data; see Helpman, Melitz, and Rubinstein (2008). The obvious drawback
of this approach is that gravity models, in general, do not allow for zeros, therefore creating a tension between the
structural model used for counterfactual analysis and the way its parameters are estimated; see Eaton, Kortum, and
Sotelo (2012) for recent work on this topic. Alternatively, one can rely more heavily on the overall structure of the model
and use other firm-level measures, like sales and markups, to estimate ε and σ; see e.g. Di Giovanni and Levchenko
(2009) and Hsieh and Ossa (2011). Once ε and σ are known, η can then be computed as a residual.
38 This value is much larger than the value of η = 0.65 used in Section 3.4. If one were to use η = 1.5 rather than
s
s
0.65 when computing the gains from trade using Equation (29), one would conclude that gains from trade predicted
by models of monopolistic competition with firm-level heterogeneity cannot be finite for any country in our dataset.

45

6

“Micro” versus “Macro” Numbers

Our chapter so far has described what could be referred to as a “macro” approach to quantifying
the consequences of globalization. The distinguishing features of this approach can be summarized as follows. First, it aims to study the overall welfare gains from trade. Second, it is based on
commonly available aggregate trade data and a few key structural parameters. Third, it tries to
remain agnostic about micro-theoretical foundations. These foundations only matter to the extent
that they affect “macro” aggregates, as illustrated, for instance, in Equations (15) and (16).
A common alternative in the literature consists in following a “micro” approach, more closely
related to demand and production function estimation in Industrial Organization. Unlike the
“macro” approach described in this chapter, the “micro” approach typically focuses on one particular source of gains from trade using micro-level data, either at the product or firm-level. The
two most prominent examples of “new” sources of gains from trade emphasized in this literature
are: (i ) gains from new varieties and (ii ) productivity gains. The broad objective of this section
is to discuss how empirical evidence related to (i ) and (ii ), i.e., “micro” numbers, relate to the
predictions of quantitative trade models reviewed in this chapter, i.e., “macro” numbers.

6.1

Gains From New Varieties

One of the hallmarks of the “new trade theory” pioneered by Paul Krugman in the early 80s is
that consumers may gain from trade through access to new varieties. These may be direct gains
coming from trade in final goods, as in Krugman (1979) and Krugman (1980), or indirect gains
coming from trade in intermediate goods, as in Ethier (1982b). An important contribution of the
empirical trade literature in the last decade is to put a number on the “new-goods” channel; see e.g.
Klenow and Rodríguez-Clare (1997), Broda and Weinstein (2006), Arkolakis, Demidova, Klenow,
and Rodríguez-Clare (2008), Feenstra and Weinstein (2010), and Goldberg, Khandelwal, Pavcnik,
and Topalova (2009).
In order to illustrate the similarities and differences with the “macro” approach of this chapter,
we will focus on the most influential paper in the “micro” approach: Broda and Weinstein (2006).
The starting point of this paper is the observation that statistical agencies typically ignore gains
from the creation of new varieties (and destruction of old varieties), when computing various
components of the Consumer Price Index (CPI), including the Import Price Index. The authors
then go on to ask: How different would measured changes in the Import Price Index of the United
States be if one were to take into account the creation and destruction of varieties over time?
To answer this question, the authors first need to define what the counterpart of a variety
in theory is in the data and then to specify a demand system to evaluate the welfare impact of
new varieties. Broda and Weinstein (2006) define a variety as a 10-digit HTS product from a
given country, e.g. “Umbrellas and Sun Umbrellas Having a Telescopic Shaft from China,” and
assume nested CES utility functions like in the present chapter. Given these assumptions, the
contribution of appearing and disappearing varieties to the import component of the CES price

46

index, i.e., the expenditure function of a representative US consumer, can then be computed using
an estimate of the elasticity of substitution across foreign varieties and measures of the changes
in the share of expenditures on continuing varieties as in Feenstra (1994). The main finding of
Broda and Weinstein (2006) is that, between 1972 and 2001, the decrease in the Import Price Index
associated with the expansion of imported varieties, and omitted by statistical agencies, has lead
to an additional 2.6% decrease in the U.S. CPI.
It should be clear that in spite of its use of micro-level data, the empirical strategy of Broda and
Weinstein (2006) has a lot in common with the approach presented in earlier sections of this chapter. First, the focus is squarely on welfare, i.e. money metric indirect utility function that are constructed by means of the expenditure function. Second, the analysis heavily relies on functional
form assumptions, namely CES utility. In particular, the correction term introduced by Feenstra
(1994) is closely related to our welfare formula in the simple Armington model; see Equation (9).
The basic idea is that under CES utility, changes in relative prices can be inferred from changes
in relative expenditure modulo the elasticity of substitution. This is true regardless of whether
changes in relative prices are due to movements in the price of existing goods or the creation of
new goods, a fact that we have exploited more generally in Section 3.1.
There is, however, a number of notable differences. A benefit of the “micro” approach taken
by Broda and Weinstein (2006) is that it only requires assumptions on the demand system, which
together with data on prices and quantities, are sufficient to compute changes in the Import Price
Index of a representative consumer with nested CES utility. These “micro” numbers are independent of technological considerations and market structure. In contrast, the “macro” numbers
presented in this chapter do heavily depend on functional form assumptions on the supply-side
of the economy, e.g. Fréchet distributions of productivity under perfect competition or Pareto
distributions under monopolistic competition.
The previous observation does not imply that technological considerations and market structure are irrelevant for such empirical micro studies. This is best illustrated by the following
thought experiment. Suppose first, as Broda and Weinstein (2006) do in the last part of their analysis, that Krugman (1980) is an accurate description of the world. Then changes in the Import Price
Index due to new varieties should be reflected one-for-one in the overall CPI. Under this assumption, “micro” numbers indeed measure additional welfare gains. Now suppose instead that Eaton
and Kortum (2002) or some other Ricardian model is an accurate description of the world. There
is a priori nothing in the trade data that Broda and Weinstein (2006) look at that would contradict
this view of the world. Yet, under this alternative assumption on market structure and technology, changes in the Import Price Index due to the creation of new varieties should be exactly offset
by changes in the domestic component of the CPI due to the destruction of old varieties. In this
neoclassical world, the set of goods available to consumers is fixed. So the “new-goods” channel
is rightly ignored by statistical agencies: in net, it should have no welfare effect. To put it bluntly,
“micro” numbers are unaffected by assumptions on technology and market structure, but whether

47

or not one should care about these numbers crucially depend on these assumptions.39
Another important difference between the “micro” approach taken by Broda and Weinstein
(2006) and the “macro” approach presented in this paper is that, at its core, the “micro” approach
is a measurement exercise, not a counterfactual exercise. The goal is to document what actually
happened in the data, e.g. in the United States between 1972 and 2001, not what could have
happened if China had grown at a different rate or if the United States had chosen different trade
policies. To address such counterfactual questions, one again needs the full structure of the model;
specifying and estimating a demand system is not enough.

6.2

Productivity Gains

In the canonical model of trade with firm-level heterogeneity developed by Melitz (2003), trade
liberalization causes a reallocation of resources from the least to the most productive firms. This
theoretical prediction has received considerable support in the data, with many empirical studies
finding very large effects of trade on measured productivity. For instance, Trefler (2004) finds that
the reallocation of market shares across firms following the Canada-US free trade agreement has
caused productivity, measured as real value added per hour worked, to go up by 8.4% in Canadian
manufacturing. Using the methodology of Olley and Pakes (1996) to measure productivity at the
firm-level, Pavcnik (2002) documents productivity gains of the same order of magnitude following
the trade liberalization of the manufacturing sector in Chile.
The goal of this subsection is to clarify the relationship between productivity studies and the
body of work reviewed in this chapter. Given space constraints, we will make no attempt at systematically reviewing this large empirical literature; see e.g. Tybout (2001), Melitz and Trefler
(2012), as well as Melitz and Redding (2013) in this volume for excellent overviews. Here we will
focus on the following conceptual issues: What is the difference between productivity and welfare? If welfare and measured productivity simultaneously go up, should we think of productivity
gains as a new source of gains from trade? At a qualitative level, should we always expect welfare
and measured productivity to go in the same direction? At a quantitative level, can we directly
compare the “micro” numbers from productivity studies with the “macro” numbers presented
earlier in this chapter?
In theory, productivity measures how much “output” one can produce with a given amount of
“input,” whereas welfare measures how much “consumption” one can afford. At the macro level,
the two concepts are therefore closely related. In a closed economy, the more productive a country
is, the more it can produce, and so, the more it consumes. This is why real GDP computed on
the revenue and expenditure sides coincide. In an open economy, the two concepts differ because
of terms-of-trade effects. Absent any shock to a country’s productivity, a country may be able
to consume more if it can purchase more imports with the same amount of exports, i.e., if its
39 A similar issue arises if one believes that Melitz (2003) rather than Krugman (1980) is an accurate description of
the world. In this case, however, changes in the Import Price Index and the domestic component of the CPI due to the
creation and destruction of varieties only exactly cancel out under special circumstances, as discussed in footnote 12.

48

terms-of-trade improve.
An obvious, but important difference between the results in this chapter and productivity
studies therefore lies in the treatment of terms-of-trade effects. They are central to our analysis.
In the simple Armington model, like in any neoclassical model, terms-of-trade effects are the only
channel through which foreign shocks may affect welfare in another country. One of the main
goals of quantitative trade models therefore is to predict the terms-of-trade changes associated
with particular shocks. In contrast, terms-of-trade effects play no direct role in productivity studies, whose main goal is to identify the consequences of trade liberalization on productivity at the
firm- and industry-level.
For the rest of our discussion, let us set aside the issue of terms-of-trade effects. The exact relationship between measured productivity and welfare depends, of course, on how one measures
productivity as well as the model used to compute welfare; see Burstein and Cravino (2011) for a
general discussion. For our purposes here, let us simply assume that all firm-level data are consistent with Melitz (2003) and that industry-level measures of productivity (in the data) increases
whenever the distribution of firm-level productivity (in the model) shifts to the right.40 Even under such ideal circumstances, changes in measured productivity caused by reallocations across
firms and welfare may be quite different, as we now illustrate through a series of short examples.
Consider first a small decrease in variable trade costs. The decrease in variable trade costs,
which can be thought of as an outward shift in the production possibility frontier, will lead to a
direct first-order increase in welfare. In addition, there will be a reallocation of resources from
the least to the most efficient firms, and this will lead to an increase in measured productivity at
the industry level. Since the initial equilibrium is efficient under monopolistic competition with
CES utility, see e.g. Dhingra and Morrow (2012), this reallocation of resources is associated with
positive, albeit second-order, welfare effects. At this point, one might therefore be tempted to
conclude that the increase in measured productivity is an additional source of welfare gains. But
it should be clear that it is the reallocation rather than the change in productivity per se that has
caused the additional welfare gain.
To see this, consider the opposite shock: a small increase in variable trade costs. By the exact
same logic, this shock would decrease measured productivity at the industry level through the
expansion of the least efficient firms. But as before, the reallocation of resources would remain
associated with positive, albeit second-order, welfare effects. That is to say, the first-order welfare
loss caused by the increase in trade costs is not as large as it would have been if workers had not
been reallocated and measured productivity had remained higher.
A careful reader may have noted that in the two previous examples, there nevertheless exists a
perfect correlation between measured productivity and welfare. When trade costs go down, as in
our first example, both measured productivity and welfare go up. When trade costs go up, as in
40 This assumption is less innocuous than it may appear. For instance, as Burstein and Cravino (2011) demonstrate,
if industry productivity is measured as total value added divided by total employment and the underlying model is
Melitz with a Pareto distribution of productivity, then measured productivity would be unaffected by the reallocation
of resources induced by trade liberalization.

49

our second example, the opposite is true. This is fairly intuitive. Any shock that tends to cause an
increase in real wages, i.e., welfare, should also tend to cause the exit of the least profitable firms,
and in turn, an increase in measured productivity. This suggests that if one were only interested
in qualitative questions—did welfare go up or down?—changes in measured productivity may
still be used as a useful proxy for welfare changes. As intuitive as it may sound, the monotonic
relationship between measured productivity and welfare does hinge on the nature of the shock
being considered. This is illustrated by the results of Demidova and Rodríguez-Clare (2009) and
Felbermayr, Jung, and Larch (2011) who study the effects of import tariffs and export subsidies in
the Melitz (2003) model. Starting from free trade, they show that an import tariff increases welfare,
whereas an export subsidy decreases welfare. Yet, an import tariff leads to labor reallocations from
high- to low-productivity firms, whereas an export subsidy leads to a reallocation from low- to
high-productivity firms. In this situation, changes in measured productivity at the industry-level
and welfare move in opposite directions. The reason is that trade policy not only affects output
per variety, but also the set of available varieties, which consumers care about.
The previous discussion illustrates that changes in welfare and changes in measured productivity are, in general, qualitatively different. For the purposes of the present chapter, however, the
key question is not a qualitative one—“Are we getting the sign right when focusing on measured
productivity rather than welfare?”—but a quantitative one—“Even when changes in welfare and
measured productivity are of the same sign, are we getting the order of magnitude right?”. The
answer to the latter question depends on why firms of different productivity coexist in the economy. To take an extreme example, suppose that firms produce the same homogeneous good under
constant returns to scale using labor as their only factor production, but that because of taxes or
other distortions, the most efficient firms are prevented from taking over the market. In this hypothetical world, changes in measured productivity are trivially equal to changes in consumption,
and hence welfare. In this hypothetical world, “micro” and “macro” numbers should coincide.41
But this hypothetical world is very different from canonical models of trade with firm-level heterogeneity in which love of variety plays a central role. If one believes such models are a reasonable
description of the world we live in, one cannot simply celebrate the death of small firms because
they raise measured productivity within an industry. These firms may be less productive, but it
is efficient for them to produce differentiated varieties in equilibrium. According to such models, “micro” and “macro” numbers are bound to be different and, according to empirical studies
reviewed in Section 6.1, the difference between the two may be quite large.
To sum up: changes in measured productivity do not capture changes in welfare, either qualitatively or quantitatively, except in settings that are very different from canonical trade models.42
41 This

equivalence is subject to the caveat that empirical studies typically identify the productivity changes in industries that experience changes in tariffs relative to those that do not; see e.g.Trefler (2004). If industries that do not
experience tariff changes are affected by trade liberalization through general equilibrium effects, “micro” numbers estimated using a difference-in-difference approach and “macro” numbers derived using the full structure of the model
would still differ.
42 Although we have focused on Melitz (2003), which is, by far, the most influential trade model featuring firm-level
heterogeneity, the caveats illustrated by our simple examples apply more generally. Consider, for instance, the model

50

Simply put, “micro” studies estimating the effect of trade shocks on measured productivity and
“macro” studies quantifying the effect of trade shocks on welfare are getting at different things. To
us, there are costs and benefits in both kinds of studies. Empirical micro studies such as Pavcnik
(2002) and Trefler (2004) have the great virtue of letting the data speak. Measured productivity
gains are what they are, regardless of what the underlying economic environment may be. However, whether such “gains” are a useful metric for policy evaluation remains open for discussion.
In contrast, quantitative macro studies such as those reviewed in this chapter aim to speak directly
to welfare considerations, albeit at the cost of stronger assumptions.

7

Life Without Gravity

We have described how gravity models can be used for quantitative analysis. We have shown that
even richer versions of these models can be calibrated using only a few elasticities. There is, however, a price to parsimony. All gravity models discussed in this chapter rely on strong functional
form assumptions. It is those functional form assumptions that allow researchers to estimate trade
elasticities from the cross-section—since elasticities are assumed to be constant across countries—
and use those to do counterfactual analysis—since elasticities are also assumed to be constant
across equilibria. We conclude by discussing alternative structural approaches to quantifying the
consequences of globalization that weaken the need for extrapolation by functional form.

7.1

Sufficient-Statistic Approach

A recent literature in public finance has popularized “the sufficient-statistic approach” to counterfactual and welfare analysis. In the words of Chetty (2009), “the central concept of the sufficient
statistic approach is to derive formulas for the welfare consequences of policies that are functions
of high-level elasticities rather than deep primitives. Even though there are multiple combinations of primitives that are consistent with the inputs to the formulas, all such combinations have
the same welfare implications.” While there are some similarities between the approach described
in this chapter and the sufficient-statistic approach in the public finance literature—namely, the
focus on high-level elasticities rather than the multiple combinations of primitives that are consistent with those—there are also some key differences, which are best illustrated through a simple
example.
Consider a small, uniform change in tariffs, d ln 1 + t j , in some country j. The sufficientstatistic approach in the sense of Chetty (2009) consists in using envelope conditions from optimization to reduce the set of parameters that need to be identified. In the case of a small open
economy j, the assumptions of (i ) utility maximization and (ii ) profit maximization under perfect
of monopolistic competition developed by Melitz and Ottaviano (2008). In this model productivity varies across firms
because markups vary. Nevertheless, terms-of-trade effects as well as labor reallocations in and out of the outside
sector that affect the set of differentiated varieties available to consumers would still introduce a discrepancy between
measured productivity and welfare; see Arkolakis, Costinot, Donaldson, and Rodriguez-Clare (2012).

51

competition imply, without any functional form assumptions, that the welfare changes associated
with a change in tariff are given by:
d ln Cj = 1
where εSS

εSS

λ jj

d ln 1 + t j ,

(48)

d ln M j /d ln 1 + t j denotes the total elasticity of imports, M j , with respect to the

tariff change. Since country j is a small open-economy, d ln Cj simply represents the deadweight
loss associated with the tariff, i.e., Harberger’s triangle. In the international trade literature, the
previous formula is the basis of numerous papers evaluating the effects of trade policy; see e.g.
Johnson (1960) and Feenstra (1995).
Like in the analysis of the previous sections, Equation (48) emphasizes a unique upper-level
elasticity. It should be clear, however, that εSS plays a very different role than the trade elasticity
ε in our previous analysis. Here, εSS is necessary to compute the area of the “triangle” below the
demand curve. In Sections 2 and 3, we are interested in “rectangles”: d ln Cj = 1

λ jj d ln τ j in

the case of changes in iceberg trade costs. In this context, ε is necessary instead to map changes
in prices into changes in shares of expenditures. Such changes can then be integrated to compute
the gains from trade in a straightforward manner.
The second difference between the two approaches comes from the nature of the upper-level
elasticity. εSS is a total elasticity in the sense that it captures all general equilibrium effects associated with the tariff change. In contrast, ε is a partial elasticity: it captures the impact of changes in
trade costs or tariffs on trade flows holding all general equilibrium effects fixed; see Lai and Trefler (2002) and Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012) for discussions of the distinction
between the two. While the recent public finance literature has been very successful in exploiting
credible reduced-form estimates of the elasticity of taxable income, credible estimates of the total
import elasticity, εSS , are much more scarce; see Feenstra (1995). In contrast, estimating the trade
elasticity ε using a gravity equation is fairly straightforward.
The third difference comes from the importance of price effects. In a closed economy, such
as the one considered in Harberger (1964), price changes are a transfer from one group of agents
to another. Thus they can be ignored in welfare computations. In an open economy, in contrast,
terms-of-trade effects do affect welfare. In the case of a large economy imposing a tariff, Equation

(48) generalizes to
d ln Cj = 1

λ jj

εSS

d ln 1 + t j + d ln PjM ,

where d ln PjM is the change in the relative price of imports, i.e. the term-of-trade of country j.
To assess the effect of a change in tariff in country j, one therefore either needs to observe price
changes after the shock or a model to predict d ln PjM before the shock, as we did in earlier sections.
Alternatively, one can ignore terms-of-trade effects by focusing on welfare changes at the world
level; see Atkeson and Burstein (2010), Burstein and Cravino (2011), and Fan, Lai, and Qi (2013).

52

In this situation, we are back to the closed economy analysis of Harberger (1964).43

7.2

Other Structural Approaches

Another strategy, closely related to the sufficient-statistic approach presented above, consists in
using optimality conditions to derive upper-bounds on the gains from trade. This is the approach
followed by Bernhofen and Brown (2005). They exploit a unique quasi-natural experiment: the
opening up of Japan in 1858. Under perfect competition, one can show that the gains from trade
are weakly lower than the difference between the vector of consumption in the trade equilibrium
and the vector of consumption in the autarky equilibrium, both evaluated at autarky prices, which
is itself lower than the opposite of the vector of net exports in the trade equilibrium, also evaluated
at autarky prices. Since Bernhofen and Brown (2005) have direct access to autarky prices in Japan
in 1858 as well as net exports in subsequent years, they can compute an upper-bound of the gains
from trade by assuming perfect competition, and nothing more. They find upper-bounds between
5.4% and 9.1% of Japan’s GDP depending on the trade equilibrium they focus on. Unfortunately,
autarky prices are rarely available in practice.44
Costinot and Donaldson (2011) develop a structural approach that tries instead to weaken the
need for strong functional form assumptions by focusing on a very particular sector: agriculture.
The basic idea is that agriculture is a sector of the economy in which scientific knowledge of
how essential inputs such as water, soil and climatic conditions map into outputs is uniquely
well understood. As a result, when studying the consequence of restricting trade, one does not
need strong functional form assumptions to extrapolate from “factual” productivity levels, that are
currently observed, to “counterfactual” productivity levels, that would be observed in economic
activities in which production does not currently take place, but would take place in the absence
of trade. Agronomists can provide direct information about “counterfactual” productivity levels.
Using very detailed micro-level data from the Food and Agriculture Organization’s (FAO) Global
Agro-Ecological Zones (GAEZ) project, Costinot and Donaldson (2011) are able to construct the
Production Possibility Frontiers (PPF) associated with 1,500 U.S. counties and explore the gains
from economic integration between these local markets from 1880 to 2002.

8

Concluding Remarks

The first goal of our chapter was methodological. We have described how to use gravity models
to perform welfare and counterfactual analysis. An appealing feature of this approach, which we
have referred to as the exact hat algebra, is that the impact of various counterfactual scenarios can
be computed without estimating the full structure of the model. All the relevant information about
43 Atkeson

and Burstein (2010) and Burstein and Cravino (2011) both feature models with monopolistic competition
and CES utility. In this case, envelope conditions from optimization can still be invoked since the solution of the
planning problem and the decentralized equilibrium coincide; see Dhingra and Morrow (2012).
44 Irwin (2005) is another exception. He focuses on the Jeffersonian embargo from 1807 to 1809. He finds the cost of
autarky, i.e. the gains from trade for the United States over that time period, to be around 5% of GDP.

53

preferences, technology, and trade costs can be inferred directly from the cross-section of bilateral
trade flows and estimates of the trade elasticity. This is a flexible approach that requires only
commonly available data, that can be applied to answer a wide range of counterfactual questions,
and that can be generalized to study a rich set of economic environments.
The second goal of our chapter was to use this methodology to explore quantitatively how
various economic considerations—market structure, firm-level heterogeneity, multiple sectors, intermediate goods, and multiple factors of production—affect the magnitude of the gains from
trade as well as the effects of trade policy. What are the main lessons?
Out of the various economic channels that we study, multiple sectors and tradable intermediate goods appear to have the largest effects on the magnitude of the gains from trade. For example,
the gains from trade for the United States increase from 1.8% to 8.3% simply by moving from the
one-sector model to the model with perfect competition with multiple sectors and intermediate
goods. Market structure and firm-level heterogeneity also matter, though their implications are
more subtle. For instance, in the presence of multiple sectors, gains from trade may be higher or
lower under monopolist competition depending on whether countries specialize in sectors characterized by larger or lower scale effects. Conditional on the same observed trade flows, firm-level
heterogeneity may also lead to much larger gains through its indirect implications for the magnitude of scale effects in the presence of intermediate goods. Given the sensitivity of the predictions
of gravity models with monopolistic competition to scale effects, more direct evidence on their
magnitude would be very valuable.
Regarding the effects of trade policy, gravity models predict welfare gains from unilateral import tariffs over a surprisingly large range. In the one-sector Armington model, the unilaterally
optimal tariff is well approximated by the inverse of the trade elasticity. Thus, a trade elasticity of
5 implies optimal tariffs of 20% around the world. In turn, it takes import tariffs to be as high as
50% to get back to the welfare levels observed under free trade. This range gets even larger once
we move from a one-sector to a multi-sector model. In addition, the overall welfare effects of large
unilateral tariffs on other countries appear to be minimal. Are these numbers we can believe in?
Is there something that is present in the data and absent from a baseline gravity model that would
dramatically affect these numbers?
The third goal of our chapter was to discuss the costs and benefits of using gravity models to
quantify the consequences of globalization. The main benefit of gravity models is parsimony. They
rely on a few key structural parameters, first and foremost the trade elasticity, that one can try to
estimate credibly in order to make counterfactual and welfare predictions. Parsimony, however,
comes at the cost of strong functional form assumptions. How restrictive are those? One would
like to see more research regarding the fit of gravity models. The fact these models can perfectly
fit any cross-section of bilateral trade flows certainly does not imply that out-of-sample their fit
will be perfect as well. If so, what are the dimensions in which gravity models succeed and those
in which they fail? How do their predictions compare to reduced-form evidence on the gains
from openness? Would alternative models—or alternative ways of estimating the same models—

54

lead to different conclusions? In the short-run, can we think of the consequences of globalization
without recognizing that there may be important frictions in factor markets? In the long-run, can
we think of the consequences globalization without knowing how it affects growth? These are all
exciting opportunities for future research.

55

References
A LVAREZ , F., AND R. E. L UCAS (2007): “General Equilibrium Analysis of the Eaton-Kortum Model
of International Trade,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(6), 1726–1768.
A NDERSON , J. E. (1979): “A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation,” The American Economic Review, 69(1), 106–116.
(2010): “The Gravity Model,” forth. Annual Review of Economics.
A NDERSON , J. E., AND J. P. N EARY (2005): Measuring the Restrictiveness of International Trade Policy.
MIT Press.
A NDERSON , J. E., AND E. VAN W INCOOP (2003): “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border
Puzzle,” The American Economic Review, 93(1), 170–192.
(2004): “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic Literature, 42(3), 691–751.
A NDERSON , J. E.,

AND

Y. V. Y OTOV (2010): “The Changing Incidence of Geography,” American

Economic Review, 100(5), 2157–2186.
(2012): “Gold Standard Gravity,” NBER Working Paper.
A RKOLAKIS , C. (2010): “Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in International Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 118(6), 1151–1199.
A RKOLAKIS , C., A. C OSTINOT, D. D ONALDSON ,

AND

A. R ODRIGUEZ -C LARE (2012): “The Elu-

sive Pro-Competitive Effects of Trade,” mimeo.
A RKOLAKIS , C., A. C OSTINOT,

AND

A. R ODRÍGUEZ -C LARE (2012): “New Trade Models, Same

Old Gains?,” American Economic Review, 102(1), 94–130.
A RKOLAKIS , C., S. D EMIDOVA , P. J. K LENOW,

AND

A. R ODRÍGUEZ -C LARE (2008): “Endogenous

Variety and the Gains from Trade,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 98(4), 444–
450.
A RKOLAKIS , C., N. R AMONDO , A. R ODRIGUEZ -C LARE ,

AND

S. Y EAPLE (2012): “Innovation and

Production in the Global Economy,” mimeo.
ATKESON , A.,

AND

A. B URSTEIN (2008): “Pricing to Market, Trade Costs, and International Rela-

tive Prices,” American Economic Review, 98(5), 1998–2031.
(2010): “Innovation, Firm Dynamics, and International Trade,” Journal of Political Economy,
118(3), 433–489.
B ALDWIN , R. E.,

AND

A. J. V ENABLES (1995): Regional economic integration, vol. 3 of Handbook of

International Economics. Elsevier.
56

B ALISTRERI , E., R. H ILLBERRY,

AND

T. R UTHERFORD (2011): “Structural Estimation and Solution

of International Trade Model with Heterogeneous Firms,” Journal of Intermational Economics,
83(1), 95–108.
B ALISTRERI , E., AND T. R UTHERFORD (2012): Computing General Equilibrium Theories of Monopolistic Competition and Heterogeneous Firms, Handbook of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling. Elsevier.
B ALISTRERI , E. J., R. H. H ILLBERRY,

AND

T. F. R UTHERFORD (2009): “Trade and Welfare: Does

Industrial Organization Matter,” Economics Letters, 109(2), 85–87, Manuscript, University of Melbourne.
B ERMAN , E., J. B OUND , AND Z. G RILICHES (1994): “Changes in Demand for Skilled Labor within
US Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufactures,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 109(2), 367–397.
B ERNARD , A. B., J. E ATON , J. B. J ENSEN ,

AND

S. K ORTUM (2003): “Plants and Productivity in

International Trade,” American Economic Review, 93(4), 1268–1290.
B ERNARD , A. B., S. J. R EDDING , AND P. S CHOTT (2007): “Comparative Advantage and Heterogeneous Firms,” Review of Economic Studies, 74(1), 31–66.
B ERNHOFEN , D. M.,

AND

J. C. B ROWN (2005): “An Empirical Assessment of the Comparative

Advantage Gains from Trade: Evidence from Japan,” American Economic Review, 95(1), 208–225.
B RODA , C.,

AND

D. W EINSTEIN (2006): “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” Quarterly

Journal of Economics, 121(2), 541–585.
B ROWN , D., A. D EARDORFF ,

AND

R. S TERN (1992): “A North American Free Trade Agreement:

Analytic Issues and a Computational Assessment,” The World Economy, 15, 15–29.
B URSTEIN , A.,

J. C RAVINO (2011): “Measured Aggregate Gains from International Trade,”

AND

mimeo.
B URSTEIN , A., J. C RAVINO , AND J. V OGEL (2011): “Importing Skill-Biased Technology,” mimeo.
B URSTEIN , A.,

A. M ONGE -N ARANJO (2009): “Foreign Know-How, Firm Control, and the

AND

Income of Developing Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(1), 149–195.
B URSTEIN , A.,

AND

J. V OGEL (2010): “Globalization, Technology, and the Skill Premium,” Manu-

script, Columbia University and UCLA.
C ALIENDO , L.,

AND

F. PARRO (2010): “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA,”

Manuscript, University of Chicago and Yale University.
C HANEY, T. (2008): “Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International
Trade,” The American Economic Review, 98(4), 1707–1721.
57

C HETTY, R. (2009): “Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural and
Reduced-Form Methods,” Annual Review of Economics, 1, 451–488.
C HOR , D. (2010): “Unpacking Sources of Comparative Advantage: A Quantitative Approach,”
forth. Journal of International Economics.
C OSTINOT, A.,

D. D ONALDSON (2011): “How Large Are the Gains from Economic Integra-

AND

tion? Theory and Evidence from U.S. Agriculture, 1880-2002,” mimeo MIT.
C OSTINOT, A., D. D ONALDSON , AND I. K OMUNJER (2010): “What Goods Do Countries Trade? A
Quantitative Exploration of Ricardo’s Ideas,” Forthcoming, Review of Economic Studies.
C OX , D.,

AND

R. H ARRIS (1992): “North American Free Trade and Its Implications for Canada:

Results from a CGE Model of North American Trade,” The World Economy, 15, 31–44.
C ROZET, M.,

AND

P. K OENIG (2010): “Structural gravity equation with extensive and intensive

margins,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 43(1).
D AWKINS , C., T. S RINIVASAN ,

AND

J. W HALLEY (2001): Calibration, vol. 5 of Handbook of Econo-

metrics. Elsevier.
DE

B LAS , B.,

AND

K. N. R USS (2010): “Teams of Rivals: Endogenous Markups in a Ricardian

World,” NBER Working Paper, 16587.
D EKLE , R., J. E ATON ,

AND

S. K ORTUM (2008): “Global Rebalancing with Gravity: Measuring the

Burden of Adjustment,” IMF Staff Papers, 55(3), 511–540.
D EMIDOVA , S.,

AND

A. R ODRÍGUEZ -C LARE (2009): “Trade policy under firm-level heterogeneity

in a small economy,” Journal of International Economics, 78(1), 100–112.
D HINGRA , S.,

AND

J. M ORROW (2012): “The Impact of Integration on Productivity and Welfare

Distortions Under Monopolistic Competition,” mimeo, LSE.
D I G IOVANNI , J.,

AND

A. A. L EVCHENKO (2009): “Firm Entry, Trade, and Welfare in Zipf’s

World,” Manuscript, University of Michigan.
D ONALDSON , D. (2008): “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Economic Impact of Transportation
Infrastructure,” Manuscript, London School of Economics.
E ATON , J.,

AND

S. K ORTUM (2001): “Trade in Capital Goods,” European Economic Review, 45(7),

1195–1235.
(2002): “Technology, Geography and Trade,” Econometrica, 70(5), 1741–1779.
E ATON , J., S. K ORTUM ,

AND

F. K RAMARZ (2011): “An Anatomy of International Trade: Evidence

from French Firms,” Econometrica, 79(5), 1453–1498.

58

E ATON , J., S. K ORTUM ,

AND

S. S OTELO (2012): “International Trade: Linking Micro and Macro,”

NBER working paper 17864.
E DMOND , C., V. M IDRIGAN ,

AND

D. X U (2011): “Competition, Markups and the Gains from

Trade,” mimeo, Duke and NYU.
E THIER , W. J. (1982a): “Decreasing Costs in International Trade and Frank Graham’s Argument
for Protection,” Econometrica, 50(5), 1243–1268.
(1982b): “National and International Returns to Scale in the Modern Theory of International Trade,” American Economic Review, 72(3), 389–405.
FAN , H., E. L AI , AND H. Q I (2013): “Global Gains from Reduction of Trade Costs,” Unpublished.
F EENSTRA , R. C. (1994): “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices,”
The American Economic Review, 84(1), 157–177.
(1995): Estimating the Effects of Trade Policy, vol. 3 of Handbook of International Economics.
Elsevier.
(2003): “A Homothetic Utility Function for Monopolistic Competition Models, Without
Constant Price Elasticity,” Economics Letters, 78(1), 79–86.
(2010): “Measuring the Gains from Trade under Monopolistic Competition,” Canadian
Journal of Economics, pp. 1–28, Manuscript, University of California, Davis.
F EENSTRA , R. C., M. O BSTFELD , AND K. N. R USS (2013): “In Search of the Armington Elasticity,”
mimeo.
F EENSTRA , R. C., AND D. W EINSTEIN (2010): “Globalization, Markups, and the U.S. Price Level,”
NBER working paper, 15749.
F ELBERMAYR , G., B. J UNG ,

AND

M. L ARCH (2013): “Icebergs versus Tariffs: A Quantitative Per-

spective on the Gains from Trade,” Unpublished.
F ELBERMAYR , G. J., B. J UNG , AND M. L ARCH (2011): “Optimal Tariffs, Retaliation and the Welfare
Loss from Tariff Wars in the Melitz Model,” CESifo Working Paper Series.
F EYRER , J. (2009a): “Distance, Trade, and Income – The 1967 to 1975 Closing of the Suez Canal as
a Natural Experiment,” NBER Working Paper.
(2009b): “Trade and Income – Exploiting Time Series in Geography,” NBER Working Paper,
14910.
F IELER , A. C. (2011): “Nonhomotheticity and Bilateral Trade: Evidence and a Quantitative Explanation,” Econometrica, 79(4), 1069–1101.

59

F ITZGERALD , D. (forthcoming): “Trade Costs, Asset Market Frictions, and Risk Sharing,” American Economic Review.
F RANKEL , J. A.,

AND

D. R OMER (1999): “Does Trade Cause Growth,” The American Economic

Review, 89(3), 379–399.
G ARETTO , S. (2012): “Input Sourcing and Multinational Production,” mimeo Boston University.
G OLDBERG , P., A. K HANDELWAL , N. PAVCNIK ,

AND

P. T OPALOVA (2009): “Trade Liberalization

and New Imported Inputs,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 99(2), 494–500.
G ROS , D. (1987): “A Note on the Optimal Tariff, Retaliation and the Welfare Loss from Tariff Wars
in a Framework with Intra-Industry Trade,” Journal of Intermational Economics, 23, 357–367.
H ARBERGER , A. C. (1964): “The Measurement of Waste,” American Economic Review, 54(3), 58–76.
H ARRISON , A. E.,

AND

A. R ODRÍGUEZ -C LARE (2010): Trade, Foreign Investment, and Industrial

Policy for Developing Countries, vol. 5 of Handbook of Development Economics. Elsevier.
H EAD , K., AND T. M AYER (2013): Gravity Equations: Toolkit, Cookbook, Workhorse, vol. 4 of Handbook
of International Economics. Elsevier.
H EAD , K.,

AND

J. R IES (2001): “Increasing Returns versus National Product Differentiation as an

Explanation for the Pattern of U.S.-Canada Trade,” American Economic Review, 91(4), 858–876.
H ELPMAN , E.,

AND

P. K RUGMAN (1985): Market Structure and Foreign Trade: Increasing Returns,

Imperfect Competition, and the International Economy. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
H ELPMAN , E.,

AND

P. R. K RUGMAN (1989): Trade Policy and Market Structure. MIT Press, Cam-

bridge, Massachussetts.
H ELPMAN , E., M. M ELITZ ,

AND

Y. R UBINSTEIN (2008): “Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Part-

ners and Trading Volumes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2(5), 441–487.
H ERTEL , T. (1997): Global Trade Analysis: Modeling and Applications. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
H OLMES , T. J., W.-T. H SU ,

AND

S. L EE (2010): “Plants and Productivity in Regional Agglomera-

tion,” mimeo, University of Minnesota.
H SIEH , C.-T.,

AND

R. O SSA (2011): “A Global View of Productivity Growth in China and India,”

NBER Working Paper.
H UMMELS , D.,

AND

R. H ILLBERRY (2012): Trade Elasticity Parameters for a CGE Model, Handbook

of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling. Elsevier.
I MBS , J., AND I. M EJEAN (2011): “Elasticity Optimism,” mimeo.
60

I RWIN , D. A. (1998): “Changes in U.S. Tariffs: The Role of Import Prices and Commercial Policies,”
American Economic Review, 88(4), 1015–1026.
(2005): “The Welfare Costs of Autarky: Evidence from the Jeffersonian Embargo, 18071809,” Review of International Economics, 13, 631–645.
J OHNSON , H. (1960): “The Cost of Protection and the Scientific Tariff,” Journal of Political Economy,
68, 327–345.
K ATZ , L.,

AND

K. M URPHY (1992): “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and Demand

Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), 35–78.
K EE , H. L., A. N ICITA ,

AND

M. O LARREAGA (2008): “Import Demand Elasticities and Trade

Distortions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(4), 666–682.
K EHOE , T. J. (2005): “An Evaluation of the Performance of Applied General Equilibrium Models
of the Impact of NAFTA,” in Frontiers in Applied General Equilibrium Modeling, ed. by T. J. Kehoe,
T. Srinivasan, and J. Whalley, pp. 341–377. Cambridge University Press, New York.
K LENOW, P. J., AND A. R ODRÍGUEZ -C LARE (1997): “Quantifying Variety Gains from Trade Liberalization,” Manuscript, University of Chicago.
K RUGMAN , P. (1979): “Increasing Returns Monopolistic Competition and International Trade,”
Journal of International Economics, 9(4), 469–479.
K RUGMAN , P. (1980): “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,” The
American Economic Review, 70(5), 950–959.
(1995): Increasing Returns, Imperfect Competition, and the Positive Theory of International Trade,
vol. 3 of Handbook of International Economics. Elsevier.
K RUGMAN , P.,

AND

A. J. V ENABLES (1995): “Globalization and the Inequality of Nations,” Quar-

terly Journal of Economics, 110(4), 857–880.
L AI , H., AND D. T REFLER (2002): “The Gains from Trade with Monopolistic Competition: Specification, Estimation, and Mis-Specification,” NBER Working Paper.
L EAMER , E. E.,

AND

J. E. L EVINSOHN (1995): International Trade Theory: The Evidence, vol. 3 of

Handbook of International Economics. Elsevier.
L EVCHENKO , A. A., AND J. Z HANG (2011): “The Evolution of Comparative Advantage: Measurement and Welfare Implications,” mimeo University of Michigan.
M C D ANIEL , C., AND E. J. B ALISTRERI (2003): “A review of Armington Trade Substitution Elasticities,” Integration and Trade, 18(7), 161–173.

61

M ELITZ , M.,

AND

S. R EDDING (2013): Heterogeneous Firms and Trade, vol. 4 of Handbook of Interna-

tional Economics. Elsevier.
M ELITZ , M.,

AND

D. T REFLER (2012): “Gains from Trade when Firms Matter,” Journal of Economic

Perspectives, 26(2).
M ELITZ , M. J. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695–1725.
M ELITZ , M. J., AND G. I. P. O TTAVIANO (2008): “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity,” The Review
of Economic Studies, 75(1), 295–316.
O LLEY, S.,

AND

A. PAKES (1996): “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications

Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 64(6), 1263–1298.
O SSA , R. (2011a): “A "New Trade" Theory of GATT/WTO Negotiations,” Journal of Political Economy, 119(1), 112–152.
(2011b): “Trade Wars and Trade Talks with Data,” NBER Working Paper.
(2012): “Why Trade Matters After All,” mimeo.
PARRO , F. (2012): “Capital-Skill Complementarity and the Skill Premium in a Quantitative Model
of Trade,” mimeo.
PAVCNIK , N. (2002): “Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence from
Chilean Plants,” The Review of Economic Studies, 69(1), 245–276.
P RESCOTT, E. C., AND E. M C G RATTAN (2010): “Technology Capital and the US Current Account,”
American Economic Review, 100(4), 1493–1522.
R AMONDO , N. (2012): “A Quantitative Approach to Multinational Production,” mimeo.
R AMONDO , N.,

AND

A. R ODRÍGUEZ -C LARE (2013): “Trade, Multinational Production, and the

Gains from Openness,” Journal of Political Economy, 121(2), 273–322.
R UTHERFORD , T. F. (2002): “Lecture Notes on Constant Elasticity Functions,” mimeo University of
Colorado.
S AMUELSON , P. A. (1939): “The Gains from International Trade,” Canadian Journal of Economics,
5(2), 195–205.
S HAPIRO , J. (2012): “Trade, CO2, and the Environment,” mimeo MIT.
S HIKHER , S. (forthcominga): “Predicting the Effects of NAFTA: Now we can do it better!,” Economic Inquiry.

62

(forthcomingb): “Putting Industries into the Eaton-Kortum Model,” Journal of International
Trade and Economic Development.
S IMONOVSKA , I.,

AND

M. WAUGH (2011): “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evidence,”

mimeo.
(2012): “Different Trade Models, Different Trade Elasticities?,” mimeo.
S OBARZO , H. (1992): “A General Equilibrium Analysis of the Gains from NAFTA for the Mexican
Economy,” The World Economy, 15, 83–100.
T IMMER , M. (2012): “The World Input-Output Database (WIOD): Contents, Sources and Methods,” WIOD Working Paper.
T INBERGEN , J. (1962): Shaping the World Economy. New York: The Twentieth Century Fund.
T REFLER , D. (1993): “International Factor Price Differences: Leontief Was Right!,” Journal of Political Economy, 101(6), 961–987.
(2004): “The Long and Short of the Canada-US Free Trade Agreement,” American Economic
Review, 94(4), 870–895.
T YBOUT, J. R. (2001): “Plant- and Firm-Level Evidence on "New" Trade Theories,” NBER Working
Paper, 8418.
WAUGH , M. (2010): “International Trade and Income Differences,” American Economic Review,
100(5), 2093–2124.

63

Gj expressed in percentages computed using:
One Sector
(12)

Multiple Sectors, No
Intermediates (23)

Multiple Sectors, with Intermediates (29)

Perfect
Perfect
Monopolistic Competition
Competition Competition (data alphas)
Country
AUS
AUT
BEL
BRA
CAN
CHN
CZE
DEU
DNK
ESP
FIN
FRA
GBR
GRC
HUN
IDN
IND
IRL
ITA
JPN
KOR
MEX
NLD
POL
PRT
ROM
RUS
SVK
SVN
SWE
TUR
TWN
USA
RoW
Average

Perfect
Competition

Monop.
Comp.
(Krugman)

Monop.
Comp.
(Melitz)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

2.3%
5.7%
7.5%
1.5%
3.8%
2.6%
6.0%
4.5%
5.8%
3.1%
4.4%
3.0%
3.2%
4.2%
8.1%
2.9%
2.4%
8.0%
2.9%
1.7%
4.3%
3.3%
6.2%
4.4%
4.4%
4.5%
2.4%
7.6%
6.8%
5.1%
2.9%
6.1%
1.8%
5.2%

8.6%
30.3%
32.7%
3.7%
17.4%
4.0%
16.8%
12.7%
30.2%
9.0%
11.1%
9.4%
12.9%
16.3%
29.8%
5.5%
4.6%
23.5%
8.7%
1.4%
3.9%
11.1%
24.3%
18.4%
23.8%
17.7%
18.0%
22.2%
39.6%
12.5%
11.9%
9.6%
4.4%
15.2%

3.7%
30.5%
32.4%
4.3%
15.3%
4.0%
21.2%
17.6%
24.8%
9.5%
10.5%
11.1%
11.7%
4.7%
31.3%
4.0%
4.3%
14.2%
9.2%
3.7%
8.6%
12.1%
23.1%
19.7%
20.6%
12.7%
0.9%
23.6%
39.3%
14.5%
13.3%
9.9%
3.8%
7.3%

15.8%
49.5%
54.6%
6.3%
30.2%
11.5%
34.0%
21.3%
41.4%
18.3%
20.2%
17.2%
21.6%
23.7%
53.5%
13.1%
9.2%
37.1%
16.4%
4.6%
12.5%
18.4%
40.1%
33.8%
35.9%
26.4%
35.9%
48.3%
57.8%
24.4%
20.0%
19.9%
8.3%
33.3%

15.7%
49.0%
54.2%
6.4%
29.5%
11.2%
37.2%
22.5%
45.0%
17.5%
20.3%
16.8%
22.4%
24.7%
55.3%
11.6%
8.6%
38.9%
16.2%
3.5%
11.4%
18.6%
39.8%
34.5%
37.4%
29.2%
30.7%
50.5%
61.6%
23.6%
20.9%
19.4%
8.0%
28.4%

6.9%
57.6%
63.0%
9.7%
33.0%
28.0%
65.1%
41.4%
42.0%
24.4%
24.2%
25.8%
22.2%
6.8%
75.7%
11.2%
9.5%
28.1%
21.7%
20.7%
44.1%
24.3%
43.4%
46.9%
36.7%
20.8%
-2.1%
78.6%
71.3%
36.6%
26.4%
28.6%
8.6%
18.1%

6.8%
64.3%
70.9%
12.7%
39.8%
77.9%
86.7%
52.9%
44.8%
30.5%
28.0%
32.1%
23.5%
6.1%
91.0%
14.6%
11.7%
29.1%
26.5%
32.7%
70.2%
28.4%
47.6%
57.0%
40.3%
20.7%
-7.1%
96.4%
79.7%
45.8%
29.5%
37.8%
10.3%
21.8%

4.4%

15.3%

14.0%

26.9%

27.1%

32.3%

40.0%

Table 1: The numbers in parenthesis indicate the equation used for the computation. All data is
from WIOD and trade elasticities are from Caliendo and Parro (2010). Perfect competition and
monopolistic competition are obtained from the formulas using δs = 0 for all s and δs = 1 for all s,
respectively. Results for the Krugman and Melitz models are obtained setting η s = 0 for all s and
setting η s = 0.65 for all s, respectively.

64

Welfare E ffec t of T ariffs under P erfec t C ompetition
Unilateral US 40% T ariff
O ne S ec tor

1
-0.10%
-0.09%
-0.16%
-0.10%
-1.20%
-0.22%
-0.05%
-0.16%
-0.20%
-0.06%
-0.09%
-0.09%
-0.16%
-0.08%
-0.13%
-0.09%
-0.16%
-0.91%
-0.07%
-0.11%
-0.21%
-1.08%
-0.22%
-0.04%
-0.06%
-0.03%
-0.03%
-0.05%
-0.06%
-0.15%
-0.03%
-0.46%
0.21%
-0.49%
-0.20%

O ne S ec tor

Multiple S ec tors

Without
Intermediates
C ountry
AUS
AUT
BE L
BR A
C AN
C HN
C ZE
DE U
D NK
ESP
F IN
FRA
GBR
GRC
HUN
ID N
IND
IR L
IT A
JPN
KOR
ME X
NL D
POL
PRT
R OM
R US
S VK
S VN
S WE
T UR
TWN
US A
R OW
Average

Uniform Worldwide 40% T ariff

Without
Intermediates ,
With
With
Dis pers ion
Intermediates

2
-0.13%
-0.06%
-0.12%
-0.08%
-1.16%
-0.14%
-0.03%
-0.10%
-0.09%
-0.04%
-0.04%
-0.07%
-0.15%
-0.02%
-0.06%
-0.06%
-0.13%
-0.56%
-0.03%
-0.06%
-0.14%
-0.87%
-0.16%
-0.03%
-0.05%
0.00%
-0.06%
-0.01%
-0.04%
-0.08%
-0.01%
-0.34%
0.41%
-0.43%
-0.14%

3
-0.11%
-0.05%
-0.10%
-0.07%
-0.97%
-0.12%
-0.02%
-0.08%
-0.08%
-0.03%
-0.03%
-0.05%
-0.13%
-0.01%
-0.05%
-0.05%
-0.11%
-0.48%
-0.03%
-0.05%
-0.12%
-0.73%
-0.13%
-0.03%
-0.04%
0.01%
-0.04%
-0.01%
-0.03%
-0.07%
-0.01%
-0.29%
0.27%
-0.37%
-0.12%

4
-0.23%
0.01%
-0.18%
-0.14%
-2.21%
-0.16%
0.10%
0.15%
-0.15%
-0.33%
0.01%
-0.19%
-0.33%
-0.60%
-0.26%
-0.11%
-0.34%
-1.22%
-0.12%
-0.07%
-0.27%
-1.72%
-0.06%
-0.17%
-0.46%
-0.48%
0.03%
0.00%
-0.22%
0.01%
-0.24%
-0.52%
0.43%
-1.14%
-0.33%

5
-1.26%
-2.98%
-3.96%
-0.81%
-2.06%
-1.56%
-3.16%
-2.48%
-3.04%
-1.47%
-2.36%
-1.51%
-1.66%
-1.84%
-4.19%
-1.56%
-1.17%
-4.41%
-1.47%
-0.92%
-2.31%
-1.74%
-3.33%
-2.21%
-2.13%
-2.08%
-1.30%
-3.97%
-3.50%
-2.71%
-1.34%
-3.40%
-0.80%
-2.69%
-2.27%

Multiple S ec tors

Without
Intermediates

With
Intermediates

6
-1.38%
-2.04%
-2.63%
-0.43%
-2.14%
-0.43%
-1.34%
-0.74%
-1.32%
-0.71%
-0.94%
-0.60%
-1.50%
-1.65%
-2.54%
-0.82%
-0.71%
-2.17%
-0.46%
0.24%
0.22%
-1.11%
-1.71%
-1.28%
-1.85%
-2.15%
-2.84%
-2.52%
-2.44%
-1.23%
-0.45%
-1.85%
-0.44%
-2.45%
-1.37%

7
-2.82%
-4.42%
-6.85%
-0.85%
-4.20%
-1.98%
-4.75%
-1.63%
-3.78%
-2.24%
-2.80%
-1.58%
-3.28%
-3.76%
-7.75%
-2.34%
-1.78%
-6.61%
-1.44%
0.06%
-1.14%
-2.48%
-3.99%
-3.47%
-4.25%
-5.25%
-4.83%
-6.88%
-6.31%
-3.14%
-1.54%
-5.03%
-1.17%
-6.09%
-3.54%

Table 2: Counterfactual results are computed using the exact hat algebra. All data is from WIOD
and trade elasticities are from Caliendo and Parro (2010). See online Appendix for details.
Welfare E ffec t of a 40% Worldwide T ariff
Without intermediates
P erfec t
C ompetition
R eg ion
P acific O cean
W es tern E urope
E as tern E urope
L atin America
North America
C hina
S outhern E urope
Northern E urope
Indian O cean
R oW
Average

1
-0.1%
-0.8%
-2.2%
-0.7%
-0.6%
-0.7%
-0.8%
-1.6%
-0.8%
-3.2%
-1.2%

Monopolis tic
C ompetition
K rug man
Melitz
2
-1.7%
-3.6%
-2.1%
-2.3%
-0.7%
-1.7%
-2.5%
-3.5%
-1.3%
-2.1%
-2.1%

3
-1.7%
-3.5%
-1.9%
-2.2%
-0.7%
-1.6%
-2.5%
-3.3%
-1.2%
-1.8%
-2.0%

With intermediates
P erfec t
C ompetition
4
-0.6%
-1.7%
-4.5%
-1.5%
-1.2%
-2.6%
-1.8%
-3.3%
-1.9%
-6.6%
-2.6%

Monopolis tic
C ompetition
K rug man
Melitz
5
-6.4%
-10.0%
-7.2%
-5.2%
-1.7%
-14.5%
-6.8%
-8.6%
-4.0%
-6.7%
-7.1%

6
-6.6%
-13.3%
-10.3%
-6.5%
-2.0%
-40.0%
-8.4%
-9.5%
-5.7%
-8.9%
-11.1%

Table 3: Counterfactual results are computed using the exact hat algebra. All data is from WIOD
and trade elasticities are from Caliendo and Parro (2010). See online Appendix for details.

65

