                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      A SPATIAL APPROACH TO ENERGY ECONOMICS

                                            Juan Moreno Cruz
                                             M. Scott Taylor

                                          Working Paper 18908
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w18908


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2013




Parts of this paper are cannibalized from "Back to the Future of Green Powered Economies" NBER
(2012, No. 18236). We are very grateful to seminar participants in several countries, and for the hospitality
of the Energy Institute at Haas, University of California Berkeley and the Henri Poincare Institute
in Paris, France where a portion of this work was conducted. We would like to thank, without implicating,
Bob Allen, John Boyce, Jared Carbone, Oded Galor, Gene Grossman, David Laband, Arvind Magesan,
and Jim Wilen for comments on earlier drafts or portions of this work. Excellent research assistance
was provided by Nolan Derby, Rui Wan, Mingtao Xu, and Jevan Cherniwchan. The usual disclaimer
applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Juan Moreno Cruz and M. Scott Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
A Spatial Approach to Energy Economics
Juan Moreno Cruz and M. Scott Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 18908
March 2013
JEL No. Q0,Q4,R0,R12

                                             ABSTRACT

We develop a spatial model of energy exploitation where energy sources are differentiated by their
geographic location and energy density. The spatial setting creates a scaling law that magnifies the
importance of differences across energy sources. As a result, renewable sources twice as dense, provide
eight times the supply; and all new non-renewable resource plays must first boom and then bust. For
both renewable and non-renewable energy sources we link the size of exploitation zones and energy
supplies to energy density, and provide empirical measures of key model attributes using data on solar,
wind, biomass, and fossil fuel energy sources. Non-renewable sources are four or five orders of magnitude
more dense than renewables, implying that the most salient feature of the last 200 years of energy
history is the dramatic rise in the use of energy dense fuels.


Juan Moreno Cruz
School of Economics
Georgia Institute of Technology
221Bobby Dodd Way
Atlanta, Georgia 30332
juan.moreno-cruz@econ.gatech.edu

M. Scott Taylor
IEE Canada Research Chair
Department of Economics
The University of Calgary
2500 University Drive, N.W.
Calgary, AB T2N 1N4
CANADA
and NBER
mstaylor@ucalgary.ca
1       Introduction
Energy is the most important commodity in the world today. And by almost any metric,
the energy industry is impossibly large. Yearly energy sales at over 10 trillion dollars dwarf
expenditures on any other single commodity; trade and transport of energy is immense
with over 3 trillion dollars in international transactions driving product deliveries through 2
million kilometers of pipelines and 500 million deadweight tons of merchant shipping; 8 of
the 10 largest global corporations are energy companies; and a third of the global shipping
ﬂeet is occupied shipping oil. Given these ﬁgures it may not be surprising that world energy
consumption takes the energy equivalent of over 2800 barrels of oil per second to quench.1
    Against this background of facts and ﬁgures testifying to the enormity of energy in our
world today, stands an energy economics literature that is very applied in focus, and often
partial equilibrium in nature. While general equilibrium and more aggregative approaches to
energy economics are not uncommon, most energy economists today eschew a more abstract
and aggregative approach to energy for a decidedly micro-based attention to individual mar-
kets, ﬁrms and energy supplies. This IO approach to energy is quite natural and appropriate
given energy is not a homogenous commodity; energy ﬁrms often wield substantial market
power; and government regulation is ubiquitous - but one wonders, what questions are left
unanswered as a result.2
    The purpose of this paper is to introduce a new, and decidedly abstract and aggregative,
approach to energy economics that may be useful in answering some of the more macro
questions surrounding energy use and economic activity. We think our approach may
prove useful to researchers examining long run and large scale questions regarding energy
transitions, the role of energy in economic growth, and the impact of energy supplies on
economic geography.
    Our approach is informed by three key observations. The ﬁrst is that energy is not
physically scarce. The second is that exploiting far ﬂung energy resources and moving
energy to markets is primarily what the energy industry does. And third, perhaps the
most important attribute of an energy source is its density: its ability to deliver substantial
power relative to its weight or physical dimensions. To implement an approach based on
these observations we build a very simple spatial model of energy exploitation where the
location and density of available energy resources determines the amount of energy available
for economic activity in a city center or core.
    The assumptions we adopt eliminate any role for physical scarcity by assuming energy
    1
    See the appendix for sources and methods of construction.
    2
    A short list of important contributions typefying the IO approach are Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak
(2002), Joskow and Kahn (2002), and Wolfram (1999).


                                                   2
resources are limitless, but still costly to exploit. Exploitation requires transportation to
the core, and these costs limit energy use. Since energy resources are located in geographic
space, the density of energy resources at any location aﬀects deliveries and ultimate energy
supplies. Together these assumptions produce our “Only Energy” model where the location
and density of energy resources determines economic outcomes.
    We think a spatial approach is valuable for many reasons. Apart from descriptive realism,
a spatial approach allows us to focus on the limits to energy use created when resources are
sourced from distant or diﬃcult to exploit regions. Many sources of energy available today -
solar, wind, coal and non-conventional oil and gas - represent vast, almost limitless, potential
supplies. The economic costs of exploiting them however limits their use. For example,
the costs of transporting energy today determines the impact local energy sources have on
economic development, and transport costs explain why we enlarge markets for natural gas
by liquefaction and solar power by concentration.
    Several results from our model echo these observations. We ﬁnd the extent to which
we exploit diﬃcult or distant energy sources is determined by their energy density. Low
density energy sources like straw or wood must be sourced nearby. Dense energy sources like
fossil fuels can be exploited at great distances, and our spatial approach produces a natural
deﬁnition of a resource frontier. Resources within this frontier constitute the intensive
margin of use and generate large rents; resources at the frontier are by deﬁnition marginal,
earn zero rents and deﬁne the extensive margin. For example, arctic oil and some forms of
tar sands production may deﬁne the resource frontier for oil today, while Saudi crude is part
of the intensive margin.
    This focus on the resource frontier also reveals an important scaling law linking the
extensive margin of exploitation to energy supply. Altering the density of available energy
resources creates changes at both intensive and extensive margins. Energy supply rises
proportionately with energy density at the intensive margin, but having denser resources to
exploit means the extensive margin rises as well. In a spatial setting this implies a scaling
law: the area of exploitation (or exploration) scales with the square of the extensive margin
in a two dimensional setting.
    This scaling law plays out diﬀerently for renewables and non-renewables. Common to
both is the result that once we combine the adjustments on both margins we ﬁnd that
energy supplies (or potential reserves) are homogenous of degree three in our measure of
energy density. This implies, in the case of renewables, that access to an energy source
twice as energy dense delivers eight times the energy supply. In the case of non-renewables,
we ﬁnd that every new resource play must ﬁrst boom and then (optimally) bust. Extractions
at ﬁrst rise and then fall, and peak extractions are also increasing in the energy density of


                                               3
the resource.
    To these impacts we must also add dense energy resources provide strong incentives
for improvements in transportation. We ﬁrst show how the (exogenous) introduction of a
low cost transportation option act as if it magniﬁes the energy density of available nearby
resources; placing a road or river near our core is equivalent to endowing the region with
resources of higher energy density. Then, and perhaps not surprisingly, we show how the
existence of energy dense resources creates large incentives for (endogenous) investments
in infrastructure. Together these two results reveal a strong complementarity: energy
dense resources beget large investments; and large investments can make any distribution of
resources appear more energy dense.
    These results tell us why the energy infrastructure for oil is the largest and most com-
plicated ever constructed for a single commodity; why villagers in Africa only collect crop
residue and dung from nearby sources; why charcoal is created worldwide despite an incredi-
bly ineﬃcient process; and why canals were laboriously developed almost exclusively to move
coal in the 19th century but not ﬁrewood, grain or people in earlier centuries. They are also
suggestive of the strong tendency we see towards natural monopoly in the transmission and
distribution of many of today’s energy dense resources.
    Finally, a spatial approach may well be appropriate in a world soon to contain over 9
billion people. Rising populations are likely to make the areal constraint faced by renew-
able energies tighter while ongoing and even accelerating urbanization raises the geographic
density of energy demands. Indeed the most salient feature of the history of world energy
consumption in the last two hundred years is the world’s increasing reliance on very dense
energy sources delivered to rapidly growing cities in a rapidly urbanizing world. To meet
these challenges and those of climate change, both renewable and non-renewable energies are
required, and we provide a common framework for thinking about how the supplies of both
renewable and non-renewables energy sources may meet this challenge. Moreover, we do
so by operating at a resolution level somewhere between the highly detailed industry level
studies of the IO approach to energy economics and the highly abstract and aggregative
analysis common to resource economics and growth theory.3 Indeed we hope to bridge this
gap by showing how detailed discussions of power concepts, transport costs, and resource
frontiers can be incorporated into a highly abstract and aggregate setting potentially useful
to future work in energy, resource and growth economics.4
    Introducing new theory requires new measurements as well, and hence we provide meth-
   3
     For a recent treatment see Acemoglu et.al. 2012. A very nice review of several of the energy, environment
and growth issues is contained in Smulders (2005).
   4
     One such extension is contained in Moreno-Cruz and Taylor (2012).



                                                      4
ods to measure energy densities for both renewable and non-renewable resources. Energy
density can be measured in a variety of ways. One method is to rank sources according to
their energy content measured in Joules/kg. Under this metric, the energy contained in a
kg of crop residue is less than that in a kg of wood, which is in turn less than that of coal,
and less than that of oil. While this metric for density is very useful for resources like fossil
fuels, it may be less useful for many renewables. Another possible method recognizes that
some energy resources take up large areas for their maintenance and exploitation (crops,
forest resources, game animals, solar power installations and wind farms) in comparison to
what might be called punctiform resources where energy resources are highly concentrated
geographically (coal, fast moving rivers and uranium). To capture the areal implications of
these resources we can measure the ﬂow of energy per unit area these resources can deliver
taking into account the area needed for exploitation or maintenance. This second method is
in fact a generalization of the ﬁrst since it captures both the energy content of sources (key
to fossil fuels) and their geographic requirements (key to many renewables).
    Since power is the ﬂow of energy per unit time, typically measured in W atts, power den-
sity measures the ﬂow of energy a source can provide in W atts per unit area needed for its
exploitation and maintenance.5 In the case of renewables power density comes directly from
the area requirement for a resource (say timber or biofuels or solar power), together with its
ability to provide a steady state ﬂow of energy measured in W atts. To facilitate measure-
ment we provide a neat decomposition of the power density of renewable resources into three
resource characteristics: its intrinsic growth rate, its physical density in the environment or
yield; and its energy content.
    In the case of non-renewables surface area is still important, but high energy content
non-renewable resources are primarily found subsurface, and energy ﬂows now come from
the depletion of energy stocks. To make renewables and non-renewables commensurate we
aggregate over the sub-surface deposits using the marginal costs of recovery. Using this
method we provide a simple decomposition linking the power density of non-renewables to
their energy contents and physical density in the environment. With these methods in hand
we then provide estimates of the power density for various food crops, fuel wood, renewable
power sources, coal and oil. Although exact measures depend on site speciﬁc assumptions
regarding deposit quality, in general we ﬁnd non-renewables are several orders of magnitude
more dense than renewables.
    Our work is of course related to previous contributions in both energy and resource eco-
nomics, and has beneﬁtted in perhaps less obvious ways from the contributions of economic
  5
   Expending one Joule of energy per second provides one W att of power.   Power density is typically
measured in W atts per m2 .



                                                5
historians.6 Although the Only Energy model is constructed from ﬁrst principles, it bears
some resemblance to von Thunen’s model of an Isolated State. In contrast to von Thunen
however, transport costs and, by implication, the extensive margin are set by appeal to
physical laws governing energy use and work. It seems only appropriate in a model oﬀering
a new approach to energy economics to go back to the basics of work, force and friction to
derive costs, deﬁne concepts, and develop measurement. By doing so we are able to gener-
ate a clear extensive margin limiting resource use and link this margin to fundamentals.7 In
addition, the physics of the problem imbue the model with a form of constant returns that
proves useful time and time again in our derivations.
    Our work is also related to two streams of the existing energy and resource literature. It
bears a family resemblance to other spatial models of resource and energy use where resources
and demand centers are treated as points in space (Gaudet, Moreaux and Salant (2001));
where consumers (Kolstad (1994)) or resources (Laﬀont and Moreaux (1986)) are distributed
on line segments; where resource pools are diﬀerentiated by costs, suggestive of a spatial
setting (Pindyck (1978), Livernois and Uhler (1987), Swierzbinski and Mendelsohn (1989),
and Chakravorty, Roumasset, and Tse (1997); and situations where resources themselves
move across space (Sanchirico and Wilen (1999)). These contributions are however quite
diﬀerent and focus on very diﬀerent questions and problems.
    Our non-renewables model is also novel but for much of our analysis we employ a refor-
mulation ﬁrst introduced by Solow and Wan (1976) to translate our spatial model (and its
assumptions) into a very tractable equivalent where resources are homogenous but extraction
is subject to rising marginal costs. In this setting our ﬁnding of a boom and bust pattern for
extractions is not novel as this possibility has long been recognized (see for example Pindyck
(1978), Livernois and Uhler (1987), and Holland (2008)).8 Our innovation here is to tightly
tie the boom and bust pattern of extractions to the implications of our scaling law; to show it
is a necessary consequence within our spatial setting; and to link the peak of the extraction
path to the energy density of resources.
    The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. In section two we develop a simple model
linking power density to energy supply. This section develops deﬁnitions and establishes
the production possibility frontier and the optimal extraction rules for both renewable and
non-renewable energy sources. We examine the renewables model in a stationary state
   6
     See for example Wrigley (2010), Smil (2008), Fouquet and Pearson (1998) and Fouquet (2006).
   7
     von Thunen’s iceberg costs have the unfortunate and clearly counterfactual implication that any energy
resource can be transported anywhere and still yield positive energy rents. See Appendix A.2 for a proof of
this assertion.
   8
     For related empirical work see the thoughtful and skeptical review of the existing Peak Oil literature by
Boyce (Forthcoming) and the early work by Slade (1982) on U-shaped paths for energy prices.



                                                      6
since recharge rates for many renewables are extremely rapid (solar, wind, hydro). The
non-renewables model is examined in a planning context to maximize its connections with
the existing literature. Section three discusses methods to measure power density. We
derive measures of power density directly from our theory and then construct empirical
counterparts using readily available data. A short conclusion ends the paper. An appendix
contains several lengthy calculations and a discussion of data sources.


2         The Only Energy Model
We develop a simple model of energy exploitation where energy is the only input and only
output of production. This simple structure allows us to introduce our assumptions on
geography and costly transport in a transparent manner and deﬁne power and energy density
measures very easily. Extensions to introduce additional factors and a market based economy
are possible.9
    We assume consumption and production activities are located at an economic core while
potential energy sources are distributed in the surrounding space. The economy’s core con-
tains all of its production and consumption units but is zero dimensional — occupies no
space. The location of the core is exogenous and ﬁxed throughout. The exploitation zones
where energy sources can be found are two dimensional planes allowing us to employ deﬁni-
tions of area, distance, and density. Distance is meant to capture any and all costs incurred
when incremental amounts of energy are exploited. Timber resources for example may only
be available some distance from the core; and for some renewable energies - solar or wind
power, or biofuels - measures of area are important to consider. For other energy sources,
like fossil fuels, area considerations are less important, but here increasing distance can re-
ﬂect the diﬃculties ﬁrms have in accessing incremental resources due to well depth, weather
conditions, and non-standard geological formations.


2.1         Renewable Resources
We ﬁrst consider the case of renewables, since it is simpler and admits a steady state analysis
that we can then modify to allow for depletion and exhaustion in the case of non-renewables.
We start with a deﬁnition. The area exploited to ﬁnd and collect energy is related to the
power obtained measured in Watts [W], and the power density measured in Watts per meter
squared [W/m2 ], of the particular energy source exploited. If the ﬂow of power obtained is
W , and the available energy source has power density Δ, then the exploitation zone we need
    9
        One such extension is developed in Moreno-Cruz and Taylor (2012).


                                                      7
to meet this demand must equal:
                                             EX = W/Δ                                                 (1)

where EX is measured in meters squared, [m2 ].

2.1.1    The Geography of Exploitation

If the energy resources are distributed uniformly, then minimum cost search implies energy
will be collected from a circular area with the economy’s core at its center. Therefore W will
be collected from a circular area with size EX deﬁned by a radius R. We assume extraction
itself is costless, but transport to the core requires use of energy.10 To determine the margin
of exploitation and energy supply the ﬁrst step is to relate the distance a resource travels
with the density of resources at that distance. The density of resources at any given radii
r less than R is simply given by the circumference at this distance, 2πr, divided by the sum
of all radii up to and including the limiting radius of R. Since the total area exploited
is πR2 , the density function for energy resources must be given by f (r) = 2r/R2 . The
average distance any resource is transported is then simply the distance r times the density
of resources at that distance. We will refer to this as the average carry distance, ACD, and
it is given by:                             R
                                                               2
                                  ACD =         r[2r/R2 ]dr = R                             (2)
                                            0                  3
While we assume energy resources are uniformly distributed across (a two-dimensional)
space, it should be clear that other options are easily dealt with at some cost in terms
of tractability. In Figure 1 we depict three alternatives. For example, suppose the core
was located with resource availability in mind (not an unlikely scenario), then resources may
be dense near the core and less dense further away. This is shown in Panel 1.(a) where
shading indicates higher power densities. Alternatively, we could allow for the equally likely
possibility that a new energy source is located further from the core than was the older
established source (think of the potential wind resources on the Great Plains or solar power
farms in Arizona). This possibility is shown in Panel 1.(b). And ﬁnally, resources could
exist in patches or ﬁelds within some region, and exploitation may alter the density itself.
This possibility is depicted in Panel 1.(c).
    In principle, all of these cases can be examined with an appropriate adjustment of the
density f (r) and naturally they will generate average carry distances less than or greater
than that given in (2).11 One speciﬁc and important possibility we discuss in Section 2.2
  10
    Adding in constant per unit extraction costs adds little except notation to the analysis.
  11
    We analyze situations where resources are either patchy (there are holes) or punctiform (they diﬀer in
density) in a subsequent section.


                                                    8
                                   RR


                           CORE




              (a) Resources close to the core




                                    R



                           CORE




             (b) Resources away from the core




                                   R


                           CORE




           (c) Uneven resources around the core

Figure 1: Alternative distributions of resources on land

                            9
occurs when the exploitation of a non-renewable resource alters the density of resources in
a continuous manner hollowing out the exploitation zone over time.
   In the uniform case the area of exploitation is a circle with A = πR2 and since EX
represents the area of exploitation, we can simply link the average carry distance to the
                                                        √
energy exploited via ACD = (2/3)(EX/π)1/2 = (2/3 π)(W/Δ)1/2 using (1). ACD is
measured in meters but to calculate the work done in transporting energy resources we
need to ﬁnd what we will call “Total Carry,” measured in kg-meters. This is found by
multiplying the average carry distance by the total weight of resources transported. Total
energy resources transported is equal to the area under exploitation times the density of fuel
over this area. Therefore, Total Carry is given by:
                     ∼
                    T C = ACD × EX × d = [m][m2 ][kg/m2 ]=[kg × m]
                                 1/2
                     ∼        2    W
                    TC =     √           EX.d                                              (3)
                            3 π    Δ
                                 3/2
                     ∼       2d    W
                    TC =     √
                            3 π    Δ

where we used (1), and d is the (uniform) physical density of this resource in [kg/m2 ]. Total
carry is the number of kilogram-meters covered in transporting energy to the core when the
power requirements are W and the energy source has density Δ.
    Not surprisingly, the greater are the power requirements, the greater are total carrying
costs. Less obvious is that marginal (carrying) costs are strictly increasing in power. As
power demand rises, larger and larger areas for exploitation must come at the fringe of
already sourced areas.

2.1.2   The Physics of Transport

Production possibilities are determined by the amount of power that can be supplied to
the core. This section sets out maximum supplied power as a function of energy resource
characteristics. A ﬁrst step in doing so is to recognize that power collected does not equal
power available for use in the core. The collection and transportation of resources, like
everything else, requires power. The net power supplied to the core is equal to total power
collected in the exploitation zone, W , minus the power needed for transportation. In obvious
notation, W S = W − W T .
    To calculate the power used in transport, a little high school physics is required. Recall
Work is equal to force, f , times distance, x, or work is Wk = f · x. Force is in turn equal to
mass, M , times acceleration g; as any mass moved horizontally must overcome the force of


                                              10
gravity as mediated by friction in transport.12 All this implies:

                           Wk = μ[M · g]x = [Newton.meters] = [Joules]                                  (4)
                           Wk = μg[M · x]
                           Wk = μg[Total Carry]

where μ is the coeﬃcient of friction, g is the acceleration of gravity at 9.81m/s2 , and Wk
is then measured in Joules. This work is done per unit time since power is a ﬂow (as is
for example the ﬂow of labor and capital services that creates the ﬂow of useful output in
standard analyses).
    Choosing units is inconsequential and if we measure time in seconds, then the ﬂow of
work, Wk , measured in Joules per second is now power requirements measured in Watts.13
Putting this all together we ﬁnd that the total cost of delivering the ﬂow of power W to the
core is given by T C(W ). Using (3) and (4) we can write this total cost as:
                                                 ∼
                                     W T = μg T C(W ) = T C(W )                                         (5)

where we note T C(W ) is a strictly convex function with T C(0) = T C  (0) = 0.
    It is now a simple matter to examine how diﬀerent choices for exploitation generate
diﬀerent supplies of power delivered and available to the core. The calculation of power
supplied and delivered to the core, W S , is made easy by plotting Watts delivered against
Watts collected as shown in Figure 2. T C(W ) is the strictly convex function shown with the
properties just derived. Its vertical height at any W gives the power used in transporting
to the core the ﬂow of energy resources represented by the associated power collected on the
horizontal axis. By construction, the gap between the 45 degree line and T C(W ) represents
the power left over to supply the core. Naturally extending the exploitation zone to collect
power W E results in zero power supplied since all of it would be exhausted in transport.
In contrast, the choice W ∗ maximizes supplied power because the vertical distance between
W ∗ and T C(W ∗ ) represents maximum of W S = W ∗ − T C(W ∗ ). We will focus throughout
on choices that are optimal in this sense.
    One important feature of Figure 2 is that it depicts an energy system that is always
productive; i.e. an energy system that can provide positive supplied power to the economy
because there always exists extraction levels for which the power needed for delivery to
  12
     We are ignoring static friction encountered when the object ﬁrst moves. The force that needs to be
overcome to keep an object in motion is equal to the normal force times the coeﬃcient of friction. Since the
object is moving horizontally, the normal force is just gravity times the mass of the object . The coeﬃcient
of friction is a pure number greater than zero; and force is measured in Newtons.
  13
     Expending 1 Joule of energy in 1 second means you are delivering 1 Watt of power.


                                                     11
                                                                             TC(W)




                 Watts Delivered




                                   W*



                                   WT




                                                           W*               WE
                                                      Watts Collected

                                        Figure 2: Optimal Energy Exploitation

the core does not exhaust power collected. The system developed here is always productive
regardless of the costs of transport. Even if we push the coeﬃcient of friction towards inﬁnity
making transport very costly in terms of energy, the slope of the total carry curve at zero
Watts, is still zero. In contrast the slope of the 45 degree line remains one even at zero
Watts, and hence for any ﬁnite coeﬃcient of friction, there will always exist an opportunity
to deliver positive power to the core.14
    It is straightforward to show that the maximum supplied power is increasing in power
density Δ as this shifts T C(W ) outwards, and increasing, for the same reason, when the
transportation system becomes more eﬃcient in the physical sense (μ falls). Associated
with any W ∗ is an area of exploitation EX ∗ . If we focus on eﬃcient (in terms of maximized
supplied power) outcomes then we have a simple model of how the density of an energy
resource aﬀects power available for use in the core.
    When supplied power is maximized, total power is given by:

                                                            πΔ3
                                                    W∗ =                                                  (6)
                                                           [μgd]2
 14
      This does not imply that all landscapes have suﬃcient resources to support life or a productive economy.



                                                         12
    The optimal solution is a cubic function of power density. The intuition is illuminating.
Suppose we increase power density but leave the area of exploitation ﬁxed; then supplied
power should rise proportionately with power density; i.e. appear with power 1 in an expres-
sion like (6) because W = ΔEX. But a higher power density also implies the marginal cost
of exploitation falls. With lower marginal costs, exploitation rises and the extensive margin
of exploitation moves outwards. Since area is proportional to the square of radius, total
power rises with the square of power density because the extensive margin of exploitation
changes.
    Although it may not be apparent at present, this result is not a function of the circular
region of exploitation but follows instead from a well known scaling law. Since area scales
with the square of length (here the margin of exploitation), power density will enter as a
cube in determining supplied power even when the exploitation zone is not circular. Putting
this logic together tells us that the power density of energy sources, and diﬀerences in their
power densities, is likely to play an important role in determining outcomes.
    To ﬁnd the portion of power used in transport and the remainder that is supplied to the
core, evaluate total carry at W ∗ and subtract to ﬁnd:

                                          1                 2
                                     W S = W ∗,         WT = W∗                                       (7)
                                          3                 3

Two thirds of the energy collected is spent in transport leaving only one third to supply the
power needs of the core. This result is linked to the uniform density of resources since an
average carry distance of 2/3R∗ implies only 1/3 of the energy collected will remain for use
in the core.
    Finally, the area of exploitation is also a function of power density since at the optimum:

                                               Δ2                       Δ
                      EX ∗ = W ∗ /Δ = π                   ∗ 2       ∗
                                                   2 = π[R ] where R =                                (8)
                                             [μgd]                     μgd

Having a more dense energy source means the energy costs of exploiting far away regions is
less: dense energy sources feed further exploitation. The area of exploitation for a fuel twice
as dense as another is four times larger. For example, villages in the Middle Ages rarely
sourced fuel wood from more than a few miles away.15 Coal however has been transported
hundreds of miles on barges, wagons and trains for much of the last two centuries. Today oil
is sourced from some of the most inhospitable climates in the far reaches of the planet and
from wells drilled literally miles deep below the ocean surface. Equation (8) tells us this is no
  15
    Towns on rivers would be an exception, since their transport costs are far less. See our discussion of
rivers in section 2.1.3.



                                                   13
surprise - dense energy sources beget large exploitation zones. The reason is straightforward.
Since gravity cares nothing about the energy content of any mass transported, higher energy
content fuels can in eﬀect fuel their own exploitation by extending the range of (energy)
proﬁtable exploitation.
    To see why this is true, consider the costs of moving energy resources providing one Watt
of power just one meter. Since friction is a constant returns process, the one meter distance
calculation is all we really need to understand. One Watt of power, takes up 1/Δ square
meters of area which in turn implies the energy resources it represents must weigh d/Δ
kilograms. Moving this mass one meter, and overcoming friction, requires a ﬂow of power of
μgd/Δ. Therefore, μgd/Δ is the number of Watts needed to transport one Watt worth of
an energy source with power density Δ, one meter. With this in hand, it is now apparent
that (8) identiﬁes marginal energy resources which are located R∗ meters from the core and
therefore provide zero net energy supply, that is we must have at the margin of exploitation
that:
                                                μgd
                                        1 − R∗       =0
                                                 Δ
Therefore, the more dense are the energy resources, the lower are the transport costs of
obtaining a marginal Watt of power, and not surprisingly the energy exploitation zone must
be larger.
    This discussion of the margin of exploitation suggests an alternative method of ﬁnding
net supply that we will sometimes use. Net power supplied must come from adding up, what
we could call, “energy rents.” These rents, 1 − μgd Δ
                                                      r, are collected at distances r ≤ R∗ from
the core. To add them up we use a two step procedure. Along any ray from the core, there
are Δ Watts of power every meter and transporting these resources from the core yields a
                       
density of Δ 1 − μgdΔ
                      r   net Watts of power at distance r from the core. The ﬁrst step is to
add up these resources along our ray over all distances less than R∗ . The second step is to
accumulate these quantities by sweeping across the 2π radians of our circular exploitation
zone. By doing so we obtain net power supply to the core as the sum of all energy rents:
                           2π       R∗                                     R∗
                                                  μgd                                       μgd
             W =S
                                           vΔ[1 −     · v]dvdϕ = 2π                vΔ[1 −       · v]dv   (9)
                        0         0                Δ                      0                  Δ
                                 3
                      πΔ
             WS =
                    3 [μgd]2

Which is of course identical to what we found earlier.
   This discussion is also useful in highlighting our relationship to the formulation of von
Thunen (1826) and his many successors (for a thorough and excellent treatment see Samuel-
son (1983)). In von Thunen’s work crops of various types generate economic rent gradients

                                                         14
falling with distance to the core; and the market economy’s demands for wood, cereals, or
meat determines relative prices, rents, and therefore land use. Despite some strong simi-
larities our formulation and that of von Thunen are not identical. Where we associate any
energy source with a ﬁnite region of exploitation tied to its power density, the geometric
transport costs of von Thunen - cleverly coined iceberg costs by Samuelson - imply an inﬁ-
nite exploitation zone for any and all energy resources. As a result the iceberg assumption
of von Thunen leads to the somewhat uncomfortable implication that we can move a barrel
of oil (a cord of wood, a bale of hay, a pound of dung, an Ampere of electricity etc.) a
billion miles and still reap some energy resources from it. Most importantly it rules out the
adjustment in the extensive margin of exploitation that is critical in linking diﬀerences in
energy density to ultimate supplies; and by implication eliminates the scaling law we ﬁnd so
important.16 Although von Thunen’s rents do fall with distance, the diﬀerences across our
approaches is subtle and we leave to an appendix a fuller discussion of these diﬀerences.

2.1.3    Incentives for Natural Monopoly? Roads, rivers and canals.

Rivers, roads, and canals were all important components of the energy transportation system
in the 19th century just as power lines, oil pipelines, and LNG terminals are important
features today. What these components have in common is that they represent low friction
and presumably low cost methods of transporting energy to markets. In this section we
consider the case of a low friction alternative by examining the impact of a having a river or
a road cross the economic core. Analytically, we treat roads as rivers that lower transport
costs in both directions.
    The analysis proceeds in two steps. First, given the lower transport costs along a river
or road energy suppliers may now decide to take a longer route to the core if it oﬀers lower
costs. This decision problem aﬀects the shape of our exploitation zone. Second, since a
river or road lowers transport costs the overall size of the exploitation zone will also change.
    To proceed consider the decision problem of a potential energy supplier located on one
meter squared of land with the ﬂow of energy produced equal to Δ Watts. The supplier
can take energy directly into the core or deviate to take advantage of a road or river nearby.
Rivers and roads help to reduce the amount of work used in transportation, increasing the
   16
      How then do authors in this literature ﬁnd adjustments along this margin? While we have not read
all related work, a close read of Samuelson’s (1983) treatment will show that city size is ﬁxed by assuming
there is a minimum ﬁnite bound on the labor to land ratio. This ﬁnite limit rules out an inﬁnite zone
of food production where small dose of labor combine with large quantities of land to produce output at
distant locations that can suﬀer large transport costs to the core. We suspect all analyses adopt, in one way
or another, a similar vehicle for limiting exploitation zones. Whether the margin is inﬁnite or exogenous
matters little to us since in both cases it is not linked to energy density and therefore cannot play a role in
determining energy supplies.


                                                      15
amount of energy delivered to the core. To capture this in our analysis we allow for the
coeﬃcient of friction of the river or road to diﬀer from the coeﬃcient of friction of land by
a fraction ρ < 1. That is, while the coeﬃcient of friction of land is equal to μ, a road’s
coeﬃcient of friction is ρμ in both directions. When traveling with the current a river’s
coeﬃcient of friction is also ρμ but against it μ/ρ. By this assumption, river transport
is only useful when you are an energy producer upstream; whereas road transport reduces
frictions in two directions and not one.17
    We assume the river or road is a straight line that crosses the core and expands indef-
initely.18 The location of a supplier relative to the core is described by two terms: ι, the
distance from the core and θ the angle between the segment formed by the core and the
supplier and the river as shown in Figure 3.
    We solve the energy producer’s problem in two stages. In the ﬁrst stage transportation
costs are minimized by choosing how much distance to cover by land and how much distance
to cover by river. In the second stage proﬁts are maximized. The cost minimization problem
is given by:                                             
                                        μgd             μgd
                               min            Δι1 + ρ         Δι2                        (10)
                               ι1 ,ι2    Δ               Δ
subject to
                                       ι2 = ι21 − ι22 + 2ιι2 cos θ                                  (11)

where ι1 is the distance travelled by land and ι2 is the distance travelled by river or road.
   The constraint follows directly from the law of triangles with ι1 being opposite to the
angle θ, as shown in Figure 3. We can replace the constraint in the objective function to
ﬁnd the optimal distances travelled by land and by river:

                                                      ι sin θ
                                           ι∗1 =                                                    (12)
                                                   (1 − ρ2 )1/2

and
                                                           ρι sin θ
                                      ι∗2 = ι cos θ −                 .                             (13)
                                                         (1 − ρ2 )1/2
   If the distance ι∗2 is strictly positive, the supplier deviates to the river, otherwise the
supplier goes straight to the core . We can solve for the critical value of θ that separates the
suppliers that go straight to the core from those who deviate to the river:

                                ι∗2 > 0 if and only if θ ≤ cos−1 ρ ≡ θ̄                             (14)
  17
    We are ignoring the physics of buoyancy which can make travel by a river even upstream quite eﬃcient.
The analytics of this case are left to the interested reader.
 18
    The case where the river does not cross the core is similar and available from the authors.


                                                    16
                                                                              Energy
                                                                              Producer



                                             ι
                                                                  ι1


             City           θ                                          River/Road
                                     ι2

                           Figure 3: Transport via Road or River

    Energy suppliers located at any angle θ < θ̄ are “close” to the low friction alternative
and choose to use it. Since ρ = cos(θ̄) we know that as ρ → 0, everyone deviates to the
river as they should, since it is so cost eﬀective. Alternatively, as ρ → 1, the river oﬀers no
advantage and no one uses it.
    The second part of the energy producer’s problem is to decide whether or not to take
its energy to the economic core. An energy producer situated a distance ι from the core
and forming an angle θ with the river will go to the core if the energy supplied to the core
is positive; i.e., if there are positive energy rents at this location. Energy supplied by this
producer is given by
                                                μgd ∗
                                    WS = Δ −        (ι1 + ρι∗2 )Δ                          (15)
                                                 Δ
Replacing equations (12) and (13) in the previous equation makes energy rents a function
of the distance to the core ι. There is a critical distance ι∗ at which suppliers become
indiﬀerent between bringing their energy production to the core or supplying zero. This
distance is determined by setting W S = 0 and it is given by:
                                                               −1
                          Δ       (1 − ρ2 )1/2 sin θ + ρ cos θ        if θ ≤ θ̄
                    ι∗ =                                                                  (16)
                         μgd     1                                    if θ ≥ θ̄

which determines the area of exploitation. The zero rent margin, if the producer does not
deviate, is exactly as before. But if the producer ﬁnds it useful to use the low friction
alternative, energy rents are greater and the zero rent margin further from the core.

                                                 17
   Total energy supplied to the core can then be written by “adding up” all energy rents
over the two regions to obtain:
                      θ̄          ι∗                              π  ι∗          
                                              μgd ∗     ∗                         μgd
   W =2×
     S
                                         v Δ−    (ι + ρι2 ) Δ dvdθ +         v Δ−     vΔ dvdθ
                   0            0              Δ 1                    θ̄  0        Δ

    The integral is multiplied by 2 since our method only adds up over the half circle of
π radians whereas total energy comes from the entire exploitation zone. The ﬁrst integral
represents energy coming from suppliers who are close enough to the river to use it in
transport. The second integral represents the energy coming from those who travel directly
to the core.
    Integrating and simplifying gives us a net energy supplied much like that we had before:

                                       1 Δ3
                                    WS =          (π + g(ρ))                                    (17)
                                       3 (μgd)2
                                        θ̄
                                                                            −2
                                g(ρ) =        (1 − ρ2 )1/2 sin θ + ρ cos θ        − θ̄dθ  0    (18)
                                                0


where the function g(ρ) is positive and monotonic and approaches inﬁnity as ρ goes to zero.
We depict the exploitation zone in the river and road case in the two panels of Figure 4
assuming ρ < 1.
   It is now possible to redeﬁne terms slightly to rewrite supply as:

                                                      1 π Δ̃3
                                               WS =            where Δ̃ ≡ Δm(ρ)
                                                      3 (μgd)2
                                              m(ρ) = ((1 + g(ρ))/π)1/3 > 1

which is exactly the same form as our earlier supply. The role of improved river transport
is identical to being granted a more dense resource base in terms of energy supplied to the
core! River location multiplies by m(ρ) the power density of available resources to an extent
determined by its capacity for reducing transport costs as reﬂected in ρ. Setting ρ = 1 means
the river or road oﬀers no advantage in terms of transportation. This implies g(ρ) = 0 since
then θ̄ = 0 and equation (17) reduces to equation (7). Any ρ < 1 eﬀectively magniﬁes power
density; and letting ρ approach zero implies g(ρ) approaches inﬁnity and energy is no longer
even economically scarce.
    An important feature of this magniﬁcation eﬀect is that it is increasing in the power
density of available resources. Improved transport is most powerful for very dense resources,
and least powerful for low density resources. Any transportation improvement increases the


                                                               18
                   θ
            City   θ                                 River




            (a) Area of Exploitation with a River




                          θ          θ
Road                          City                    Road




            (b) Area of Exploitation with a Road

       Figure 4: Exploitation with Rivers or Roads


                              19
extensive margin proportionately, regardless of the energy source; but the resulting change
in energy supply is larger for more dense resources because of the scaling law linking changes
in the extensive margin to energy supply.
    These calculations can be easily expanded to accommodate the case of a road for which
the direction of ﬂow is not important. In this case energy suppliers can take advantage of
the reduced coeﬃcient of friction in either direction away from the core. Using similar steps,
this leads to supply being given by:

                                    1 π Δ̂3
                             WS =            where Δ̂ ≡ Δn(ρ)
                                    3 (μgd)2
                            n(ρ) ≡ ((1 + 2g(ρ))/π)1/3 > 1

which is of course very similar to the ﬂow of the river case.
    The implication of these results is that transport infrastructure is most valuable to convey
dense energy resources since the beneﬁts of an existing system are increasing in density.
To make this connection clear, suppose we could build roads, canals, or other low cost
transportation systems to facilitate energy transport. Suppose further the ﬂow cost of
building and maintaining these facilities depend on their eﬃcacy in reducing costs; and we
can choose the optimal quality of these investments. Let the cost of building and maintaining
transport that delivers an eﬃciency of ρ be given by l(ρ) which is a decreasing and convex
function: l (ρ) < 0 , l (ρ) > 0. Then energy supplied net of infrastructure costs are
W N = W S (ρ) − l(ρ). For concreteness consider the case where W S (ρ) is given by equation
(17) and we are improving river transportation by dredging, locks, canals, maintaining ports
etc. The optimal investment problem is simply given by

                                                    1 Δ3
                   max W N = W S (ρ) − l(ρ) =                (π + g(ρ)) − l(ρ)             (19)
                     ρ                              3 (μgd)2

The ﬁrst order condition that maximizes energy requires

                                     1 Δ3 
                                              g (ρ) = l (ρ)                               (20)
                                     3 (μgd)2

The lefthand side of this equation is the marginal beneﬁt from improved transport and it
is again a cubic in power density showing a strong relationship between density and the
marginal beneﬁt of further investments. The right hand side is simply marginal costs of
improved transportation. Denote the implicit solution to (20) as ρ̃(Δ) and total diﬀerentiate




                                               20
it to ﬁnd19                                            2
                                                   Δ
                                     dρ          (μgd)2
                                                        g  (ρ)
                                        =                Δ3
                                                                     <0
                                     dΔ   l (ρ) − 13 (μgd)    
                                                             2 g (ρ)


where the second order conditions ensure the denominator is positive. Therefore, not only do
dense resources beneﬁt diﬀerentially from existing transportation options like rivers, roads,
and sea lanes, but they naturally create large incentives for further improvements magnifying
the already large impact diﬀerences in transportation make to energy availability in a power
dense rich environment.


2.2     Non-Renewable Resources
Using non-renewable energy today precludes you from using it tomorrow. As a result, the
exploitation zone will change over time as the resource stock is depleted. This is true because
with non-renewables, energy ﬂows come from depleting the resource stock and not from
harvesting the perpetual yields ﬂowing from a renewing resource. But stock depletion is not
the only way in which renewables and non-renewables diﬀer. Non-renewables are often found
beneath the earth’s surface in pools, seams, and reservoirs; and naturally their exploitation
takes many forms including surface collection (salts, some coals), strip mining (coal, oil sands,
peat), and deep mining and drilling (oil, natural gas, uranium). Because non-renewables
are often found in topographically concentrated deposits and often at considerable depth,
we will need to account for the punctiform nature of these quite diﬀerent resources in both
theory and measurement.
   We leave these questions for the moment to examine how the exploitation zone for a non-
renewable energy source may evolve over time as energy is supplied from it. One simple and
natural way to capture depletion is to have ongoing extraction hollow out the exploitation
zone as the resource is extracted. This would for example satisfy a least cost sequence
depletion path.20 We present one snap shot of the exploitation zone this path generates in
Figure 5. At this point in time, all the energy resources up to r have been extracted, and
in order to generate the ﬂow of power W , the new area exploited, EX, would need to be a
  19
     We have already assumed l (ρ) > 0; it can be shown that g(ρ) is convex for low values of ρ and concave for
high values of ρ. Because of the change in concavity there may exist two solutions to the ﬁrst order conditions,
                                                                                               Δ3
but only one maximum. The second order conditions required for a maximum imply 13 (μgd)                    
                                                                                                  2 g (ρ) < l (ρ)

which simply says the costs are more convex than the beneﬁts from investing in infrastructure.
  20
     There is a small literature examining least cost paths for depletion in situations with multiple deposits or
resources. This literature, started by Herﬁndahl (1967), examines when, and under what conditions, a least
cost order of extraction path will be optimal. Chakravorty and Kruice (1994) contains relevant references,
some discussion, and a neat result showing the typical least cost path prediction does not hold up when the
resources in question are not perfect substitutes in use. This possibility is ruled out in our one energy source
set up, but would be relevant in any extension with two, less than perfectly substitutable, resource types.


                                                       21
ring with outer radius R satisfying:
                                       
                                 EX = π R2 − r2 = W/Δ                                    (21)

By rearranging we can neatly link the new exploitation zone with the resource ﬂow extracted
W = πΔ (R2 − r2 ).




                                                              r
                                                                        R
                                                        CORE




                            Figure 5: Extraction with Depletion

    These W resources have to be brought to the core for use, and we can again calculate
the average carry distance by relating the distance a resource travels with the density of
resources at that distance. Recalling previous methods, the density of energy resources
located a distance v between r and R is given by f (v) = 2v/[(R2 − r2 )]. The average
distance resources are transported is again v times the density of resources at that distance.
Putting this together we ﬁnd the average carry distance, ACD, is now given by:
                                              R
                                                          2v           2(R3 − r3 )
                       ACD(R, r) =                 v              dv =                   (22)
                                           r           (R2 − r2 )      3(R2 − r2 )

or writing in terms of power W we ﬁnd:

                                                                            3/2
                                     2 πΔ                         W
                         ACD(W, r) =                                 + r2         − r3   (23)
                                     3W                           πΔ



                                                         22
   Using now familiar methods, Total Carry is given by:
                     ∼
                    T C = ACD × EX × d = [m][m2 ][kg/m2 ]=[kg × m]
                     ∼                        3/2
                           2πd     W
                    TC =              + r2          − r3                                  (24)
                            3      πΔ

where again use has been made of (23). Using (24) and (4) we can write this total cost in
terms of energy used in transporting energy as:
                                          ∼
                               W T = μg T C(W, r) = T C(W, r)                             (25)

This total cost function is identical to our earlier renewables formulation when we evaluate
it at r = 0. More generally it is increasing and convex in W with T C(0, r) = 0, but now
marginal extraction costs also depend on r. Diﬀerentiating shows:

                                                            1/2
                                         2 μgd W
                           T CW (W, r) =         + r2             >0                      (26)
                                         3 Δ πΔ

Whenever r > 0, the marginal cost of delivering even the very ﬁrst unit of power is strictly
positive and this marginal cost is increasing in r.
    This result is very natural and has two straightforward implications. First, if ongoing
extractions drive r upwards over time then the marginal cost of extraction rises over time.
As a result, if the resource frontier is currently at r(t), then cumulative extractions must be
Δπr(t)2 and marginal extraction costs are an increasing function of cumulative extractions
to date. Second, since the marginal beneﬁt of extracting one more Watt is 1, and marginal
costs are rising as the resource frontier moves outwards, eventually extractions must cease.
To ﬁnd this point we can set (26) equal to one and solve to ﬁnd, not surprisingly, that this
occurs when r equals Δ/μgd. Therefore, when the resource frontier r(t) approaches the
zero rent margin at R̄ = Δ/μgd the energy system is incapable of delivering any more net
energy.
    While we have assumed above that the resource frontier would move slowly outwards
over time, there is (as yet) no reason for today’s energy maximizing planner to save even
an iota worth of energy resources for tomorrow. As a result, all resources within the zero
rent margin would be extracted as fast as possible with the frontier jumping to the zero rent
margin. Once we assume that current and future energy ﬂows are not perfect substitutes
the problem becomes far more interesting.




                                               23
2.2.1    A Solow-Wan Reformulation

To examine optimal depletion paths it is useful to reformulate our problem. From the dis-
cussion above it may already be apparent that our spatial model with reserves diﬀerentiated
by location and hence rent, is isomorphic to a standard zero dimensional problem where
there is a ﬁxed and given resource stock that can be exploited subject to marginal extraction
costs that rise with cumulative extractions. A similar reformulation was ﬁrst suggested
by Solow and Wan (1976) in an environment where resources were diﬀerentiated by their
grade.21
    What we do here is a standard Solow-Wan reformulation, but with one important twist.
The diﬀerence comes from the fact that our spatial environment carries with it a built in
restriction on the cost distribution of resources. In short an implication of our spatial
assumptions is that very high quality - high rent - resources are rare while low quality - low
rent - resources are abundant. This follows because as the extensive margin moves outwards
resource quality falls linearly, while the quantity of resources available rises quadratically.22
As a result, for any zero rent margin R̄, resources within the top 50% of the quality spectrum
represent only 25% of available resources. In this sense high quality reserves are scarce and
low quality reserves are abundant. This implication of our spatial assumptions has major
implications for the extraction cost function and the optimal depletion path.
    To reformulate the problem along Solow-Wan lines, the ﬁrst step is to link current ex-
tractions to remaining reserves. To start we recognize that the maximal exploitation zone
has radius R̄, and this maximal exploitation zone implies a corresponding limit on recov-
erable reserves which we denote X̄. It is apparent that these recoverable reserves can be
represented by X̄ = πΔ3 /[μgd]2 . Therefore, if the current resource frontier is r̄(t) < R̄, then
the remaining recoverable reserves at t, which we denote X(t) are given by
                                                         R̄
                                            X(t) =               f (ι)dι
                                                         r̄(t)


where f (ι) = R̄22ι−r̄2 is deﬁned above and r(0) = 0 since no resources have been extracted at
the start of time. This allows us to write remaining reserves as

                                          X(t) = X̄ − Δπr(t)2                                            (27)
  21
      Solow and Wan (1976) suggested this reformulation in a short footnote; for a more illuminating treatment
see section 2 of Swierzbinski and Mendelsohn (1989).
   22
      While it is not apparent now we show subsequently that the implications of the scaling law still hold
when the resource exploitation zone is patchy (has heterogeneous power densities), punctiform (has holes in
it), or when resources are present in certain locations only probabalistically.



                                                     24
where we note cumulative extractions at t, are simply Δπr(t)2 .
    Now if we diﬀerentiate (27) with respect to time we ﬁnd the needed link between remain-
ing recoverable reserves and today’s rate of extractions:

                                Ẋ = −2Δπr(t)ṙ(t) = −W (t)                                (28)

The intuition is simple. As extraction proceeds, the resource base is drawn down and the
frontier expands. The frontier expands at rate ṙ(t) and resources with power density Δ are
reaped from a ring with density 2πr(t) per unit time. The last equality in (28) follows
because the instantaneous change in the stock must equal W (t), the ﬂow of energy extracted
at t measured in Watts. This completes the ﬁrst step of the reformulation.
    The second step in the reformulation is to ﬁnd the associated cost function for extrac-
tions. To ﬁnd the cost function recall that at any t when W (t) is extracted, we use W S (t) for
consumption and W T (t) for fuel extraction. At this t there is also a unique r(t) and therefore
extraction costs must be W T (t) = r(t)[μgd/Δ]W (t) since W S (t) = W (t) − r(t)[μgd/Δ]W (t).
Consequently, r(t)[μgd/Δ] is one measure of the per unit extraction cost. To eliminate the
reliance on r, note that equation (27) gives us a relation between remaining reserves X(t),
total reserves X̄, and cumulative extractions to date Δπr(t)2 . Use this expression to substi-
tute for r(t) in terms of remaining and recoverable reserves. With some simpliﬁcation, we
can now write the relationship between energy services supplied, W S (t), current extractions,
W (t), remaining reserves X(t), and recoverable reserves X̄, as follows:

                                 W S (t) = [1 − C(X(t))]W (t)                              (29)


                                                        1/2
                                                    X
                                    C(X) =       1−                                        (30)
                                                    X̄
where we can now interpret C(X(t))W (t) as the cost of extracting W (t) units of energy from
a homogenous pool of recoverable reserves X̄, when remaining reserves equal X. C(X(t))
is therefore the unit extraction cost function (where we have suppressed its reliance on
recoverable reserves, X̄).
    As we mentioned above our spatial formulation imposes further restrictions on the unit
extraction cost function. In particular, it has several properties directly tied to our spatial
environment.
    First consider the role played by remaining reserves X. The unit cost of extraction, when
there has been no extraction at all, is zero, C(X = X̄) = 0. The very ﬁrst units of the resource
extracted are costless since they are proximate. But as extraction proceeds and remaining


                                              25
reserves fall, the costs of extraction increase. This is reﬂected in the ﬁnding C  (X) < 0.
With enough extraction the remaining reserves approach zero, and unit extraction costs hit
their upper bound. When all reserves depleted X = 0 and we have C(0) = 1. The number
one has special signiﬁcance because at the zero rent margin it takes one unit of energy to
extract one unit of energy. Therefore, the spatial structure implies unit costs start at zero,
rise with extraction, but are always less than one: C(X) < 1 for X < X̄.
    Second, consider the role of total recoverable reserves X̄. An increase in total reserves
raises unit extraction costs. This, at ﬁrst blush, is perplexing. But holding remaining
reserves constant, an increase in total reserves implies we are currently exploiting inferior
and very costly reserves. As a result cumulative production must be greater and costs
higher. By increasing X̄ we are in eﬀect adding reserves at the extensive - more expensive
- margin and costs rise. In contrast, an increase in remaining reserves X (with given total
reserves) adds reserves at the intensive margin. Adding reserves at this margin implies
there are more yet to exploit high quality reserves remaining. Unit extraction costs fall.
Therefore, the spatial structure allows us to distinguish between the intensive and extensive
margins.
    Third, and perhaps most importantly, the form of the unit extraction cost function
reﬂects the scaling law we have found so important elsewhere. Since the costs of extraction
rise linearly in distance (or what is the same reserve quality falls linearly) while reserves
obtained by incurring these costs rise with its square, costs must rise with the square root
of cumulative extractions. This is nothing but the dual (cost) implications of the scaling
law.

2.2.2   Optimal Depletion

To highlight our connections with the existing literature we adopt a standard planning
perspective. We assume a social planner maximizes the welfare of a representative consumer
who values the energy services available for consumption in the core. By choosing service
units appropriately, utility is deﬁned over net energy supplied. Very little is lost if we adopt
a CRRA instantaneous utility function given by:

                                            (W s )1−σ − 1
                                               S
                                   U (W ) =                                                (31)
                                               1−σ

where σ > 0 and write social welfare as simply:
                                                  ∞
                                  max                  e−ρt U (W S (t))dt                  (32)
                                   W (t)       0




                                                         26
   The planner maximizes (32) subject to the constraints (28) and (29).          We write the
current value Hamiltonian as

                          H = U [(1 − C(X(t))) W (t)] − λ(t)W (t)                         (33)

where λ(t) is the co-state variable associated with the stock of resources. The optimality
conditions are given by:

                         ∂H
                               = U  (W S (t))(1 − C(X(t))) − λ(t) = 0                    (34)
                        ∂W (t)

                         ∂H
                              = −U  (W S (t))C  (X)W = ρλ(t) − λ̇(t)                    (35)
                        ∂X(t)
with transversality condition
                                     lim eρt λ(t)X(t) = 0                                 (36)
                                     t→∞

    Equation (34) is the static optimization condition. It says to equate the marginal value
of an extra unit of energy consumed to the shadow value of resources needed to deliver it.
To deliver one unit of consumption requires 1/(1−C(X(t)) units of the resource be extracted
at a shadow cost λ(t) per unit extracted; that is:

                                                       λ(t)
                                U  (W S (t)) =                                           (37)
                                                  (1 − C(X(t)))


   Equation (35) is the intertemporal asset market condition. Rearranging slightly:

                             ρλ(t) = λ̇(t) − U  (W S (t))C  (X)W                        (38)

Leaving a marginal unit of the resource in situ is an investment of λ(t) and this requires a
return of ρ. The return provided is composed of expected capital gains at rate λ̇(t) plus the
marginal reduction in the costs of providing current consumption or −U  (W S (t))C  (X)W .
    Using (31) and taking the time derivative of (34), substituting in (35), and rearrang-
ing we ﬁnd one diﬀerential equation linking the current rate of extractions to cumulative
extractions:
                                Ẇ (t)     ρ
                                       = − − C  (X)W S (t)                              (39)
                                W (t)      σ
A second diﬀerential equation is provided by (28) while one initial condition and the transver-
sality condition close the system.

                                                  27
    Before proceeding to an examination of the extraction path in the phase plane, it is
useful to understand the two quite diﬀerent motivations at work in (39). This equation
is especially important to understand since it is the only behavioral equation governing
extractions. First, and not surprisingly, there are the standard Hotelling motives arising
from the ﬁniteness of the resource stock and the impatience of our planner. To isolate this
motive suppose extraction costs are zero, then using (37) and (38) the shadow value of the
resource in situ rises at the rate of time preference. Energy extracted equals energy supplied
and we would simply have
                                         Ẇ (t)     ρ
                                                =− <0
                                         W (t)      σ
The values of marginal utilities discounted to time zero must be equalized across all periods
and this is achieved by energy consumption falling at a rate proportional to time preference
and the elasticity of marginal utility. This motivation follows from the ﬁniteness of the
reserves; it predicts a declining path for extractions, and it reﬂects the forces identiﬁed in
Hotelling’s classic work (Hotelling 1931).
    The second motivation at work is a Ricardian one, as it follows from the fact that reserves
diﬀer in their Ricardian rents. To see this connection return to our spatial structure for
a moment. We know that very proximate resources have large rents and are relatively
scarce; very distant ones have very little rent and are relatively abundant. Therefore,
resources diﬀer in the Ricardian rent created by their location relative to the core. Once
we translate this spatial structure - via the Solow-Wan reformulation - into an implication
on extraction costs, it implies that diﬀerences in Ricardian rent across reserves are now
reﬂected in extraction costs that rise with cumulative extraction. Since any unit extracted
today raises the cost of all future extractions, it pays to shift extraction into later periods.
This Ricardian motivation - which follows from diﬀerences in energy rents across resources -
argues for a delay in extractions or what is the same, a rising path of extractions over time.
Ignoring the ﬁrst Hotelling term in (39) we would ﬁnd an extraction path that reﬂects only
Ricardian considerations given by

                                 Ẇ (t)
                                        = −W S (t)C  (X) > 0
                                 W (t)

    Since both cumulative extractions and energy consumed vary with time, the strength
of the Ricardian motives vary over time. In contrast with time separable preferences and
CRRA instantaneous utility, what we have described as the Hotelling motives are pinned
down only by parameters. As we show below, the interplay of these two forces will always



                                              28
produce a boom and bust path for energy production.23

2.2.3    Boom and Bust

The behavior of the dynamic system is presented in Figure 6. The Ẇ (t) = 0 isocline is
depicted by the solid curve in Figure 6. This curve is positive for values of X(t) ∈ [0, X̄]
and has a maximum value when cumulative extraction is one quarter of total reserves; i.e.
with remaining reserves X(t) = 3X̄/4 and cumulative extraction X̄ − X(t) = X̄/4. The
Ẋ(t) = 0 isocline is coincident with the horizontal axis. At all points above the Ẋ(t) = 0
isocline, movement must be rightwards to extract all reserves, giving arrows of motion in
the positive direction parallel to the horizontal axis. At points above the Ẇ (t) = 0 isocline,
extractions must be increasing since costs are currently too low; below the isocline just the
opposite is true. This information is captured by the arrows of motion shown.
     Imagine we start with a new resource and hence cumulative extractions are zero. Since
the arrows of motion near the origin imply all movement must be upwards and to the right,
we know the system must move immediately to an initial extraction point like that shown
by W (0) = W0 . From this initial point, the arrows of motion indicate we move upwards
and to the right and cut the Ẇ (t) = 0 isocline at zero slope. Once we cross this isocline,
the arrows of motion tell us the extraction path must turn downwards and the transversality
condition requires the path slowly approach X̄ on the horizontal axis. Working backwards
it is now apparent the transversality condition chooses the initial W0 and this choice has to
feature less extraction than that given by the peak of the Ẇ (t) isocline.
     The key result is of course the peak in energy extraction.24 Descriptively, the result
  23
    One other way to isolate these two forces is to divide up extractions into those going to consumption
and those allocated to extraction costs. Hotelling forces must rule the former; Ricardian the latter. To do
so take the time derivative of (29). to ﬁnd:

                              Ẇ S (t) = (1 − C(X(t)))Ẇ (t) − C  (X(t))W (t)Ẋ(t)                         (40)

and using equations (28) and (39), canceling terms and rearranging obtain:
                                                          ρ
                                              Ẇ S (t) = − W S (t)                                          (41)
                                                          σ
with solution given by W S (t) = W0S e−(ρ/σ)t where W0S = W0 . Therefore, energy consumption follows a
very simple Hotelling like rule ensuring that discounted marginal utilities are equal at time zero. It is now
immediate then that the proﬁle for energy used in extraction must reﬂect the Ricardian forces highlighted
above. These forces argue for a rising proﬁle for extractions over time, and since they rely on endogenous
magnitudes the strength of this force should vary over time. The reader can verify that this component of
energy extraction does initially rise quite steeply with time, but eventually falls since energy extracted itself
also falls.
  24
     It is well known that the typical Hotelling’s prediction that the extraction path is always declining only
applies when, among other things, the extraction costs are independent of cumulative extraction or what is
equivalent remaining reserves; that is, C  (X) = 0. When costs are increasing in cumulative extraction then


                                                       29
                                        W MAX

               Energy Extracted, W(t)
                                        W(0)                                Ẇ(t)=0

                                                          (X(t),W(t))




                                                             Ẋ(t)=0
                                                  X/4                                   X
                                                        Cumulative Extraction, X-X(t)


                                                Figure 6: Optimal Extraction Rule

follows because the Ricardian motivations dominate the Hotelling ones up to the point
where the system crosses the Ẇ (t) = 0 isocline. Thereafter the Hotelling forces dominate.
Analytically, it follows because at the very ﬁrst instant of time, energy consumption must
be positive W S (0) > 0, and C  (X(0)) = −∞ implying Ẇ (t) > 0 at least initially. And as
extraction proceeds W S (t) must approach zero (the resource is ﬁnite) and C  (X(t)) increases
to a ﬁnite bound. Therefore, the Ricardian forces fall over time and are eventually dominated
by the Hotelling ones.
    More deeply, the impact of using up the very ﬁrst unit of resources on subsequent extrac-
tion costs is extremely high, C  (X(0)) = −∞, not because these resources have the greatest
rents (which they do) but because they are so scarce in relation to the resource pool whose
extraction costs are now raised. Scarcity drives the result; and high rent resources are so
scarce because of our scaling law.25
C  (X) < 0 and the second term in the righthand side of equation (39) is positive, and if this term is large
enough then it is possible for Ẇ > 0, at least for a period of time. This observation is often credited to
Livernois and Uhler (1987).
   25
      As a check on our intuition and our scarcity measure we present in the appendix a simpliﬁed model with
spatially distributed resources, a Solow-Wan reformulation, and an identical planning problem. We assume
however that the extensive margin can only expand in one direction, by letting the length of a ﬁxed width
rectangular exploitation zone adjust to economic conditions. Under this assumption, the area of exploitation
rises only proportionately with the extensive margin and energy supply does not scale with the square of the
extensive margin: our scaling law is absent. As well, we now have a cost distribution over resources given
by F (r) = [r/R̄] - one quarter of reserves are now within
                                                         the lowest one quarter of costs since F (.25) = .25.
We ﬁnd the unit extraction cost function is C(X) = 1 − X/X̄ which reﬂects the absence of our scaling
law. And C  (0) = −1/X̄ < 0 is ﬁnite and constant. Perhaps not surprisingly, the Hotelling motivations



                                                                 30
2.2.4    Two Small Mysteries

Two questions remain unanswered. How is the extraction path related to resource charac-
teristics - most importantly, its power density? And secondly, what is the division of energy
across consumption and extraction services over time?
    To answer the ﬁrst, we present in Panel 7.(a) the time paths of reserves and extraction
for three diﬀerent values of power density, ΔI < ΔII < ΔIII . An increase in power density
increases total initial reserves, so that X̄ I < X̄ II < X̄ III . The initial level of extraction
also increases when power density increases, W0I < W0II < W0III . And the boom and bust
pattern we have found is accentuated when the resource in question is of higher density.
Therefore, while all new resource plays must boom and then bust this pattern may be most
visible in the case of very productive, and power dense, fossil fuels. Moreover the peaks
in energy extraction occur later in the life of the resource when cumulative extractions are
much larger.
    The intuition follows from our earlier discussions. An increase in power density raises
the quality of all reserves we would have exploited (an intensive margin eﬀect) and adds new
ones (an extensive margin eﬀect). Giving the economy more resources would normally call
for a level shift in energy consumption in all periods via the Hotelling motive. In fact, if only
Hotelling motives were at play it is easy to show an increase in power density would be met
with a uniform shift in energy consumption in all periods. But higher power density also
moves the resource frontier outwards and this expansion along the extensive margin makes
quite costly reserves now economic to recover. The Ricardian motive strengthens and this
argues for a shift in the extraction path. Together we ﬁnd higher extractions but a path
shifted forward.
    One useful way to examine how the optimal division of energy across consumption and
extraction services is to examine how the shares of energy going to each activity varies as the
resource is exploited. The share of energy allocated to consumption is simply W S (t)/W (t) =
1 − C(X(t)) which starts at one and approaches zero in the limit. Similarly, the share
of energy used in extraction is simply W T (t)/W (t) = C(X(t)) which starts at zero and
approaches one. The two shares are equal when C(X(t)) = .5 which occurs when remaining
reserves are .75 of total reserves and the Ẇ (t) = 0 isocline peaks. We plot several of these
shares in Panel 7.(b) showing how these proﬁles change as the power density of the underlying
resource changes. Naturally with more power dense resources extractions are higher than
otherwise, but so too is consumption and this implies that the share of consumption in energy
use remains larger later in the life of the resource. Power dense resource forestall the day
always outweigh the Ricardian ones and the extraction path is everywhere declining.



                                                   31
when energy costs of extraction limit energy consumption. In all cases the ﬁgure shows the
share of energy going to extraction costs rises as the resource is developed but this impact
is delayed with power dense resources. It is immediate that the energy costs of extraction
only rises above 50% after the peak in extraction occurs.




                                                                                                                 Δ I < Δ II < Δ III
                        Energy Extracted, W (t)




                                                                                                        W III

                                                                                     W II
                                                                WI



                                                                               XI                     X II                    X III
                                                                       Cumulative Extraction, X − X



                                                         (a) Diﬀerent Power Densities



                                                   1


                                                          C I (X)
                                                                    C II (X)
                                                                                    C III (X)
                                                                                                                 Δ I < Δ II < Δ III
                          Power Shares




                                                  00.5




                                                                                                  1− C III (X)
                                                                                    1− C II (X)

                                                          1− C I (X)
                                                                               XI                     X II                    X III
                                                                       Cumulative Extraction, X − X



                                                                    (b) Power Shares

                     Figure 7: Optimal Extraction and Power Density




                                                                                      32
2.3    Patchy, Punctiform and Probabilistic Resource distributions
Thus far we have assumed resources are uniformly distributed, the space containing resource
plays is connected, and there is no uncertainty regarding whether the energy resources in
question are present. These are strong assumptions, but for some resources they seem
innocuous. For example, crops and woodlands typically satisfy these constraints at least
over fairly large areas. But for other resources they ﬁt less well and it is unclear how
our analysis would change under these assumptions. For example, the available locations
for resource exploitation may be patchy (containing holes) because of land use restrictions,
habitat conservation, or noise considerations. The siting decisions for wind and solar farms
certainly ﬁt this description. In other cases, most notably fossil fuels, there are often a few
very signiﬁcant deposits surrounded by areas with little if any resource potential (the space
contains resource “plays” with widely diﬀerent power densities). We will refer to this case
as one where the resource distribution is punctiform. Finally in some cases it is not clear
ex ante whether resources are present in any speciﬁc location although there maybe a well
deﬁned probability distribution over them (oil and gas deposits come to mind). We refer
to this case as one where the distribution of resources is probabilistic. We will show that
often very little of substance changes with alternative resource distributions although the
calculations become more lengthy and the expressions less transparent.
    To understand why these complications rarely matter, recall our discussion of energy
rents which allowed us to deﬁne the extensive margin R∗ , for a resource of given power
density Δ. Let this reliance of the extensive margin on the power density of resources be
written as R∗ (Δ). Then since all resources within this margin provide positive energy rents it
should be apparent that they will be exploited even if the resource base is not connected nor
homogenous. And if we locate all such potential resources, identify their extensive margins,
and then integrate over their relevant regions this (more complicated) sum of energy rents
will equal the energy supply just as before. Apart from mathematical complications, patchy
and punctiform resource distributions pose no special problem. Alternatively if we assume
resources are present in speciﬁc locations with given probabilities, we can again identify
R∗ (Δ) and integrate over this space to ﬁnd what would now be expected energy supply.
And if the space deﬁned by R∗ (Δ) can be divided into many resource plays with identical
and independent success distributions, then a law of large numbers result could be invoked
to render expected energy supply equal to ex post energy supply. At bottom the reason why
these complications do not matter much is the constant returns built into transport costs
by the physics of the underlying problem. Moving an object twice as far is twice the work;
moving an object with twice the mass is twice the work; and if movement is output and work
(energy) is the input, this production function is CRS. The CRS feature of the problem

                                              33
allows us to aggregate easily, deﬁne boundaries simply, and replace patchy, punctiform and
probabilistic resource distributions with much simpler connected and homogenous ones in
many cases.
    To see exactly how we to incorporate complicated resource distributions, we construct
two examples.

2.3.1   Patchy and Punctiform

It may be clear from the description above that the key complication is locating the various
resources in space. To make the analysis tractable and transparent, we construct discrete
resource distributions. Consider a division of the space surrounding the core into concentric
circles that are then divided further into wedges created by extending rays from the core.
The result, shown in Figure 8, is a sequence of land parcels we will refer to as resource plays.




                                        n
                                        




                                 m 

                                                       (m, n)
                                                                 θ hn

                                                          θ ln


                                                rl m
                                                         rhm


                Figure 8: Uneven distribution of power density into parcels

   Let there be n = 1, ..., N rays and m = 1, ..., M circles, then there are N × M resource
plays each uniquely identiﬁed by the duple (m, n). Suppose each play has an associated
power density Δmn with geometrical shape characterized by its width rm = rhm − rlm and the
angle of the wedge θn = θhn − θln . Where h and l refer to both the higher and lower radius

                                              34
bounds deﬁning the play; and the higher and lower angles (measured in radians) that deﬁne
its location in the plane. Using the same approach as in equation (9) we can ﬁnd write the
(maximum) energy supplied by any given resource play:
                                                 n
                                                 θh        m
                                                           rh                      
                                                                               μgd
                               W   mn
                                        =                        vΔmn       1−     v dvdϕ
                                                θln       rlm                  Δmn
                                                                               
                      1 n         m 2      m 2         2 μgd (rhm )3 − (rlm )3
            W   mn
                     = (θh − θl ) (rh ) − (rl ) Δmn 1 −
                              n
                                                                                                                          (42)
                      2                                 3 Δmn (rhm )2 − (rlm )2
   Since an energy supplier with play (m, n) supplies energy if the play provides positive
energy rents, we need to account for this complication by noting that each density Δmn has
an associated energy margin R̄mn = Δμgdmn
                                          . This implies the actual energy supplied to the
core by any resource play must be such that:
                                              ⎧
                                              ⎪
                                              ⎨ Wmn if rh ≤ R̄mn
                                                          m

                                    S
                                   Wmn      =   W̄mn if rlm ≤ R̄mn < rhm                                                  (43)
                                              ⎪
                                              ⎩
                                                0    if R̄mn < rlm < rhm

where W̄mn has the same form as equation (42) but where rhm is replaced by R̄mn .
    To ﬁnd the aggregate energy supplied we add the n plays of each annulus m and then add
all the annulus. Without further restrictions, the possibilities are very numerous. Therefore
consider the case where each play within an annulus m has the same power density Δm .
As well, order the power densities from lowest to highest such that Δ0 = 0 < Δ1 < ... <
Δm < ... < ΔM so distant resources are the most power dense, and in order to eliminate
potential gaps in our distribution we assume the width of each annulus is determined by
the energy margins of the neighboring annulus. That is assume rlm = R̄m−1 and rhm = R̄m .
Alternate assumptions are readily investigated. Using these assumptions we can now replace
the deﬁnition of R̄m back in equation (42) to ﬁnd the energy supplied to the core :
                                          2                        2                                           
             1                        Δm                        Δm−1
                                                                                                  Δm 3
                                                                                          2 μgd ( μgd ) − ( Δμgd
                                                                                                              m−1 3
                                                                                                                  )
     W mn   = (θhn − θln )                            −                       Δm       1−         Δ         Δ
             2                        μgd                       μgd                       3 Δm ( μgd  ) − ( μgd )2
                                                                                                    m 2       m−1



                                                                                                     
                               1               1                       Δ3m             2
                     W   mn
                              = (θhn − θln )                               − Δm Δ2m−1 + Δ3m−1
                               2             (μgd)2                     3              3
Add over all wedges in the annulus m to ﬁnd
                                                                                               
                                          π                   Δ3m             2
                              W   m
                                      =                           − Δm Δ2m−1 + Δ3m−1
                                        (μgd)2                 3              3


                                                                  35
and add over all annulus M to ﬁnd:

                                        M                     
                                   π         3      Δ2m−1 Δ3m−1
                              S
                            W =            Δ     1−3 2 +2 3
                                3(μgd)2 m=1 m        Δm    Δm

Two observations are in order. First, since the summation is over primitive determinants
of the model, we could just as well replace this complicated sum with Δ̃, where Δ̃ is the
power density of a hypothetical connected and uniformly distributed resource base yielding
the same energy supply. Δ̃ > 0 by virtue of our ordering of power densities, and we can
write it simply as:
                               M                            1/3
                                    3        Δ2m−1     Δ3m−1
                        Δ̃ =      Δm 1 − 3 2 + 2 3
                              m=1
                                              Δm        Δm

Second, if we alter the power density of our hypothetical resource base, Δ̃ , by λ > 0 this is
equivalent to uniform scaling by λ of all power densities in the heterogenous resource zone.
A moment’s reﬂection will show that energy supply is homogenous of degree three in all
power densities taken together. Therefore, for many purposes we can simply write

                                                            π Δ̃3
                                                   WS =
                                                          3(μgd)2

and ignore the fact that the exploitation zone in question is both patchy and punctiform.

2.3.2       Probabilistic

Here we assume the power density of the resource is uniform across space and it is given by Δo .
This implies all the resources found inside the margin of extraction given by Ro = Δo /μgd
are going to be exploited. Divide this space as we did before using N rays and M circles
to identify N × M resource plays but now assume each play has a probability q of having a
resource with power density Δo in place and a probability 1 − q of being empty. Given Δo is
uniform and constant, our previous assumptions imply the width of each annulus is equal to
Ro /M . Thus, the geometrical shape of the parcel (m, n) is characterized by its boundaries
        h
set by rm  = (m + 1) RMo and rm
                              l
                                = m RMo and the angle of the wedge θn = θhn − θln . In the case
where parcel (m, n) is not empty, we can calculate the same double integral we calculated
                                                                 l       h
for the case of patchy distributions and replace the values for rm and rm  to ﬁnd
                                          2                                                     
                  1                   Ro                 2      2          2 1 ((m + 1)3 − m3 )
        W   mn
                 = (θhn − θln )                 Δo (m + 1) − m           1−                            (44)
                  2                   M                                     3 M ((m + 1)2 − m2 )




                                                          36
Replacing the deﬁnition for Ro and noting the wedges are of equal size given by θn = 2π/N
we ﬁnd:
                                                                            
                      π     Δ3o         2     2       2 1 ((m + 1)3 − m3 )
            W mn
                 =                (m + 1) − m      1−                                 (45)
                    N M 2 (μgd)2                       3 M ((m + 1)2 − m2 )

   As we mentioned above, the power collected from parcel (m, n) is W mn with probability
q and it is zero with probability 1 − q. Therefore, the expected value of energy provided by
parcel (m, n) is:
                               E[W mn ] = q · W mn + (1 − q) · 0                        (46)

We can now aggregate across parcels and use the linearity of the expected value operator to
ﬁnd:
                                                   πΔ3o
                                E[W S ] = q · M̄                                       (47)
                                                 3(μgd)2
where M̄ is a constant given by:

                        M                                           
                            ((m + 1)2 − m2 )       1 ((m + 1)3 − m3 )
                   M̄ =                        3−2                                        (48)
                        m=0
                                  M2               M ((m + 1)2 − m2 )

    In this more complicated case very little seems to change. Power density again enters
as a cubic as before since now the area of exploration rises with the square of the extensive
margin and success is proportional to this exploration zone. As well, as mentioned earlier if
the number of plays were large a variety of assumptions are available on the joint distribution
across the plays that would render a law of large numbers result. The simplest case being the
one employed above where each play is treated as an independent and identically distributed
Bernoulli random variable.


3    Measuring Power Density
Thus far we have taken power density as a primitive. While this is a natural starting point, it
is important to develop a deeper understanding of the determinants of power density in order
to provide estimates useful for empirical work, for calibration exercises, etc. We start by
developing the theory required for measurement. While there exist in the literature estimates
of power densities for many energy sources, how these ﬁgures are constructed is unclear and
rarely documented adequately. Measuring power density for some renewable resources is
fairly straightforward; for example, crops dedicated to biofuels or human consumption can
be turned into energy equivalents and then power ﬂows by taking account of crop cycle,


                                              37
length, and area planted; similarly coppiced forests can provide stable ﬂows of wood products
for heating and cooking needs and similarly occupy well deﬁned areas. In these cases, the
renewable ﬂows are captured by the physical quantity of fuel reaped from a resource stock.
    In other cases the renewable ﬂow does not have mass but provides either kinetic or
electromagnetic energy we capture and exploit directly. In these cases the measurement is
straightforward and represents the potential of these ﬂows. For example, the power density
of solar is easily estimated once we are armed with knowledge of insolation potential at a
location. Similarly, wind or wave farms provide useful kinetic energy and we again ﬁnd the
potential power ﬂow from the resource per unit area.
    In the case of non-renewables, measurement is generally more challenging. One common
method is to calculate the actual physical footprint of a energy facility’s size and divide this
by the current energy output. So for example, if a coal based generating station produces a
constant ﬂow of 1MW, and the mine and generating station takes up 1 km2 , then its power
density is simply [1 × 106 W]/[1 × 103 m]2 =1W/m2 . There are several obvious problems with
this method. First, the measure of power density is technology dependent. Improvements
in generation technology will aﬀect power density, and therefore power density will not be
a characteristic of an energy source but rather reﬂect current technology in place. Second,
it is diﬃcult to know which “inputs” we should include in the measurement. For example,
by including mining, crushing, and generating facilities in the calculation we make implicit
decisions about which facilities to include and which to exclude. Should we also include
the area taken up by transmission lines, relay stations, and other parts of the grid? In the
case of oil, do we include pipelines, reﬁneries and gas stations? If pipelines are buried and
transmission lines are above ground, how do we deal with this?
    How these decisions are made will materially aﬀect the calculation. Replication of any
measure produced will be almost impossible. As a result any comparison across measurement
attempts will be far to reliant on the individual judgment of the researcher.
    In order to resolve these issues, we present a method to measure power density for both
renewables and non-renewables that is independent of technology, easy to replicate, and al-
lows for a comparison of power densities across energy types. To do so we use restrictions
from economic theory to help aggregate resources along the dimensions on which they diﬀer,
and we provide measures assuming an ideal environment where resource stocks are homoge-
nous and where the only costs of exploitation are those arising from energy costs. Our goal
is to develop measures that reﬂect only the physical properties of the resource and not our
current, past, or future ability to reap these energy ﬂows.
     We start our discussion with the case of renewables since it is simpler to understand and
relatively straightforward in practice.


                                              38
3.1     Power Density for Renewables
3.1.1    Theory

Any renewable ﬂow of energy resources produced from a renewable resource F [Watts] can
be written as the product of the current (and steady state) physical size of the resource
stock S [kg] multiplied by the energy content of the resource, e [Joules/kg] and a growth
rate r [1/time]. This implies the ﬂow is given by F = reS.26 The physical size of the stock
can be similarly written as the product of the physical density of the resource, d [kg/m2 ]
times the area actually used by the resource a[m2 ]. Making this substitution we obtain the
ﬂow of energy as F = (red)a. Power density is just the ﬂow of energy per unit area or
Δ = F/a = red [W/m2 ].
    Power density is proportional to the product of the maximal rate of regeneration, r, which
measures the percentage rate of growth of the resource in an unconstrained environment.
Perhaps not surprisingly, a renewable energy source that grows twice as fast has twice the
power density. It is also proportional to the energy content of the fuel, e, measured in
[Joules/kg], again perhaps not surprising that energy density matters but the speciﬁc form
is of course not obvious. Finally power density also depends on a fuel’s physical density,
d, measured in [kg/m2 ]. All else equal a fuel that produces a greater output in terms of
harvest weight gives more energy.
    Two special cases deserve attention. The ﬁrst case applies to resources like wind or
solar where there is no associated physical product. In this case we replace the stationary
harvest of the resource that we used above by a measure of an average ﬂow per unit time, and
then apply energy equivalents to obtain a measure in terms of energy production per unit
time. For example, average wind ﬂow per unit area in a given location can be transformed
into its kinetic energy equivalent per unit time; average solar insolation in a location is
already measured in Watts per unit area terms, and measures of the energy in wave motion
can likewise be measured in power density terms. In these three cases while there is no
physical resource reaped, power density is simply measured by the potential energy ﬂow
these resources deliver per unit area, per unit time.
    The second case arises when the harvest from a resource aﬀects the resource stock size,
and in turn the power density of the energy source. For example this is most likely to occur
when resources are crops, forest land, or hydro power. In these situations it is natural to
pin down the power density of the resource by assuming the energy supplier manages the
resource to maximize the discounted ﬂow of energy over time. In the appendix we show
  26
     For example, a 100kg forest growing at 10% per year generates 10 kg of ﬁrewood per year. Firewood
contains 15 MJ per kg; and there are 31,536 x 103 seconds in a year. The forest provides 4.75 W on average
for the year.


                                                   39
                              Table 1: Power Density Crops
                                                 Energy    Power
                                        Yield    Content Density
                      Crop             [kg/m2 ] [M J/kg] W/m2
                      Sugar cane         7.16     17.01     3.86
                      Sugar beet         4.87      9.75     1.50
                      Cassava            1.25      6.69     0.27
                      Bananas            2.05      3.73     0.24
                      Rice, paddy        0.43      15.5     0.21
                      Potatoes           1.78      3.22     0.18
                      Sweet Potatoes     1.25      3.60     0.14
                      Wheat              0.30     15.07     0.14
                      Barley             0.26     14.74     0.12
                             Note: Data are shown in the Appendix.


that even in this case, the decomposition of power density is very simple and given by:

                                    Δ = γred        γ>0

where the new term γ captures the intensity of harvesting and is tied directly to the energy
suppliers discount rate. Taking this complication into account we ﬁnd power density is
simply linked to four potentially observable magnitudes: the rate of resource regeneration,
the energy content of the fuel provided, its physical density, and the discount rate applied
to future rents by energy suppliers.

3.1.2   Empirics

Renewable energy has two ﬁnal uses: food and fuel. One use is supplying energy to main-
tain bodily functions, while the other use is supplying energy for heating, light and power
applications. In Table 1, we present ﬁgures on the power density of various staple crops
from around the world. The ﬁgures presented for yields are estimates of “typical” yields for
these crops in a system with sustainable rotation (fallow periods). As shown food crops,
even staples, oﬀer relatively small power density. Even the powerful potato oﬀers only 0.18
W/m2 in terms of food for fuel, but some tropical crops such as cassava (.26 W/m2 ) and
bananas (.24 W/m2 ) provide much more. Crops that have found use as biofuels such as sugar
cane (3.87 W/m2 ) and sugar beet (1.50 W/m2 ) have power densities one order of magnitude
larger than other crops.
    Table 2 presents ﬁgures on the power density of forests for six regions of the U.S. Since
the productivity of forests and their composition varies so too does their power density. For


                                              40
example, the South Central forests have the highest growth rates (column three) whereas
the North Central forests have the greatest percent of Hardwoods (column ﬁve). The power
density ﬁgures are again relatively small and on the order of 0.1 to 0.15 W/m2 .

                             Table 2: Power Density of Wood
                                                                                Average
   Forest Region      Total Acres     Ave. Prod.       Percent        Percent Power Dens.
                       (1,000s)      (ft3 /acre/yr)   Softwood       Hardwood   (W/m2 )
   Northeast             79,803           57.10        25.21%         74.79%      0.10
   North Central         84,215           66.54        18.72%         81.28%     0.12
   Southeast             85,665           80.22        41.00%         59.00%     0.14
   South Central        118,364           84.69        35.20%         64.80%     0.15
   Rocky Mountain       70,969            52.00        90.29%          9.71%     0.08
   Paciﬁc Coast          75,197           81.71        89.01%         10.99%     0.12
                             Note: Data are shown in the Appendix.


    Comparing Table 1 to Table 2 we see that in general wood provides lower power density
than crops. This is true even though wood density, d, and energy content, e, are much higher
than the standard crop. The result follows, because forest’s rate of growth, r, is very low
relative to that provided by annual crops.
    Finally in Table 3 we present estimates for solar and wind energy for six regions in the
US. In all cases, we measure the potential provided by the resource rather than measures
of our current ability to reap the resources in question. The power density of solar energy
captures the yearly average amount of radiation collected by one squared meter of surface
with tilt equal to the latitude of the point of measurement. Solar radiation data is reported
in the ﬁrst column on Table 3.
    The amount of power that can be extracted from wind is a cubic function of the speed
of the wind (column 2), and it is proportional to the area of the cross-section perpendicular
to the velocity of the wind. Assuming one squared meter cross-section give us the amount
of power extracted at any given velocity. If we further assume one meter squared of land is
used by one meter squared of cross-section then we can ﬁnd the power density of wind. This
is what we show in the last column of Table 3.
    It is interesting to note the huge diﬀerences across these tables measuring the power
density of crops or timber versus the raw energy ﬂows in solar. Photosynthesis is, even
in the best environments, a very ineﬃcient process taking solar power from the sun and
then via nature’s capital equipment turning it into biomass. Estimates on this eﬃciency
vary but a common estimate is below 1% eﬃciency, and this is similar to what a very naive
comparison of these tables might suggest.


                                              41
                         Table 3: Power Density of Wind and Sun
                 Region                Solar              Wind
                                   Power Density Speed Power Density
                                      [W/m2 ]      [m/s]     [W/m2 ]
                 Northeast              164          7         122
                 North Central          226          9         281
                 Southeast              217         7.5        136
                 South Central          219          7         115
                 Rocky Mountain         256         9.5        296
                 Paciﬁc Coast           229         7.5        144
                             Note: Data are shown in the Appendix.


3.2     Power Density for Non-renewables
3.2.1   Theory

When exploiting a non-renewable energy source of homogenous quality, the ﬂow of energy
obtained is proportional to the change in the resource stock over time. If we measure
energy in Joules, and time in seconds, then the ﬂow is in Watts; if we measure the resource
stock in kilograms then the coeﬃcient of proportionality, e, should be in units of [Joules/kg]
while the change in the stock must be in units of kilograms per second. If the resource
was distributed uniformly on a two dimensional plane, then the change in the stock is equal
to the physical density of the resource, which we will denote by d[kg/m2 ], times the area
exploited, a[ m2 ]. This implies the power density of a non-renewable resource, if distributed
on a two dimensional plane, would be written as:

                                       W = eda                                            (49)
                                        Δ = W/a = ed                                      (50)

This makes perfect sense: the ﬂow of energy comes from the change in a stock; the magnitude
of the ﬂow is determined by the stock’s energy content; the change in the stock is equal to the
product of the area extracted times the physical density of the energy source; and dividing
by the size of the area exploited, we obtain the result.
    This measure of power density may be useful but it only holds in those cases where non-
renewables are distributed very thinly across Earth’s surface. For example, shallow deposits
of the non-renewable Peat may well ﬁt this description. In the vast majority of cases however
non-renewables are not thinly distributed as surface deposits. Their key characteristic is in
fact their punctiform nature. Our task is to develop a method to allow the density of
resources available at the surface to reﬂect an appropriate aggregate of available resources


                                              42
lying below. Perhaps not surprisingly, our method of aggregation uses relative prices which
in this case reﬂect the marginal energy costs of exploiting underlying deposits.
     The Ideal Deposit: Consider a hypothetical resource owner with resource rights to one
meter squared of surface area in our exploitation zone of homogenous resource quality. If
this resource owner extracts a 1m3 cube of energy resources with energy content e[J/kg] and
volumetric density dv [kg/m3 ], then this cubic meter has mass of dv [kg] and weight of dv g[N].
The total energy contained in this cube would be simply edv [J] and if it was exhausted in
one second the power delivered would be edv [Watts].
     Now consider resources contained beneath this 1m2 as shown in Figure 9.(a). If resources
are located at distance η[m] from the surface, then the work needed to bring them to the
surface would be just gdv η[J] since work must be done to oﬀset gravity.27 The energy
contained in any cube mined is just edv [J] as before, therefore the net energy this cube
represents at the surface is what we have referred to previously as energy rents. Energy
rents in this case are just edv − gdv η. Resources where the energy cost of extraction equals
their entire energy content produce zero energy rents and are located at depth η ∗ = e/g.
These are the resources at the margin of proﬁtability. Resources above this depth provide
positive energy rents; resources below it provide negative energy rents. Hence, any resources
located at depth η > η ∗ will not be recovered. The depth of marginal resources is determined
by the energy cost of extraction — it is proportional to g, and is rising in the energy content
of the resource itself, e.
     Putting all of this together shows the energy extracted below 1m2 of surface area is given
by the volume of the mined area η[m3 ], the implied mass of mined materials per unit volume,
dv , and the energy content of this extraction, e. This extraction represents the change in
the stock over time. The net energy available must account for the energy costs of extraction
and is found by the following simple integration.


                                η∗                               η∗
                          Δ=          [edv − gdv η] dη =                edv [1 − (g/e)η] dη               (51)
                                                               0
                                0

                          Δ = e2 dv /2g                                                                   (52)

    The power density of non-renewable resources in units of [W/m2 ] is given by e2 dv /2g. This
is a very important result. It links the power density of non-renewables to two observable
  27
    We assume here the resource is not under pressure as many liquid or gaseous forms of hydrocarbons are,
nor is the extraction subject to friction. Adding either of these complications is relatively easy, but require
deposit speciﬁc information.



                                                      43
                                                 1m
                        1m




                                                              [m]
 Volume: 1[m3]
 Weight: dv[kg]
 Energy: edv[J]




                                                      1[m]
                             (a) Ideal Deposit

                                                 1m
                        1m




                                                      h0[m]


Volume: h[m3]
Weight: hdv[kg]
Energy: hedv[J]

                                                      h[m]




                      (b) Characteristic Deposit

                  Figure 9: Non-renewable deposit




                                    44
and commonly measured characteristics of energy resources – their energy content e and
volumetric density dv – and one parameter g. The power density of exhaustible sources is a
quadratic in the energy content of a resource, and linear in its (volumetric) density. It is a
quadratic in energy content because doubling energy content doubles the energy contained
in any given extraction, while also doubling mine depth. Here again we see the role played
by changes in both the intensive and extensive margins. While doubling volumetric density
doubles the energy contained in any extraction - since mass rises linearly with density - it
has no eﬀect on mine depth. The reason is simply that increased density doubles energy
per unit volume, but also doubles the energy costs per unit volume extracted. Since costs
and beneﬁts both double, mine depth is independent of volumetric density.
    Not surprisingly, this result is quite similar to the preliminary calculation contained in
equation (50) and quite similar to our earlier decomposition for renewables. In fact these
measures are identical at some level. To see why, it is necessary to recognize the density of
deposits (measured in kg/m2 or d) brought to the surface net of the energy costs of extraction
is equal to edv /2g. This is true since e/g is depth of the ideal deposit, and dv /2 is average
carry. Therefore, it is now easy to see how our earlier formulation can account for the
sub-surface aggregation proposed above, and we have for nonrenewables:

                                 Δ = ed where d = edv /2g                                 (53)

3.2.2   Empirics

Non-renewable resources are found in all continents. Reservoirs can be shallow or deep; they
can be large or small; and fuels can be of diﬀerent qualities. For example, the “quality” of
coal as measured by its energy content depends on the depth of burial. Lignite coal is the
coal with the lowest energy content and it is formed when Peat is buried between 200 and
1500 meters during the coaliﬁcation process. The process of Lignite coaliﬁcation increases
the energy content from around 13 MJ/kg for Peat to 16 MJ/kg but it almost doubles its
volumetric density from around 355 kg/m3 to 700 kg/m3 . The formation of Bituminous coal
occurs at greater depths (between 2500 and 6000 meters), and in the process the energy
content increases to 32 MJ/kg and the volumetric density again increases to over 900 kg/m3 .
Anthracite coal is formed deeper that other ranks of coal (between 6000 and 7500 meters).
It is the purest form of coal (up to 96% pure carbon) with an energy content of 35 MJ/kg
and volumetric density as high as 950 kg/m3 . Erosion, earthquakes and volcanic activity
can expose these deposits or bury them even more. For example, the maximum depth of
deposits in Argentina is 600 meters for sub-bituminous coal and minimum seam thickness of
1.8 meters, Ukraine has deposits of bituminous coal that are 1600 meters deep and have a

                                              45
minimum seam thickness of 0.5 meters. Australia has Lignite coal deposits at a maximum
depth of 300 meters and minimum seam thickness of 3 meters (WEC 2010). Many places in
the world also feature surface deposits.
    Oil and Natural Gas deposits can also be found at various depths and the quality of the
resources also depends on the depth of burial, although the process of formation is quite
diﬀerent. The formation of petroleum occurs anywhere between 2500m and 4500m (Deﬀeyes
2005). The temperature and pressure at this depth combine to transform decayed organic
matter into oil. Just as with coal, erosion and other geological forces can bury the oil deposit
further or expose it. Oil deposits can be right at the surface of Earth’s crust or they can be
as deep as 12,000 meters; extreme temperatures below this point are likely to bake most of
the crude in the deposit (WEC 2010).
    These complications mean that our theoretical construct of a continuous ideal deposit
running η meters in depth from the surface is rarely obtained. To amend our calculation for
any speciﬁc deposit, suppose the upper limit of the deposit is located at a distance h0 from
the surface, and suppose the thickness of the deposit is h, so the maximum depth of the
deposit is h0 + h; as shown in Figure 9.(b). Because the resource rights are over one meter
squared the dimensions of the deposit are simply h[m3 ]. In this case to measure the power
density of this deposit, we use:
                     min{h0 +h,η ∗ }                            min{h0 +h,η ∗ }
            Δ=                          [edv − gdv η] dη =                          edv [1 − (g/e)η] dη
                     h0                                          h0

                             Δ = min{h [dv e − gdv (h0 + h/2)] , e2 dv /2g}                               (54)

    Given the large variation in deposit size, depth, and thickness across energy sources we
present several possible conﬁgurations in Table 4. Several observations are in order. First,
non-renewable resources have very high energy contents and correspondingly large power
densities. Even a cubic meter of Peat contains a huge energy supply as shown by the deposit
at zero depth and 1m thick which contains 4340 MJ. Part of this feature comes from the
fact that a Watt is a very small unit of power; and part from the high energy content of
non-renewables.
    Second, energy content and volumetric density are positively correlated. Energy resources
dense in energy content Joules/kg also tend to be dense in a volumetric sense kg/m3 . As a
result, as “density” increases these fuels contain increasingly large amounts of energy.
    Third, the term hdv e in equation (54) dominates the energy costs hgdv (h0 + h/2) of any
extraction. While depth matters, it matters relatively little to overall energy delivered. As
a result, power density can be approximated by a linear function of thickness, h. This is
apparent by looking across any row of the table at deposits of the same thickness buried at

                                                       46
                        Table 4: Power Density Non-Renewables
                           Energy Volumetric         Power Density [GW/m2 ]
       Resource           Content     Density       h0 =0 m         h0 =10000m
                          [MJ/kg]     [kg/m3 ]  h=1m h=10m h=1m h=10m
       Bituminous Coal       33         913      30.1     301      30       300
       Lignite               16         865      13.8     138     13.8      138
       Peat                  14         310      4.34     43.4    4.31      43.1
       Qinhuangdao Crude     44         960      42.2     422     42.1      421
       Brent Crude           46         830      38.2     382     38.1      381


diﬀerent depths.
    Finally, it is very natural to compare the estimates in Tables 1-3, and Table 4 and
conclude non-renewables are far superior to renewables. This conclusion is premature. We
would start by reminding the reader that the power densities in Tables 1-3 are ﬂows provided
indef initely by the resources in question whereas the power densities reported in Table 4
are ﬂows coming from the exhaustion of a quantity of non-renewable resources in a second.
In addition it is unclear what superior means. In an economic context superior means of
greater social value, and we are abstracting from diﬀerences across energy resources in terms
of their storability, intermittency and environmental impact.28


4      Conclusions
This paper set out a simple model where energy resources diﬀer in their power and energy
density; where the collection, exploitation and transport of any energy resource is costly; and
where energy resources are distributed in space. We did so to highlight a hitherto under
appreciated characteristic of energy supplies - their densities. Although everyone knows a
kilogram of straw oﬀers less energy than one of wood or coal, it is less obvious how these
diﬀerences can aﬀect the extent to which we exploit these energy resources, the production
plans we make, and the surpluses we reap. Although we enjoy the beneﬁts of exploiting
dense energy sources everywhere in our daily lives - when we drive to work, turn on an space
heater, or use our cell phones - a clear and explicit examination of the implications of energy
density is nowhere to be found.
    To understand how density may matter to economic outcomes, we built a very simple
spatial model where energy is the only input and output in the economy and all outcomes
are eﬃcient. A spatial approach is necessary if we are to deﬁne and employ measures of
  28
    See Borenstein (2012) for an excellent description and analysis of the methods and pitfalls in comparing
renewable and non-renewable energy technologies for electricity generation.


                                                    47
power and energy density; a cost to exploiting energy resources is required if we are to
understand how energy densities may aﬀect economic outcomes; a one factor energy-in-
energy-out framework is the simplest possible setting in which to introduce, develop and
discuss key results; and a planning perspective is innocuous in a world where all technologies
are CRS and ownership of resources is assumed to be diﬀuse.
    The model has two key characteristics that drive many results: energy resources are
distributed spatially and marginal energy resources require more energy inputs to exploit.
The spatial setting delivers a scaling law, linking the margin of exploitation of a resource to
its supply. Supplies scale with the square of the margin of exploitation and this has large
economic consequences. Since dense energy resources are in some sense cheaper to move we
are likely to search far and wide to exploit them. The very density of the energy resource we
seek, fuels our eﬀorts to obtain more. Therefore diﬀerences in power density across energy
resources create large diﬀerences in energy supply. We ﬁnd that roads, rivers and other
low friction alternatives eﬀectively magnify the power density of available resources turning
what could be a resource poor region into a resource rich one. And while our energy system
today is extremely complex and features an incredible transport of energy from producers
to consumers that suggests locations and energy density may be irrelevant, we turn this
logic on its head by showing how the incentive to create such an infrastructure relies on the
existence of dense energy sources in the ﬁrst place.
    Our assumption of rising marginal energy costs of exploitation is also key to many results.
Even though we assume the potential supply of energy resources is limitless, we show how
the energy supply available for use will always be constrained by the physical necessity of
using energy in the costly exploitation and transportation of energy resources. A rising
marginal cost to energy exploitation interacted with our scaling law to produce a boom and
bust pattern for non-renewable production.
    Finally, since there can be no useful theory without measurement we developed ideal
measures of power and energy densities for both renewable and non-renewable resources.
The measures came directly from our theory, are independent of available technology, and
are relatively easy to implement. We then showed how to implement these formulas by
providing measures for a range of both renewable and non-renewable energy sources. Our
measures show non-renewables are often 4 or 5 orders of magnitude more power dense than
renewables implying that the most salient feature of the history of energy use in the last two
hundred years is our increasing reliance on extremely energy dense fuel sources.




                                              48
A       Appendix
A.1     Data and Data Manipulation
A.1.1    How large is the Energy Industry

The aggregate 10 trillion dollar number is an estimate calculated as follows: annual energy
consumption was 12,274.6 million tons of oil equivalent in 2011 (British Petroleum, 2012,
40). A ton of oil is equivalent to 7.33 barrels, and the average spot price of a barrel of Brent
crude oil, a common benchmark for the world price of oil, was $111.26 (US) in 2011 (Energy
Information Administration, 2012). Calculating annual global energy sales in 2011 using this
information yields an estimate of $10.010 trillion US.
    Global energy consumption in barrels of oil equivalent per second in 2011 is calculated
by once again taking annual energy consumption of 12,274.6 million tons of oil equivalent,
multiplying by 7.33 barrels of oil per ton and then dividing that ﬁgure by 31,536,000 =
60 × 60 × 24 × 365 seconds in 2011 to get 2853.02 barrels of oil equivalent consumed per
second.
    The World Trade Organization valued 2011 global fuels exports (f.o.b.) at $3.171 trillion
US (2012, 3). Fuels are classiﬁed by the United Nations Statistics Division (2006) in section
3 of the Standard International Trade Classiﬁcation, Rev. 4 as: coal, coke and briquettes;
petroleum, petroleum products and related materials; gas, natural and manufactured; and
electric current.
    Data on global pipeline infrastructure listed by country is accessible through the Cen-
tral Intelligence Agency’s World Factbook (2012). Simple addition yields global oil and
gas pipeline infrastructure totaling 1,934,298 km, with natural gas pipelines accounting for
1,217,324 km. Oil, reﬁned products and liquid petroleum gas pipelines account for the
remaining 716,974 km.
    The global oil tanker ﬂeet has a total capacity of 474.846 million deadweight tons (DWT),
corresponding to a 34.0 percent share of the total capacity of the global merchant ﬂeet.
Liqueﬁed natural gas (LNG) carriers have a combined total capacity of 43.339 million DWT,
a 3.1 percent share of the deadweight tonnage of the global merchant ﬂeet. Combining
these numbers yields a total global oil and gas merchant vessel capacity of 518.185 DWT.
All Information on capacity and percentage share of global ﬂeet capacity is taken from the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (2011, 37).
    Fortune Magazine’s Global 500 list (2012) ranks the largest companies in the world, by
revenue. Included in the list’s top 10 are energy companies Royal Dutch Shell, Exxon Mobil,
British Petroleum, Sinopec Group, China National Petroleum, State Grid, Chevron and


                                              49
ConocoPhillips.

A.1.2   Table 1: Crops.

Data on 2011 global crop yields in Table 1 is provided by the Food and Agriculture Orga-
nization of the United Nations’ (FAO) FAOSTAT Production database (2013). Global crop
yield is calculated automatically by the FAO database by dividing annual crop production
by area harvested. Production and harvest ﬁgures are reported to the FAO by individual
countries via questionnaire or national agriculture publications. Detailed information on the
collection methods for this data can be found in the Metadata section of the FAO Statistical
Yearbook (2012, 357-358) as well as in the entry for agricultural production on the FAO’s
Methods & Standards Webpage.
    Data on energy content for the crops given in Table 1 is provided by the United States
Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service’s National Nutrient Database,
Release 25. Energy content is given in kilocalories (kcal) per 100 grams, which is converted
to MJ/kg by multiplying by 4.1868 kJ/kcal and then dividing by 100 to convert kJ/100g
into MJ/kg.

A.1.3   Table 2: Forests.

Average power density for a forest in each of the United States regions listed in Table 2 is
calculated by the formula:
    (Average Productivity in Region (hg/m2 /year) × Power Density of Average Hardwood
(J/m2 /year) × Percentage Hardwood in Average Forest) + (Average Productivity (kg/m2 /year)
× Power Density of Average Softwood × Percentage Softwood in Average Forest)
    The power density of average hardwoods and softwoods is calculated from data provided
by Engineering Toolbox. To be precise, power density for individual tree species is calculated
by dividing the recoverable heat value of a dry cord of wood (million BTU/cord) by the
weight of a dry cord (lb/cord) given by Engineering Toolbox to get the recoverable heat
value per pound of wood (million BTU/lb), which is then converted to recoverable heat
value per kilogram of wood (MJ/kg), also called potential heat value per kilogram of wood,
using conversion factors of 1 lb = 0.4536 kg and 1 million BTU = 1055.06 MJ. Calculations
in Table 2 are based on an average dry hardwood density of 35.52 lb/ft3 with a 14.89 MJ/Kg
potential heat value, and an average dry softwood density of 27.45lb/ft3 with a 14.87 MJ/Kg
potential heat value.
    Average hardwood power density is then calculated by averaging the potential heat value
per kilogram of wood for ﬁve species (aspen, cottonwood, red oak, red maple and white oak)


                                             50
considered common in American forests by the USDA (2007, 62). An identical calculation is
done for four species of softwood (hemlock, ponderosa pine, balsam ﬁr and white pine) also
considered common in American forests by the USDA (2007, 62) to get an average softwood
power density. It should be noted that the variation in potential heat value per kilogram
between diﬀerent species of tree is always less than 1%, so average hardwood and softwood
heat values do not vary much if diﬀerent species of tree are chosen for the calculation.
    Data on percentage of softwoods and hardwoods in an average forest is calculated using
data on hardwood and softwood volumes provided by the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) (2007, 206-208). Data on average productivity classiﬁcations for forests
is also taken from the USDA (2007, 160-162). Forests are categorized by the USDA by
cubic feet of wood per acre per year (cu. ft.) into one of ﬁve diﬀerent classiﬁcations: 120+
cu. ft., 85-119 cu. ft., 50-84 cu. ft., 20-49 cu. ft. and 0-19 cu. ft. A simple average of
the extreme values in each productivity class is taken to represent average productivity for
forests within that class, while forests with a productivity exceeding 120 cu. ft. are capped
at a productivity of 120 cu. ft. The productivity of an average forest in any region of the
United States can then be calculated after making these assumptions. Forests on reserved
land, or with an average productivity between 0-19 cubic feet per acre per year, are omitted
from the stocks of total hardwood and softwood by the USDA, and hence are also omitted
from the calculation of average forest productivity.

A.1.4   Table 3: Solar and Wind.

Solar energy calculations based on data from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory
NREL 2012. The data can be downloaded from http://www.nrel.gov/gis/data solar.html.
We use the annual average direct normal irradiance for the lower 48 states and Hawaii PV
10km Resolution 1998 to 2009. The data are originally in kWh/m2 /day. We transform them
to W/m2 multiplying by 1000 to get Watts and diving by 24 to eliminate day from the
calculation.
    Wind energy calculations are also from NREL and can be downloaded from
http://www.nrel.gov/gis/data wind.html and it is using wind speeds at a height of 50 meters.
The exact relation between speed and power is given by the following equation W = 12 ρv 3 ,
where ρ is the density of air and v is the speed. Increasing the height of the tower increases
speed. For example increasing the height of the wind tower from 10 to 50 meters increases
speed by approximately 25% which in turn would increase power density. Here we also
assume wind speeds at 50 meters. To calculate power we assume air density at sea-level and
temperature of 15o C which is ρ = 1.225kg/m3 . Gipe P. (2004) “Wind Power: Renewable
Energy for Home, Farm, and Business.” Chelsea Green Publishing Company ISBN: 978-1-

                                             51
931498-14-2. We assume a cross-sectional area of 1m2 sitting on 1m2 of land. That is, we
assume the radius of the wind turbine is approximately 55% of the area it sit on.
   For both solar and wind energy we use GIS to aggregate at the state level calculating
the area-weighted average of the cells contained in each state. We then obtain the regional
area weighted average using the same regions described above.
   The six regions of the United States listed in Table 2 and Table PD Sun are deﬁned by
the USDA (2007, 1) as follows:

   • Northeast: Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire,
     New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont, West Virginia

   • North Central: Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Ohio, Wisconsin

   • Southeast: Florida, Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Virginia

   • South Central: Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Oklahoma, Ten-
     nessee, Texas

   • Rocky Mountain: Kansas, Nebraska, North Dakota, South Dakota, Arizona, Colorado,
     Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, Wyoming

   • Paciﬁc Coast: Alaska, Oregon, Washington, California, Hawaii


A.2     von Thunen and Iceberg Costs of Transport
The transport cost assumptions adopted in von Thunen are subtly, but importantly, diﬀer-
ent from what we have assumed here. In short, iceberg costs require the energy costs of
transportation to fall immediately and completely as energy is expended. At the practical
level this rules out containers for fuel storage or combustion, residues left from incomplete
combustion, and no mass of the vehicle carrying the load. In terms of the oat eating horse
example both Von Thunen and Samuelson used, the horse cannot have any mass, the oats
cannot remain resident in the horse, and there is of course no wagon to pull. It is fair to
say that while the iceberg assumption is tractable it is also a knife edge assumption as we
will show below. If even an epsilon of the mass of energy is wasted in moving containers,
in moving engines or left in incompletely combusted particles then the transport process
produces a result signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than von Thunen’s but qualitatively the same as in
our speciﬁcation. Speciﬁcally it will lead to a formulation where there is a maximum zone
of exploitation tied to the power density of energy.



                                             52
   To be precise, assume there is some ﬁxed cost associated with moving energy a distance
dx. Then transportation costs over this increment are given by:
                                                             
                               T                     μgd
                            W (x) =         C(W0 ) +     W (x) dx
                                                      Δ
                                                                                       μgd
   Total energy remaining at distance x+dx is given by W (x+dx) = W (x)− C(W0 ) +        Δ
                                                                                            W (x)   dx.
Rearranging terms we can rewrite this expression as
                                                                   
                 W (x + dx) − W (x)   dW (x)              μgd
                                    =        = − C(W0 ) +     W (x)
                         dx            dx                  Δ

The solution to this diﬀerential equation is:
                                                 
                                         Δ           μgd     Δ
                     W (x) =       W0 +     C(W0 ) e− Δ x −     C(W0 )
                                        μgd                 μgd


   Deﬁne R as the radius for which W (R) = 0; that is, the energy supplied to the core by
any energy source further away than R is zero. The solution for R is:
                                                      
                                   Δ         μgd W0
                               R=     ln 1 +
                                  μgd         Δ C(W0 )

     The iceberg assumption occurs when C(W0 ) = 0 since in this case R goes to inﬁnity.
The case we consider in the text occurs arises when C(W0 ) is proportional to the mass of
                                                                                    Δ
energy transported; speciﬁcally that C(W0 ) = μgd   W0
                                                Δ e−1
                                                       since then we obtain R = μgd   .
    Two observations are in order. First, there exists a ﬁnite margin of exploitation for any
C(W0 ) > 0. Thus, iceberg costs represent a knife edge assumption; any value other than
C(W0 ) = 0 generates a qualitatively diﬀerent result. Any and all energy sources sharing
the same - inﬁnite - margin of exploitation when C(W0 ) = 0; they have ﬁnite and diﬀerent
margins of exploitation for any C(W0 ) > 0. Second, iceberg costs have proven tractable in
general equilibrium models because they allow us to model the transportation system without
introducing another economic activity complicating predictions in small dimensional models.
The formulation in the body of the paper does however respect this constraint. Note the
only costs of transport come from moving energy (and not containers, equipment or engines
even though the result is consistent with formulations with these ﬁxed costs), the key to our
result is our assumption that the mass of energy is transported even as it is used (converted)
in transport. In Von Thunen and Samuelson terms, we are either a) still feeding the horse,
but only when it gets to town; or b) keeping the oats resident in the horse throughout.


                                                53
A.3     Renewables with Stock Eﬀects
To investigate further it is necessary to be speciﬁc about the dynamics of resource growth.
Suppose the energy source is a renewable fuel with natural growth given by G(S) with
G(0) = G(K) = 0. As is standard let G be strictly concave and let S denote the stock
in physical units. For example, the energy source could be a forest, an area dedicated
to biofuels, or even an area dedicated to solar or wind power. It is helpful to ﬁrst take a
speciﬁc example with explicit units. To that end, let G(S) = rS[1−S/K] and the maximum
sustainable yield harvest, H msy , as one possible plan for taking from the resource. Then in
perpetuity this harvest is given by:

                             H msy = G(S msy ) = G(K/2) = rK/4                            (A.1)

where r is the intrinsic resource growth rate and K is the carrying capacity (i.e. a growth rate
times a stock level). Now consider units explicitly. If K is measured in kilograms and K =
100 kg, and r = 10% per unit time, then the sustainable harvest is (.1)(100)/(4)=2.5kg/unit
time. If we multiply this quantity by the energy content of the fuel in [Joules/kg] denoted
by e, we obtain a measure of Joules per unit time that could be harvested from the resource.
Choosing to measure time in seconds, we obtain W atts. The ﬁnal step is to divide this ﬂow
of power by the area of exploitation needed to maintain it. Since the carrying capacity is K
kg, and if the fuel has a physical density, d, measured in [kg/m2 ], then the total area needed
for this resource ﬂow is K/d. All this implies we can write power density for this renewable
energy resource, Δ, as:

                            H msy e = F[Joules/second] = [Watts]
                                      (rK/4)e   Watts
                                 Δ=           =                                           (A.2)
                                        K/d      m2
                                 Δ = γred       γ > 0.

    Power density is the simple product of three fundamental, commonly used, and poten-
tially observable characteristics of an energy source, plus one behavioral component captured
in the parameter γ. The remaining term in power density is the factor of proportionality
γ which captures the intensity of harvesting. To see this note that if harvesting results
in a steady state stock equal to a fraction of the carrying capacity given by κK, then γ =
κ(1− κ) < 1. Harvesting zero implies κ = 1, γ = 0 and Δ = 0; harvesting suﬃciently high
to cause extinction implies κ = 0, γ = 0 and again Δ = 0. The example given above has
κ = 1/2 and γ = 1/4. We chose this example for a particular reason: if the resource owner


                                              54
was interested in maximizing total energy collected over an indeﬁnite future, then the owner
would adjust their take to match that of the maximum sustainable yield. This is obvious,
but more generally, if the owner discounts the value of future versus current energy ﬂows,
the optimal stationary harvest maximizing this objective would lead to δ = G (S ∗ ) where
δ is the discount rate on future periods. This is an application of a well known result in
resource economics.29


A.4      A One-dimensional model of Energy Exploitation
Consider due to geographical limitations, the area of exploitation is restricted to a two
dimensional stripe that can only expand along the one dimension shown by the horizontal
axis as shown in Figure 10.a. This stripe is h meters wide. The core is centered in the origin.
Here the exploitation zone is given by

                                                    W
                                            EX =      = h.R                                          (A.3)
                                                    Δ

where R is the distance away from the core that is needed to collect W Watts. That is
W = Δ.h.R. The density of resources at a distance r is given by f (r) = h/h.R and using
familiar methods we ﬁnd the average carrying distance is given by ACD = W/2Δh. Assume
                                                                         Δ2
the resource is renewable, then total energy extracted is given by W ∗ = μgd h, the energy
used in transportation is W = W /2 and the energy supplied to the core is W S = W ∗ /2.
                            T      ∗

                                                                                 Δ
The zero energy margin can by found by setting EX = hR = W ∗ /Δ so that R̄ = μgd   . Note
with one less dimension supply is no longer a cubic in power density.
    Now assume the resource is non-renewable. Then the stock of non-renewable resources
                Δ2
is X̄ = ΔhR̄ = μgd h. Using the same techniques as in section 5 we ﬁnd X(t) = X̄ − Δhr(t)
                 X̄−X(t)
so that r(t) =     Δh
                         .   The cost function is then given by

                                                  r(t)    X
                                        C(X) =         =1− .                                         (A.4)
                                                   R̄     X̄

Note from the ﬁgure it should be clear that one half the resources are in the ﬁrst one half
of resource quality, unlike our previous case and this is why the cost function appears as it
does. Now replacing this equation in equation 39 we ﬁnd:

                                                ρ    W2
                                          Ẇ = − W +    ;                                            (A.5)
                                                σ    X
  29
      The optimal stock and attendant harvesting is set only by impatience and is independent of prices. In
our simple example with logistic growth, power density is simply Δ = γred, and γ = [1 − δ/r]2 /4 is positive
as long as suppliers discount rate is not too high.


                                                    55
which implies the Ẇ = 0 locus is a straight line of the form W = σρ X. The phase diagram
is shown in Figure 10.b. It shows the transition path towards exhaustion is monotonic.




                                 C

                                        I                   h[m]
                                  T

                                  Y




                                                                             R[m]

                                                                  (a) Exploitation Zone
               Energy Extracted, W(t)




                                            W(0)

                                                                           Ẇ(t)=0



                                                             (X(t),W(t))




                                                                            Ẋ(t)=0
                                                                                                     ◉
                                                                     Cumulative Extraction, X-X(t)   X

                                                                    (b) Phase-Diagram

                                                   Figure 10: One-directional energy search model




                                                                               56
References
Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, L. Bursztyn, and D. Hemous. 2012. “The Environment
and Directed Technical Change.” American Economic Review, 102(1): 131-66.
Boyce, J.R. “Prediction and Inference in the Hubbert-Deﬀeyes Peak Oil Model.” The
Energy Journal, forthcoming.
Borenstein, S. 2012. “The Private and Public Economics of Renewable Electricity Gener-
ation.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1): 67-92.
Borenstein, S. J. Bushnell, and F. Wolak. 2002. “Measuring Market Ineﬃciencies in
California’s Restructured Wholesale electricity market.” The American Economic Review,
92(5): 1376-1405.
British Petroleum. 2012. BP Statistical Review of World Energy. London: British
Petroleum.
Central Intelligence Agency. 2012. The World Factbook: Field Listing: Pipelines. Avail-
able at: https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/ﬁelds/2117.html, Ac-
cessed March 10, 2013.
Chakravorty, U. and D.L. Kruice. 1994. “Heterogenous Demand and Order of Resource
Extraction.” Econometrica, 62(6): 1445-1452.
Chakravorty, U., J. Roumasset, and K. Tse. 1997. “Endogenous substitution among
energy resources and global warming.” Journal of Political Economy, 195: 1201-1234.
Exxon Mobil. 2010. The Outlook for Energy: A View to 2030.
Energy Information Administration. 2012. 2012 Brief: Average 2012 Crude Oil Prices
Remain Near 2011 Levels. Available at: http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=9530,
Accessed March 10, 2013.
Engineering Toolbox. Wood and Combustion Heat Values. Available at:
http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/wood-combustion-heat-d 372.html, Accessed March 12,
2013.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2013. FAOSTAT Produc-
tion. United Nations. Available at: http://faostat.fao.org/site/339/default.aspx, Accessed
March 12, 2013.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2012. FAO Statistical
Yearbook 2012 World Food and Agriculture. Rome: United Nations.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2012. Methods &
Standards. Available at: http://faostat3.fao.org/home/index.html#METADATA, Accessed
March 12, 2013.
Fouquet, R. and R. Pearson. 1998. “A Thousand Years of Energy Use in the United


                                          57
Kingdom.” The Energy Journal, 19(4): 1-41.
Fouquet, R. 2006. “Seven Centuries of Energy Services: The price and Use of Light in the
United Kingdom (1300-2000).” The Energy Journal, 1: 139-177.
Fortune Magazine. 2012. Global 500. Available at: http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/global500
Accessed March 10, 2013.
Gaudet, G., M. Moreaux, and S.W. Salant. 2001. “Intertemporal Depletion of Re-
source Sites by Spatially Distributed Users.” American Economic Review, 91(4): 1149-1159.
Gipe, P. 2004. Wind Power: Renewable Energy for Home, Farm, and Business. USA:
Chelsea Green Publishing Company.
Herﬁndahl, O.C. 1967. “Depletion in Economic Theory.” In Extractive Resources and
Taxation, edited by Mason Gaﬀney, 63-90. Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin
Press.
Holland, S.P. 2008. “Modeling Peak Oil.” The Energy Journal, 29(2): 61-79.
Hotelling, H. 1931. “The Economics of Exhaustible Resources.” Journal of Political Econ-
omy, 39(2): 137-175.
International Atomic Energy Agency. 2009. World Distribution of Uranium Deposits
(UDEPO) with Uranium Deposit Classiﬁcation Vienna. IAEA-TECDOC-1629
Joskow, P. and E. Kahn. 2002. “Quantitative Analysis of Pricing Behavior in California’s
Electricity Market During the Summer 2000.” The Energy Journal, 23(4): 1-35.
Krautkraemer, J.A. 1998. “Nonrenewable Resource Scarcity.” Journal of Economic Lit-
erature, 36(4): 2065-2107.
Kolstad, C.D. 1994. “Hotelling Rents in Hotelling Space: Product Diﬀerentiation in
Exhaustible Resource Markets.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
26: 163-180.
Laﬀont, Jean-Jacques and Moreaux, Michel. 1986. “Bordeaux Contre Gravier: Une
Analyse par les Anticipations Rationnelles,” in Gerard Gaudet and Pierre Lasserre, eds.,
Ressources naturelles et theorie economique. Quebec: Presses de l’Universite Laval, 1986,
pp. 231- 53.
Livernois, J.R. and R.S. Uhler. 1987. “Extraction Costs and the Economics of Nonre-
newable Resources.” Journal of Political Economy, 95(11): 195-203.
Moreno-Cruz, J. and M.S. Taylor. 2012. “Back to the Future of Green Powered
Economies,” The National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No: 18236.
Neher, P.A. 1990. Natural Resource Economics: Conservation and Exploitation. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Pindyck, R.S. 1978. “The Optimal Exploration and Production of Nonrenewable Re-
sources.” Journal of Political Economy, 86(5): 841-861.


                                         58
Sanchirico, J.N. and J.E. Wilen. 1999. “Bioeconomics of Spatial Exploitation in a
Patchy Environment.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 37: 129-
150.
Samuelson, P.A. 1983. “Thunen at Two Hundred.” Journal of Economic Literature, 21(4):
1468-1488.
Slade, M.E. 1982. “Trends in Natural-Resource Commodity Prices: An Analysis of the
Time Domain.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 9: 122-137.
Smil, V. 2008. Energy in Nature and Society: General Energetics of Complex Systems.
USA: MIT Press.
Smith, M.D., J.N. Sanchirico, and J.E. Wilen. 2009. “The Economics of Spatial-
dynamic Processes: Applications to Renewable Resources.” Journal of Environmental Eco-
nomics and Management. 57: 104-121.
Smulders, S. 2005. “Endogenous Technological Change, Natural Resources, and Growth.”
In Scarcity and Growth Revisited: Natural Resources and the Environment in the New Mil-
lennium, edited by R.D. Simpson, M.A. Toman, and R.U. Ayres, Chapter 5. Baltimore: The
John Hopkins University Press for Resources for the Future.
Solow, R.M. and F.Y. Wan. 1976. “Extraction Costs in the Theory of Exhaustible
Resources.” The Bell Journal of Economics, 7(2): 359-370.
Swierzbinski, J.E. and Mendelsohn, R. 1989. “Exploration and Exhaustible Resources:
The Microfoundations of Aggregate Models.” International Economic Review, 30(1): 175-
186.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. 2011. Review of Maritime
Transport. Geneva: United Nations.
United Nations Statistics Division. 2006. Standard International Trade Classiﬁca-
tion, Revision 4. Available at: http://unstats.un.org/unsd/cr/registry/regcst.asp?Cl=28,
Accessed March 10, 2013.
United States Department of Agriculture. 2007. Forest Resources of the United States.
Available at: http://www.fs.fed.us/nrs/pubs/gtr/gtr wo78.pdf, Accessed March 12, 2013.
United States Department of Agriculture. 2012. Agricultural Research Service. USDA
National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, Release 25. United States Department
of Agriculture. Available at: http://ndb.nal.usda.gov/ndb/search/list, Accessed March 12,
2013.
Von Thunen, J.H. 1826. “Der Isolierte Staat,” In Beziehung auf Landwirtschaft und
Nationalekonomie. Hamburg.
World Trade Organization. 2012. World Commodity Proﬁles for 2011. Available
at: http://www.wto.org/english/res e/statis e/world commodity proﬁles11 e.pdf, Accessed


                                           59
March 10, 2013.
Wolfram, C.D. 1999. “Measuring Duopoly Power in the British Electricity Spot Market.”
The American Economic Review, 89(4): 805-826.
World Trade Organization. 2011. “World Commodity Proﬁles for 2011.” WTO,
Geneva.
World Energy Council. 2010. Survey of Energy Resources. ISBN: 978 0 946121 021.
Wrigley, E.A. 2010. Energy and the English Industrial Revolution. Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.




                                         60
