NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INDIRECT INCENTIVES OF HEDGE FUND MANAGERS
Jongha Lim
Berk A. Sensoy
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 18903
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18903
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013

We would like to thank Niki Boyson for particularly helpful comments on an earlier draft. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jongha Lim, Berk A. Sensoy, and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Indirect Incentives of Hedge Fund Managers
Jongha Lim, Berk A. Sensoy, and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 18903
March 2013
JEL No. G23,G3,J3
ABSTRACT
Indirect incentives exist in the money management industry when good current performance increases
future inflows of new capital, leading to higher future fees. We quantify the magnitude of indirect
performance incentives for hedge fund managers. Flows respond quickly and strongly to performance;
lagged performance has a monotonically decreasing impact on flows as lags increase up to two years.
Conservative estimates indicate that indirect incentives for the average fund are four times as large
as direct incentives from incentive fees and returns to managers’ own investment in the fund. For new
funds, indirect incentives are seven times as large as direct incentives. Combining direct and indirect
incentives, for each dollar generated for their investors in a given year, managers receive close to another
dollar in direct performance fees plus the present value of future fees over the expected life of the
fund. Older and capacity constrained funds have considerably weaker relations between future flows
and performance, leading to weaker indirect incentives. There is no evidence that direct contractual
incentives are stronger when market-based indirect incentives are weaker.
Jongha Lim
Department of Finance
Trulaske College of Business School
University of Missouri
Columbia, MO 65211
limjong@missouri.edu
Berk A. Sensoy
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
sensoy_4@fisher.osu.edu

Michael S. Weisbach
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
Ohio State University
2100 Neil Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
weisbach.2@osu.edu

1. Introduction
Hedge fund managers are among the most highly paid individuals today. According to Kaplan
and Rauh (2010), the top five hedge fund managers likely earned more than all 500 CEOs of S&P 500
firms in 2007 (p. 1006). Therefore, the payoff to becoming a top hedge fund manager is enormous. The
logic of Holmström (1999), Berk and Green (2004) and Chung et al. (2012) provides a framework for
understanding hedge fund manager’s careers: Investors allocate capital to funds based on their perception
of the managers’ abilities, which is a function of the performance of the fund. Good performance,
especially early in one’s career, increases a manager’s lifetime income not only through incentive fees
earned at the time of the performance but also by increasing future flows of new investment to the fund,
thereby increasing future fees.
The extremely high level of pay for the top hedge fund managers suggests that the effect of
current performance on lifetime income through future flows is likely to be important. However, there are
no estimates of its magnitude. For an incremental percentage point of returns to investors, how much
additional capital does the market allocate to that particular hedge fund? How much of this additional
capital do hedge fund managers end up receiving as compensation in expectation? How does this
“expected future pay for today’s performance” compare in magnitude with the direct fees from incentive
fees that they earn from an incremental return? How do these effects differ across types of funds, and
over time for a particular fund? To what extent are these results consistent with theories of optimal capital
allocation, and also of optimal compensation?
In this paper, we evaluate the way in which hedge fund investors allocate their capital, the extent
that it depends on performance, and the way that this relation affects long-term incentives of hedge fund
managers. In a sample of 2,687 hedge funds from 1995 to 2010, we first estimate the relation between
hedge fund performance and inflows to the fund. As predicted by learning models of fund allocation and
consistent with prior work on mutual funds and private equity funds, this relation is substantially stronger
for newer funds, whose managers’ abilities the market knows with less certainty. For an average fund, the
estimates imply that a 10 percentage point incremental return in a given year leads to a 22 percent

1

increase in the fund’s assets under management from inflows of new investment over the next two years.
For a new fund the effect is much larger: every 10 percentage points of return in a fund’s first year leads
to a 41 percent increase in assets under management over the next two years.
The estimates suggest that investors respond remarkably quickly to performance. Estimated using
annual data, about half of the increase in assets under management occurs in the year of the abnormal
performance. Using quarterly or even monthly data, the estimated impact on inflows is strongest for
performance in the immediately preceding quarter or month and declines monotonically so that inflows in
a particular period are much more affected by recent performance one to two years prior. In addition,
performance has a greater impact on flows for funds engaged in more “scalable” strategies. These results
are consistent with the view that investors are continually updating their assessment of managers and
adjust their portfolios based on these updated assessments relatively quickly.
The way in which the inflow-performance relation affects managers’ compensation depends on
the fee structure in hedge funds. Typically, hedge fund managers receive a management fee equal to 2
percent of assets under management, together with incentive fees equal to 20 percent of profits above a
high water mark. As Goetzmann et al. (2003) emphasize, the incentive fee portion of the fee structure is a
call option on the fund’s return, with the high water mark as the exercise price. These authors provide an
analytical formula for calculating the fraction of an incremental dollar invested in the fund that, in
expectation, will be received by the fund’s managers as compensation over the life of the fund. We use
this formula, parameters estimated from our data or suggested by Goetzmann et al. (2003), and our
estimates of the impact of fund performance on inflows to estimate the magnitude of indirect
performance-based compensation. In other words, for an incremental percentage point of current return,
we calculate the additional lifetime income the fund’s managers receive in expectation due to future
inflows of new investment.
As a benchmark for assessing the importance of this effect, we calculate its magnitude relative to
the direct performance pay managers receive from incentive fees and changes in the value of their own
investment in the fund. We use the Agarwal et al. (2009) contingent-claims framework to estimate the

2

change in the value of managers’ direct incentive fees claim for an incremental return. We make these
estimates under different assumptions about managers’ ownership and reinvestments in the fund.
Our estimates suggest that incentives coming from future fund flows are particularly important in
hedge funds, substantially larger than direct incentives from carried interest and the managers’ personal
stakes. For an average-sized hedge fund ($230m in assets under management), conservative estimates
indicate that a one percentage point increase in returns generates, in expectation, $378,000 in extra
incentive fees and profits on the management’s personal stake. The indirect compensation comes from a
predicted extra $7.4 million in assets under management ($5.1 million from new capital flows and $2.3
million from increase in value of existing investors’ stakes), of which $1.65 million are expected to go to
the hedge fund manager in future fees. These calculations imply that for an average-sized fund, the
indirect, career-based incentive effect is about four times larger than the direct income managers receive
from incentive fees and returns on their personal investments. For every extra dollar in value created, 83
cents go to investors and 17 cents go to hedge fund managers in incentive fees and returns on their
personal stake. However, the managers also receive an additional 58 cents from expected fees on future
income, so the total expected return to the hedge fund manager from a dollar of additional profits is 75
cents, which is similar to the 83 cents returned to their investors today.
Incentives from future flows are even larger for young funds. Our estimates indicate that for
brand new funds, the indirect effect is about seven times as large as the direct effect. We estimate that the
increase in future compensation for a new fund is $0.84 for every $1.00 in additional value to the
investors. The importance of indirect incentives also depends on the “style” of the fund; for an average
fund following a style unlikely to be capacity-constrained, the ratio of the indirect to direct effect is four
to five, while it is three to four for a fund that is likely to be constrained and hence unable to grow as
much in response to good performance.
Overall, pecuniary incentives in the hedge fund industry over a manager’s career are vastly higher
than direct incentive fees alone would suggest, consistent with the huge earnings of managers who have
built a track record of strong performance over many years. In a final test, we examine whether parties

3

appear to take into account differences in indirect incentives across funds when agreeing to explicit
contracts. The logic of Gibbons and Murphy (1992) suggests that funds with weaker market-based
incentives from future flows should have stronger explicit incentives (e.g., a higher incentive fee rate) put
in place at the fund’s inception. Contrary to this view, we find that direct and indirect incentives are
positively correlated. Presumably, this positive correlation reflects heterogeneity in required total
incentives across funds.
This paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the way in which we quantify the direct and
indirect components of hedge fund pay for performance. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 presents
estimates of they way in which inflows into hedge funds respond to the funds’ performance. Section 5
estimates the change in hedge fund managers’ expected lifetime incomes through the direct and indirect
channels in response to a change in performance. Section 6 investigates the relation between explicit
contractual incentives and indirect incentives, while Section 7 concludes.

2. Quantifying the Magnitude of Pay for Performance of Hedge Fund Managers
2.1. Direct Pay for Performance
Hedge fund managers’ compensation generally consists of management fees that are a percentage
of assets under management (often around 2%), plus incentive fees, which is a percentage (usually 20%)
of profits, or of profits earned above the historical “high water mark” if the fund has the high-water mark
provision. In addition, hedge fund managers usually make a personal investment into the fund. The direct
pay for performance a manager receives come from the incentive fees and his personal investment in the
fund, both of which increase in value with the fund’s performance. Quantifying the hedge fund manager’s
direct performance incentives (i.e. the manager’s expected dollar gains from increasing returns) is
complicated because of the option-like features contained in the hedge fund manager’s incentive fee
contract. In particular, the incentive fee contract resembles a call option whose exercise price is
determined by each investor’s time of entrance into the fund, the fund’s hurdle rate and/or historical high
water mark level. Even if different managers have the same 20% incentive fee rate, the actual pay-

4

performance sensitivity they face will vary depending on the distance between the current asset value and
the exercise price.
To estimate the direct pay-performance sensitivity, we utilize Agarwal et al. (2009)’s total delta
approach, which measures the impact of an incremental 1% return to fund investors on the increase in the
value of the manager’s incentive fees, plus the increase in the value of the manager’s own ownership
stake. Agarwal et al. (2009) show that the incentive fee contract of the manager can be considered as “a
portfolio of call options” written on various investors’ assets. The total delta is the sum of these individual
option’s deltas plus the change in the value of the manager’s stake, with the manager’s stake calculated
assuming that managers reinvest all of their after-tax incentive fees back into the fund. Details on this
calculation are described in the Appendix.

2.2. Indirect Pay for Performance
In addition to the pay for performance from incentive fees and their own investment in the fund,
hedge fund managers’ lifetime incomes change with performance through a reputational effect: Good
performance increases the market’s perception of a manager’s ability, leading to higher inflows of new
investment to the fund. Ultimately, part of these incremental inflows will be received by the fund’s
managers as future management fees and incentive fees. The expectation of this future income will
change with today’s performance, leading to what we refer to as indirect incentives.
There are two components that must be known to evaluate the magnitude of these indirect
incentives. First, we have to estimate the way in which performance affects expected inflows to the fund.
Second, we must have a model of the present value of the manager’s expected lifetime compensation as a
fraction of fund assets. This model should predict, for each incremental dollar under management, the
increase in the manager’s expected compensation over the future lifetime of the fund.
While the first issue, the relation between fund performance and inflows, is straightforward to
estimate, the second is more complex. Total lifetime payoffs are a call option (or a portfolio of call
options) with the high water mark as a strike price, the high water mark potentially resets annually or

5

quarterly, and inflows to both the hedge fund industry and the fund in particular have a large stochastic
element. Goetzmann, Ingersoll, and Ross (2003) (henceforth GIR) provide a contingent-claims solution to
this problem. GIR view the hedge fund management contract as a potentially perpetual option contract
with a path-dependent payoff. 1 GIR theoretically model the present value of this option using an
equivalent martingale framework in a continuous time, assuming that the fund’s value follows a
lognormal diffusion process. Details on the GIR model and the choice of its parameters are described in
the Appendix.
After calculating the present value of the total future fees that the manager earns for an extra
dollar of assets under management, we calculate indirect pay for performance by multiplying this present
value by an estimate of the number of extra dollars of fund flows that result from a one-percentage point
incremental improvement in returns to investors.

3. Hedge Fund Data
Our data come from the TASS database, which covers about 40% of the hedge fund universe
(Agarwal et al. (2009)). Summary statistics of key fund characteristics for our sample are very close to
those for the sample considered by Agarwal et al. (2009) (see Table 1), who merge and consolidate four
major databases (CISDM, HFR, MSCI, and TASS). For this reason, we believe that our sample of hedge
funds is representative of the hedge fund universe.
Our sample period extends from January 1995 to December 2010. We focus on the post-1994
period because the TASS started reporting information on ‘defunct’ funds only after 1994.2 We exclude
managed futures/CTAs and fund-of-funds, which have a different treatment of incentive fees and are
likely to have different inflow-performance relations than typical individual hedge funds. We also exclude

1

The estimates we emphasize are conservative, meaning that they likely understate indirect incentives, because we
make assumptions that imply a finite expected fund life.
2
Defunct funds include funds that are liquidated, merged, or restructured as well as those stopped reporting returns
to TASS (Fung et al. (2008)).

6

closed-end hedge funds, since subscriptions in these funds are only possible during the initial issuing
period and future flows are not possible. This initial filter leaves us with 4,939 open-end hedge funds.
We drop funds for which TASS does not contain information on organizational characteristics
such as management fees, incentive fees, and high-watermark provisions. In addition, we only consider
funds with an uninterrupted series of net asset values and returns so that we can calculate inflows. Further,
we restrict our sample to funds with at least 12 consecutive monthly returns available during the sample
period. If there is a ‘break’ in return data (i.e., a fund reports returns for more than 12 consecutive months,
stops reporting for a while, and then resumes reporting), we only consider the first sequence of
uninterrupted data. Finally, we exclude funds with an incentive fee of zero, since there can be no direct
pay-for-performance for these funds. Our final monthly sample contains 159,235 fund-month
observations for 3,073 individual funds, of which 1,039 are live as of December 2010 and the remaining
2,036 are considered ‘defunct’.
To construct quarterly and annual samples, we further drop all quarters or years that have return
information only for a fraction of the period (e.g. a quarter with only 2 month returns available). This
sample construction process leaves us with a quarterly sample of 3,073 funds (51,300 fund-quarter
observations) and an annual sample of 2,687 funds (10,811 fund-year observations).
Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for the sample of funds in our annual data. Time-varying
variables such as annual flows and returns are measured at the fund-year level, and other contractual
characteristics such as management and incentive fees rate are measured at the fund level.3 All timevarying variables except fund age are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles to minimize the effect of
outliers.

3

TASS provides information on funds’ organizational characteristics as of the last available date of fund data. Like
most previous studies, we also assume that these organizational characteristics do not change throughout the life of
the fund. Agarwal et al. (2009) argue that funds’ organizational characteristics are unlikely to change much over
time based on their discussions with practitioners, which suggest that if a manager wants to impose new contractual
terms, it is easier for him to start a new fund with different terms than to go through the legal complications of
changing an existing contract. Consistently, Liang and Schwarz (2008), Liang (2001) and Deuskar et al. (2012) find
that hedge fund fees do not change much over time.

7

The mean annual flow is 53.6%, and the median 3.8%, so the distribution is highly skewed. The
mean and median annual returns are 11.7% and 9.2%. Both the flows and returns are similar to those in
Agarwal et al. (2009), who report mean (median) annual flow of 60.6% (5.9%) and mean (median) annual
return of 12.2% (9.7%). However, the average fund size in our sample ($227 million) is about twice the
average size reported in Agarwal et al. ($120 million), reflecting the fast growth of the sector as well as
the recent trend of raising mega hedge funds.4
The remaining variables reflect time-invariant contractual features. Summary statistics on various
fund characteristics except fund size are very close to those reported in other prior studies (e.g. Agarwal
et al (2009), Baquero and Verbeek (2009), amd Aragon and Nanda (2012)). The management fee is the
annual percentage of the asset under management received by the manager as compensation and has a
sample mean (median) of 1.4% (1.5%). The incentive fee is the annual percentage of positive profits (or
profits earned above high-water mark in case high-water mark provision is present) and has a sample
mean (median) of 19.3% (20%). High-water mark is an indicator variable that equals one if the fund has a
high-water mark provision, and zero otherwise. About 69% of our sample funds have a high-water mark
provision. About 67.7% of our sample funds report that they use leverage, 19.5% are open to public
investors, and about a quarter are on-shore funds.
We also consider three variables that reflect potential restrictions on the behavior of flows. Total
redemption period is defined as the sum of the notice period and the redemption period, where the notice
period is the time (in years) the investor has to give notice to the fund about an intention to withdraw
money from the fund, and the redemption period is the time that the fund takes to return the money after
the notice period is over. The lockup period is the minimum time in years that an investor has to wait
before withdrawing invested money. The subscription period is a time delay, measured in years, between
investing in a fund and actually purchasing fund shares. In our sample the mean total redemption period,

4

According to HFR Industry Reports, by the end of 2010, mega hedge funds collectively managed around 60% of
total industry AUM.

8

lock-up period, and subscription period are 0.273 years (3.2 months), 0.247 years (three months), and
0.089 years (one month), respectively.

4. Estimating the Sensitivity of Fund Inflows to Performance
To understand the impact of performance on fund flows, we use a Bayesian learning framework
that presumes that investors are continually evaluating managers trying to assess his ability (see Berk and
Green (2004) and Chung et al. (2012)). A fund’s performance provides information about the manager’s
ability, so an observation of performance causes investors to update their assessment of his ability and
allocate more capital to a fund when the manager’s estimated ability increases. These models suggest that
investors should update their portfolios relatively quickly. The magnitude of the updates and hence the
sensitivity of inflows to performance should depend on the informativeness of the signal relative to the
precision of the prior estimate of the fund manager’s ability. In addition, the sensitivity of inflows to
performance should also depend on the extent to which ability can be “scaled” to replicate a fund’s return
distribution on new capital.
Measuring the indirect incentives of hedge fund managers requires an estimate of the relation
between fund performance and future inflows. There is a long literature beginning with Ippolito (1992)
that estimates this relation to be relatively strong in the mutual fund industry.5 Similarly, beginning with
Kaplan and Schoar (2005) the literature has documented a clear positive relation between performance
and inflows in the private equity industry. However, the results for hedge funds are less clear; Goetzmann
et al. (2003) find a negative and concave relation while other studies generally find a positive one.6

5

See Ippolito (1992), Brown, Harlow and Stark (1996), Sirri and Tufano (1998), Chevalier and Ellison (1999),
Barclay, Pearson and Weisbach (1998), Del Guercio and Tkac (2002), Bollen (2007), Huang, Wei and Yan (2007),
Sensoy (2009), etc.
6
Agarwal et al. (2003) find a positive and convex relation similar to that documented for mutual funds. Baquero and
Verbeek (2009) find a linear relationship but the shape of relation depends on the time horizon being analyzed. Ding
et al. (2009) investigate the impact of share restrictions on the flow-performance relation of hedge funds and find a
convex relation in the absence of share restrictions, a concave relation in the presence of restrictions, but a linear
relation when consider all hedge funds together. We focus on linear specifications for simplicity but our results are
not materially affected by allowing for nonlinearities in the flow-performance relations.

9

4.1. Empirical Specification
Consequently, we estimate equations predicting the relation between fund inflows and fund
performance. We estimate the following specification:

Flowi,t  β0  β1 Return i,t  β 2 Return i,t 1  β3 Return i,t 2  β4 Flowi,t 1  γX t  λY
 StrategyFE  Year FE  εi,t

(4)

Following the literature on flows to mutual funds (for example, Chevalier and Ellison (1997),
Sirri and Tufano (1999)) or hedge funds (for example, Goetzmann et al. (2003), Fung et al. (2008),
Agarwal et al. (2009)), we compute annual flows of capital into a fund as follows:

Flowi,t 

AUM i,t  AUM i,t 1 (1  Returni,t )
AUM i,t 1

(5)

where AUMi,t and AUMi,t-1 are the assets under management of fund i at the end of year t and t-1,
respectively, and Returni,t is the net of fee return for fund i during year t.7 When considering quarterly or
monthly horizons, we compute quarterly or monthly flows in a similar manner using the AUM at the
quarter (month) end and quarterly (monthly) returns.
For young funds that have, for example, only one year’s worth of return history, we cannot
compute lagged returns and flows. In such cases, instead of dropping these young funds from the
estimation, we “dummy out” missing lagged variables to retain observations. In other words, we treat
missing values of lagged flows and returns as zero and include a dummy that indicates missing values.
The vector X consists of time-varying fund characteristics that include the natural logarithm of
asset under management for fund i at the end of year t-1, the natural logarithm of fund i’s age plus one at
the end of year t-1, and annualized return volatility of fund i during year t. The vector Y is of snapshot
fund characteristics that include the management fee rate, the incentive fee rate, the total redemption
period, the lock-up period, the subscription period, and a set of indicator variables that equal one if fund i

7

This standard method of measuring flows implicitly assumes that flows occur at the end of each period, after fund
returns are observed.

10

has a high-water mark provision, if its manager invests personal capital in the fund, if it uses leverage,
and if it is open to public investors, if it is an on-shore fund, and if it is capacity constrained, respectively.
We include 11 strategy dummies listed in Table 1 to capture the differences in average flows
between funds that have different strategies. We also control for time effects by including time dummies,
to capture economy-wide shocks. Standard errors are calculated using double clustering by fund and time.
A key issue in designing a specification is the choice of time units. Most of the prior literature
uses annual data, estimating the effect of performance in one year on flows in the next.8 Yet, a learning
model like Berk and Green’s predicts that investors will update their assessments and change their
allocations of capital at the time performance is observed, so current performance influences current
flows. Since the appropriate time unit is not obvious, we estimate Equation (4) using annual, quarterly,
and monthly data.
4.2. Estimates of the Flow-Performance Relation.
We present estimates of the flow-performance relation for our sample of hedge funds in Panel A
of Table 2 using annual data, in Panel A of Table 3 using quarterly data, and in Panel B of Table 3 using
monthly data. In all specifications, the estimates indicate that there is a strong relation between inflows
and performance.
In the annual specification in Panel A of Table 2, we include returns in the current year and the
two prior years as independent variables in Column (1). In Column (2) we add a number of fund-level
controls. In each specification, the coefficients on returns are all positive and statistically significant, and
decline sharply over time, so the coefficient on contemporaneous returns is the largest. The coefficients
on returns lagged one and two years are substantially lower. If we sum the coefficients on the
contemporaneous and past returns, the sum in Column (1) is 2.09 and in Column (2) is 2.23. These
coefficients imply that a one standard deviation increase in returns (24.6%), will lead to between a 51%
and 55% increase in fund size in two years following the return.

8

An exception is Baquero and Verbeek (2009), who investigate both quarterly and annual horizons.

11

Comparable equations using quarterly and monthly data are presented in Panels A and B of Table
3. In each column, the coefficients on lagged performance are positive and statistically significantly
different from zero. Moreover, they decline sharply with the time away from the potential inflows to the
fund, so that recent performance affects inflows substantially more than performance farther away. The
effect is monotonic using both quarterly and monthly data, so that the coefficient on the most recent
period’s performance is larger than the one on the prior period, which in turn is larger than the period
before that; this pattern holds for the six quarters prior to the quarter in question in the quarterly
specification and for the 13 months in the monthly specification.

In the quarterly specification,

performance in the most recent prior quarter has four times as large an effect on inflows as performance
in quarter -4, and almost 10 times as large an effect as performance in quarter -8. Using monthly data,
performance in the most recent month has about twice the effect of performance in month -6 and about 5
times the effect of performance in month -12. These results strongly suggest that investors quickly adjust
their assessments of hedge fund managers and consequently their portfolios.
Several other points are worth noting about the equations estimated using quarterly and monthly
data. First, the coefficients tend to be small and statistically insignificant for time periods more than two
years prior to the period for which inflows are measured, suggesting that focusing on the two or three
years prior to any potential inflows is reasonable. Second, the coefficients on contemporaneous returns
are smaller than those for returns in the immediately preceding period, suggesting that the large positive
contemporaneous coefficient in the equations using annual data are picking up returns in the same year
but preceding the potential inflows. Finally, the sum of the coefficients in quarterly and monthly
specifications is somewhat smaller than those in the annual specification, totaling around 1.6. These
equations imply that a one-standard-deviation increase in annual returns (24.6%, or 5.7% per quarter
compounded) leads to an increase of 9.1% in quarterly inflows, which when annualized is equivalent to a
41.7% increase.
4.3. Age and Strategy Interactions.

12

Theoretically, a learning framework such as Berk and Green (2004) suggests that the sensitivity
of fund flows to performance should depend on the precision of the prior distribution of ability. The
precision of the prior distribution is likely to be related to the experience of the fund managers. Intuitively,
a more experienced manager is more of a “known quantity”, so given an observation of performance, an
observer will update their assessment of his ability less than if the same performance were observed from
a new manager. In addition, the sensitivity of inflows to performance should depend on the extent to
which it is possible to replicate the current distribution of returns if the fund increases in size, in other
words, the fund strategy’s “scalability”. Consistent with these arguments, Chung et al. (2012) use data on
private equity funds, and find that the sensitivity of inflows to performance is larger for younger
managers than for older ones, and also larger for relatively scalable buyout funds than for venture capital
funds that require a substantial investment of personal partner time for each dollar invested.
We first estimate the extent to which the sensitivity of inflows to performance depends on the
fund’s age. To do so, we estimate Equation (4) using annual data, including interaction terms of the log
of the fund’s age plus one with prior performance, and present these estimates in Panel B of Table 2. In
each estimated equation, the coefficients are negative and are statistically significant for the current
period and the period immediately preceding the potential change in inflows. The negative coefficient on
the interaction term means that as hedge funds get older, the effect of performance on inflows declines.
The coefficients from Column (1) of Panel B of Table 2 imply that a 1.5 year-old fund (the 25th percentile)
that has a one standard deviation increase in returns (24.6%) has an extra 63.8% increase in size over the
two years following the increase. In contrast, a 6 year-old fund (the 75th percentile) with the same increase
in performance would experience only an extra 25.1% growth.
A fund’s strategy likely affects the sensitivity of inflows to performance because some strategies
can be replicated with more capital, while others will face diminishing returns. For example, arbitrage
strategies (e.g. Convertible Arbitrage), where opportunities disappear as they are exploited, are unlikely to
be infinitely scalable by nature. Strategies that invest in illiquid assets and have high market impact costs
(e.g. Event-driven) are also more likely to face capacity constraints (Getmansky (2005), Aragon (2007),

13

Teo (2009)). On the other hand, strategies that involve liquid instruments (e.g. Long/Short Equity, Equity
Market Neutral) are less prone to capacity constraints (Getmansky (2005), Ding et al. (2009)).
To evaluate whether the scalability in fact does affect the way in which fund performance affects
inflows, we rely on the classification of Ding et al. (2009), who consider Emerging Market, Fixed-income
Arbitrage, Event Driven, and Convertible Arbitrage strategies to be “capacity constrained”. The other
strategies (Long/Short Equity, Dedicated Short Bias, Equity Market Neutral, Global Macro, MultiStrategy, Options Strategy) are classified as “unconstrained”.9 We create a dummy variable equal to one
if the fund is capacity constrained and zero if it is unconstrained. We interact this variable with the prior
performance variables, and present the results in Panel C of Table 2.
As with the previous estimates, the coefficients on contemporaneous performance as well as two
lags of performance are positive and significantly different from zero. However, the coefficients on this
variable interacted with the “Constrained” dummy variable are negative, with the terms reflecting more
recent performance significantly different from zero. Consistent with the logic of the learning model, this
result suggests that the strategies we consider to be constrained are less responsive in size to a
performance shock.10 Presumably, even though a shock to performance for “constrained” funds would
cause the market to update its assessment of the fund managers’ abilities, the fact that they are less
scalable limits the extent to which investors are willing to change their investments in these funds as a
result.

9

Ding et al. (2009) use the methodology of Getmansky (2005) to determine which strategies experience decreasing
returns-to-scale (i.e. concave performance-asset relation). Naik et al. (2007) similarly identify four capacity
constrained strategies (Emerging market, Fixed-income arbitrage, Relative value, Directional) based on a negative
relation between past flow and future alphas, although they do not exactly map to the four in Ding et al. due to the
different categorizations of strategies used by different databases. These findings are also consistent with
practitioners’ observations. For example, Commonfund Institute explains that Long/Short Equity and Global Macro
are not as capacity-constrained as Convertible Arbitrage, Fixed-income Arbitrage, and Event-driven in which
managers try to identify and capture relative pricing inefficiencies between related securities (Commonfund Institute,
2004, “Hedge Fund and Absolute Return Strategies.” The report is available at http://www.commonfund.org/
InvestorResources/Publications/Pages/WhitePapers.aspx).
10
We also estimate the interactive effects of age and strategy with performance on flows using quarterly and
monthly data, and obtain similar results. For brevity we do not tabulate these results.

14

5. Calculating Indirect and Direct Pay for Performance
In this section, we use the models discussed in Section 2 and in the Appendix, together with the
estimates presented in Section 4, to quantify the magnitude of direct and indirect pay-performance
sensitivities facing hedge fund managers. We utilize Agarwal et al.’s (2009) total delta and the parameters
discussed in Appendix to calculate direct pay for performance.
For indirect pay for performance, we estimate the incremental inflows into a fund for a specified
level of performance using the estimates presented in Table 2. We then use the Goetzmann et al. (2003)
approach (characterized by Equation (A7) in their paper) with the parameters described in Appendix to
estimate the expected fraction of each incremental dollar in capital will ultimately be paid out to managers
in fees and incentive fees. A particularly important parameter is b, which represents the minimum asset
value relative to the high water mark that the investor will tolerate before withdrawing all his money from
the fund. If b=0, such liquidation never takes place and the fund operates forever. Positive values of b
imply a positive probability of liquidation each period and therefore a finite expected fund life. Our
preferred estimates use b=0.8 as recommended by Goetzmann et al. This choice means that a 20% loss
results in liquidation of an investor’s stake. We present estimates using b=0 and b=0.5 for comparison.
5.1. Direct and Indirect Incentives for a “Typical” Fund
The estimates of direct and indirect incentives are summarized in Table 4. Panel A of this table
indicates that there are 10,645 fund years in the sample, with an average AUM of $230m.11 Panel A
presents calculations of direct and indirect incentives for a “typical” fund of average size and age (4
years).
Direct incentives come from two sources: incentive fees and the manager’s personal stake.
Valued using the Agarwal et al. (2009) approach, the expected dollar increase in incentive fees for an
incremental percentage point increase in annual net return equals $195,000 (Row 3 of Table 4, Panel A,

11

We drop 166 observations from the full sample (10,811 observations), since the sum of the values of all investors'
stake is zero for these cases according to the computations described in the Appendix.

15

when b=0.8), or roughly 8.3 cents for every dollar returned to investors (row 9).12 Even with a 20%
incentive fee rate, the expected incentive fees equal only 8.3 percent because the option is not always in
the money.
Our data do not include information on the personal investment of the fund managers. Our
calculations follow Agarwal et al. (2009) and assume that there is no initial investment by managers but
that they reinvest all after-tax incentive fee payments in the fund. These calculations probably understate
managers’ stakes at the time the fund is formed and overstate them as the fund ages. Given these
assumptions, profits on managers’ stakes are $183,000 for an incremental 1% return for an average fund
(Row 4 of Table 4, Panel A) and 8.2 cents for every dollar returned to investors (Row 10).13
Row 6 of Table 4, Panel A does the comparable calculation for indirect fees given a one
percentage point incremental return: An extra one percentage point return leads to an expected extra $5.1
million inflow to the $230 million average-size fund (using coefficients from Column (2) of Table 2,
Panel A), of which the Goetzmann et al. (2003) model predicts that $1.07 million in present value will go
to the managers in expectation in future fees. In addition to the effect of new capital flows, indirect
incentives further increases by changes in value of existing investors’ assets. For the $230 million
average-sized fund, an additional one-percentage point return leads to an increase in asset base of extra
$2.3 million. Row 7 indicates that the manager receives additional $0.58 million future fees in expectation
from this change in existing investors’ asset values. Row 14 calculates that this indirect effect in sum
translates into a 58 cent increase in the manager’s lifetime income for every additional dollar generated
for investors in the current fund.
These calculations suggest that hedge fund managers’ indirect incentives resulting from future
fund flows are substantially larger than the direct incentives coming from incentive fees and
management’s direct investment in the fund. Indirect incentives are so large for hedge funds because
12

Pay for performance per $1 increase in fund value is calculated by dividing pay for performance per 1% increase
in fund value by one hundredth of the fund size.
13
We also perform all the calculations in Table 4 under the alternative assumption that there is no management
ownership and managers do not reinvest their carried interest fees. The results are similar to those of Table 4 and are
presented in Appendix Table A1.

16

inflows are very sensitive to performance, and also that the fee structure of hedge funds is such that a high
fraction of incremental dollars into the fund end up going to the fund’s managers as fees over time. The
ratio of the expected extra indirect fees to expected extra direct fees for the average fund is 3.51 (Row 15).
Taking the ratio for each fund-year and then averaging these ratios results in a somewhat larger figure,
4.76.14 Either way one does the calculation, it is evident that indirect incentives are substantially larger
than direct incentives for a typical fund.
5.2. Direct and Indirect Incentives by Fund Age
Panel B of Tables 2 document that the magnitude of the return-inflow relation declines sharply
with the fund’s age, consistent with the logic of Berk and Green (2004). Since the indirect incentives
managers face come directly because of the influence of returns on inflows, it is likely that managers’
indirect incentives also decline with a fund’s age.
Panel B of Table 4 examines this hypothesis by calculating indirect incentives for funds of
different ages. The first row indicates that the number of fund-years in the sample of each age decreases
with the age of the fund, because new funds are initiated and existing funds sometimes exit. Average fund
size tends to increase with fund age until the fund turns 13 years old, implying that surviving funds tend
to grow over time. Direct pay for performance increases with fund age because managers’ ownership
increases; however, the portion coming from incentive fees declines somewhat when measured as a
fraction of an incremental dollar (10.1 cents of one dollar increase in fund value for new funds compared
to 5.9 cents for funds more than 15 years old). As funds age, the ones that do well will continually reset
their high water marks over time so that their incentive fees claims remains at the money, while the ones
that do relatively badly will fall behind their high water marks, especially if the funds have hurdle rates
that the fund must earn before managers receive incentive fees. On average, as funds get older, their
values tend to lag relative to their high water marks, leading to lower direct incentives relative to newer
funds.

14

When computing the ratio of indirect to direct incentives for each fund year, direct incentives are floored at 0.05%
of AUM to avoid the effects of outliers having infinitesimal values.

17

Indirect incentives, however, change dramatically as a fund ages. For new funds, an incremental
dollar returned to investors today results in an extra $0.84 in expected future fees (Row 14). For new
managers, this indirect effect is about seven times as important as the direct effect of performance on
current income from incentive fees and gains on the manager’s own stake. The indirect effect declines
sharply with the fund’s age, and is below the magnitude of the direct effect after a fund is over 14 years
old.
5.3. Direct and Indirect Incentives and Fund Scalability
Indirect incentives result from managers being able to increase their funds’ sizes when
performance has been good. Their ability to do so depends on the ability of managers to “scale” their
investments: Some funds are relatively unconstrained in that they adopt strategies that are “scalable”,
implying that the fund can likely invest new capital with the same ex ante return distribution as existing
funds. In contrast, other more constrained funds typically cannot accept more capital without significantly
reducing expected returns.
Panel C of Table 4 provides statistics on funds classified as “Not Capacity-Constrained” and
“Capacity-Constrained”. There are about twice as many fund-years classified as “Not Constrained” (7,058)
as “Constrained” (3,587). Not surprisingly, funds in the ‘Not Capacity-Constrained’ subsample are, about
20% larger in terms of AUM. The direct incentives of each type are very similar (16.4 cents of each
dollar returned to investors for not constrained funds compared to 17.0 cents for constrained funds). The
differences in indirect incentives, however, are substantial; 64 cents for each dollar returned to investors
for the unconstrained funds compared to 50 cents for constrained funds. This difference implies an
average indirect/direct ratio of about 3.9 for the not constrained funds, compared to 3.0 for the
constrained funds (5.4 vs. 3.9 if one uses the average of fund by fund ratios). These differences suggest
that indirect incentives are relatively more important in funds adopting more scalable investment
strategies.

6. Do Indirect Incentives Affect Contracting?

18

We have documented that indirect incentives facing hedge fund managers are substantial. For
most funds, they are several times larger than the direct incentives hedge fund managers receive. There is
wide variation in the magnitude of these indirect incentives, both across funds and over time for the same
fund. The cross-sectional and time series variation in indirect incentives appears to occur because of both
differences in the informativeness of returns as a signal of managerial quality, and the ability of funds to
scale their investment strategies when more capital is invested into their funds.
Given the magnitude of these indirect incentives, it is plausible that that they affect the way in
which direct incentives are structured in hedge funds at the inception of the fund. Hedge funds are set up
contractually in a sophisticated manner with a fee structure containing a combination of management fees
and incentive contracts that use high water marks that adjust their effective strike price. Presumably, these
contracts are set up to solve a principal-agent problem of some sort. Yet, as emphasized by Gibbons and
Murphy (1992), what matters in any principal-agent problem is the total pay for performance that agents
receive, and not the distribution between its direct and indirect components. Therefore, when indirect
incentives are higher for one group of hedge funds than for another group that are identical in other
respects, optimal contracting would imply that the group with lower indirect incentives would offset these
lower indirect incentives with higher direct incentives.
The proposition that funds adjust their managers’ direct incentives depending on the magnitude of
market-based indirect incentives applies both to individual funds over time, and across funds. Funds do at
times change their fee structure, but such changes are infrequent. Deuskar et al. (2012) report a number of
findings about the factors that lead hedge funds to change their fees. None of the findings in Deuskar et al.
(2012) suggest that changes in the hedge fund fee structure are driven by a desire to offset changes in
indirect incentives faced by fund managers.
The common view of economists is that contracts are structured so total incentives are determined
by the solution to a principal-agent problem. This argument implies that all other things equal, direct
incentive fees should be negatively related to the flow-performance relation, since this relation is the
primary determinant of a fund manager’s indirect incentives. To test this hypothesis on our sample, we

19

estimate equations estimating inflows to a fund similar to those reported in Table 2, except that we add
interaction terms designed to explore the way the return-inflow relation varies with the fee structure. This
equation also includes a number of other variables designed to control for other factors that potentially
affect inflows. We estimate this equation using annual data on flows and returns. Since each fund appears
more than once in the equation, we calculate the standard errors, double-clustering by fund and year.
Table 5 contains estimates of these equations. Column (1) includes interaction terms containing
the product of the annual return for the current year and the previous two lags of returns with the level of
the incentive fee. Inconsistent with the notion that fund contracts are structured to adjust direct fees for
indirect incentives, the coefficient on each interaction term is positive, and the coefficient on current
returns interacted with incentive fees is statistically significantly from zero. Column (2) includes
interactions of returns with dummy variables indicating whether the fund-year is one of 11.1% of the
sample that has an incentive fee of less than 20%, and also if they are one of the 3.4% of the sample with
incentive fees greater than 20%. The coefficients on the interaction terms indicating that the fund has less
than a 20% incentive fee are negative, and are statistically significantly different from zero for current
returns and returns lagged one year. This negative coefficients are counter to the notion that stronger
direct incentive fees are set to compensate for weaker indirect incentives, since they imply that indirect
incentives are lower when direct incentive fees are also lower. Column (3) interacts annual returns with
management fees, and the coefficients on the interaction coefficients are positive, although not
significantly different from zero for the year of the inflows and the year immediately preceding it. Overall,
there is no evidence in Table 5 consistent with the notion that contracts are structured to provide direct
incentives that offset differences in fund managers’ indirect incentives.
While we do not have a definitive explanation for the positive correlation between direct and
indirect incentives, we suspect the answer stems from unobserved heterogeneity of some sort.
Presumably, the underlying agency conflict varies with fund strategies, so it is possible that fund
strategies for which direct incentives are more important also have higher sensitivity of fund flows to
performance, leading to higher indirect incentives. Another mechanism that would produce the observed

20

positive correlation in the data is a matching mechanism whereby more talented managers self-select into
funds with higher-powered incentives.

7. Conclusion
At least since Fama (1980) and Holmström (1999), it has been recognized that managers’
incentives to perform well come not only through direct pay for performance plans, but also through the
managerial labor market. The market draws inferences about managers’ abilities from their observed
performance and rewards or penalizes them accordingly, providing an additional channel through which
managers’ performance can affect their welfare. The money management industry is one place where the
managerial labor market can provide substantial incentives, since investors can observe managers’
performance and reallocate capital easily between alternative investments. This paper estimates the
magnitude of this effect for hedge fund managers.
Our estimates indicate that indirect incentives are particularly large for hedge fund managers. For
a typical fund, for an incremental dollar returned to investors, managers’ expected lifetime incomes
increase by 71 cents due to their ability to earn fees on incremental inflows of new investment to the fund.
This effect is 4 or 5 times as large as the pecuniary incentives received from incentive fees in our estimate
of their personal ownership stakes. The large indirect incentives for hedge fund managers come from the
fact that inflows to hedge funds are very sensitive to performance, and the fee structure in hedge funds is
such that managers expect to receive a large fraction of each dollar invested in the fund as compensation
over time.
The estimates indicate that the allocation process to hedge funds is consistent with the Bayesian
learning framework used by Berk and Green (2004) and Chung et al. (2012) to study allocations to mutual
funds and private equity funds. First of all, consistent with the notion that investors update their
assessment of ability to performance, inflows react to performance quickly. All of the effect of
performance on inflows occurs in the two years subsequent to the performance, and within the two-year

21

period, it declines sharply over time. Even using monthly data, the decline in the performance-inflow
relation is evident on a month-to-month basis.
Second, the sensitivity of inflows to performance and hence the magnitude of the indirect pay for
performance relation declines for a given fund over time. For a new fund, indirect pay for performance is
sufficiently large so an incremental dollar returned to investors leads to more than a dollar in expected
pay to the managers. Indirect pay for performance declines with the age of the fund, becoming smaller
than direct pay for performance when a fund is about 10 years old. This pattern is consistent with
Bayesian updating, because as a fund ages, its management’s ability becomes more of a known quantity,
so investors assessment of it do not change as much for a given observed return.
Third, the performance-inflow relation and indirect pay for performance are larger for funds with
strategies that are likely to be replicable for larger quantities of capital. For funds using strategies that are
likely to be replicable for larger quantities of capital, managers receive 84 cents for an incremental dollar
returned to investors. In contrast, for funds using strategies that are harder to replicate, managers receive
53 cents. This pattern is again with Bayesian allocation of capital to fund managers, because if the ability
of managers to earn returns on new capital in the fund is limited by fund’s strategy, then it is rational for
investors to allocate less capital to that fund in response to a given return.
Finally, we consider the whether funds are set up contractually taking account of the indirect pay
for performance that managers will receive. The idea, originally proposed by Gibbons and Murphy (1992),
is that what should matter in a principal-agent problem is the total amount of pay for performance rather
than its distribution into direct and indirect components. Therefore, it should be optimal to adjust direct
pay for performance for the amount of indirect pay for performance managers face. The evidence we
present is not consistent with this view; in contrast, indirect pay for performance is actually larger for
funds when direct pay for performance is higher.
Hedge funds managers’ interests are generally considered to be well-aligned with those of their
investors, because they receive a large part of their compensation in the form of incentive fees and often
additionally make a substantial equity contribution to the fund. The evidence in this paper strongly

22

suggests that hedge fund managers’ pecuniary incentives are substantially higher than is implied by their
ownership and incentive fees stakes. Combining direct and indirect incentives, for each dollar generated
for their investors in a given year, managers receive close to another dollar in direct performance fees plus
the present value of future fees over the expected life of the fund. Understanding why hedge funds are
structured the way they are, and, more generally, the effects of the very high indirect incentives hedge
fund managers face, would be an excellent topics for future research.

23

References
Agarwal, Vikas, Naveen Daniel, and Narayan Naik, 2009, “The Role of Managerial Incentives and
Discretion in Hedge Fund Performance,” Journal of Finance, 44, 2221-2256.
Aragon, George, 2007, “Share Restrictions and Asset Pricing: Evidence from the Hedge Fund Industry,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 83, 33-58.
Aragon, George and Vikram Nanda, 2012, “Tournament Behavior in Hedge Funds: High-Water Marks,
Fund Liquidation, and Managerial Stake,” Review of Financial Studies, 25, 937-974.
Baquero, Guillermo and Marno Verbeek, 2009, “A Portrait of Hedge Fund Investors: Flows, Performance
and Smart Money,” Working Paper.
Barclay, Michael J., Neil D. Pearson and Michael S. Weisbach, 1998, “Open-End Mutual Funds and
Capital Gains Taxes,” Journal of Financial Economics, 49, 3-43.
Berk, Jonathan and Richard Green, 2004, “Mutual Fund Flows and Performance in Rational Markets,”
Journal of Political Economy, 112, 1269-1295.
Bollen, Nicolas P.B., 2007, “Mutual Fund Attributes and Investor Behavior,” Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, 42, 683-708.
Brown, K. C., W. V. Harlow, and L. T. Starks, 1996, “Of Tournaments and Temptations: An Analysis of
Managerial Incentives in the Mutual Fund Industry,” Journal of Finance, 51, 85-10.
Chevalier, Judith and Glenn Ellison, 1999, “Career Concerns of Mutual Fund Managers,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 114, 389-432.
Chung, Ji-Woong, Berk A. Sensoy, Lea H. Stern and Michael S. Weisbach, 2012, “Pay for Performance
from Future Fund Flows: The Case of Private Equity,” Review of Financial Studies, 25, 3259-3304.
Del Guercio, Diane, Paula A. Tkac, 2002, “The Determinants of the Flow of Funds of Managed Portfolios:
Mutual Funds vs. Pension Funds, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 37, 523-557
Deuskar, Prachi, Z. Jay Wang, Youchang Wu and Quoc H.Nguyen, 2012, “The Dynamics of Hedge Fund
Fees,” Working Paper.
Fama, Eugene F., 1980, “Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm,” Journal of Political Economy,
88, 288-307
Fung, William, David A. Hsieh, Narayan Y. Naik and Tarun Ramadorai, 2008, “Hedge Funds:
Performance, Risk, and Capital Formation”, The Journal of Finance, 63, 1777-1803.
Gibbons, Robert and Kevin J. Murphy, 1992, “Optimal Incentive Contracts in the Presence of Career
Concerns: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Political Economy, 100, 468-505.
Goetzmann, William N, Jonathan E. Ingersoll Jr. and Stephen A. Ross, 2003, “High Water Marks and
Hedge Fund Management Contracts,” The Journal of Finance, 43, 1685-1717.

24

Holmström, Bengt R., 1999, “Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective,” Review of
Economic Studies, 66, 169-182.
Huang, J., K. D. Wei, and H. Yan, 2007, “Participation Costs and the Sensitivity of Fund Flows to Past
Performance”, Journal of Finance, 62, 1273–311.
Ippolito, Richard A., 1992, “Consumer Reaction to Measures of Poor Quality: Evidence from the Mutual
Fund Industry,” Journal of Law and Economics, 35, 45-70.
Kaplan, Steven N. and Joshua Rauh, 2010, “Wall Street and Main Street: What Contributes to the Highest
Incomes?” Review of Financial Studies, 23, 1004-1050.
Naik, Narayan Y., Tarun Ramadorai and Maria Stromqvist, 2007, “Capacity Constraints and Hedge Fund
Strategy Returns,” European Financial Management, 13, 239-256
Sensoy, Berk A., 2009, “Performance Evaluation and Self-designated Benchmark Indexes in the Mutual
Fund Industry,” Journal of Financial Economics, 92, 25-39
Sirri, Eric and Peter Tufano, 1998, “Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows,” The Journal of Finance, 53,
1589-1622.
Teo, Melvyn, 2009, “Does Size Matter in the Hedge Fund Industry?” Working Paper.

25

Table 1. Summary Statistics
This table presents descriptive statistics for the sample of 2,687 funds during the sample period of 1995-2010.
Time-varying variables are reported at the fund-year level, and other time-invariant contractual characteristics are
reported at the fund level. Annual flow is the difference between the reported year-end AUM and the year-beginning
AUM times (1+Auunal Returns), scaled by year-beginning AUM. Annual returns are the reported annual net-of-fee
returns. AUM is the assets under management. Age is the number of years from the fund’s inception date, measured
at the beginning of year. Volatility is annualized standard deviation of monthly returns estimated over the calendar
year. All time-varying variables except fund age are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles. Management fees are
the percentage of the assets charged by the fund as regular fees. Incentive fees are the percentage of positive profits
(or profits earned above high-water mark in case high-water mark provision is present) received by the manager as
performance incentives. High-water mark is an indicator variable that equals one if the fund has a high-water mark
provision, and zero otherwise. Leverage is an indicator variable that equals one if the fund uses leverage, and zero
otherwise. Open-to-public is an indicator variable that equals one if the fund allows public investment, and zero
otherwise. On-shore is an indicator variable that equals one if the fund is domiciled in the U.S., and zero otherwise.
Total redemption period is the sum of the notice period and the redemption period, where the notice period is the
time the investor has to give notice to the fund about an intention to withdraw money from the fund, and the
redemption period is the time that the fund takes to return the money after the notice period is over. Lockup period is
the minimum time in years that an investor has to wait before withdrawing invested money. Lockup period is
considered to be zero for the fund that does not have a lock-up provision. Subscription period is a time delay,
measured in years, between investing in a fund and actually purchasing fund shares. Constrained is an indicator
variable that equals one if the fund’s strategy belongs Convertible Arbitrage, Fixed Income Arbitrage, Emerging Markets,
and Event Driven strategies, and zero otherwise (Ding et al. (2009).

Variable
Annual flow
Annual returns
AUM ($M)
Age (years)
Volatility (annualized)
Management fees (%)
Incentive fees (%)
High-water mark provision indicator
Leverage indicator
Open-to-public indicator
On-shore indicator
Total redemption period (years)
Lockup period (years)
Subscription period (years)
Strategy
Constrained indicator
Constrained=1
Convertible Arbitrage
Fixed Income Arbitrage
Emerging Markets
Event Driven
Constrained=0
Equity Market Neutral
Global Macro
Long/Short Equity Hedge
Multi-Strategy
Dedicated Short Bias
Options Strategy
Other

N
10,811
10,811
10,811
10,811
10,811
2,687
2,687
2,687
2,687
2,687
2,687
2,687
2,687
2,687

Mean
0.536
0.117
227.2
4.238
0.125
1.4
19.3
0.691
0.677
0.195
0.240
0.273
0.247
0.089

25th Pctl.
-0.184
0.012
13.1
1.499
0.048
1.0
20.0
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.137
0.000
0.082

Median
0.038
0.092
45.6
3.164
0.090
1.5
20.0
1.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.164
0.000
0.082

75th Pctl.
0.504
0.193
145.5
6.000
0.164
2.0
20.0
1.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.329
0.000
0.082

SD
1.830
0.246
679.9
3.754
0.112
0.5
3.4
0.462
0.468
0.397
0.427
0.256
0.526
0.064

2,687

0.305

0.000

0.000

1.000

0.460

2,687
2,687
2,687
2,687

0.035
0.052
0.121
0.098

2,687
2,687
2,687
2,687
2,687
2,687
2,687

0.069
0.081
0.418
0.076
0.008
0.003
0.040

26

Table 2: Flow-Performance Sensitivity
This table presents the OSL coefficient estimates of Equation (4) and corresponding p-values (in parentheses) using
annual data. The dependent variable is Annual flow. The sample period is from 1995 to 2010. See Table 1 for
definitions of all independent variables. In Panel B, Equation (4) is augmented to include interaction terms of the log
of the fund’s age plus one with prior performance, and in Panel C, to include interaction terms of Constrained
indicator with prior performance. All specifications include strategy fixed effects and year fixed effects. Standard
errors are double clustered by fund and year. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and
10% level, respectively.

Panel A: Base-case
(1)
Dep.Var. = Annual Flow(t)

(2)

coef

(p-val)

coef

(p-val)

Annual Return(t)

1.117***

(0.000)

1.077***

(0.000)

Annual Return(t-1)

0.762***

(0.000)

0.830***

(0.000)

Annual Return(t-2)

0.209**

(0.033)

0.324***

(0.000)

0.052***

(0.000)

Log(Age in years +1)

-0.139***

(0.009)

Log(AUM(t-1)+1)

-0.209***

(0.000)

Annual return volatility

-1.328***

(0.001)

-0.070

(0.793)

ManagementFee

2.112

(0.615)

IncentiveFee

0.178

(0.747)

0.125***

(0.003)

0.044

(0.210)

Annual Flow(t-1)

Constrained?

High Water Mark?
Leveraged?
Open-to-public?
Oh-shore?
Log(Total redemption period in years +1)
Log(Lock-up period in years +1)
Log(Subscription period in years +1)

-0.002

(0.969)

-0.264***

(0.000)

0.409***

(0.003)

-0.044

(0.448)

-0.431

(0.235)

Missing Annual Return(t-1)

1.277***

(0.000)

1.025***

(0.000)

Missing Annual Return(t-2)

0.537***

(0.000)

0.164**

(0.023)

0.175*

(0.051)

0.700**

(0.016)

Missing Annual Flow(t-1)
Constant

-0.373***

(0.000)

Number of observations

10,811

10,811

Adjusted R2

0.158

0.198

27

Panel B: Age Interactions
(1)
Dep.Var. = Annual Flow(t)

(2)

coef

(p-val)

coef

(p-val)

-1.329***

(0.000)

-1.296***

(0.000)

Annual Return(t-1)*Log(Age in years +1)

-0.481*

(0.059)

-0.439*

(0.063)

Annual Return(t-2)*Log(Age in years +1)

0.279

(0.306)

0.319

(0.210)

Annual Return(t)

2.918***

(0.000)

2.842***

(0.000)

Annual Return(t-1)

1.464***

(0.001)

1.498***

(0.000)

Annual Return(t-2)

-0.384

(0.436)

-0.257

(0.563)

0.051***

(0.000)

Annual Return(t)*Log(Age in years +1)

Annual Flow(t-1)
Log(Age in years +1)

0.006

(0.936)

Log(AUM(t-1)+1)

-0.219**

(0.023)

-0.207***

(0.000)

Annual return volatility

-1.301***

(0.001)

-0.051

(0.841)

ManagementFee

2.689

(0.502)

IncentiveFee

0.096

(0.868)

0.127***

(0.005)

0.047

(0.171)

Constrained?

High Water Mark?
Leveraged?
Open-to-public?
Oh-shore?
Log(Total redemption period in years +1)
Log(Lock-up period in years +1)
Log(Subscription period in years +1)

0.000

(0.995)

-0.272***

(0.000)

0.376***

(0.009)

-0.035

(0.555)

-0.363

(0.305)

Missing Annual Return(t-1)

1.119***

(0.000)

1.067***

(0.000)

Missing Annual Return(t-2)

0.113

(0.179)

0.093

(0.238)

0.150

(0.103)

0.520*

(0.085)

Missing Annual Flow(t-1)
Constant

0.110

(0.493)

Number of observations

10,811

10,811

Adjusted R2

0.180

0.212

28

Panel C: Strategy Interactions
(1)
Dep.Var. = Annual Flow(t)

(2)

coef

(p-val)

coef

(p-val)

-0.543**

(0.012)

-0.562***

(0.006)

Annual Return(t-1)*Constrained

-0.335

(0.108)

-0.395*

(0.067)

Annual Return(t-2)*Constrained

-0.025

(0.855)

-0.044

(0.725)

Annual Return(t)

1.342***

(0.000)

1.311***

(0.000)

Annual Return(t-1)

0.897***

(0.000)

0.992***

(0.000)

Annual Return(t-2)

0.226*

(0.051)

0.350***

(0.000)

0.052***

(0.000)

Log(Age in years +1)

-0.137***

(0.007)

Log(AUM(t-1)+1)

-0.209***

(0.000)

Annual return volatility

-1.356***

(0.000)

0.020

(0.938)

ManagementFee

2.573

(0.537)

IncentiveFee

0.122

(0.828)

0.120***

(0.004)

0.040

(0.272)

Annual Return(t)*Constrained

Annual Flow(t-1)

Constrained?

0.295**

(0.042)

High Water Mark?
Leveraged?
Open-to-public?
Oh-shore?
Log(Total redemption period in years +1)
Log(Lock-up period in years +1)
Log(Subscription period in years +1)

-0.000

(0.994)

-0.266***

(0.000)

0.404***

(0.004)

-0.045

(0.432)

-0.431

(0.245)

Missing Annual Return(t-1)

1.279***

(0.000)

1.030***

(0.000)

Missing Annual Return(t-2)

0.535***

(0.000)

0.164**

(0.019)

0.172*

(0.054)

0.658**

(0.021)

Missing Annual Flow(t-1)
Constant

-0.638***

(0.000)

Number of observations

10,811

10,811

Adjusted R2

0.160

0.199

29

Table 3. Flow-Performance Sensitivity at Higher Frequency
This table presents the OSL coefficient estimates of Equation (4) and corresponding p-values (in parentheses) using
higher frequency data. In Panel A, we presents the estimates using quarterly data, and in Panel B, using monthly
data. The dependent variable is Quarterly flow in Panel A, and Monthly flow in Panel B. The sample period is from
1995 to 2010. See Table 1 for definitions of all independent variables. All specifications include strategy fixed
effects. In Panel A, we additionally include year-quarter fixed effects, and in Panel B, year-month fixed effects.
Standard errors are double clustered by fund and time. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Panel A: Quarterly
(1)
Dep.Var. = Quarterly Flow(t)

(2)

coef

(p-val)

coef

(p-val)

Quarterly Return(t)

0.180***

(0.000)

0.177***

(0.001)

Quarterly Return(t-1)

0.452***

(0.000)

0.445***

(0.000)

Quarterly Return(t-2)

0.294***

(0.000)

0.247***

(0.000)

Quarterly Return(t-3)

0.205***

(0.000)

0.186***

(0.000)

Quarterly Return(t-4)

0.116***

(0.000)

0.111***

(0.000)

Quarterly Return(t-5)

0.086***

(0.001)

0.096***

(0.000)

Quarterly Return(t-6)

0.062**

(0.045)

0.076***

(0.008)

Quarterly Return(t-7)

0.095***

(0.000)

0.115***

(0.000)

Quarterly Return(t-8)

0.050**

(0.012)

0.065***

(0.001)

Quarterly Return(t-9)

0.009

(0.756)

0.031

(0.271)

Quarterly Return(t-10)

-0.008

(0.773)

0.025

(0.363)

Quarterly Return(t-11)

0.021

(0.463)

0.053*

(0.051)

Other Control

No

Yes

Number of observations

51,300

51,300

Adjusted R2

0.157

0.189

30

Panel B: Monthly
(1)
Dep.Var. = Monthly Flow(t)

(2)

coef

(p-val)

coef

(p-val)

-0.029*

(0.064)

-0.032**

(0.045)

Monthly Return(t-1)

0.167***

(0.000)

0.176***

(0.000)

Monthly Return(t-2)

0.150***

(0.000)

0.132***

(0.000)

Monthly Return(t-3)

0.138***

(0.000)

0.122***

(0.000)

Monthly Return(t-4)

0.125***

(0.000)

0.112***

(0.000)

Monthly Return(t-5)

0.116***

(0.000)

0.104***

(0.000)

Monthly Return(t-6)

0.085***

(0.000)

0.075***

(0.000)

Monthly Return(t-7)

0.077***

(0.000)

0.071***

(0.000)

Monthly Return(t-8)

0.076***

(0.000)

0.071***

(0.000)

Monthly Return(t-9)

0.067***

(0.000)

0.062***

(0.000)

Monthly Return(t-10)

0.049***

(0.000)

0.045***

(0.000)

Monthly Return(t-11)

0.049***

(0.000)

0.049***

(0.000)

Monthly Return(t-12)

0.034***

(0.004)

0.032***

(0.005)

Monthly Return(t-13)

0.029**

(0.012)

0.030***

(0.008)

Monthly Return(t-14)

0.043***

(0.000)

0.044***

(0.000)

Monthly Return(t-15)

0.010

(0.362)

0.010

(0.324)

Monthly Return(t-16)

0.022**

(0.038)

0.026**

(0.015)

Monthly Return(t-17)

0.024**

(0.034)

0.027**

(0.019)

Monthly Return(t-18)

0.014

(0.227)

0.015

(0.167)

Monthly Return(t-19)

0.012

(0.219)

0.016*

(0.095)

Monthly Return(t-20)

0.024**

(0.019)

0.027***

(0.007)

Monthly Return(t-21)

0.021**

(0.033)

0.023**

(0.017)

Monthly Return(t-22)

0.015*

(0.059)

0.018**

(0.025)

Monthly Return(t-23)

0.015*

(0.077)

0.019**

(0.028)

Monthly Return(t-24)

0.019**

(0.029)

0.022**

(0.012)

Monthly Return(t-25)

0.020**

(0.032)

0.024**

(0.012)

Monthly Return(t-26)

0.002

(0.855)

0.005

(0.593)

Monthly Return(t-27)

0.011

(0.360)

0.017

(0.161)

Monthly Return(t-28)

0.006

(0.605)

0.011

(0.318)

Monthly Return(t-29)

0.000

(0.983)

0.006

(0.570)

Monthly Return(t-30)

-0.018

(0.109)

-0.011

(0.335)

Monthly Return(t-31)

0.010

(0.329)

0.020*

(0.058)

Monthly Return(t-32)

0.004

(0.723)

0.009

(0.404)

Monthly Return(t-33)

0.013

(0.286)

0.019

(0.129)

Monthly Return(t-34)

-0.005

(0.685)

-0.000

(0.979)

Monthly Return(t-35)

0.001

(0.921)

0.009

(0.407)

Monthly Return(t)

Other Control
Number of observations
Adjusted R2

31

No

Yes

159,235

159,235

0.103

0.122

Table 4. Direct and Indirect Pay-for-Performance: With manager’s re-investment
This table presents the magnitude of direct and indirect pay-performance sensitivities for all funds include in our sample (Panel A), by age group (Panel B), and
by scalability (Panel C). We report estimates for b=0, 0.5, and 0.8 in Panel A, and for b=0.8 in Panel B and Panel C, where b represents investors’ asset valuebased liquidation point in Equation (A7). Pay for performance indicates the expected increase in the hedge fund manager’s wealth to incremental performance.
Rows (3)-(8) of each panel report direct and indirect pay for performance per 1% change in fund value (in million dollars), and Rows (9)-(14) report direct and
indirect pay for performance per 1$ change in fund value. Direct pay for performance is estimated by Agarwal et al.’s (2009) total delta as described in Appendix
A.1. When estimating direct incentives we assume that the manager does not have personal stake in the fund at inception, but re-invests all of his after-tax
incentive fees back into the fund over time. Total direct pay for performance (total delta) is the sum of the expected increase in incentive fees and the manager’s
personal stake for having an incremental performance today. Indirect pay for performance is the incremental expected long-term payoff to the hedge fund
manager for having an incremental performance today, and is estimated using the coefficient estimates in Table 2, and using the Goetzman et al. (2003)
framework and parameters described in Appendix A.2. Coefficient estimates in Panel A, Column (2) of Table 2 are used to compute values reported in Panel A,
and coefficient estimates in Panel B and Panel C of Table 2 to compute values in Panel B and C, respectively. We drop 166 observations from the full sample,
since the sum of the values of all investors' stake is zero for these cases according to the computations described in the Appendix. At the bottom of each panel we
report the ratio of indirect to direct fees in two different ways. First, we take the ratio for a typical fund reported in Row (14) and Row (11) of each panel. Second,
we take the ratio for each fund-year, and then average these ratios. When computing the fund-by-fund Indirect/Direct ratios, direct fees are floored at 0.05% of
AUM to avoid the effects of outliers having infinitesimal values.
Panel A: All funds
b=0
10,645
230

b=0.5
10,645
230

b=0.8
10,645
230

Pay for performance per 1% Change in Fund Value ($M)
(3)
Direct effect from incentive fees
(4)
Direct effect from managers’ personal stake
(5)
Total direct effect
(6)
Indirect effect from new money
(7)
Indirect effect from change in value of existing assets
(8)
Total indirect effect

0.19
0.18
0.38
1.61
0.75
2.36

0.19
0.18
0.38
1.50
0.72
2.23

0.19
0.18
0.38
1.07
0.58
1.65

Pay for performance per 1$ Change in Fund Value ($M)
(9)
Direct effect from incentive fees
(10) Direct effect from managers’ personal stake
(11) Total direct effect
(12) Indirect effect from new money
(13) Indirect effect from change in value of existing assets
(14) Total indirect effect
(15) Indirect/Direct (= (14)/(11))
(16) Fund-by-fund Indirect/Direct

0.08
0.08
0.17
0.73
0.32
1.05
6.34
8.81

0.08
0.08
0.17
0.64
0.26
0.91
5.47
7.52

0.08
0.08
0.17
0.42
0.16
0.58
3.51
4.76

(1)
(2)

N
AUM ($M)

32

Panel B: By Age group (b=0.8)
Fund age (years)
(1)

N

(2)

AUM ($M)

0~1

1~2

2~3

3~4

4~5

5~6

6~7

7~8

8~9

9~10

10~11

11~12

12~13

1,924

1,745

1,469

1,191

989

738

594

466

361

285

232

174

137

149

185

182

208

220

257

283

281

300

393

451

500

544

13~14

14~15

≥15

94

69

177

536

326

347

Pay for performance per 1% Change in Fund Value ($M)
(3)

Direct effect from incentive fees

0.15

0.17

0.16

0.17

0.19

0.20

0.23

0.22

0.24

0.34

0.35

0.40

0.42

0.40

0.19

0.20

(4)

Direct effect from managers’ personal stake

0.02

0.05

0.07

0.11

0.15

0.22

0.27

0.33

0.35

0.44

0.58

0.80

1.02

1.12

0.55

0.94

(5)

Total direct effect

0.17

0.22

0.23

0.28

0.34

0.42

0.50

0.55

0.59

0.78

0.93

1.20

1.44

1.52

0.73

1.14

(6)

Indirect effect from new money

1.09

1.04

0.84

0.84

0.75

0.73

0.70

0.69

0.60

0.73

0.62

0.57

0.48

0.36

0.13

-0.12

(7)

Indirect effect from change in value of existing assets

0.33

0.47

0.46

0.50

0.48

0.58

0.60

0.77

0.65

1.63

1.50

1.59

1.31

1.77

0.81

0.73

(8)

Total indirect effect

1.42

1.52

1.30

1.34

1.23

1.31

1.30

1.47

1.24

2.36

2.12

2.16

1.79

2.13

0.94

0.61

Pay for performance per 1$ Change in Fund Value ($)
(9)

Direct effect from incentive fees

0.10

0.09

0.09

0.08

0.08

0.08

0.07

0.07

0.07

0.07

0.06

0.06

0.06

0.06

0.05

0.06

(10)

Direct effect from managers’ personal stake

0.02

0.04

0.05

0.07

0.09

0.11

0.13

0.15

0.17

0.17

0.19

0.21

0.21

0.23

0.25

0.26

(11)

Total direct effect

0.12

0.13

0.14

0.15

0.17

0.19

0.20

0.22

0.24

0.24

0.26

0.27

0.28

0.28

0.31

0.32

(12)

Indirect effect from new money

0.66

0.53

0.43

0.37

0.32

0.27

0.23

0.20

0.17

0.14

0.12

0.10

0.07

0.06

0.04

-0.02

(13)

Indirect effect from change in value of existing assets

0.18

0.17

0.16

0.16

0.15

0.15

0.15

0.15

0.15

0.15

0.16

0.16

0.16

0.16

0.13

0.16

(14)

Total indirect effect

0.84

0.70

0.59

0.53

0.47

0.43

0.38

0.35

0.32

0.29

0.28

0.26

0.23

0.22

0.17

0.15

(15)

Indirect/Direct (= (14)/(11))

7.14

5.46

4.32

3.58

2.77

2.25

1.85

1.60

1.35

1.22

1.09

0.95

0.83

0.76

0.55

0.46

(16)

Fund-by-fund Indirect/Direct

7.81

6.39

5.29

4.53

3.85

3.16

2.63

2.26

2.04

1.77

1.61

1.33

1.21

1.19

0.85

0.62

33

Panel C: By Scalability (b=0.8)

(1)

N

(2)

AUM ($M)

Pay for performance per 1%
Change in Fund Value ($M)
(3)
Direct effect from incentive fees
(4)
Direct effect from managers’ personal stake

Not Capacity Constrained

Capacity Constrained

7,058

3,587

242

207

0.20
0.19

0.19
0.16

(5)
(6)

Total direct effect
Indirect effect from new money

0.39
1.25

0.35
0.82

(7)

Indirect effect from change in value of existing assets

0.59

0.57

(8)

Total indirect effect

1.84

1.39

0.08

0.08

Pay for performance per 1$ Change in Fund Value ($)
(9)
Direct effect from incentive fees
(10)

Direct effect from managers’ personal stake

0.08

0.08

(11)
(12)

Total direct effect
Indirect effect from new money

0.16
0.48

0.17
0.33

(13)

Indirect effect from change in value of existing assets

0.16

0.18

(14)

Total indirect effect

0.64

0.50

(15)

Indirect/Direct (= (14)/(11))

3.90

2.97

(16)

Fund-by-fund Indirect/Direct

5.42

3.87

34

Table 5. Flow-Performance Sensitivity: Fees Interactions
This table presents the OSL coefficient estimates of Equation (4), including various interaction terms. The p-values
are reported in parentheses. The dependent variable is Annual flow. In Column (1), interactions of annual returns
with the incentive fee level are included, in Column (2), interactions of annual returns with dummy variables
indicating whether the fund charges incentive fee rate of below or above 20%, and in Column (3), interactions of
annual returns with the management fee level. The sample period is from 1995 to 2010. See Table 1 for definitions
of all independent variables. All specifications include strategy fixed effects and year fixed effects. Standard errors
are double clustered by fund and year. ***, **, and * correspond to statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.
(1)
Dep.Var. = Annual Flow(t)
Annual Return(t)* IncentiveFee
Annual Return(t-1)* IncentiveFee
Annual Return(t-2)* IncentiveFee
Annual Return(t)* Below 20% Ifee
Annual Return(t-1)* Below 20% Ifee
Annual Return(t-2)* Below 20% Ifee
Annual Return(t)* Above 20% Ifee
Annual Return(t-1)* Above 20% Ifee
Annual Return(t-2)* Above 20% Ifee
Annual Return(t)* ManagementFee
Annual Return(t-1)* ManagementFee
Annual Return(t-2)* ManagementFee
Annual Return(t)
Annual Return(t-1)
Annual Return(t-2)
Below 20% Ifee
Above 20% Ifee
Annual Flow(t-1)
Log(Age in years +1)
Log(AUM(t-1)+1)
Annual return volatility
Constrained?
ManagementFee
IncentiveFee
High Water Mark?
Leveraged?
Open-to-public?
Oh-shore?
Log(Total redemption period in years +1)
Log(Lock-up period in years +1)
Log(Subscription period in years +1)
Missing Annual Return(t-1)
Missing Annual Return(t-2)
Missing Annual Flow(t-1)
Constant
Number of observations
Adjusted R2

coef
8.001***
2.974
1.162

-0.461
0.256
0.095

(2)
(p-val)
(0.002)
(0.281)
(0.677)

(0.305)
(0.619)
(0.862)

0.052*** (0.000)
-0.138** (0.011)
-0.209*** (0.000)
-1.322*** (0.001)
-0.071 (0.792)
2.053 (0.620)
-0.993 (0.270)
0.129*** (0.002)
0.051 (0.169)
-0.002 (0.969)
-0.267*** (0.000)
0.399*** (0.004)
-0.046 (0.435)
-0.402 (0.277)
1.028*** (0.000)
0.162** (0.027)
0.173* (0.053)
0.923*** (0.006)
10,811
0.198

35

(3)

coef

(p-val)

-0.827***
-0.510**
0.001
0.070
-0.743*
0.115

(0.000)
(0.046)
(0.998)
(0.906)
(0.052)
(0.771)

1.171***
0.901***
0.311***
0.022
-0.073
0.051***
-0.132**
-0.209***
-1.355***
-0.083
1.578

(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.808)
(0.582)
(0.000)
(0.015)
(0.000)
(0.001)
(0.750)
(0.709)

0.131*** (0.002)
0.045 (0.208)
0.000 (0.996)
-0.274*** (0.000)
0.406*** (0.004)
-0.049 (0.414)
-0.454 (0.222)
1.019*** (0.000)
0.163** (0.027)
0.183** (0.039)
0.763*** (0.008)
10,811
0.199

coef

(p-val)

33.572
8.779
-3.084
0.593
0.703**
0.359*

(0.273)
(0.712)
(0.839)
(0.220)
(0.041)
(0.095)

0.052*** (0.000)
-0.141*** (0.008)
-0.208*** (0.000)
-1.330*** (0.001)
-0.071 (0.793)
-2.917 (0.625)
0.182 (0.741)
0.126*** (0.003)
0.046 (0.196)
-0.005 (0.916)
-0.264*** (0.000)
0.413*** (0.003)
-0.044 (0.444)
-0.416 (0.258)
1.024*** (0.000)
0.163** (0.025)
0.176** (0.050)
0.776*** (0.003)
10,811
0.198

Appendix
A.1. Calculating direct pay for performance
Our proxy for direct pay for performance is given by total delta, as defined in Argawal et al.
(2009). Total delta is the expected incremental dollar change in the manager’s wealth for an additional
1% increase in the fund’s net asset value (NAV). The total delta can be decomposed into two parts: the
portion coming from investors’ assets (manager’s option delta) and the portion coming from the manger’s
ownership stake in the fund. The manager’s option delta is in turn the sum of the deltas from different set
of investors, since a hedge fund manager’s incentive fee contract indeed resembles a ‘portfolio’ of call
options, not a single option, because of the fact that different investors in the fund face different spot
prices (S) and exercise prices (X) depending on the timing of the entrance into the fund. Following
Agarwal et al. (2009), we compute each individual option’s delta using the Black-Sholes model for a oneyear maturity European call option as follows:

Individual Option Delta  N (Z )  S  0.01 k ,

(A1)

where Z={ln(S/X) + T(r+σ2/2)}/ σT0.5, S is the investor-specific spot price (i.e., the market value of the
investor’s assets at the end of the calendar year), k is the contractual incentive fee rate, and X is the
investor-specific exercise price. Given the structure of hedge fund contracts, X is the high water mark
level for the investor’s assets (i.e., the historic high that the investor’s asset has ever reached since her
investment in the fund) if the fund has a high water mark provision, and simply the market value of the
investor’s assets at the beginning of the year if the fund has no such provision. Therefore, S/X measures
whether and to what degree the option is in-the-money or out-of-the-money. T is time to maturity of the
option. r is the natural logarithm of one plus risk-free rate, which is measured by a 12-month LIBOR rate
that is observed at the end of the year and therefore governs the next calendar year. σ is annualized
standard deviation of monthly (net of fee) returns over the calendar year, and N(.) is cumulative
distribution function of the standard normal distribution.

36

A complication in computing individual option delta is that various investors’ assets are pooled
together for management so they earn the same rate of gross return, but different investors will in general
have different spot prices (S) and exercise prices (X) depending on the time in which they entered the fund.
Unfortunately, the exact times and prices at which each investor entered each fund is not publicly
available. To compute the investor-specific spot price (S) and exercise price (X) for each investor, we
make the following assumptions:
1. The first investor enters the fund at the end of year 0. We assume no capital investment by the
manager at inception. Therefore, the entire assets at inception are assumed to come from a single
investor.
2. All cash flows including fee payments, investors’ capital allocation, and manager’s reinvestment
are assumed to take place once a year at the end of each calendar year.
3. Exercise price (X) for each option is assumed to be reset annually at the end of the year and is
applied to the next calendar year.
4. All new capital inflows are assumed to come from a single new investor.
5. When capital outflows occur, we adopt the FIFO rule to decide which investor’s money leaves
the fund by how much. In particular, the net asset value of the first investor is reduced by the
magnitude of outflow. If the absolute magnitude of outflow exceeds the first investor’s net asset
value, then the first investor is considered to liquidate her stake in the fund and leave, and the
balance of outflow is deducted from the second investor’s asset, and so on.
6. We assume that a hurdle rate is LIBOR if the fund has a high-water mark provision. For others,
the hurdle rate is assumed to be 0%.
7. We assume that managers reinvest all of the after-tax incentive fees into the fund.
An algorithm for estimation is as follows:

37

1. First, we solve the following recursive problem iteratively to back out gross returns (gross), using
observable information on net-of-fee returns (net), assets under management (AUM), and the
parameters of the compensation contract (k,c).

net t 

 S
i

i ,t 1

 (1  grosst )  ifee i ,t  mfeei ,t  MS t 1  (1  grosst )
AUM t 1



 1,

(A2)

 

where ifeei ,t  Max Si ,t 1  (1  grosst )  X i ,t 1 , 0  k , mfeei ,t  S i ,t 1  c , and MSt denotes the
market value of manager’s stake in the fund. We start the algorithm with the following initial
values:

S1,0  X 1,0  AUM 0 

,
MS 0  0


(A3)

2. We update the market value of the manager’s stake as follows.

MS t  MS t 1  (1  grosst )   ifee i ,t  (1  t p ) ,

(A4)

i

3. The new spot price and exercise price of investor i are updated recursively as follows:

S i ,t  S i ,t 1  (1  grosst )  (ifee i ,t  mfeei ,t )
X i ,t 1  MaxS i ,t  X i ,t 1 , 0 (1  LIBOR), if with HWM provision
X i ,t  
S i ,t , if without HWM provision

,

(A5)

4. The net flow into the fund is defined as the difference between the reported value of year-end
AUM and the current market value of all existing investors’ and the manager’s assets.



Flowt  AUM t    S i ,t  MS t  ,
 i


(A6)

If (A6) > 0, then we assume that a new investor enters the fund, with the beginning spot price and
exercise price equal to Flowt. If (A5) < 0, then we apply the FIFO rule as described above.
5. Using S and X for each investor and equation (A1), we compute the delta from each investor’s
asset, and then sum them up to compute the manager’s option delta. The total delta of the fund is

38

the sum of the manager’s option delta and the delta from the manager’s stake, which is equal to
0.01*MSt.15
A.2. Calculating indirect pay for performance
We compute the present value of the total future fees (both management and incentive fees) as a
fraction of the asset value of the fund using the following equation provided by GIR:

f (S / X ) 

1
c    


(     )k  [ (1  k )  1]cb 1
c

( S / X )  1

 

(
1

k
)

1

b
[

(
1

k
)

1
]

,



(A7)


b  (     )k  [ (1 _ k )  1]cb 1
( S / X ) 1 
 
 (1  k )  1  b [ (1  k )  1]


where γ and η are the larger and smaller roots of the following characteristic quadratic equation:
2

1 2
1

σ  c  r  α  c  g   σ 2  c  r  α  c  g   2σ 2(r  c  g  ω  λ)
γ 2
2

  
, (A8)
2
σ
 η
To give intuition, it is helpful to look at a simple case in which b=0. In that case, (A7) can be
simplified as follows:


 1


c
kX
kX
f ( S / X )b  0  
( S / X )  
( S / X )   , (A7’)
S 
 (1  k )  1
  (1  k )  1
c       
 S
The first term in (A7’) measures the present value of the perpetuity of the management fees. The
first factor in the second term measures the present value of the incentive fee when S=X, i.e. when the
option becomes at the money. The factor (S/X) is the reduction in the present value of the future incentive
fees due to the time required before the currently out-of-money becomes at-the-money (i.e. S reaches X).
Combined, the second term in the equation measures the present value of the incentive fees at any level of
asset value.

15

This is because all the return from the manager’s stake in the fund is retained and hence additional 1% of return to
the fund leads to a 1% increase in the manager’s stake.

39

There are 11 parameters in the valuation equation (A7): c and k are contractual management fee
and incentive fee rate, respectively; c’ is the costs and fees allocated to reducing the high-water mark,
usually determined by an accounting choice of the fund; σ is the volatility of fund returns; g is the
contractual growth rate in the high-water mark level, which is usually zero or risk-free rate; α is the riskadjusted expected return on the fund’s assets, reflecting manager skill; S is the market value (or net asset
value) of the investor’s position (i.e., the spot price) and X is the high-water mark that applies to this
position (i.e., the strike price); ω+λ is the effective withdrawal rate of the investor that captures
liquidation as a chance occurrence, while b is the lowest acceptable level of the asset value below which
the investor loses his confidence in the fund and liquidates all of his position. As such, b captures
intended liquidation based on asset value. r is the risk-free interest rate.
We estimate the parameters of Equation (A7) from observable fund level data whenever possible.
In particular, for c and k we use individual fund’s contractual information available from TASS. σ is
computed as the annualized standard deviation of monthly returns over the concurrent calendar year. S
and X for each investor are obtained from the estimation procedure described in A.1. We use the 12month LIBOR available at the beginning of the year as a proxy for r.
For the rest of the parameters that are not observable or reasonably estimable, we adopt the basecase parameter values used by GIR: α is set to zero, assuming no superior skill of the hedge fund manager;
g is assumed to be r if a fund has a hurdle rate, and zero otherwise; c’ is assumed to be 5%: ω+λ and b
are unobservable investment policies of individual investors. ω+λ is assumed to be 5%. We look at
liquidation policies of b=0, 0.5, and 0.8. The assumption that b=0 implies that there is no asset valuebased liquidation and the fund operates forever. Higher values of b imply a finite expected fund life. For
example, with b=0.8 an investor liquidates his entire stake if it falls in value by 20% from its high water
mark.
Indirect effects come from two sources: new money flows and changes in the value of existing
investors’ stakes, both of which result from incremental returns. The GIR fraction for new money,
f(S/X)new, can be computed using Equation (A7) with S/X defined as follows:

40

if the fund has no hurdle rate
1,

S / X new   1
,
 1  r , if the fund has hurdle rate

(A9)

Then indirect pay-performance from new money flows is calculated as f(S/X)new times the
regression estimate of the amount of new flows (as a fraction of AUM) times AUM.
To compute indirect pay-performance from changes in the value of existing investors’ stakes, we
take the following steps. First, we compute the GIR fraction for each existing investor assuming that the
16
fund earns a baseline return, f ( S / X )base
To obtain each individual investor’s S/X under the baseline
old , i .

return, we take each investor’s S/X at the beginning of the year, multiply by (1+baseline return), and then
if the result is greater than one, set S/X to either 1 or 1/(1+r), depending on whether there is a hurdle rate
or not. S/X is adjusted in this way, because if the result is greater than one, then the option becomes inthe-money, incentive fees are paid, and the strike resets. We sum these individual investor GIR fractions
over all investors in the fund as follows:
base
f ( S / X )base
where wi 
old   wi f ( S / X ) old , i ,
i

Si
,
 Si

(A10)

i

Similarly, we compute GIR fraction for existing investors assuming that the fund earns an
base 1%

additional one percentage point return in addition to the baseline return ( f ( S / X )old

). Then we

estimate the impact of an incremental 1% return on the manager’s future pay due to the increase in the
base 1%

asset values of existing investors as the difference between f ( S / X )old

×AUM×(1+baseline

base

return+1%) from f ( S / X )old ×AUM×(1+baseline return).17

16

Baseline return is a mean return computed by age group and fund strategy.
Note that regression estimates are irrelevant for existing investors, since what is be considered here is the increase
in asset base due to incremental performance itself, not due to capital inflows resulting from incremental
performance.
17

41

Table A1. Direct and Indirect Pay-for-Performance: Without manager’s re-investment
This table presents the magnitude of direct and indirect pay-performance sensitivities for all funds include in our sample (Panel A), by age group (Panel B), and
by scalability (Panel C). Pay for performance indicates the expected increase in the hedge fund manager’s wealth to incremental performance. Rows (3) and (6)
of each panel report direct and indirect pay for performance per 1% change in fund value (in million dollars), and Rows (7) and (10) report direct and indirect pay
for performance per 1$ change in fund value. Direct pay for performance is estimated by Agarwal et al.’s (2009) total delta as described in Appendix. When
estimating direct incentives we assume that the manager neither has personal capital invested into the fund at inception nor re-invests the received fees back into
the fund over time. Under this assumption, direct pay for performance solely consists of the expected increase in incentive fees for having an incremental
performance today. The 166 observations dropped in Table 4 now can be included, since the sum of the values of all investors' stake is non-zero in all cases
under the no re-investment assumption. Indirect pay for performance is the incremental expected long-term payoff to the hedge fund manager for having an
incremental performance today, and is estimated using the coefficient estimates in Table 2, and using the Goetzman et al. (2003) framework and parameters
described in Appendix. At the bottom of each panel we report the ratio of indirect to direct fees in two different ways. First, we take the ratio for a typical fund
reported in Row (10) and Row (7) of each panel. Second, we take the ratio for each fund-year, and then average these ratios. When computing the fund-by-fund
Indirect/Direct ratios, direct fees are floored at 0.05% of AUM to avoid the effects of outliers having infinitesimal values.
Panel A: All funds
(1)

N

(2)

AUM ($M)

Pay for performance per 1% Change in Fund Value ($M)
Direct effect
(3)
(4)
Indirect effect from new money

b=0

b=0.5

b=0.8

10,811

10,811

10,811

227

227

227

0.21
1.59

0.21
1.48

0.21
1.05

(5)

Indirect effect from change in value of existing assets

0.75

0.72

0.59

(6)

Total indirect effect

2.34

2.20

1.65

0.09
0.73

0.09
0.64

0.09
0.42

Pay for performance per 1$ Change in Fund Value ($)
Direct effect
(7)
(8)
Indirect effect from new money
(9)

Indirect effect from change in value of existing assets

0.32

0.26

0.16

(10)

Total indirect effect

1.05

0.91

0.58

(11)

Indirect/Direct (= (10)/(7))

11.54

9.95

6.37

(12)

Fund-by-fund Indirect/Direct

12.16

10.21

6.26

42

Panel B: By Age group (b=0.8)
Fund age (years)

0~1

1~2

2~3

3~4

4~5

5~6

6~7

7~8

8~9

9~10

10~11

11~12

12~13

13~14

1,926

1,752

1,476

1,205

1,003

745

604

479

380

303

242

182

143

149

184

181

206

217

255

279

274

286

371

433

479

524

(3) Direct effect

0.15

0.17

0.17

0.18

0.20

0.22

0.25

0.25

0.26

0.37

0.39

0.46

(4) Indirect effect from new money

1.09

1.04

0.84

0.83

0.74

0.73

0.69

0.67

0.57

0.68

0.60

(5) Indirect effect from change in value of existing assets

0.33

0.47

0.45

0.47

0.73

0.57

0.62

0.76

0.64

1.37

(6) Total indirect effect

1.42

1.51

1.29

1.31

1.47

1.29

1.31

1.44

1.21

(7) Direct effect

0.10

0.10

0.09

0.09

0.08

0.09

0.08

0.08

(8) Indirect effect from new money

0.66

0.53

0.43

0.37

0.32

0.27

0.23

0.20

(9) Indirect effect from change in value of existing assets

0.18

0.17

0.16

0.16

0.16

0.15

0.15

(10) Total indirect effect

0.84

0.70

0.59

0.53

0.47

0.42

(11) Indirect/Direct (= (10)/(7))

8.16

7.22

6.52

6.06

5.59

(12) Fund-by-fund Indirect/Direct

8.42

7.29

6.38

5.88

5.31

(1) N
(2) AUM ($M)

14~15

≥15

101

76

194

502

302

322

0.51

0.49

0.22

0.26

0.54

0.46

0.33

0.12

-0.11

1.41

1.54

1.23

1.55

0.71

0.70

2.05

2.01

2.08

1.70

1.88

0.83

0.59

0.08

0.08

0.08

0.09

0.09

0.08

0.07

0.08

0.17

0.14

0.12

0.10

0.07

0.06

0.04

-0.01

0.15

0.16

0.15

0.16

0.16

0.16

0.16

0.13

0.16

0.38

0.35

0.33

0.29

0.28

0.26

0.23

0.22

0.16

0.14

4.83

4.47

4.16

3.83

3.52

3.39

3.01

2.62

2.66

2.19

1.72

4.66

4.21

3.88

3.55

3.14

3.01

2.59

2.39

2.44

1.76

1.34

Pay for performance per 1% Change in Fund Value ($M)

Pay for performance per 1$ Change in Fund Value ($)

43

Panel C: By Scalability (b=0.8)

(1)

N

(2)

AUM ($M)

Pay for performance per 1% Change in Fund Value ($M)
(3)
Direct effect

Not Capacity Constrained

Capacity Constrained

7,159

3,652

239

204

(4)

Indirect effect from new money

0.21
1.24

0.21
0.80

(5)

Indirect effect from change in value of existing assets

0.62

0.55

(6)

Total indirect effect

1.85

1.35
0.09
0.33

Pay for performance per 1$ Change in Fund Value ($)
(7)
Direct effect
(8)

Indirect effect from new money

0.09
0.48

(9)

Indirect effect from change in value of existing assets

0.16

0.18

(10)

Total indirect effect

0.64

0.50

(11)

Indirect/Direct (= (10)/(7))

7.09

5.39

(12)

Fund-by-fund Indirect/Direct

7.06

5.17

44

