                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        WALL STREET AND THE HOUSING BUBBLE

                                          Ing-Haw Cheng
                                            Sahil Raina
                                            Wei Xiong

                                       Working Paper 18904
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18904


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2013




The authors thank Vu Chau, Kevin Chen, Andrew Cheong, Tiffany Cheung, Alex Chi, Andrea Chu,
Wenjing Cui, Christine Feng, Kelly Funderburk, Elisa Garcia, Holly Gwizdz, Jisoo Han, Bret Herzig,
Ben Huang, Julu Katticaran, Olivia Kim, Eileen Lee, Yao Lu, Shinan Ma, Amy Sun, Stephen Wang,
and Daniel Zhao for excellent research assistance. The authors are also grateful to Malcolm Baker,
Nick Barberis, Roland Benabou, Harrison Hong, Atif Mian, Adair Morse, Uday Rajan, Amit Seru,
and seminar participants at Columbia University, Dartmouth College, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, Harvard Business School, 2012 NBER Behavioral Finance Meeting, 2012 NBER Summer
Institute, Northwestern University, Stanford University, University of California-Berkeley, University
of Michigan, University of Pennsylvania-Wharton, and University of Southern California for helpful
discussion and comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Ing-Haw Cheng, Sahil Raina, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Wall Street and the Housing Bubble
Ing-Haw Cheng, Sahil Raina, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 18904
March 2013
JEL No. G01

                                             ABSTRACT

We analyze whether mid-level managers in securitized finance were aware of the housing bubble and
a looming crisis in 2004-2006 using their personal home transaction data. To the extent that the practice
of securitization may have led to lax screening of subprime borrowers, we find that the average person
in our sample did not expect it to lead to problems in the wider housing market. Certain groups of
securitization agents were particularly aggressive in increasing their exposure to housing during this
period, suggesting the need to expand the incentives-based view of the crisis to incorporate a role for
beliefs.


Ing-Haw Cheng                                       Wei Xiong
701 Tappan St                                       Princeton University
Ross School of Business                             Department of Economics
University of Michigan                              Bendheim Center for Finance
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                                 Princeton, NJ 08450
ingcheng@umich.edu                                  and NBER
                                                    wxiong@princeton.edu
Sahil Raina
701 Tappan Ave
Ross School of Business
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
sraina@umich.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18904
   The recent financial crisis has spurred a large literature studying whether poorly designed
incentives led Wall Street to take excessive risks in the housing market, leading to disastrous
consequences.    The key friction in this narrative is that agents on Wall Street did not have
incentives appropriately aligned with outside stakeholders such as shareholders (Bebchuk, Cohen,
and Spamann, 2010; Bhagat and Bolton, 2011), or other stakeholders such as creditors, taxpayers,
and society at large (Acharya, et al. 2010; Bolton, Mehran and Shapiro, 2011; Edmans and Liu,
2011; Rajan, 2006, 2010).
    A comparatively smaller literature emphasizes the role of distorted beliefs about house prices.
The theoretical literature emphasizes that over-optimistic beliefs about house prices may have
arisen due to behavioral biases and cognitive dissonance (Barberis, 2012; Benabou, 2011; Burnside,
Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2011; Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny, 2011, 2012) or money illusion
(Brunnermeier and Julliard, 2008). The empirical debate about whether fundamentals were driving
house prices unfolded in real time (Himmelberg, Mayer, and Sinai, 2005; Mayer, 2006; Shiller,
2006, 2007; Smith and Smith, 2006), with subsequent anecdotal evidence of biased beliefs from
Lewis (2011) and systematic evidence about sentiment from Soo (2013). Anecdotally, many people
believed that house prices would never fall at a national level, and perhaps over-extrapolated house
prices based on past trends.
    The focus of these two literatures has remained distinct in many ways.            In particular, a
sustained focus in the incentives literature has accumulated evidence that the practice of securitizing
mortgages in the originate-to-distribute model contributed towards lax screening of subprime
borrowers (Agarwal and Ben-David, 2012; Berndt and Gupta, 2009; Demyanyk and Van Hemert,
2011; Jiang, Nelson and Vytlacil, 2011; Keys et al., 2009, 2010, 2012; Mian and Sufi, 2009;
Piskorski, Seru and Witkin, 2013; Purnanandam, 2011; Rajan, Seru and Vig, 2012). On the other
hand, the beliefs literature has emphasized that, as a whole, the housing market is prone to distorted
beliefs due to specific features such as the long history of rising national house prices (Shiller,
2007). These two issues are not mutually exclusive (Cole, Kanz, and Klapper, 2012), and in fact
are very much related, in that distorted beliefs about the wider housing market and bad incentives to
lend to unqualified borrowers are two forces which may interact and reinforce each other. For
example, any weakened incentives to screen subprime borrowers would be exacerbated if lenders
were buoyed by expectations that prices in overall house markets would never fall. An expanded
narrative that incorporates an additional role for beliefs about overall housing markets, while neither


                                                  1
contradicting nor supporting existing evidence of bad incentives in screening borrowers,
nevertheless may help us provide a complete account of the magnitude of the overall housing boom
and bust.
     To establish whether beliefs played a role in the development of the housing bubble and crash,
we test a simple hypothesis: that people involved in the mortgage securitization business, who were
arguably at the nexus of bad incentives, were fully aware during the boom that housing markets
were overvalued and that a large-scale crisis was likely and imminent. This hypothesis, which we
term the full-awareness hypothesis, has been debated in the academic literature examining
incentives among executives (Bebchuk, Cohen, and Spamann, 2010; Bhagat and Bolton, 2011;
Fahlenbrach and Stulz, 2011). This hypothesis also substantially informs discourse and policy,
which often conflates weakened incentives to screen subprime borrowers with the idea that Wall
Street was fully aware that there was an impending across-the-board crisis yet took no corrective
action owing to a “heads I win, tails you lose” system.                  For example, in its 2011 report
commissioned by Congress, the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission writes that “Alarm bells were
clanging inside financial institutions…Many knowledgeable executives saw trouble and managed to
avoid the train wreck.” Public discourse about lawsuits alleging awareness of problems in the
subprime borrower market also links these two issues. In its coverage of the release of internal
documents and emails relating to China Development Industrial Bank vs. Morgan Stanley (2013),
the New York Times writes that “…the documents suggest a pattern of behavior larger than this one
deal: people across the bank understood that the American housing market was in trouble.”1
    Despite its simplicity, disagreement about whether Wall Street was fully aware of broad-based
problems in housing has remained relatively unresolved, owing to the difficulty in disentangling
behavior motivated by beliefs from behavior motivated by job incentives. This paper confronts this
challenge by studying the individual home purchase behavior of Wall Street mid-level managers
who worked directly in the mortgage securitization business. The evidence unearthed by lawsuits
suggests that mid-level managers in securitization may be a significant group in which there was
systematic awareness of problems in housing markets. E-mails deriding securitized mortgage
instruments as garbage are rarely from C-suite-level executives, but rather are from CDO traders,



1
 “Financial Crisis Suit Suggests Bad Behavior at Morgan Stanley,” Jesse Eisinger, The New York Times contributor,
ProPublica.org, January 23, 2013.

                                                       2
whose job is to understand the pricing of these instruments at the center of the crisis (Coval, Jurek
and Stafford, 2009).2
    We argue that individual home transaction behavior reveals information about whether these
employees believed there were problems in housing markets, as a home typically exposes its owner
to substantial house price risk. Even employees in the financial industry, despite their relatively
high incomes, should have maximum incentives to make informed home-transaction decisions on
their own accounts, particularly for mid-level managers.
    We sample a group of securitization investors and issuers from a publicly available list of
conference attendees of the 2006 American Securitization Forum, the largest industry conference.
These investors and issuers, whom we refer to collectively as securitization agents, comprise vice
presidents, senior vice presidents, managing directors, and other non-executives who work at major
investment houses and boutique firms. Using the Lexis-Nexis Public Records database, which
aggregates information available from public records, such as deed transfers, property tax
assessment records, and other public address records, we are able to collect the personal home
transaction history of these securitization agents.
    We compare the home transactions of these securitization agents to those of plausibly
uninformed control groups, which arguably had no private information about housing and
securitization markets, and compare how securitization agents fared in housing against these groups.
We test for two forms of awareness. Under the null hypothesis that securitization agents were
aware of serious problems and that a large crash was imminent, they may have attempted to time
the housing market. A necessary condition for this strong form of “market timing” awareness is to
observe home-owning securitization agents divest homes before the bust in 2007-2009. Given the
difficulties of timing the market, however, awareness of a bubble might appear in a weaker,
“cautious” form of awareness, where securitization agents knew enough to be cautious of housing
markets and avoided increasing their housing exposure during the bubble period of 2004-2006.
    We construct two uninformed control groups. The first control group consists of S&P 500
equity analysts who do not cover homebuilding companies.                    Due to their work outside the
securitization and housing markets, they were less likely to be informed about the housing bubble
than securitization agents, yet are nonetheless a self-selected group of agents who work for a similar

2
  See, for example, e-mails and instant messages documented in China Development Industrial Bank v. Morgan Stanley
(2013), Dexia v. Deutsche Bank (2013), Federal Housing Finance Agency v. J.P. Morgan Chase (2011), and People of
the State of New York v. J.P. Morgan Chase (2012).

                                                        3
set of finance firms. A nuanced issue for our analysis is that securitization agents received large
bonuses during the bubble years, which may motivate them to buy houses despite any potential
awareness of the housing bubble. By working for similar finance firms, equity analysts arguably
also experienced income shocks. Our second control group consists of a random sample of lawyers
who did not specialize in real estate law. This control group serves as a benchmark for a wealthy
segment of the general population and helps us understand the broader question of whether
securitization agents exhibited awareness relative to the public.
   Our analysis shows little evidence of securitization agents’ awareness of a housing bubble and
impending crash in their own home transactions. Securitization agents neither managed to time the
market nor exhibited cautiousness in their home transactions. They increased, rather than decreased,
their housing exposure during the boom period through second home purchases and swaps into
more expensive homes. This difference is not explained by differences in financing terms such as
interest rates, or refinancing activity, and is more pronounced in the relatively bubblier Southern
California region compared to the New York metro region. Our securitization agents’ overall home
portfolio performance was significantly worse than that of control groups. Agents working on the
sell-side and for firms which had poor stock price performance through the crisis did particularly
poorly themselves.
   Our analysis presents evidence that is broadly inconsistent with systematic awareness of broad-
based problems in housing among mid-level managers in securitized finance based on a revealed
beliefs approach. However, a home purchase provides a consumption stream that may not be easily
found in the rental market, and thus may reflect a consumption motive in addition to beliefs about
the future path of asset prices. Despite this, our analysis can be interpreted as testing for whether
agents believed income shocks from their jobs in mortgage securitization were permanent. In
particular, it is difficult to rationalize why securitization agents endowed with income risk tied to
housing would purchase additional second homes and swap into larger homes in 2005 if they
simultaneously anticipated an imminent broad-based collapse in housing markets. We also find
little evidence that securitization agents were conservative in the value-to-income ratios of their
purchases, and that homes purchased in 2004-2006 were among those most aggressively sold in
2007-2009, relative to both control groups. This suggests that securitization agents overestimated
the persistence of their incomes and that any consumption stream in these houses was short-lived.




                                                   4
   We stress that our conclusions do not contradict the existing evidence that bad incentives caused
loan officers and securitization agents to relax lending standards in the subprime borrower market.
Our securitization agents are not subprime borrowers themselves. Rather, our evidence is a first
step in an expanded view of the crisis that incorporates a role for both incentives and beliefs. In
particular, if Wall Street was complicit in relaxing lending standards in the subprime borrower
market, our evidence suggests they did so without expecting it to lead to a wider crash in housing
markets.   This distinction has important implications for post-crisis policy reform and future
research. Regulators and academia should devote more attention to understanding whether agents
working in the securitization finance industry had ex ante distorted beliefs or whether these beliefs
only seem distorted ex post (Foote, Gerardi and Willen, 2012; Gerardi, et al. 2008). Our evidence
suggests that certain groups of agents – those living in bubblier areas, working on the sell side, or at
firms with greater exposure to subprime mortgages – may have been particularly subject to potential
sources of belief distortions, such as job environments that foster group think, cognitive dissonance,
or other sources of over-optimism. Changing the compensation contracts of Wall Street agents
alone, for example through increased restricted stock holdings or more shareholder say on pay, may
be insufficient to prevent the next financial market crisis (Bolton, Scheinkman and Xiong, 2006;
Cheng, Hong and Scheinkman, 2012).

                                    1. Empirical Hypothesis
    The aim of our analysis is to examine whether Wall Street employees anticipated the housing
bubble and crash. Figure 1 depicts the Case-Shiller house price indices for the composite-20
metropolitan areas as well as New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles from 2000-2011. Of these
areas, Los Angeles had the most dramatic boom and bust cycle, with house prices increasing by
over 170% from 2000 to a peak in 2006 and then crashing down by over 40% from the end of 2006
through the end of 2011. New York also experienced a boom/bust cycle, with prices increasing by
over 110% from 2000-2006 and then dropping by over 20% through 2011. Over the composite 20
metropolitan areas, prices rose by 100% from 2000-2006 and fell by over 30% through 2011.
Despite the differences in magnitudes, the cycles across different regions experienced rapid price
expansions in 2004-2006, which we define as a bubble period in our analysis, the beginning of a
decline in 2007, followed by steep falls in 2008.
    The practice of securitizing mortgages has been widely recognized as one of the important
enablers in the development of the crisis. As such, we focus on understanding the beliefs of mid-

                                                    5
level managers in the securitization business across these boom and bust periods, whom we
collectively refer to as securitization agents. In practice, our mid-level managers are investors and
issuers attending the 2006 American Securitization Forum, a large industry conference, and are
mostly Vice Presidents, Senior Vice Presidents, and Managing Directors at investment banks,
commercial banks, hedge funds, mortgage lenders, and other financial companies. These agents
buy and sell tranches of securitized mortgages and are largely responsible for understanding the
pricing of these instruments and the correlation of the underlying securities.
     There are several reasons to analyze the beliefs of mid-level managers rather than C-level
executives. First, they made many important business decisions for their firms. The 2012 “London
Whale” risk-management failure of JP Morgan Chase suggests that, if anything, CEO Jamie Dimon
realized relatively late that traders had accumulated significant exposure to specific CDS positions
which subsequently resulted in outsized losses. Second, mid-level managers were very close to the
housing markets. There is a growing notion that perhaps mid-level managers knew about the
problems in the housing markets even if C-level executives did not – for example, Joseph Cassano
of AIG FP or Fabrice Tourre of Goldman Sachs. Documents and emails suggesting that managers
knew of problems in housing, released during investigations and lawsuits such as China
Development Industrial Bank v. Morgan Stanley (2013), are from mid-level Vice Presidents and
Managing Directors rather than C-suite executives.3
     We use a revealed belief approach based on people’s personal home transactions. A home is
typically a significant portion of a household’s balance sheet. As our data will confirm later, this is
true even for the mid-level securitization agents in our sample. To the extent that homeowners have
thick skin in their homes, they have maximum incentives to acquire information and make informed
buying and selling decisions, even if they are subject to poorly designed incentives on the job.4
This is a key feature that allows us to isolate their beliefs from their job incentives.5



3
  In another example, evidence provided by Dexia against Deutsche Bank in Dexia v. Deutsche Bank (2013) includes a
2005 parody of “Ice, Ice Baby” written by a trader with lyrics such as “CDO, Oh baby…print, even if the housing
bubble looms.”
4
  Home transactions are also more informative of individuals’ beliefs than buying and selling of their companies’
stocks, which is contaminated by potential signaling effects of disloyalty and lack of confidence to their bosses and
colleagues.
5
  A subtle issue for our analysis is that poorly designed incentives can distort beliefs among agents (Cole, Kanz, and
Klapper, 2012). Our analysis is informative about this hypothesis in the following way. If agents exhibited beliefs
consistent with awareness of the bubble, this would be inconsistent with the hypothesis of this interaction, as their
beliefs would be aligned with their presumably bad incentives. Evidence of unawareness would be consistent with this

                                                          6
     Our general strategy focuses on testing whether securitization agents were more aware of the
housing bubble compared to plausibly unaware counterfactual control groups. This strategy relies
on the cross-sectional variation in home purchase and sale behavior across these groups during the
boom and bust periods. We have three primary tests. We first test for awareness in a strong
“market timing” form. Under this strong form, securitization agents knew about the bubble so well
that they were able to time the housing markets better than others. This implies that securitization
agents who were homeowners anticipated the house price crash in 2007-2009 and reduced their
exposures to housing markets by either divesting homes or downsizing homes in the bubble period
of 2004-2006.
     Market timing is a strong form of awareness for two reasons. First, the cost of moving out of
one’s home, especially the primary residence, is high, and may prevent securitization agents from
actively timing the house price crash. Second, even if securitization agents knew about the presence
of a housing bubble, they might not be able to precisely time the crash of house prices. While these
caveats reduce the power of using the securitization agents’ home divestiture behavior to detect
their awareness of the bubble, it is useful to note that the cost of moving out of second homes is
relatively low and should not prevent the securitization agents from divesting their second homes.
     More importantly, the cost of moving and inability to time the crash should not prevent
securitization agents from avoiding home purchases if they were indeed aware of problems in
housing, particularly in avoiding purchases of second homes and moves into more expensive homes.
This consideration motivates our second empirical test for a weaker, “cautious” form of awareness,
which posits that securitization agents knew enough to avoid increasing their housing exposure – by
avoiding purchases of primary homes, second homes, and avoiding moves into more expensive
houses - during the bubble period of 2004-2006.
     Our third test focuses on the net trading performance of observed transactions to see whether
securitization agents’ observed transactions improved or hurt their financial performance. We
benchmark their observed strategy against a static buy-and-hold strategy and compare whether
securitization agents did better against their benchmark than control groups. This final test sheds




interaction, with the cause of unawareness being poorly designed incentives. However, our tests do not distinguish
between specific reasons for unawareness.

                                                        7
light on whether agents benefitted overall through other potential types of actions associated with
awareness, for example, by “riding the bubble” (Brunnermeier and Nagel, 2005).6
     Economic determinants of home transaction behavior other than beliefs could drive cross-
sectional differences between securitization agents and potential control groups. First, the level of
risk aversion may vary, particularly if the age profile varies across career groups. Second, there
may be career selection and life cycle effects. Different careers may have different optimal points
of purchasing housing not obtainable in the rental market due to career risk and different life cycle
patterns in when to have children. Third, heterogeneity in wealth levels and income shocks may
drive home purchase behavior. Less wealthy people may be less likely to purchase a home due to
credit constraints, and credit constrained agents may be more likely to purchase a home after a
positive income shock.
     To address these issues, we construct two uninformed control groups. The first group is a
sample of equity analysts covering S&P 500 companies in 2006, excluding major homebuilders.
The assumption is that, being a self-selected group of agents who work for similar finance
companies, they face similar ex ante career risks and have similar risk aversion and life cycle
profiles. They also received some forms of income shocks during the housing boom, as finance
companies generally performed very well over this period. We also construct a second control
group comprised of lawyers practicing outside of real estate law. Although differences or non-
differences between these two groups may be less ascribable to beliefs due to heterogeneity, this
exercise tests for awareness among securitization agents relative to a benchmark group of wealthy,
high-income people in the general population.
     Taken together, we test the following hypothesis regarding whether securitization agents were
aware of the housing bubble:
Hypothesis (Full Awareness): Securitization agents exhibited more awareness of the housing
bubble relative to equity analysts and lawyers in three possible forms:
    A. (market timing form) Securitization agents who were homeowners were more likely to divest
         homes and down-size homes in 2004-2006.


6
 One worry is that homeowners may hedge house price risk in ways that we do not observe. However, there has been a
general lack of interest in markets created to hedge house price risk, which in turn also creates difficulties in hedging
such risk. Shiller (2008) documents that repeated attempts to create markets to hedge house price risk have failed to
attract liquidity, pointing out that the “near absence of derivatives markets for real estate…is a striking anomaly.”
Shorting homebuilding stocks and real estate investment trusts also leaves substantial basis risk.

                                                           8
   B. (cautious form) Securitization agents who were non-homeowners were less likely to acquire
       homes in 2004-2006.
   C. (performance) Overall, securitization agents had better performance after controlling for
       their initial holdings of homes at the beginning of 2000.
As a practical matter, we operationalize tests of (A) and (B) by considering a basic framework for
agent choices described in the next section and testing for differences in the intensity of certain
types of choices through time.
    A nuanced issue in our analysis is that securitization agents received large bonuses during the
bubble period. Large income shocks might have induced them to acquire homes despite their
awareness of the bubble. The housing finance literature (e.g., Yao and Zhang, 2005; Cocco, 2005;
Ortalo-Magne and Rady, 2006) provides models to analyze individuals’ home purchase decisions in
the presence of income shocks, credit constraints, and life-cycle and investment portfolio
considerations. To the extent that large bonuses received by securitization agents during the bubble
period relaxed their credit constraints by allowing them to afford the down payments of home
purchases, one might interpret their home purchases during the period as a reflection of relaxed
credit constraints rather than as expectations of future house prices.
    The equity analyst control group should partially control for such shocks, given that they also
work in the finance industry. To explore this issue further, we use the insight that, to the extent that
a home provides a utility stream over time and there are moving costs, a household should choose
an optimal size based on its expected permanent income rather than current income. We analyze
indicators such as the value-to-income ratios of purchases by the securitization group to trace out
beliefs about permanent income, if not house prices directly. Under the full awareness hypothesis,
securitization agents should have realized that their current incomes were unlikely to persist, and
purchased homes with more conservative value-to-income ratios than control groups. We also test
whether securitization agents “lived happily ever after” by testing whether homes purchased during
2004-2006 were held for significant periods of time. If home purchase behavior during the boom
period was driven by consumption, these homes should be held for significant periods of time (Sinai
and Souleles, 2005), or else a significant discount rate would be required to justify these purchases.

                             2. Data and Empirical Framework

2.1. Data collection


                                                   9
     We begin by collecting names of people working in the securitization business as of 2006. To
do so, we obtain the list of registrants at the 2006 American Securitization Forum’s (ASF)
securitization industry conference, hosted that year in Las Vegas, Nevada, from January 29, 2006
through February 1, 2006. This list is publicly available via the ASF website. 7 The ASF is the
major industry trade group focusing on securitization. It published an industry journal and has
hosted the “ASF 20XX” conference every year since 2004. The conference in 2006 featured 1760
registered attendees and over 30 lead sponsors, ranging from every major US investment bank (e.g.,
Goldman Sachs) to large commercial banks such as Wells Fargo, to international investment banks
such as UBS, to monoline insurance companies such as MBIA.
     We construct a sample of 400 securitization agents by randomly sampling names from the
conference registration list and collecting their information from our data sources until we have 400
agents with data. We make sure to oversample people at the most prominent institutions associated
with the financial crisis by attempting to collect information for all people associated with the
largest financial institutions such as Lehman Brothers and Citigroup. We screen out people who
work for credit card, student loan, auto, and other finance companies primarily involved in the non-
mortgage securitization business, and also use any available information in LinkedIn to screen out
people working in non-mortgage securitization segments. We also use LinkedIn to collect any
background information about each person that will be helpful in locating them within the
Lexis/Nexis database. Lexis/Nexis aggregates information available from public records, such as
deed transfers, property tax assessment records, and other public address records to person-level
reports and provides detailed information about property transactions for each person.
     There are a number of reasons that a person we selected from the registration list may not
appear in our final sample, as described in Table 1, Panel A and also Appendix A in more detail.
Chief among these are that they worked in the securitization business but in a non-housing segment
such as credit card loans, or that they have a very common name that cannot be uniquely identified
in Lexis-Nexis. All told, we sample 613 names to obtain 400 securitization agents in sample.
     For each person in our sample, we collect data for all properties ever owned, including the
location, the date the property was bought and sold, the transaction price, and mortgage terms, when



7
 As of this writing, this list appears to be no longer available on the web. The authors have copies of the webpages
available.

                                                        10
available. 8 Lexis/Nexis contains records for individuals who never own property, since it also
tracks other public records, and we record these individuals as not having ever owned property. We
also collect data about any refinances undertaken during the sample period. Our data collection
began in May 2011 and we thus have all transactions for all people we collect through this date.
Our analysis focuses on the period 2000-2010, the last full year we have data.9
     Our sample of equity analysts consists of analysts who covered companies during 2006 that
were members of the S&P 500 anytime in 2006, excluding homebuilding companies. These people
worked in the finance industry but were less directly exposed to housing, where the securitization
market was most active. We download the names of analysts covering any company in the S&P
500 during 2006 outside of SIC codes 152, 153 and 154 from I/B/E/S. These SIC codes correspond
to homebuilding companies such as Toll Brothers, DR Horton, and Pulte Homes.10 There are 2,978
analysts, from which we randomly sample 469 names to obtain 400 equity analysts with
information in our sample.
     To construct our sample of lawyers, we select a set of lawyers for each person in our
securitization sample from the Martindale-Hubbell Law Directory, an annual national directory of
lawyers which has been published since 1868, matched on age and the work location of the lawyer.
We provide details in Appendix A. This matching is not available for equity analysts given the
information we have available ex ante in our sampling. We have 406 total names that we search for
within Lexis/Nexis to obtain 400 lawyers matched on age and location to our securitization
sample.11

2.2. Classifying home purchases and sales
     Our starting point for understanding home purchase behavior is a broad framework to
categorize the purpose of a transaction for a given person. We think of person i at any time t as
either being a current homeowner, or not. If she is not a current homeowner, she may purchase a
8
  If we do not find a record of a person selling a given property, we verify that the person still owns the property through
the property tax assessment records. In cases where the property tax assessment indicates the house has been sold to a
new owner, or if the deed record does not contain a transaction price, we use the sale date and sale price from the
property tax assessment, when available.
9
  We collect data for all transactions we observe, even if they are after 2010. This mitigates any bias associated with
misclassifying the purpose of transactions, as we discuss below. To ease data collection requirements, we skip
properties sold well before 2000, as they are never owned during the 2000-2010 period and are thus immaterial for our
analysis.
10
   Our references for SIC codes is CRSP, so a company needs to have a valid CRSP-I/B/E/S link.
11
   The success rate for collecting information about lawyers is much higher because the Martindale-Hubbell Law
Directory provides detailed information about each lawyer, allowing us to pinpoint the name in Lexis-Nexis more easily
than other groups.

                                                            11
house and become a homeowner (which we refer to generically as “buying a first home”). Note that
one may have been a homeowner at some point in history and still “buy a first home” if one is
currently not a homeowner. If a person is currently a homeowner, she may do one of the following:
         A)   Purchase an additional house (“buy a second home”),
         B)   Sell a house and buy a more expensive house (“swap up”),
         C)   Sell a house and buy a less expensive house (“swap down”),
         D)   Divest a home but remain a homeowner (“divest a second home”),
         E)   Divest a home and not remain a homeowner (“divest last home”).

To operationalize this classification of transactions, we define a pair of purchase and sale
transactions by the same person within a six month period as a swap, either a swap up or a swap
down based on the purchase and sale prices of the properties. If either the purchase or sale price is
missing, we classify the swap generically as a “swap with no price information.”
     The purchases that are not swaps are either non-homeowners buying first homes, or
homeowners buying second homes.12 We use the term “second” to mean any home in addition to
the person’s existing home(s).           Divestitures are classified similarly: among sales that are not
involved in swaps, if a person sells a home and still owns at least one home, we say she is divesting
a second home; if she has no home remaining, we say the person is divesting her last home.13

2.3. Transaction intensities
     Our main analysis centers on the annual intensity of each transaction type – that is, the number
of transactions per person per time period. 14 We focus on an annual frequency to avoid time
periods with no transactions. Formally, the intensity of one type of transaction in year in a sample
group is defined as the number of transactions of that type in year t divided by the number of people
eligible to make that type of transaction at the beginning of year t:



For example, the intensity of buying a first home is determined by the number of first home
purchases during the year divided by the number of non-homeowners at the beginning of the year.
An important feature of our data is that we observe not only transaction activity but also transaction
12
   If a home is on record for an individual, but the home does not have a purchase date, we assume the owner had the
home at the beginning of our sample, January 2000. We provide more details of our classification in Appendix A.
13
   When classifying transactions in 2010, we use information collected on purchases and sales in 2011 to avoid over-
classifying divestitures and first-home/second-home purchases and underclassifying swaps in the final year of data.
14
   We focus on the intensity of transactions rather than the probability of an eligible person making a given transaction
because the latter discards information about a person making multiple transactions of one type in one year. However,
focusing instead on probabilities yields nearly identical results.

                                                           12
inactivity, due to the comprehensiveness of the public records tracked by Lexis/Nexis. This allows
us to test the hypothesis that one group was more cautious (i.e., bought less) than other groups, as
we can normalize the number of transactions by the total number of people who could have made
that transaction, instead of the number of people who made the transaction.15

2.4 Income data
     We are able to observe income in the year they purchase a home for a subset of people by
matching information we observe about the year of their purchase, their mortgage amount, and
property location with the information provided in the 2000-2010 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
(HMDA) mortgage application data. The HMDA dataset contains information on the income relied
on by the originating institution to underwrite the loan. Although most identifying information –
such as the borrower’s name, exact date of origination and property address and zip code – is not
provided, the data provides the mortgage amount (up to the thousands) as well as the census tract of
the property. We match purchases with all mortgages in HMDA of the same amount in the
purchase year with the same census tract as the property. If we successfully find a match, we take
the stated income on the HMDA application as the income of our person at the time the purchase
was made.16

                                           3. Descriptive Statistics
     Table 1, Panel A presents the number of people in each sample. Our groups of interest each
have 400 people by construction. Panel B presents the age distribution for each group. The median
ages in 2011 for the securitization agent, equity analyst, and lawyer samples are 45, 44, and 46,
respectively. Chi-square tests of homogeneity fail to reject the hypothesis that the distributions
presented in Panel B are the same.


15
   A complication in this calculation is that, in a given year, a person may make multiple transactions. As a result, the
number of non-homeowners at the beginning of the year does not fully represent the number of people eligible for
buying a first home during the year, because, for instance, a homeowner may sell her home in February and then buy
another home in September. To account for such possibilities, we define “adjusted non-homeowners,” who are eligible
for buying a first home during a year, to be the group of non-homeowners at the beginning of the year plus individuals
who divest their last homes in the first half of the year. We similarly adjust the number of homeowners and multiple
homeowners. Appendix A contains a detailed description of adjustments.
16
   One concern is that, even given an exact mortgage amount (e.g., $300K), census tract, and purchase year, there may
be multiple matches within HMDA. The average number of matches per purchase is roughly three, and the median
match is unique. 16 Given the economically-motivated construction of census tracts, we average income over all
matches in HMDA as the income for that purchase. One can repeat the analysis using only unique matches, which
reduces our sample by slightly less than half, and obtain qualitatively similar results that are more influenced by a small
number of observations at the tail ends of the distribution.

                                                           13
     Our sample features people from 176 distinct firms, of which we are able to match 65 as
publicly traded companies in CRSP during the 2007-2008 period. Our sample is tilted towards
people working at major firms due to our oversampling of those firms. The most prominent
companies in our sample are Wells Fargo (27 people), Washington Mutual (23), Citigroup (16), JP
Morgan Chase (14), AIG (12), and Countrywide, Deutsche Bank, Merrill Lynch, UBS, and Lehman
Brothers (9 each). The most common position titles are Vice President (87), Senior or Executive
Vice President (58), and Managing Director (39). In addition to the large firms, a number of
regional lenders such as BB&T, smaller mortgage originators such as Fremont General and
Thornburg Mortgage, and buy-side investors such as hedge funds and investment firms are present
as well. Additional details about the people in our securitization sample are provided in Table B1 in
Appendix B.
     Our reading suggests that many of these agents were involved in forecasting, modeling, and
pricing cash flows of mortgage-backed paper. As an example, one person in our group lists their
job title in LinkedIn as “Mortgage Backed Securities Trader, Wells Fargo,” with job responsibilities
including “Head of asset-backed trading group for nonprime mortgage and home equity mortgage
products,” “Built a team of 3 traders with responsibility for all aspects of secondary marketing of
these products, including setting pricing levels, monthly mark-to-market of outstanding
pipeline/warehouse, and all asset sales.”
     Table 2, Panel A breaks down the number of properties owned over 2000-2010. Our data
spans 674 properties owned by securitization agents during the 2000-2010 period, 604 by equity
analysts, and 609 by lawyers. Of these, the majority was bought during the same period, while
roughly 40% of total properties were sold during this period.17
     Figure 2 presents a map of properties in our sample. The New York combined statistical area
(roughly the NJ-NY-CT tri-state metro area plus Pike County, PA) is the most prominent metro
area, followed by Southern California (Los Angeles plus San Diego). Both equity analysts and
securitization agents are concentrated in New York, with a slightly higher concentration for equity
analysts. Table B2 in Appendix B presents the geographical distribution in detail, while Tables B3
and B4 report further summary statistics on how purchases and sales are distributed through time,
and how these purchases and sales were classified.

17
  There are a small number of properties for which we have no purchase date. A missing purchase price reflects
missing data, which we deal with below. There are a substantial number of properties with either no sale date or a sale
date after December 31, 2010; these are homes that were still owned as of that date.

                                                          14
     Table 2, Panel B summarizes mortgage information. For the securitization sample, we have
mortgage information for 327 purchases out of 437 we observe from 2000-2010. Of these, we are
able to match 200 to HMDA, an unconditional success rate of 58%; for the equity analyst and
lawyer groups, this rate is 53% and 57%, respectively. Over the entire 2000-2010 period, the
average income at purchase was $350K for the securitization sample, $409K for the equity analyst
sample, and $191K for the lawyers. All income figures are reported in real 2006 dollars adjusted
using the Consumer Price Index (CPI) All Items series as of the end of December 2006.
     One concern is that these numbers appear a bit too “small” relative to what is commonly
perceived as finance industry pay. The income reported in HMDA represents income used by the
bank to underwrite the loan, which may often include only taxable income provided by the
mortgage applicant and is thus likely downward biased. Forms of compensation not taxable during
the year, such as employee stock option grants, would not be included.18
     Even if this reporting issue were not present, observed income levels are not unbiased
representations of the true distribution of underlying income because we only observe income at
purchase, and not income in other years (nor for non-purchasers). Additionally, our analysis does
not represent income of the same people over repeat purchases. As a descriptive exercise, however,
Table 3 breaks down average income observed at purchase into three bins, corresponding to the pre-
housing boom (2000-2003), housing boom (2004-2006), and housing bust (2007-2010). 19 Our
securitization agents received income shocks from the pre-boom to the boom period, with average
income rising by $92K, over 38% of average pre-boom income. Equity analysts also received
income shocks, with average income at purchase rising by $51K, although this is a smaller fraction
of pre-boom income, 16%. These results are roughly consistent with our initial hypothesis that the
two finance industry groups received positive income shocks, although securitization agents
received a slightly larger average shock.

                                           4. Empirical Results

4.1. Were securitization agents more aware of the bubble?
     We first examine whether securitization agents divested houses in advance of the housing
crash. Figure 3, Panel A plots the divestitures per person per year for each group through time. The
18
   If the amount of underreporting varies across time, the bias becomes problematic for our analysis comparing average
value-to-income ratios at purchase across groups and time. We discuss this in Section 4.4.
19
   Because we are interested in average income per person, we first average within person over purchases to obtain a
person-level average income for the period before averaging over people in each period.

                                                         15
divestiture intensities for the securitization agent sample are, if anything, lower than those of equity
analysts and lawyers in years before 2007. Compared to equity analysts, the divestiture intensity for
securitization agents is lower every year from 2003-2006, and slightly higher during the bust period,
2007-2009.20
     To account for heterogeneity in the age and multi-homeownership profiles of each group, we
compute regression-adjusted differences in intensities. We do this by constructing a strongly-
balanced person-year panel that tracks the number of divestitures each year for each person,
including zero if no divestiture was observed. We then estimate the following equation for each
pairing of the securitization group with a control group using OLS:
         [                                    ]

                                                                 ∑

The variable                             is the number of divestitures for individual i in year t,
                     is an indicator for whether individual i is part of our securitization agent sample,
             is an indicator for whether individual i is part of age group j in year t (where eight age
brackets are defined according to Table 1, Panel B, and one age group is excluded),
represents whether individual i was also a multi-homeowner at the end of year t-1, and                              is an
indicator for whether individual i was a homeowner at the end of year t-1. We use indicators for
age brackets instead of a polynomial specification for age as it makes the regression easily
interpretable as a difference in means. In each year t, we condition the sample such that only the
adjusted homeowners as of the end of year t-1 (i.e., those who started year t as homeowners or
became a homeowner during year t, so that                           ) are included in the estimation. We cluster
standard errors by person. The effective sample size is the number of homeowners during the 2000-
2010 period, as divesting a home is one of their possible choices.21


20
   The raw number of divestitures each year may be read off by multiplying the intensity in a given year from Table 4
by the number of homeowners in that year given by Table B5 in Appendix B. For example, in 2008, there were 19
divestitures (0.061 times 313) in the securitization sample. In contrast to our regression-adjusted differences, we do not
condition on having age information when reporting these raw intensities.
21
   The effective sample size (number of people contributing to the variation) of this estimation will be the total number
of people who we ever observed as adjusted homeowners during the 2000-2010 period for whom we have age
information across these two groups. This may be read off from the last row of Table B5, Panel B. For example, when
estimating equation (1) for the securitization sample and the equity analyst sample, the number of people will be 633
(328 plus 308). The number of homeowners contributing to the variation each year may similarly be read off from the
same table, which lists the number of homeowners and non-homeowners each year with age information. For example,

                                                           16
     The coefficients        are the difference in average annual divestitures per person within the
homeowner category across samples, adjusted for these age and multi-homeownership factors, and
are our coefficients of interest, with               during the 2004-2006 period suggesting evidence of
market timing. Table 4 presents these regression-adjusted differences. Consistent with the raw
divestiture intensities, these differences are very small during the boom period; point estimates are
negative compared to equity analysts. There is weak evidence that securitization agents had a
slightly higher intensity of divestiture in 2007 and 2008. This could be consistent with a form of
market timing such as riding the bubble, but also consistent with divestitures related to job losses, a
point which we return to in Section 4.2.7. Overall, however, there is little evidence that suggests
people in our securitization agent sample sold homes more aggressively prior to the peak of the
housing bubble relative to either equity analysts or lawyers.
     We next examine whether non-homeowners among securitization agents were cautious in
purchasing homes in 2004-2006.             This cautiousness alternative emphasizes that securitization
agents knew about the bubble, but that the optimal response was to avoid purchasing homes given
the difficulty in timing the crash. We focus on the behavior of second home purchases and swap-
ups into more expensive houses. Results for first-home purchases are reported in Appendix B,
Table B6 and do not reveal significant differences; if anything, there are more first home purchases
for securitization agents than equity analysts, particularly in 2006.
     Figure 3, Panel B plots the raw intensity of second home purchases and swap-ups through time,
while Table 5 presents regression-adjusted differences. The regression-adjusted differences are
computed using a specification analogous to equation (1) where we replace the left-hand side
variable with the number of second home purchases plus swap-up transactions for individual i
during year t. Contrary to what would be suggested by the full awareness hypothesis, we observe
        consistently throughout the 2004-2006 period, with statistically significant differences with
the equity analyst group at the 1% level in the 2005 period. Pooling intensities every other year
reveals positive and statistically significant differences in the 2002-2003, 2004-2005, and 2006-
2007 periods (Table B7 in Appendix B). Economically, the intensity of second home purchase and
swap-up activity was 0.07 homes per person higher in 2005 for securitization agents than equity




when estimating (1) for the securitization agent and equity sample, the number of people observed in 2000 is 415 (220
plus 195).

                                                         17
analysts. This suggests that securitization agents were aggressively increasing, not decreasing, their
exposure to housing during this period. We now explore this issue in more detail.

4.2. Second home purchases and swap-ups
       4.2.1. Firm-specific effects. We exploit the fact that we observe 78 securitization agents and
136 equity analysts working at a common set of 19 firms to remove company-specific effects. For
this test and for other tests, we pool together intensities every other year (2000-2001, 2002-2003,
and so forth) to mitigate the concern that our results are driven by spurious differences between a
small number of transactions we may observe during a single year when we condition the sample
tightly. We estimate the following equation:
       [                                       ]

                                                              ∑

where      represents company-specific effects and            if t=2000 or 2001,           if t=2002
or 2003, and so forth. The first column of Table 6 reports the results and shows that, within this
subsample, purchase intensities for second homes and swap-ups are higher for securitization agents
in the 2002-2003 and 2006-2007 periods, even controlling for firm effects.
       4.2.2. Location effects. Heterogeneity in property locations is a concern, since the magnitude
of the housing bubble was very heterogeneous across areas, as shown previously in Figure 1.
Although our sample of lawyers is location matched with our securitization agents, equity analysts
are relatively more concentrated in the New York metro area. If securitization agents lived in areas
where it was cheaper or easier to purchase a second home or swap up, this location effect may drive
our previous results. To check whether this is the case, we condition the sample of homeowners
each year to those who own property in the New York metro region at the end of the previous year,
and estimate the following model:
   [                                                             ]

                                                        ∑

where                  is an indicator for whether person i owns property in the New York metro area
at the end of year t-1. Results are reported in Columns 2 and 3 of Table 6. We find that, even
within this smaller subsample, securitization agents were more aggressive with purchases of second


                                                   18
homes and swap-ups in 2004-2005 relative to equity analysts, an effect that is statistically
significant at the 5% level. In Columns 4 and 5, we repeat this exercise for people who live in
Southern California, our second most represented metro region and find similar behavior results,
although the sample size is smaller than in the New York metro area.
     4.2.3. Differences-in-differences across locations. Comparing columns 2 and 4 of Table 6,
the difference in intensities between securitization agents and equity analysts is larger in Southern
California than New York. Given that Southern California had a much larger boom-bust cycle than
New York, this suggests that securitization agents were even less aware of the bubble in areas
where the bubble was very pronounced relative to areas where the bubble was not pronounced.
     To further test this insight, we focus on the relative difference between securitization agents
and equity analysts in Southern California with that of New York by estimating:
     [                                                                                              ]



                                                                         ∑


where                      is an indicator for whether person i owns property in the Southern California
region at the end of year t-1.22 We perform this exercise both with the number of second home
purchases and swap ups on the left hand side (Column 6 of Table 6) as well as just second home
purchases (Column 7). The thought experiment is the following. Suppose Southern California
begins to look bubbly in the 2004-2005 period, relative to New York. Allowing for differences
between the New York and Southern California regions (through the                         coefficients) and between
securitization agents and equity analysts (through the                  coefficients), do securitization agents in
Southern California react more or less cautiously compared to those in New York during that time
period? Evidence of                   during 2004-2005 would suggest that securitization agents living in
areas which experienced larger boom/bust cycles were more alerted than their counterparts in
regions with more moderate cycles.23



22
   To conservatively avoid an ex ante classification bias in either direction, we discard a handful of observations where
people own property in both New York and Southern California at the end of year t-1.
23
   There were insufficient observations in the Arizona/Nevada/Florida regions to conduct this type of test. We chose
New York and Southern California both because New York experienced a much more moderate bubble than Southern
California, but also because of practical considerations given how many observations we have.

                                                           19
    In fact, the aggressiveness of securitization agents relative to equity analysts is more
pronounced in Southern California than in New York. This suggests that securitization agents
living in areas which experienced larger boom/bust cycles were potentially even more optimistic
about house prices than otherwise, and cuts against the full-awareness hypothesis while also
suggesting a potential role for distorted beliefs. To mitigate the concern that there are relatively
fewer equity analysts in Southern California, and to demonstrate that these results are driven by
differences across areas, columns 8 and 9 of Table 6 estimate only the single-difference between
Southern California and New York within securitization agents and shows results consistent with
the difference-in-differences.
    4.2.4. Financing. One concern is that differences in purchase behavior are driven by
differential financing terms. Figure 4, Panel A plots the average interest rate at purchase for each
year and each group. On average, the interest rates observed at purchase between the two groups
are very similar and experienced overall time variation similar to that of national benchmark rates.
    A second concern is that securitization agents with knowledge of the bubble and crash may
speculate in the housing market by purchasing homes with very little equity and thus bear very little
downside. Figure 4, Panel B plots the median loan-to-value (LTV) ratio at purchase, and shows that
it holds steady near the unconditional median of 80% throughout the sample period. The median
LTV ratios of the marginal second home and swap-up purchases are also very close to 80% through
time. Overall, we see little evidence that securitization agents purchased more homes with lower
financial exposure than equity analysts.
    A third financing-related concern is that securitization agents with knowledge of the bubble
and crash may have reduced their house price exposure by refinancing and withdrawing equity from
other homes during the boom period. We collect data from Lexis/Nexis regarding all refinances
(pure refinances, second mortgages, home equity loans, and home equity lines of credit) and the
amount refinanced. The annual number of refinances per homeowner is plotted in Figure 4, Panel
C. Overall, we see little evidence that the refinance intensity rose in 2004-2006. Refinancing
intensity exhibits a negative co-movement with national benchmark mortgage interest rates. As
interest rates fell from 2000 through 2003, the intensity of refinances rose dramatically. Refinance
intensity was relatively low in 2004 and 2005 and fell when interest rates rose in 2006. Refinance
intensity rose in 2009 when interest rates fell in response to the crisis. Appendix B shows that the




                                                 20
average securitization agent who refinanced did not extract more equity from their home(s) relative
to equity analysts prior to 2006, and paid down significant amounts of debt in 2006 and 2007.
     4.2.5. Non-recourse states. Securitization agents with knowledge of the bubble and crash may
have chosen to buy extra homes in non-recourse states, also limiting their financial exposure. In
Appendix B, we check whether purchases among securitization agents were differentially
concentrated within non-recourse states rather than recourse states relative to equity analysts.
Ghent and Kudlyak (2011) classify states based on lender friendliness and whether it is practical for
lenders to obtain deficiency judgments and find that borrowers are substantially more likely to
default in non-recourse states, particularly when equity is negative. Conditional on whether a
person already has a home in a non-recourse state, we find no evidence of a higher marginal
intensity for securitization agents to purchase second homes or swap up into more expensive homes
in non-recourse states than equity analysts.
     4.2.6. Type of property. One concern is that home purchases are purely motivated by
consumption. In Appendix B, we provide evidence that, conditional on a second home purchase,
the type of home (single-family or condominium) is significantly more likely to be a condominium
for securitization agents relative to equity analysts, even though they are no more likely to be farther
away. This suggests that they are potentially condominiums purchased to rent rather than for
consumption purposes. We discuss the consumption motive more in Section 4.4.
     4.2.7. Job switches. The higher number of divestitures in 2007 and 2008 may suggest market
timing, with securitization agents divesting homes earlier than others. On the one hand, this
difference is small relative to the difference in intensity of second home and swap-up purchases.
For example, between securitization agents and equity analysts, the difference in divestiture
intensity is 0.026 per homeowner in 2008 while the difference in second home/swap-up intensity is
0.069 per homeowner in 2005. We explore this issue further by using Bayes’ rule to decompose the
divestiture intensity into the intensity among those who experience job losses (job-losers), the
intensity among those who do not experience job losses (no-job-losers), and the rate of job loss.24
In Appendix B, we provide evidence which suggests that securitization agent job-losers were more
likely than equity analyst job-losers to divest a home, despite significant job losses among both
groups. In contrast, there is a smaller difference in divestiture intensities between securitization


24
  We examine the LinkedIn profiles of each of our securitization agents and years in which a person switches jobs as
the last year of employment within an employer on a person’s resume. We provide details in Appendix A.

                                                        21
agent no-job-losers and equity analyst no-job-losers. Since both the initial difference in divestiture
intensities and the total absolute number of divestitures are small, one caveat to this result is that
this decomposition is over a small sample, so that this holds only qualitatively. On the other hand,
results for total sales yield statistically significant differences between the two groups of job-losers,
while no differences for no-job-losers.      Under the market timing hypothesis, we should have
expected to see differences between securitization agents and equity analysts in both job-loser and
no-job-loser groups, rather than only in the job-loser group.

4.3. Net trading performance
    We next systematically analyze which groups fared better during this episode by comparing
their trading performance. Our strategy is to compare their performance based on the relative
differences in the location and timing of their sales and purchases from the beginning of our sample
onwards to see whether trades subsequent to this date helped or hurt each group on average.
    Our thought experiment is the following: if agents follow a self-financing strategy from 2000
onwards, where the available investments are houses in different zip codes and a risk-free asset,
how did their observed performance compare with that of a hypothetical buy-and-hold strategy?
We sketch the assumptions for this exercise here and provide full details in Appendix B. First, we
assume time flows quarterly, and we mark the value of each house up or down every quarter from
its actual observed purchase price and date in accordance with quarterly zip-code level home price
indices from Case-Shiller when possible. Second, we assume that agents each purchase an initial
supply of houses at the beginning of 2000 equal to whichever houses they are observed to own at
that time. Third, agents have access to a cash account which earns the risk-free rate, and we endow
each agent with enough cash to finance the entirety of their future purchases to abstract away from
differences in leverage.     This last assumption errs on the side of conservatism in isolating
performance differences arising from the timing of home purchases.
    We compute both the return from the self-financed strategy and the return from a
counterfactual buy-and-hold strategy, where agents purchase their initial set of houses and then
subsequently never trade. We denote the difference between the returns of these two strategies as
the performance index for each individual, which captures whether trading subsequent to the initial
date helped or hurt the individual relative to a simple buy-and-hold strategy.
    We then compute the value-weighted average dollar performance for each group by taking the
weighted average of the performance index across individuals, weighting by the initial value of each

                                                   22
individual’s portfolio. We test for value-weighted differences in performance by projecting the
performance index onto an indicator for the securitization group and indicators for the age
categorizations using ordinary least squares in the cross-section of individuals, with sampling
weights equal to their initial wealth and heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors. Intuitively, this
methodology is a “difference-in-difference” where the first difference is over the buy-and-hold
performance and the second difference compares the securitization agents’ value-weighted
performance with that of the control group.
     Table 7, Panel A presents summary statistics for our exercise, while Panel B tabulates the
value-weighted average return, buy-and-hold return, and performance index per person for each
group, as well as the regression-adjusted differences, while Figure 5 illustrates the comparative
evolution of the performance indices. What is apparent is that all groups, including securitization
agents, were worse off at the end of 2010 relative to a buy-and-hold strategy that began in 2000q1.
     In fact, the securitization group experienced significantly worse gross returns than the equity
analyst group, a difference of 4.5% on a regression-adjusted basis. Although part of this is due to a
difference in the buy-and-hold return across the two groups (1.7%), the remaining difference of
2.74% quantifies the net trading underperformance of the securitization group, a difference which is
statistically significant at the 5% level.25 In particular, the gross return during the 2007-2010 bust
period for the securitization group was particularly poor. Differences with the lawyer group were
more modest, although still negative.26 In summary, the observed trading behavior of securitization
agents hurt their portfolio performance.
     We also compare groups of agents within our securitization group to further isolate the full
awareness hypothesis. One salient view is that those who were selling mortgage-backed securities
and CDOs knew that the asset fundamentals were worse than their ratings suggested, which
suggests that they may have anticipated problems in the wider housing market earlier than others.
Table 8, Panel A compares the performance of sell-side agents (issuers) with agents from the buy
side (investors). Of the 379 securitization agents reporting age information, 161 work on the sell
side and 239 work on the buy side. Evidently, sell-side analysts performed much more poorly

25
   In interpreting this magnitude, it is worth recalling that our performance evaluation fully collateralizes all purchases
and endows agents with large amount of cash, so that this difference likely significantly understates the true difference
in portfolio performance across the two groups given a typical loan-to-value ratio of 0.8.
26
   We have also experimented with different initial dates for the performance evaluation. For starting dates between
2000q1 and 2004q4, results are very similar. Differences between the two groups when using a starting date of 2005q4
and 2006q4 manifest mostly in the gross return, since the bulk of homes had been purchased by then.

                                                           23
compared to their buy-side peers, with a performance index 6% lower, a difference that is
statistically significant at the 5% level.
     Table 8, Panel B compares the performance of people working at firms who performed well
during the crisis and those who did not. The idea is to test whether people whose firms did poorly
anticipated the wider crisis and were able to escape the broad-based fall in home prices themselves.
We hand-match our list of companies to CRSP and sort them into terciles of buy-and-hold stock
performance from July 2007 through December 2008, the period over which a significant portion of
the crisis develops.       Low-performing companies include Lehman Brothers and Countrywide.
Better-performing firms include BB&T, Wells Fargo, and Blackrock. The results show that people
working at poorly-performing firms did worse in their own housing portfolios than people working
at better-performing firms, both in their performance index and in gross returns through the crisis
period. Overall, if fully aware agents were attempting to “ride the bubble,” they missed the peak,
leading not only to sharply negative returns, but also worse performance relative to other groups.

4.4. Consumption and income shocks
     One concern is that equity analysts are not a sufficient control for the effect of income shocks
that securitization agents received during the boom period. Although they worked for similar
financial firms, better-performing segments may have been rewarded more, consistent with the
evidence in Table 3. Income shocks may be large enough as to make cautiousness in beliefs
difficult to detect by analyzing only the timing of home transactions.
     We explore two more tests to isolate whether agents exhibited any cautiousness. First, we
examine whether the securitization sample was less aggressive than other groups in terms of the
value-to-income ratio of their purchases in order to trace out beliefs about income. Ceteris paribus,
if securitization agents expected their income shocks to be transitory but uninformed equity analysts
did not, we should observe securitization agents purchase homes at lower value-to-income ratios,
where current income is in the denominator.
     We compute the value-to-income (VTI) ratio for the subsample of purchases where we have
both income data from HMDA and an observed purchase price.27 Table 9 tabulates the mean and
median VTI for each group in each of the three periods. The average VTI for purchasers in the
securitization sample increased from 3.2 to 3.4; the median showed a slight decrease from 3.1 to

27
   Due to the nature of VTI as a ratio, we require a minimum nominal reported income of $100K in the year of purchase
to avoid drawing conclusions based on possible extreme tails overly influencing our analysis.

                                                         24
3.0, suggesting there are some purchasers who purchased homes at a very large VTI ratio, even after
trimming out those with very low incomes. The average VTI among equity analyst purchasers
increased from 2.9 to 3.1, while the median increased from 2.7 to 2.8. Overall, the evidence does
not display any strong pattern consistent with the hypothesis that the securitization agents were
more conservative in their VTI ratios when purchasing homes.28
     One caveat to analyzing the value-to-income ratio is that our measures of income are likely
downward biased, as noted in Section 3. Because our analysis focuses on the comparing the change
in value-to-income across groups, the change in VTI will be mis-measured if the bias in
underreporting income itself varies across time. In Appendix B, we also examine whether there
were differential patterns of selling during the bust across our groups within the subsample of
purchasers during the 2004-2006 period. If purchasers during this period divested their houses
during the housing bust, this would cut against the hypothesis that securitization agents bought
houses during the boom for the consumption stream despite knowing that there would be a crash in
housing markets, since the consumption stream was short-lived. We find that, in the prime crisis
years (2007 and 2008), sales of 2004-2006 properties per purchaser were much higher for
securitization agents than equity analysts and lawyers. As discussed in Section 4.2.7, differences in
divestiture and sale intensities during this period are related to a higher intensity among
securitization job-losers relative to equity analyst job-losers.                This suggests that securitization
agents had based earlier purchase decisions on overoptimistic projections of permanent income
relative to equity analysts.

                                                  5. Conclusion
     We find little systematic evidence that the average securitization agent exhibited awareness of
problems in overall house markets and anticipated a broad-based the crash earlier than most. They
neither managed to time the market nor exercised caution, relative to equity analysts and non-real
estate lawyers. Our evidence suggests that certain groups of agents may have been particularly
subject to potential sources of belief distortions. Agents living in bubblier areas may have been
particularly influenced by stronger sentiment in those regions, while those working on the sell side
and firms with particularly high exposure to housing may have been influenced by factors such as

28
  Including the mark-to-market value of other existing homes at the time of purchase, computed using the method
described in Section 4.3, to form a portfolio value-to-income ratio at purchase yields similar results, which we report in
Appendix B. We focus on the purchase value-to-income ratio to ensure any results or non-results are being driven by
the data rather than the additional assumptions required in computing the mark-to-market value of each house.

                                                           25
group think. Such firms may even find it optimal to hire agents prone to over-optimism due to the
lower cost of incentivizing them. Overall, our analysis suggests the need for more research into the
role of beliefs in the crisis in addition to incentives.



References
Acharya, Viral, Thomas Cooley, Matt Richardson and Ingo Walter (2010), Manufacturing tail risk:
A perspective on the financial crisis of 2007-09, Foundations and Trends in Finance 4, 247-325.
Agarwal, Sumit and Itzhak Ben-David (2012), Did loan officers’ incentives lead to lax lending
standards, Working paper, Ohio State University.
Barberis, Nicholas (2012), Psychology and the financial crisis of 2007-2008, in Financial
Innovation and Crisis, M. Haliassos ed., MIT Press.
Bebchuk, Lucian, Alma Cohen and Holger Spamann (2010), The wages of failure: Executive
compensation at Bear Stearns and Lehman 2000-2008, Yale Journal on Regulation 27, 257-282.
Benabou, Roland (2011), Groupthink: Collective delusions in organizations and markets, Review of
Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Berndt, Antje and Anurag Gupta (2009), Moral hazard and adverse selection in the originate-to-
distribute model of bank credit, Journal of Monetary Economics 56, 725-743.
Bhagat, Sanjai and Brian J. Bolton (2011), Bank executive compensation and capital requirements
reform, SSRN working paper no. 1781318.
Bolton, Patrick, Hamid Mehran, and Joel Shapiro (2011), Executive compensation and risk taking,
Working paper, Columbia University.
Bolton, Patrick, Jose Scheinkman and Wei Xiong (2006), Executive compensation and short-termist
behavior in speculative markets, Review of Economic Studies 73, 577-610.
Brunnermeier, Markus and Christian Julliard (2008), Money illusion and housing frenzies, Review
of Financial Studies 21, 135-180.
Brunnermeier, Markus and Stefan Nagel (2005), Hedge funds and the technology bubble, Journal
of Finance 59, 2013-2040.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo (2011), Understanding booms and busts in
housing markets, NBER working paper no. 16734.
Cheng, Ing-Haw, Harrison Hong and Jose Scheinkman (2012), Yesterday's heroes: compensation
and creative risk-taking, Working paper, University of Michigan.
Cocco, Joao (2005), Portfolio choice in the presence of housing, Review of Financial Studies 18,
535-567.
Cole, Shawn, Martin Kanz and Leora Klapper (2012), Incentivizing calculated risk-taking: evidence
from an experiment with commercial bank loan officers, Working paper, Harvard University.
Coval, Joshua, Jakub Jurek and Erik Stafford (2009), The economics of structured finance, Journal
of Economic Perspectives 23, 3-25.
Demyanyk, Yuliya and Otto Van Hemert (2011), Understanding the subprime mortgage crisis,
Review of Financial Studies 24, 1848-1880.

                                                     26
Edmans, Alex and Qi Liu (2011), Inside Debt, Review of Finance 15, 75-102.
Fahlenbrach, Rudiger and Rene Stulz (2011), Bank CEO incentives and the credit crisis, Journal of
Financial Economics 99, 11-26.
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (2011), The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report.
Foote, Christopher, Kristopher Gerardi and Paul Willen (2012), Why did so many people make so
many ex-post bad decisions? The causes of the foreclosure crisis, Working paper, Federal Reserve
Bank of Boston.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (2011), Neglected risks, financial innovation,
and financial fragility, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (2012), A model of shadow banking,
Working paper, Harvard University.
Gerardi, Kirstopher, Andreas Lehnert, Shane Sherlund and Paul Willen (2008), Making sense of the
subprime crisis, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 69-145.
Ghent, Andra C. and Marianna Kudlyak (2011), Recourse and residential mortgage default:
Evidence from US states, Review of Financial Studies 24, 3139-3186.
Himmelberg, Charles, Christopher Mayer and Todd Sinai (2005), Assessing high house prices:
bubbles, fundamentals, and misperceptions, Journal of Economic Perspectives 19, 67-92.
Jiang, Wei, Ashlyn Nelson and Edward Vytlacil (2011), Liar’s loan? Effects of origination channel
and information falsification on mortgage delinquency, Working paper, Columbia University.
Keys, Benjamin, Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru and Vikrant Vig (2009), Financial regulation and
securitization: evidence from subprime loans, Journal of Monetary Economics 56, 700-720.
Keys, Benjamin, Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru and Vikrant Vig (2010), Did securitization lead to
lax screening? Evidence from subprime loans, Quarterly Journal of Economics 125, 307-362.
Keys, Benjamin, Amit Seru and Vikrant Vig (2012), Lender screening and the role of securitization:
evidence from prime and subprime mortgage markets, Review of Financial Studies 25, 2071-2108.
Lewis, Michael (2011), The Big Short, W.W. Norton & Company.
Mayer, Christopher (2006), Commentary: Bubble, bubble, where’s the housing bubble?, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 2006:1, 51-59.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi (2009), The consequences of mortgage credit expansion: Evidence from
the US mortgage default crisis, Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1449-1496.
Ortalo-Magne, Francois and Sven Rady (2006), Housing market dynamics: On the contribution of
income shocks and credit constraints, Review of Economic Studies 73, 459-485.
Piskorski, Tomasz, Amit Seru and James Witkin (2013), Asset quality misrepresentation by
financial intermediaries: evidence from the RMBS market, Working paper, Columbia University.
Purnanandam, Amiyatosh (2011), Originate-to-distribute model and the subprime mortgage crisis,
Review of Financial Studies 24, 1881-1915.
Rajan, Raghu (2006), Has finance made the world riskier?, European Financial Management 12,
499-533.
Rajan, Raghu (2010), Fault Lines, Princeton University Press.


                                                27
Rajan, Uday, Amit Seru and Vikrant Vig (2012), The failure of models that predict failure: distance,
incentives, and defaults, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Shiller, Robert (2006), Commentary: Bubble, bubble, where’s the housing bubble?, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 2006:1, 59-67.
Shiller, Robert (2007), Understanding recent trends in house prices and homeownership,
Proceedings of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 89-123.
Shiller, Robert (2008), Derivatives markets for home prices, NBER working paper no. 13962.
Sinai, Todd and Nicholas S. Souleles (2005), Owner-occupied housing as a hedge against rent risk,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 763-789.
Smith, Margaret and Gary Smith (2006), Bubble, bubble, where’s the housing bubble?, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 2006:1, 1-50.
Soo, Cindy (2013), Quantifying animal spirits: news media and sentiment in the housing market,
Working paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Yao, Rui and Harold Zhang (2005), Optimal consumption and portfolio choices with risky housing
and borrowing constraints, Review of Financial Studies 18, 197-239.




                                                28
                                         Figure 1: Home Price Indices
This figure plots the Case-Shiller non-seasonally-adjusted home price indices from January 2000 through July
2012. Values for January 2000 are normalized to 100.
 300.00
 280.00
 260.00
 240.00
 220.00
 200.00                                                                                                                                                                                                            Composite-20
 180.00                                                                                                                                                                                                            NY-New York
 160.00                                                                                                                                                                                                            CA-Los Angeles
 140.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IL-Chicago
 120.00
 100.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                       July 2012
          January 2000

                         January 2001

                                        January 2002

                                                       January 2003

                                                                      January 2004

                                                                                     January 2005

                                                                                                    January 2006

                                                                                                                   January 2007

                                                                                                                                       January 2008

                                                                                                                                                      January 2009

                                                                                                                                                                     January 2010

                                                                                                                                                                                    January 2011

                                                                                                                                                                                                   January 2012
                                                            Figure 2: Property Locations
                                        This figure displays the locations of properties collected in our sample.




                                                                                                                                  29
                                            Figure 3: Transaction Intensities
Panel A plots the intensity of divestitures through time, defined as the number of divestitures per adjusted homeowner
each year, for each group. Panel B plots the intensity of second home purchases and swap-ups.

                          Panel A                                                       Panel B




                                                   Figure 4: Financing
Panel A plots the average interest rate at purchase for securitization and equity analyst groups, as well as average annual
national benchmark 30-year jumbo and conforming interest rates from BankRate. Panel B plots the median loan-to-value
observed at purchase. Panel C plots the intensity of refinancing, defined as the number of refinances per homeowner, for
securitization agents through time, as well as annual average national benchmark 30-year jumbo and conforming interest
rates from BankRate.
                                                          Panel A




                                                            30
                                                  Figure 4, continued

                          Panel B                                                     Panel C




                                           Figure 5: Trading Performance Indices
This figure plots the average performance index, defined as the initial-wealth-weighted average difference between the
cumulative return on the self-financed trading strategy and the buy-and-hold return of the initial stock of houses, where
2000q1 is taken as the initial quarter, for each group.




                                                           31
                                           Table 1: People


This table lists the number of people for which we gathered information in each of three samples:
securitization agents, equity analysts, and lawyers. Panel A tabulates the number of names we searched
for and reasons for why a name may not be in our sample. Panel B shows the age distribution of people
in our sample.

                                     Panel A: Number of People
                                                                            Equity
                                               Sample     Securitization   Analysts        Lawyers
                                   Number of names            613            469             406
                               Not mid-level manager           13            N/A             N/A
                                           Not housing         94            N/A             N/A
                          Not found in public records          29             16               3
                     Multiple found in public records          50             27               3
                                          International        27             25               0
                                             Deceased           0              1               0
                                     People in sample         400            400             400
                   Person found, but no homes owned            58             82              42
            People who sold all properties before 2000          3              1               0
    People who only own homes beginning after 2010              3              4               3
People in sample owning at least one home, 2000-2010          336            313             355
                Unconditional rate of homeownership           0.84           0.78            0.89

                                   Panel B: 2011 Age Distribution
                                                                            Equity
                                                Age       Securitization   Analysts        Lawyers
                                       30 and under           0.53%         0.26%           0.26%
                                            31 to 35          6.60%         6.46%           5.37%
                                            36 to 40         16.09%        21.96%          15.86%
                                            41 to 45         27.97%        32.56%          24.04%
                                            46 to 50         23.48%        18.60%          19.69%
                                            51 to 55         13.72%        10.08%          18.16%
                                            56 to 60          6.07%         4.13%          10.74%
                                            Over 60           5.54%         5.94%           5.88%
                                 Total with age data           379           387             391
                                   Missing age data             21            13               9
   Chi-Square Test of Homogeneity with Sctzn Sample            N/A          10.92           10.67
                          Homogeneity Test, p-value            N/A           0.14            0.15
                                         Median age             45            44              46




                                                  32
                                              Table 2: Properties

This table provides summary statistics for properties owned anytime over 2000-2010. Dollar amounts are reported
in December 2006 CPI-adjusted real thousands. Panel A presents the fraction of people owning more than one
address over 2000-2010. Panel B presents summary statistics for our matching process with mortgage applications.

                                Panel A: Total Properties, Purchases and Sales
                                                     Securitization      Equity Analysts          Lawyers
Total properties ever owned, 2000-2010                     674                 604                  609
Total purchases, 2000-2010                                 437                 368                  355
     with purchase price                                   392                 318                  306
     average purchase price                              761.67             1032.38                485.62
Number of homes with no purchase date                       81                 112                  101
Total sales, 2000-2010                                     266                 207                  171
     with sale price                                       238                 172                  145
     average sale price                                  633.74              794.76                446.37
Number of homes with no sale date                          408                 397                  438
     or sold after Dec 31 2010

                                        Panel B: Mortgage Applications
                                                      Securitization   Equity Analysts            Lawyers
Purchases, 2000-2010                                      437                368                    355
    with mortgage info                                    327                247                    257
    mean, median LTV                                   0.72 / 0.79       0.71 / 0.75             0.73 / 0.80
    with income from HMDA match                           253                196                    203
         income at purchase, property average            350.01            408.74                  191.32
People purchasing, 2000-2010                              274                242                    243
    with income from any HMDA match                       191                153                    167
Average # HMDA mortgage applications per match            2.41              2.62                    2.46
Median # HMDA mortgage applications per match               1                 1                       1




                                                      33
                                        Table 3: Income

This table presents average income in three periods for each group. We first average income from
purchases observed within each person-period before averaging across people to obtain an average
income per person for each period. Dollar amounts are in December 2006 CPI-adjusted thousands.
Row A tests whether the boom minus pre-boom difference in averages was positive by projecting
person-level income onto an indicator for the boom period in a two-period unbalanced panel of
person-level income. Row B tests whether the difference-in-difference is significant across groups.
Standard errors are clustered at the person level. */**/*** denotes significant at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively.

                                                                      Income
                                                                    Equity
                                                       Sctzn.      Analysts         Lawyers
  Pre-Boom period                   Mean               246.4        360.4            170.4
    (2000-2003)                     Median             180.9        224.7            148.7
                                    SD                 266.8        335.4            114.8
                                    People               83           72               70
  Boom period                       Mean               338.8        418.0            174.0
    (2004-2006)                     Median              210         246.4            131.8
                                    SD                 513.8        501.9            116.4
                                    People               89           58               68
  Bust period                       Mean               369.2        476.1            231.9
    (2007-2010)                     Median             205.8        308.0            151.4
                                    SD                 489.2        433.4            258.6
                                    People               68           56               54
    A) Boom-PreBoom                 Point Est.         92.36        57.62            3.678
                                    t-stat            [1.68]*       [0.76]           [0.19]
                                    N                   172          130              138
                                    R2                 0.012        0.005            0.000
    B) DID                          Point Est.                      34.75            88.68
      Sctzn. minus                  t-stat                          [0.37]           [1.53]
      Control                       N                                302              310
                                    R2                              0.021            0.047




                                                 34
                                         Table 4: Divesting Houses

The first three columns tabulate the number of divestitures per homeowner for each group, by year. Z-
statistics from a two-sample test of differences in proportions with the securitization sample are reported
each group-year for the two control groups. The next two columns report regression-adjusted differences in
the number of divestitures per person each year, where we control for the eight age groups defined in Table
1 as well as an indicator for whether someone is a multi-homeowner at the start of the year, and the sample
period is 2000-2010. The number of people in-sample each year is the number of homeowners at the
beginning of each year for the two groups that are compared. T-statistics computed from person-clustered
standard errors are reported in brackets below each difference. */**/*** represents statistically significant
at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                   Divestitures per person                 Regression-Adjusted
                                                                               Difference
                                                                              Sctzn. minus:
                                           Equity                          Equity
                Year Securitization       Analysts        Lawyers        Analysts         Lawyers
                2000    0.045               0.060           0.018         -0.0117          0.0262
                                           [-0.67]         [1.67]*         [-0.50]          [1.59]
                2001       0.038            0.043           0.020         0.00260          0.0188
                                           [-0.25]          [1.16]         [0.14]           [1.22]
                2002       0.040            0.062           0.030         -0.0109          0.0117
                                           [-0.94]          [0.62]         [-0.48]          [0.71]
                2003       0.045            0.050           0.032         0.00118          0.0191
                                           [-0.21]          [0.78]        [0.059]           [1.10]
                2004       0.040            0.050           0.034        -0.00648         0.00389
                                           [-0.58]          [0.39]         [-0.36]          [0.24]
                2005       0.024            0.044           0.060         -0.0137         -0.0329
                                           [-1.26]        [-1.80]*         [-0.85]        [-1.69]*
                2006       0.030            0.040           0.019        -0.00724         0.00950
                                           [-0.61]          [0.92]         [-0.44]          [0.75]
                2007       0.048            0.031           0.021          0.0227          0.0249
                                            [1.03]         [1.89]*         [1.40]          [1.66]*
                2008       0.061            0.038           0.030          0.0256          0.0253
                                            [1.28]         [1.88]*         [1.44]           [1.50]
                2009       0.045            0.024           0.015          0.0290          0.0314
                                            [1.45]        [2.17]**        [1.91]*         [2.09]**
                2010       0.029            0.020           0.027          0.0117         0.00130
                                            [0.59]          [0.13]         [0.79]          [0.086]
                                                  Multi-homeowner?         0.0632          0.0657
                                                                        [7.71]***        [8.14]***
                                                    Age Indicators?           Y                Y
                                                                 N          5739             6149
                                                         R-Squared          0.022           0.026
                                                            People           633              675



                                                     35
                             Table 5: Buying a Second Home or Swapping Up

The first three columns tabulate the number of second home/swap up purchases per homeowner for each group,
by year. Z-statistics from a two-sample test of differences in proportions with the securitization sample are
reported each group-year other than the securitization group. The next two columns report regression-adjusted
differences in the number of second home/swap up purchases per person each year, where we control for the
eight age groups defined in Table 1 as well as an indicator for whether someone is a multi-homeowner at the
start of the year. The number of people in-sample each year is the number of homeowners at the beginning of
each year for the two groups that are compared, and the sample period is 2000-2010. T-statistics computed from
person-clustered standard errors are reported in brackets below each difference. */**/*** represents statistically
significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                      Second home/swap up purchases per person            Regression-Adjusted
                                                                              Difference
                                                                             Sctzn. minus:
                                          Equity                          Equity
             Year     Securitization     Analysts       Lawyers          Analysts        Lawyers
             2000        0.054             0.055          0.057           0.0144         -0.0110
                                          [-0.05]        [-0.15]           [0.66]         [-0.56]
             2001         0.064            0.086          0.057          0.00639          0.0126
                                          [-0.86]         [0.31]           [0.27]          [0.65]
             2002         0.113            0.075          0.072           0.0652          0.0467
                                           [1.38]         [1.62]        [2.65]***        [2.11]**
             2003         0.080            0.079          0.093           0.0237        -0.00756
                                           [0.04]        [-0.50]           [0.99]         [-0.33]
             2004         0.097            0.081          0.054           0.0339          0.0349
                                           [0.65]       [1.78]*            [1.45]          [1.54]
             2005         0.121            0.070          0.082           0.0685          0.0366
                                         [1.94]*          [1.49]        [2.96]***          [1.62]
             2006         0.073            0.065          0.062           0.0286         0.00232
                                           [0.36]         [0.53]           [1.37]          [0.12]
             2007         0.087            0.066          0.048           0.0372          0.0307
                                           [0.86]       [1.78]*          [1.72]*           [1.50]
             2008         0.045            0.045          0.024           0.0170          0.0133
                                          [-0.01]         [1.44]           [1.02]          [0.91]
             2009         0.026            0.037          0.048          0.00615         -0.0231
                                          [-0.79]        [-1.40]           [0.41]         [-1.48]
             2010         0.029            0.044          0.030         -0.00161        -0.00203
                                          [-1.02]        [-0.08]          [-0.10]         [-0.14]
                                                Multi-homeowner?           0.246           0.262
                                                                        [19.8]***       [18.0]***
                                                   Age Indicators?           Y               Y
                                                                N           5739            6149
                                                        R-Squared          0.183           0.202
                                                           People           633             675



                                                       36
                                                                  Table 6: Robustness
We report the regression-adjusted differences in the annual intensity of a second home purchase or swap-up, where we pool together intensities every other
year in our sample, as in equations (2) through (4). Column 1 compares the intensity of securitization agents versus equity analysts among the sample of
people who work at common firms, and includes firm effects. Columns 2-3 report differences where we condition the sample to homeowners in the New
York City area. Columns 4-5 report differences where the sample is conditioned to homeowners in the Southern California. Columns 6 and 7 report
difference-in-differences estimates of the effect of securitization agents minus equity analysts in Southern California minus New York City. Columns 8
and 9 report differences between securitization agents in Southern California and New York. Standard errors clustered at the person level are reported
below in brackets. */**/*** represents statistically significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                   Firm Effects        NYC Homeowners                S.CA Homeowners             Diff in Diff, S.CA-NYC          Within Securitization
                      Sctzn.
                      Minus          Securitization minus:          Securitization minus:       Sctzn-Eq.Analysts, β(s(t))          S.CA minus NYC
                       (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)           (7)              (8)            (9)
                                                                                                  Second                        Second
                      Equity         Equity                         Equity                      Home or        Second          Home or          Second
           Year      Analysts       Analysts       Lawyers         Analysts      Lawyers        Swap Up      Home Only         Swap Up       Home Only
      2000-2001      0.00583         0.0102         -0.0157         0.0666       0.000837         0.0174       -0.0821           0.0554        -0.0138
                      [0.22]          [0.39]         [-0.61]        [0.73]        [0.016]          [0.17]       [-0.91]           [1.13]        [-0.49]
      2002-2003       0.0924         0.0508         -0.0211         0.0425         0.0243         -0.160        -0.109           0.0587         0.0602
                    [2.81]***        [1.78]*         [-0.64]        [0.35]          [0.39]        [-1.02]       [-0.89]           [0.88]         [0.89]
      2004-2005       0.0246         0.0550          0.0194          0.218         0.0564          0.113         0.103           0.0670         0.0843
                      [0.76]        [2.04]**          [0.64]      [4.15]***         [1.30]       [2.03]**     [2.16]**            [1.54]       [2.09]**
      2006-2007       0.0857         0.0193        -0.00379        0.00608        -0.0392        -0.0755       -0.0468         -0.00780       -0.00210
                     [2.46]**         [0.74]         [-0.14]        [0.10]         [-0.93]        [-1.07]       [-0.69]          [-0.24]       [-0.067]
      2008-2009       0.0344         0.0130         -0.0166         0.0789         -0.103         0.0512        0.0338          -0.0253        -0.0162
                      [1.47]          [0.70]         [-0.69]        [1.62]       [-2.38]**         [1.20]        [1.04]          [-0.79]        [-0.59]
           2010      0.00728        -0.0404         -0.0491         0.0260        -0.0443          0.126        0.0976           0.0413         0.0416
                      [0.25]        [-1.94]*        [-1.76]*        [0.26]         [-0.86]       [2.25]**      [1.97]*            [0.94]         [0.94]
     Multi-HO?           Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y             Y                Y              Y
 Age Indicators?         Y              Y               Y              Y              Y               Y             Y                Y              Y
  Firm Effects?          Y              N               N              N              N               N             N                N              N
              N        1876            1868            1478           373            581            2183          2183             999            999
      R-Squared        0.179          0.122           0.174          0.215          0.280          0.149         0.098            0.191          0.119
         People         214            234             179             52             74            279           279              130            130

                                                                          37
                                          Table 7: Performance Index
Panel A presents summary statistics for the performance index. Averages per person are reported while standard
deviations are reported below in parentheses. Dollar amounts are in nominal thousands. Panel B reports
average performance and regression-adjusted differences in performance weighted by the initial portfolio value.
Regression-adjusted differences are the coefficient on an indicator for the securitization group in a person-level
cross-sectional regression of the dependent variable indicated in first column of the row on a securitization group
indicator and indicators for age controls, with samplings weights equal to the initial portfolio value and robust
standard errors reported in brackets. */**/*** denotes statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels,
respectively.

                                          Panel A: Summary Statistics
                                            Securitization            Equity Analysts            Lawyers
                                         2000q1       2010q4        2000q1       2010q4     2000q1      2010q4
  Number of properties per person         0.603        1.020         0.590        0.993      0.652       1.095
                                         (0.693)      (0.766)       (0.799)      (0.809)    (0.727)     (0.817)
                Value of properties       236.8        751.2         308.2        992.2      191.1       522.6
                                         (390.2)      (893.8)       (568.7)     (1210.1)    (282.0)     (522.4)
                      Cash account        848.0        689.2        1159.7        988.0      470.3       375.1
                                         (874.7)      (975.4)      (1090.6)     (1005.6)    (461.9)     (529.5)
                    Portfolio value      1084.8       1440.4        1467.9       1980.2      661.4       897.7
                                        (1035.9)     (1586.0)      (1214.1)     (1661.3)    (548.9)     (829.1)
                 Number of people                400                        400                     400

                                      Panel B: Performance, 2000q1-2010q4
                                                                                       Reg.Adj. Differences
                                                   Means and Std. Devs.                   Sctzn. minus:
                                                         Equity                         Equity
                                          Sctzn.        Analysts       Lawyers        Analysts       Lawyers
                            Return        0.328           0.349         0.357          -0.0445        -0.0266
                                         (0.197)         (0.169)       (0.221)       [-2.63]***        [-1.08]
              Buy-and-hold return         0.366           0.369         0.377          -0.0171       -0.00848
                                         (0.120)         (0.116)       (0.140)         [-1.72]*        [-0.75]
                Performance index        -0.0378        -0.0199        -0.0198         -0.0274        -0.0181
                                         (0.147)         (0.113)       (0.145)        [-2.19]**        [-1.02]
          Return, 2006q4-2010q4          -0.0736        -0.0457        -0.0814         -0.0225        0.00404
                                         (0.108)        (0.0936)       (0.115)       [-2.68]***        [0.44]
                                N          400             400           400              766            770
          R-squared on perf. index                                                       0.033          0.034




                                                         38
                               Table 8: Within-Securitization Performance Index


This table reports average performance and regression-adjusted differences in performance within subgroups of the
securitization sample, weighted by the initial portfolio value. Regression-adjusted differences are the coefficient on
an indicator for the securitization group in a person-level cross-sectional regression of the dependent variable
indicated in first column of the row on a securitization group indicator and indicators for age controls, with
samplings weights equal to the initial portfolio value and robust standard errors reported in brackets. */**/***
denotes statistically significant at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

                                          Panel A: Sell-side vs. Buy-side
                                                                                        Reg.Adj
                                                             Means and SDs                Diff.
                                                        Sell-side     Buy-side         Sell-Buy
                                             Return       0.275          0.361          -0.0915
                                                         (0.184)        (0.198)       [-3.01]***
                               Buy-and-hold return        0.347          0.377          -0.0315
                                                         (0.118)        (0.120)        [-2.17]**
                                Performance index       -0.0727        -0.0162          -0.0601
                                                         (0.168)        (0.127)        [-2.44]**
                           Return, 2006q4-2010q4        -0.0985        -0.0583          -0.0391
                                                         (0.118)       (0.0990)       [-2.95]***
                                                N          161            239             379
                          R-squared on perf. index                                       0.080

                                   Panel B: Worst and Best Performing Firms
                                                                                        Reg.Adj
                                                         Means and Std. Devs.             Diff.
                                                          Worst         Best          Worst-Best
                                             Return       0.269         0.337           -0.0567
                                                         (0.159)      (0.193)           [-1.76]*
                               Buy-and-hold return        0.347         0.350            0.0112
                                                         (0.135)      (0.103)            [0.49]
                                Performance index       -0.0783       -0.0134           -0.0679
                                                         (0.158)      (0.138)          [-2.29]**
                           Return, 2006q4-2010q4        -0.0957       -0.0619           -0.0433
                                                        (0.0977)      (0.102)         [-2.61]***
                                                N          103           77                174
                          R-squared on perf. index                                        0.102




                                                         39
                                    Table 9: Value-to-Income
This table presents average value-to-income (VTI) at purchase in three periods for each group. We
first average VTI from purchases observed within each person-period before averaging across people
to obtain an average VTI per purchaser for each period. Row A tests whether the boom minus pre-
boom difference in averages was positive by projecting person-level income onto an indicator for the
boom period in a two-period panel of person-level income. Row B tests whether the difference in
difference is significant across groups. Standard errors are clustered at the person level. */**/***
denotes significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                                         VTI
                                                                    Equity
                                                       Sctzn.      Analysts          Lawyers
  Pre-Boom period                    Mean               3.2           2.9               2.9
    (2000-2003)                      Median             3.1           2.7               2.5
                                     SD                 1.3           1.5               1.2
                                     People              65           60                 49
  Boom period                        Mean               3.4           3.1               3.3
    (2004-2006)                      Median             3.0           2.8               3.2
                                     SD                 2.0           1.7               1.7
                                     People              73           45                 46
  Bust period                        Mean               3.1           3.1               2.8
    (2007-2010)                      Median             3.0           3.1               2.8
                                     SD                 1.2           1.4               1.3
                                     People              55           51                 40
    A) Boom-PreBoom                  Point Est.        0.268        0.175              0.400
                                     t-stat            [0.94]       [0.57]            [1.37]
                                     N                  138          105                 95
                                     R2                0.006        0.003              0.019
    B) DID                           Point Est.                     0.0927            -0.132
      Sctzn. minus                   t-stat                         [0.22]            [-0.32]
      Control                        N                               243                233
                                     R2                             0.015              0.015




                                                  40
