                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    FINANCIAL EDUCATION AND CHOICE IN STATE PUBLIC PENSION SYSTEMS

                                              Julie Agnew
                                             Joshua Hurwitz

                                          Working Paper 18907
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w18907


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2013




We acknowledge and are grateful for generous financial support from the National Bureau of Economic
Research. In addition, we are grateful to several individuals who helped us with our data collection
by sharing their connections or offering their insight to us about financial education in retirement plans
and the public pension market. They include Alicia Munnell, Robert Clark, Keith Brainard, Deborah
Dupont, Gay Lynn Bath, Julia Durand, Alison Salka, Donna Blatecky, Wendy Young Carter, Walter
Kelleher, Mark Warshawsky, Michael Jurs and Olivia Mitchell. We are also indebted to the many
public plan providers who completed our survey and responded to our follow up questions. We regret
that we cannot thank them by name but we want to ensure that we maintain their anonymity. We are
very appreciative of their time and their enthusiastic support of this research effort. Some of this research
was conducted while Dr. Agnew was a Senior Visiting Fellow in 2012 at the Australian School of
Business at the University of New South Wales in Sydney, Australia. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Julie Agnew and Joshua Hurwitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Financial Education and Choice in State Public Pension Systems
Julie Agnew and Joshua Hurwitz
NBER Working Paper No. 18907
March 2013
JEL No. D14,G11,H75,J26

                                              ABSTRACT

As more and more public pension systems are shifting away from a defined benefit only framework,
the complexity of the financial decisions facing public employees is increasing. This raises some concerns
about the financial literacy of participants and their ability to make informed decisions. While surveys
addressing financial education in private plans are available, little is known about what types of education
and advice are offered in public plans. This paper fills this gap by presenting new results from the
first National Public Pension Plan Financial Education Survey. The paper focuses specifically on primary
defined contribution and hybrid plans. The results indicate that some form of education or advice is
offered by every surveyed plan and that the sponsoring entity is actively involved in the development
of the programs. However, it appears that legal uncertainties related to advice and education may be
a problem for a few plans. In addition, more rigorous evaluation methods to test programs are needed.
The paper concludes with suggestions for areas of future research.


Julie Agnew
Mason School of Business
College of William and Mary
P.O. Box 8795
Williamsburg, VA 23185
julie.agnew@mason.wm.edu

Joshua Hurwitz
Center for Retirement Research
at Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
hurwitzj@bc.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18907
                   Financial Education and Choice in State Public Pension Systems

1. Introduction
        Until recently, defined benefit plans in the public sector offered public employees a
reliable income in retirement without the responsibility of making important investment choices.
This has changed in recent years as a shift away from defined benefit only systems to public
systems with defined contribution and hybrid plan options has emerged. New employees in these
systems now must make critical financial decisions, such as what type of plan to choose and how
to allocate contributions among asset choices. In the long run, these decisions will directly affect
the employees’ financial well being in retirement. Given the documented low levels of financial
literacy in the U.S., it is natural to wonder if public plans are helping prepare members to make
financial decisions and, if so, what approaches they are taking. While data to answer these
questions exist for the private sector where defined contribution plans prevail, there is little public
information available to address these questions in the public sector. To fill this gap, this paper
presents new survey evidence from large state primary systems with a specific focus on those that
offer plan and investment choice. This survey documents the type of financial education and
advice offered to members. In addition, the evidence from plans with choice is contrasted with
data collected from state systems offering only a defined benefit option.
        This paper is laid out as follows. Section 2 begins by discussing why financial literacy
matters. The section documents the lack of financial literacy in the U.S. and how it may affect
financial decisions. Section 3 continues with a short overview of the literature related to the
effectiveness of financial education and advice associated with retirement plans and describes an
important legal distinction between advice and education that plan sponsors must consider. In
addition, this section addresses the different legal environments facing public and private plans.
Section 4 provides details behind the recent public sector shift away from defined benefit only
systems and offers reasons why this new trend has lagged the private sector movement. In
addition, this section highlights important differences between public and private sector
employees and explains why this matters in the context of financial decisions and literacy. Section
5 presents the new results from the National Public Pension Plan Financial Education Survey and
contrasts these findings with evidence from the private sector. The final section provides
conclusions and implications.

2.   Financial Literacy: Why Might it Matter?
        Studies consistently find that Americans generally lack an understanding of basic financial
concepts. For example, Lusardi and Mitchell (2011a) find in a recent survey of American adults
that less than one third (30 percent) of respondents can correctly answer three basic questions
related to interest rates, inflation and risk diversification. Their findings are in line with earlier
studies (for example, Bernheim 1998; Hilgert et al. 2003). Many studies also find that certain
demographic groups score significantly lower than others and these patterns are consistent across
many countries (Mitchell and Lusardi 2011b). In most studies, women, individuals with less
education and younger people underperform in financial literacy tests. As women and the least
educated individuals currently have the highest poverty rates in old age and statistics suggest that
younger people are not actively saving, these findings are of particular concern (Munnell 2004;
Smeeding et al. 2011).1


1   Workers under 35 have the lowest participation rate in 401(k) plans of any age group (Vanguard 2011)


                                                                                                           2
         Additional research suggests that lack of financial knowledge can influence financial
decision-making related to retirement.2 For example, Lusardi and Mitchell (2011a) find that
individuals who cannot correctly answer their basic financial questions are less likely to be
retirement planners. They confirm the causality from financial literacy to retirement planning
using an instrumental variable approach. Given that research demonstrates that planners
accumulate more retirement wealth than non-planners, it follows that low financial literacy can
lead to inadequate savings outcomes (for example, Lusardi and Beeler 2007; Lusardi and Mitchell
2007 a,b, 2011). In addition, Mottola and Utkus (2008) find that less financially sophisticated
investors are more likely to hold inappropriately conservative asset allocations in their retirement
plans leading to substantial welfare losses. Furthermore, Agnew and Szykman (2005) and Brown,
Farrell and Weisbenner (2011) find that individuals with less financial knowledge are
significantly more likely to invest in the default option. In these cases, if the defaults are not
carefully chosen, suboptimal retirement outcomes may result (Goda and Manchester 2010). Taken
together, these studies highlight why basic financial literacy matters.
         Beyond basic financial knowledge, many Americans also frequently are unaware of the
benefits and features of their own retirement plans and display an inability to correctly answer
basic questions about common asset types (Choi et al. 2011, Gustman and Steinmeir 2004,
Mitchell 1988). We consider plan knowledge and asset awareness to be important components of
financial literacy as it seems unreasonable to expect participants to respond appropriately to plan
incentives, such as employer matches, or effectively allocate their portfolios if they are unaware
of their plan features and asset choices. Research supports this by providing evidence that lack of
plan knowledge relates to poor plan decisions. For example, Agnew et al. (2012) find that
individuals are less likely to participate in their 401(k) plan if they are unaware that their
company offers a match, regardless of the enrollment arrangement.3 Furthermore, Brown et al.
(2011) report that individuals with basic and more advanced knowledge of their plan features are
more likely to make active decisions and not default. Finally, according to Chan and Stevens
(2008), individuals who are knowledgeable about their plan features are more responsive to plan
features than those who are less informed, who are more likely react to their own misperceptions
of the plan features.
         One final consideration is that financial illiteracy may also make it difficult for individuals
to process the financial information they are given. If they are overwhelmed by the information,
they may resort to relying on simple heuristics to make important decisions or procrastinate. In
addition, educational materials and decision aids may not be helpful to them. Research suggests
that those with low financial literacy are more prone to feelings of ‘information overload.’ Recent
work also suggests that satisfaction and regret with decisions made can be linked to information
issues experienced while making the decision (Agnew and Szykman 2011, Brown et al. 2011).
More research is needed to fully understand this relationship but these initial findings suggest that
this is another problem possibly rooted in financial illiteracy.

2
  While this paper focuses on the relationship between financial literacy and financial decisions related to retirement,
Lusardi and Mitchell (2011b) provide a short review of additional literature that links financial literacy with other
financial decisions, such as stock market participation, borrowing behavior and mutual fund selection. In addition,
Calvet, Campbell and Sodini (2009) use an extensive Swedish dataset to relate a financial sophistication index to
three commonly made investment mistakes: underdiversification, inertia in risk taking and the disposition effect in
direct stockholdings.
3
  One important caveat to this study is that the assumption that the direction of causality runs from plan knowledge to
participation was not tested. Therefore, it is possible that participants acquired plan knowledge through their
participation.


                                                                                                                      3
       In total, the evidence presented here provides a convincing argument that not only basic
financial knowledge but plan specific literacy and asset awareness matter. Given the documented
widespread financial illiteracy in the U.S., these results present considerable challenges to plan
sponsors whose members must often make complex financial decisions that will affect their
retirement outcomes.

3.   Financial Education and Advice in Retirement Plans: Regulatory Issues and
     Effectiveness
         Given the complicated financial decisions individuals face in retirement plans, particularly
in defined contribution and hybrid plans, questions naturally arise regarding how and if plan
providers address financial literacy issues and whether their efforts are effective. One important
factor that directly shapes the availability and format of the education and advice provided is the
existing legislation focused on financial education and advice. It is relevant as plans sponsors may
harbor concerns about their liability if their financial programs lead an individual to an
unsatisfactory outcome. Therefore, this section begins with a discussion of the regulatory
environment pertaining to retirement plans and financial programs in both the public and private
sector. We also provide descriptions of different types of financial education and advice options
as defined by law.
         One of the most important pieces of legislation that has significantly affected plan
education and advice programs is the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974
(ERISA). Concerns about conflicts of interest by plan fiduciaries providing advice for a fee
existed when this legislation was drafted. As a result, the act specifically includes ‘prohibited
transaction rules’ disallowing advisors from providing fiduciary-type investment advice that
produces fees or benefits to the advisor or its affiliates. Over the ensuing years, written guidance
from the Department of Labor (DOL) and the passage of the Pension Protection Act of 2006
(PPA) have provided private plan sponsors with additional clarification regarding the definition of
advice, what constitutes education and what type of advice is exempt from the prohibited
transaction rules.4 This additional legislation and guidance has allayed many liability concerns
that in the past may have deterred private plan sponsors from providing education and advice
programs to members. Importantly, this guidance and legislation only covers private plans and
does not cover public plans.
         Public plans face a much more variable regulatory environment than do private plans.
According to an industry legal expert, public plans are subject to common law trust principles
within individual jurisdictions. These same principles relate to the ERISA standards. However,
states vary regarding whether they codify common law trust concepts in statute or rely on case
law interpretation. Thus, public plans do not benefit from one national standardized set of
guidance and legislation as private plans do. ERISA case law and DOL guidance often play a
role when state and local plan sponsors make decisions and, therefore, in practice public plans
often follow these guidelines. However, public plans do not receive any of the legal protections
afforded to private plans under these acts. Thus, it is not known whether liability concerns might
affect the delivery of financial education and advice in some public plans. Therefore, a separate
analysis of the public system is necessary to determine whether the various public plans, do or do
not offer the financial education and advice programs available in private plans.
         So what legally constitutes financial education and advice? As it stands now, guidance
from the DOL states that information about plan features, investment alternatives, investing

4   For more background regarding the PPA and past regulations, please see Tyson and Palumbo (2011).


                                                                                                       4
concepts, and asset allocation portfolios designed for hypothetical individuals are considered to be
education rather than advice. In addition, there is a fine line drawn between what is considered
guidance and advice under the law. According to ERISA, advice is a recommendation that is
immediately actionable. Thus, a recommendation to invest in a specific fund is advice but a nearly
identical recommendation to invest in a fund type without mention of a specific fund is
considered guidance. This is because the latter recommendation is not immediately actionable.
This very subtle distinction is clearly illustrated in Chalmers and Reuter (2012). Finally,
according to the PPA, advisors can provide recommendations under the PPA ‘prohibited
transaction exemption’ if they are affiliated with the underlying investments as long as they
adhere to very specific conditions. Examples include ensuring that an unbiased computer model
that has been certified by an independent third party makes the portfolio recommendations or that
advisors receive level compensation. As a result of this guidance and legislation, plans now may
provide a broad array of educational offerings and advice services to participants. Whether or not
these offerings are effective is a continuing source of active academic research, since the time
plans began offering financial education.5 While not a comprehensive summary, we will now
highlight some of the major findings in this area.
         Not surprisingly, the financial education and advice programs addressed in the academic
research follow the history of the services and education products popular at the time. Early
academic research focuses mainly on traditional educational efforts, including written
communications about the company’s retirement plans, information about the financial markets
and/or financial education seminars. Clark and d`Ambrosio (2003) provide a brief summary of
this literature. They conclude that these early studies show a positive impact of financial
education on savings behavior. Likewise, Bernheim and Garrett (2003) find using a survey of
households that the availability of employer-based financial education relates positively to various
measures of asset accumulation. Additionally Bayer, Bernheim and Scholz (2009) using evidence
from an annual survey of employers offering voluntary savings programs, find that participation
rates and contribution rates are higher for companies that offer frequent seminars and the
education effects are greater for non-highly compensated employees. Lusardi (2004) also finds
financial education seminars can dramatically increase wealth for families with low education and
at the bottom of the wealth distribution.
         On the negative side, Choi, Laibson, Madrian and Metrick (2002) and Clark and
d’Ambrosio (2003) provide evidence that when the effectiveness of employer education is judged
based on subsequent investment behavior and not on intentions following the seminar, the success
is more limited. New insight from the growing literature in behavioral finance is providing
explanations for why this inaction occurs. Most notably, research suggests that individuals follow
the path of least resistance (Choi et al. 2006). Therefore, seemingly simple extra steps, for
example requiring employees to fill in a large enrollment form, may prove enough of an obstacle
to keep many employees from acting on their intentions. In addition, the behavioral finance
literature also provides solutions to help employees overcome the psychological barriers they
face. For example, new studies show that simplifying processes can improve behavior in these
cases. Beshears et al. (2012) test whether providing employees simple “Quick Enrollment” and
“Easy Escalation” cards improves savings behavior in retirement plans. They find significant

5 Hastings, Madrian and Skimmyhorn (2012) provide a thorough overview of literature related to financial

literacy, financial education and economic outcomes across multiple contexts. They find little consensus on the
efficacy of financial education and, like this paper, recommend more rigorous testing of financial education
interventions.


                                                                                                             5
increases in participation and contribution rates. In addition, social marketing approaches are
proving successful. Lusardi, Keller and Keller (2008) consider obstacles to savings in their
university plan and they develop a planning aid to help at-risk new employees overcome self-
control issues which triples participation compared to a control group.
        More recent research tests new services available via the internet, employs field study
approaches and connects survey evidence to administrative data. Clark et al. (2012) provide a
summary of a number of different large-scale projects they are working on that include studies
using these new approaches. Their research supports earlier findings suggesting that financial
education programs improve behavior. They find seminars increase both financial knowledge and
retirement plan knowledge immediately and one year following participation in a seminar. They
also document in preliminary work that individual retirement goals, such as the respondent’s
planned age of retirement, are affected by the new knowledge acquired.
        Using a field study, Clark et al. (2012) test the efficacy of informational flyers mailed to
non-participants and find that this information can significantly increase plan participation for the
youngest workers (aged 18-24) versus the control group. However, they report that a significant
difference was not found for older individuals. This suggests that a single educational effort or
communication approach may not work for all. Choi et al. (2012) also use a field study to test
how e-mail communications can affect behavior. Targeted e-mails are a cost-effective way for
plan sponsors to educate and communicate with employees. In their study, the researchers find
that very small changes, such as the content of e-mail reminders to employees about
contributions, influence savings rates. Both papers demonstrate the value of field-testing
educational efforts for effectiveness.
        Finally, the guidance from DOL and the passage of the PPA have made advice services
more available. These advice services come in many forms, including face-to-face consultations,
on-line advice engines and managed account services that allow the participant to hand over the
management of their 401(k) portfolio to an outside party. Research into these products suggests
that different types of advice appeal to different types of people. For example, several studies
find that participants opting to use online advice and managed accounts tend to differ based on
demographics (Agnew 2009; Madamba and Utkus 2012; Financial Engines and Hewitt 2010). In
terms of brokerage services, Chalmers and Reuter (2012) find that younger, less highly educated
and less highly paid employees prefer a plan offering broker services to one without.6
        As far as effectiveness, the results vary. Ameriks (2001) conducts an analysis of the
influence of a software-guided system and finds that the advice sessions have “a significant,
positive impact on the likelihood that participants will reallocate assets or begin directing
contributions to recommended investment accounts that were not being used prior to the guidance
session.” Two newer studies written by financial firms who provide these services suggest that
managed accounts lead to better portfolios with less extreme allocations, as well as less assets
invested in company stock (Madamba and Utkus 2012; Financial Engines and Hewitt 2010). In
addition, Chalmers and Reuter (2012) find marked differences between the broker portfolios and
non-broker portfolios in public pension plans, with the former associated with greater risk.
Finally, participants may be more responsive to advice if they seek it. In an experiment, Hung and

6 Given that the focus of this paper is on retirement plans, which face strict rules about the type of advice that

can be provided, this paper will not summarize the recent literature on financial advisors in the retail market
where less restrictions exist. There are a number of recent papers that address this area (for example,
Haliassos, Hackethal, Jappelli 2011, Mullainthan, Noeth and Schhoar 2012, Bhattacharya, Hackethal, Kaesler,
Loos, Meyer forthcoming).


                                                                                                                     6
Yoong (2010) find that defined contribution participants that actively seek advice are more likely
to follow the advice versus those who receive unsolicited advice.7
        As is stands now, the extant research provides evidence that retirement plan financial
education appears to work and offers mixed evidence regarding advice. The findings also raise
questions and suggest that one-size-fits-all approaches may not work for communicating
educational facts or providing services. That said, the promising new trend towards field studies
and the large-scale projects underway, as well as the opportunity to incorporate behavioral finance
theory into educational methods, suggests that many of these questions will be answered in the
future. Importantly, the literature stream will benefit from the more rigorous testing methods
afforded by the field study approach which can be used to test new ideas as well as confirm old
findings.


4.   The Public Sector versus the Private Sector: Plan Trends and Employee Types
         The recent shift towards defined contribution and hybrid plans in the public sector is well
documented (Beshears et al. (2011) and Munnell (forthcoming)). This transition away from
defined benefit plans has significantly lagged movement in the private market, where in 2008
approximately 69 percent of private sector workers with pension coverage were covered by only a
defined contribution option and not a defined benefit plan. In comparison, 97 percent of covered
state and local public workers in 2010 were covered by a DB plan. However, this statistic is
changing as now 14 states currently offer a primary defined contribution plan component for
some or all of their employees. The recent global financial crisis has accelerated the change as
fiscal realities have prompted many more states to review their pension systems.
         Munnell (forthcoming) attributes the delay in the public transition to defined contribution
plans to several factors including, but not limited to, the public sector’s relatively higher
unionization, more stable firm structure, and less costly regulatory environment relative to the
private sector. She also notes that change in the public sector often requires a lengthy political
process, which is an obstacle not faced by private firms. Finally, she highlights the distinct nature
of the public sector work force, which differs from the private sector across several dimensions.
For example, public workers tend to be older, more educated and have longer job tenures. In
addition, using the University of Michigan’s 1996 Panel Study of Income Dynamics, Munnell
(forthcoming) finds highly risk-averse individuals are also significantly more likely to work in the
public sector.8 She theorizes that employees who are more risk averse, older and with longer job
tenures are more likely to favor a defined benefit system. It follows, she contends, that the public
sector may have continued to offer defined benefit plans to attract this type of employee.
Statistics also show that a higher percentage of public employees are women compared to the
private sector.

7
  This is consistent with findings in the organizational behavior literature. For a comprehensive review, see
Bonaccio and Dalal (2006).
8 Munnell’s findings are supported by a 2010 survey conducted by ING of 1,026 public employees (excluding

K‐12 teachers) (ING 2011). The study finds that only 26 percent of the respondents indicate that they are risk‐
takers. Furthermore, using the Merrill‐Reid personality typing system, ING reports that a majority consider
themselves good team players that prefer stability to risk. Only 9 percent categorized themselves as a
“Director,” who among other things, is confident, decisive, determined and a risk‐taker. When asked about
their retirement investment style, 50 percent considered themselves conservative, meaning they wanted to
protect savings and avoid losses. Forty four percent were moderate investors and six percent considered
themselves aggressive investors.


                                                                                                              7
        Table 1 presents an overview of the different types of primary plans offered in each state.
To our knowledge, it is the most comprehensive summary of the major public state plans in the
U.S. The information in this table was collected from various plan documents.9 In the table, under
the column header ‘Primary Plan Options,’ each plan is sorted into a category based on the plan’s
type (either DC (defined contribution), DB (defined benefit) or hybrid) and how the plan is
selected or not selected by employees (Mandatory or Choice). The ‘Mandatory DC’ and
‘Mandatory Hybrid’ categories imply that employees have no choice but to participate in that
specific plan. Similarly, a ‘DB only’ categorization indicates that only a DB option is available to
the employees. The categories ‘DC choice,’ ‘DB choice,’ and ‘Hybrid choice’ indicate that the
plan is part of a ‘choice set’ from which employees can select their retirement plan. The choice
sets are bolded and the default option is denoted with superscript D. It is possible for a state plan
to be mandatory for some employees and part of a choice set for others. In this case, both
categories are put in the column and the order reflects how many employees have this option
available. The category that describes the situation for most of the plan members is listed first.
        This table immediately reveals one of the complications of state retirement systems. In
many states, there is not one plan available to all employees but often many different plans
offered to workers based on their type of employment. This is one reason that understanding the
state public plan system is difficult. In addition, plan eligibility may be based on time of hire. In
some cases, new employees may be required to join plans that offer choice, while older
employees may be restricted to their original options or given an option to change.10 It all depends
on the state. To add further complexity, in some states, certain employees may be able to choose
their type of plan, while at the same time other employees may be required to participate in a plan
chosen by the state. This is the current case in Virginia where a subset of state employees,
including higher education workers, political appointees and school superintendents, may choose
to join an optional DC plan, the ORP, instead of the DB plan that is mandatory for other state
employees. This is evident by looking at the ‘Primary Plan Options’ column under the Virginia
state heading. For Virginia Retirement System (VRS), ‘DB only’ is the first category that is listed
and applies to most employees. ‘DB choice’ is the second category in bold that only applies to the
subset. Employees eligible for the ORP plans that choose not to participate are defaulted into the
VRS, as indicated by the superscript D next to ‘DB choice.’ In 2014, new state and local
employees and teachers in the state will be enrolled in a new Virginia hybrid plan, with once
again a small subset given the choice between the current ORP and the new hybrid.
        With regard to financial education, it can be argued that the recent public plan trend
towards more choice increases the need for financial literacy in its membership. While the public
workforce tends to be more educated, a characteristic generally associated with greater financial
literacy, there are certain public constituencies that may need more assistance than others. For
example, several public plans cater to K-12 teachers only. ING present statistics from their K-12
public plans documenting that this group tends to be predominately women. This is a group
identified by research as having a higher risk for low financial literacy. In addition, the ING
survey finds that a large majority of this group have not developed a plan for retirement (ING
2010). Finally, it is still an outstanding question whether the risk aversion of public workers in
general adversely influences their financial choices or not. If as a result they invest in

9
  The majority of information in Table 1 was collected from state and plan-level Comprehensive Annual Financial
Reports (CAFRs), the Public Plans Database (2010), and pension system websites.
10
   In some cases, participants in a closed primary plan classified as “Mandatory” in Table 1, may have had the option
to switch to a newly established plan.


                                                                                                                    8
inappropriately conservative portfolios, Mottola and Utkus (2008) calculate very high associated
welfare costs with this strategy. Therefore, depending on the findings, financial education may
also be helpful in this context.


5. The National Public Pension Plan Financial Education Survey
        For years, the Plan Sponsor Council of America (PSCA) has conducted annual surveys on
education provided in private plans. In their 2010 report, they highlight the most common
approaches to education among these plans, provide information regarding the different program
goals and offer statistics related to the developers of the programs (PSCA 2010). Unfortunately,
this type of information is not readily available for public plans and, as a result, little is known
about the educational and advice practices in this sector. Seeking to fill this gap, we fielded over
the January to June 2012 time frame the first National Public Pension Plan Financial Education
Survey. The survey focuses specifically on DC and hybrid state plans. While decisions associated
with defined benefit plans sometimes can be complicated, DC and hybrid plans by design require
many more choices influencing retirement outcomes. As a result, it is arguable that education and
advice are more necessary in these types of savings vehicles.
        Table 2, Panels A and B outline the state primary DC and hybrid plans targeted for the
survey. We specifically chose large primary state systems. We exclude plans serving very small
constituencies.11 However, we do include new primary state plans that at the moment may be
small but can be expected to cover a substantial number of employees within the next several
years. Table 2, Panel A provides a list of the mandatory primary state plans we study while Table
2, Panel B provides a list of the targeted plans that are offered as part of a selection of plans
available to employees. These tables include the market value of the plans assets.
        At first glance, these tables may initially lead to some confusion as one state’s name may
appear under multiple subcategories. For example, Michigan appears under both ‘Mandatory
Hybrid’ and ‘Mandatory DC’ subcategories in Table 2, Panel A. A closer look reveals that the
official plan names that follow the Michigan name in the tables are different. It is these specific
plan names that are the keys to understanding the tables. By referring back to Table 1, readers
can learn more about each official plan and the types of employees eligible to participate in them.
For example, Table 2 lists Michigan’s mandatory DC plan as the State of Michigan Defined
Contribution plan. Turning back to Table 1 and moving to the Michigan section, we see that this
plan is open to all employees formerly eligible for the SERS, JRS, or LRS DB plans and opened
in 1997. Under Table 2’s mandatory hybrid plan section, the Michigan MPSERS-PPP plan is
listed. Once again, we can learn from Table 1 the eligibility for this plan. We find this plan serves
only employees of public schools, district libraries, and certain schools and universities.
        In addition to the DC and hybrid plans listed in Table 2 Panel A and B, we did solicit
responses from major defined benefit systems and city systems. Our full dataset includes
approximately 50 percent of the state defined benefit only systems. While not the focus of our
research, we will discuss some of the anecdotal findings from their responses later on.
Importantly, before survey respondents took the survey, they were told upfront that their
responses would be anonymous and aggregated. This was necessary to ensure a high response
rate. To adhere to this condition, we will not present results by plan level nor highlight which
plans completed the survey.

11
  We also exclude privately managed optional defined contribution plans, such as those commonly available for
faculty and staff in higher education.


                                                                                                                9
         Table 3 provides the aggregated statistics for our survey respondents and our survey
population. For mandatory DC and hybrid plans, we have responses for 80 percent of the plans,
representing roughly 54 percent of active participants. For DC and hybrid plans that are part of a
choice set offered to members, we collected responses from 87 percent of plans, representing 96
percent of active participants. Combined, this equates to a response rate of 84 percent of the
possible 25 plans and 69 percent of active participants. For DB plans that are offered as a choice
set, we have data on 89 percent of the active population.
         Before moving to the discussion of the financial education programs, Table 4 provides
information about important features of the plans surveyed, such as the presence of automatic
enrollment and automatic escalation, whether a default investment option is offered and vesting.
In addition, it provides details regarding what type of employee (new hires only or most
employees) have access to these options. This information is relevant as these features are useful
ways to guide behavior in plans, especially if members are not financially literate. Practitioners
often debate whether certain features like automatic enrollment and automatic escalation should
be used as substitutes or complements to financial education and advice. Not surprisingly, when
plans are mandatory, automatic enrollment is always offered, whereas this is not the case when
plans are part of a choice set. In the latter case, it is likely that the small percentage of plans that
offer automatic enrollment in the choice contexts are the default DC and hybrid plans in the set.
Automatic escalation is not a feature in most plans regardless of the type. Data presented in
Beshears et al. (2011) provides some insight for this finding. In their study of primary defined
contribution plans focused on general employees, they find that plans often have mandatory
contribution levels for employees. Thus, the employee does not set the contribution level nor, in
some cases, have the ability to increase it. As a result, automatic escalation in these instances is
not necessary. Another interesting finding is that default investment options exist in plans offered
in a choice set. This is also consistent with Beshears et al. (2011) findings that many opt-in plans
also have a default investment option. Some plans do offer matches but they are not offered
universally. In addition, most plans come with vesting requirements.
         Table 5 combines the choice and mandatory DC and hybrid plans and reports the
aggregated responses to questions regarding education and advice programs. Of those surveyed,
all of the plans offered some sort of financial education and/or advice with the most popular
option being one-on-one telephone consultations. The table sorts the options available by the
percentage of actives with access to each option. The table also includes an additional measure,
the percentage of plans offering the educational program. This allows comparisons with the
PSCA data. Often, but not always, the popularity of the option follows the same ranking for these
two metrics. The next most popular options available to over 90 percent of the surveyed
respondents include group seminars, periodic newsletters, live webinars, and new hire
information packets. Additionally, approximately three-quarters of actives have access to third
party online financial advice. One-on-one in person consultations and internet options (financial
education web component and online videos) are offered to little more than half of actives. While
over half the plans use e-mails, it only equates to 19 percent of the active member population.
This could indicate smaller plans are using this option more than larger plans. The least popular
approach is social media. PSCA’s 2010 results report that for private plans, the most popular
education provided includes enrollment kits (70.2 percent of plans), seminars/workshops (63.5
percent), internet/intranet (59.3 percent), e-mail (52.5 percent) and fund performance sheets (44
percent). In addition, PSCA reports that 57.6 percent of plans offer investment advice.12 Of those
12
     All percentages from the PSCA are as a percent of private profit sharing and 401(k) plans surveyed.


                                                                                                           10
offering investment advice, 58.9 percent offer one-on-one counseling, 62 percent offer advice
through the internet, 55.5 percent offer a telephone hotline. Less popular are web conferences
offered by 18.2 percent.
        In terms of who develops the educational programs, we asked plans whether they created
the programs in-house or contracted a third party to develop them. A third party could include the
contracted record keeper or a company hired specifically to help with education. Table 6 presents
the results. This table is sorted in the same order as Table 5, therefore the most available options
to actives are listed first. The percentages are based on the number of plans that offer each option.
Therefore, the rows sum to 100 percent. Interestingly, the public plans are very involved in the
development of their programs. The majority of the programs are either developed by the plan in-
house or in conjunction with a third party. In most cases, with the understandable exception of
third party online advice, less than 35 percent of financial education is completely outsourced to a
third party for development. In contrast, the 2010 PSCA report indicates that only 36 percent of
retirement planning educational programs are offered by the plan sponsor. In a text response, we
asked what third party groups were employed. Interestingly, a few plans had several different
providers creating their financial education programs. For example, one firm designed their
workshops, another firm handled communications and a third firm provided the advice.
        Figure 1 provides more insight into the different topics that are covered. Most types of
educational offerings cover both plan specific and general financial knowledge topics.13 Table 7,
Panels A and B include more detail regarding the popularity of the topics within each main area
(plan specific and general). Table 7, Panel A provides information about plan specific topics.
Plans were permitted to choose more than one topic. In most cases, the most popular plan specific
topic is a plan overview, with plan investment options and plan distribution options competing for
second. Third party online advice is the only educational program that is more likely to cover plan
investment options and distribution options than provide a plan overview. Regarding general
financial topics (Table 7, Panel B), retirement planning dominates all other topics in all but one
case, with diversification, overview of assets and basic investment principles generally ranking
second or third. Other topics that are covered by some plans but are not as popular as those listed
include debt management, inflation, compound interest, and budgeting.
        Finally, the plans list their main goals for financial education as improving overall
retirement outcomes (95 percent), highlighting the importance of retirement savings (95 percent)
and helping members make better investment decisions (90 percent). The PSCA reports list the
most common reasons plans cite for their plan education is to increase participation (79 percent),
to increase appreciation for the plan (77 percent) and to increase deferrals (74 percent). Increasing
participation and increasing deferrals could both fit under the classification of improving overall
retirement outcomes. Thus, the results are fairly consistent. However, increasing the appreciation
for the plan was not an option provided as a possible response in the survey so it is not clear
whether this is a factor for public plans.
        We also asked respondents whether they measured the success of their programs, and their
responses are in Table 8. As the earlier literature review suggests, this is relevant because not all
educational methods are effective overall or for specific groups. We find roughly eighty percent
of our DC and hybrid plans surveyed measure success. Based on the total surveyed DC and
hybrid plans indicating they measure success, about 90 percent use surveys and attendance
records to assess performance. These approaches are often useful for capturing participant

13
  Some the plans indicate that they do not offer plan specific or general financial education topics. We are following
up with these plans to confirm their responses.


                                                                                                                   11
satisfaction but, as previously discussed in Section 3, can fall short if participants are not
following through with what they have learned. In terms of following actual member decisions
made, about 40 percent of plans track default rates and just 35 percent follow actual participant
behavior. Only two plans have employed an experimental field study to test for statistically
significant changes in behaviors.
         With regards to tracking defaults, the Florida Retirement System (FRS) provides a useful
case study to illustrate how plans measure success related to defaults. The FRS gave us
permission to include and discuss their results. For background, the FRS is the fourth largest
public pension plan in the U.S. in size and since 2002 has required new public employees within
the first five months of hire to decide whether they want to participate in the DB plan, called the
FRS Pension Plan, or the DC option, referred to as the FRS Investment Plan. This is a critical
retirement decision for new employees, complicated by the fact that they have limited time to
make their choice, while at the same time starting a new job. If no election is made, workers are
defaulted into the Pension Plan. These participants are also given one 2nd election opportunity to
switch plans during their active career.14 The State Board of Administration of Florida (SBA)
manages the Investment Plan and has the responsibility to help members choose the appropriate
plan through financial education and planning tools. An important goal set by the SBA is to
promote active and informed decision-making. As a result, they track the default choices made by
new employees and strive to ensure that members defaulting do so actively.15 Towards this goal,
they hired a third party in 2005 to improve and simplify their plan communications using focus
groups to guide the process. They refined the communication and education products over the
2007-2010 time frame. Figure 2 presents a chart that displays how the default rate has declined
over time. They estimate that up to 41 percent of those listed as defaulters did so actively. The
declining default rate suggests that the communications methods may have worked. However,
further econometric analysis is warranted to judge significance. Regardless, Florida provides an
excellent example of how one plan is actively following and evaluating decision-making around
their education program. They are taking an important step beyond measuring satisfaction with
educational materials that others may wish to follow.
         Finally, respondents were given the opportunity to provide free text responses to discuss
the issues they face offering educational programs and what they would like to know about other
public plans. The responses to questions asking respondents what they view as the single largest
problem with financial education gives valuable insight into the challenges facing plans. Several
plans mentioned that their members’ lack of financial literacy/sophistication was an issue, as was
helping a diverse membership that includes a broad range of investing expertise and interest level.
Several plans mentioned that getting the message to start saving early for retirement was difficult
to deliver, as well as encouraging individuals to act on the information they are given. In
particular, reaching young people was a common concern. Two plans also mentioned budget
constraints.
         Interestingly, one plan mentioned concern over crossing the line into financial advice.
This comment reveals that the legal issues discussed earlier related to education and advice may
affect some public plans. Finally, two plans mentioned the need to better reach out to members at
important life milestones. The number of responses to the question asking plans what they would

14 After eight years of service in the FRS Pension Plan or FRS Investment Plan (five years for members hired prior to
July 1, 2011), members may also choose to participate in the FRS Investment Plan Hybrid Option.
15
   This means their intention is to participate in the Pension Plan and they knowingly allowed themselves to be
defaulted into it.


                                                                                                                 12
like to know about what other plans are doing demonstrated a general interest in learning more
about best practices. Methods for evaluating plan success, encouraging young workers to engage
and save, and promoting supplemental savings were topics of interest. One plan wanted to know
whether members value in-person education or if they prefer new electronic methods.
Additionally, they wondered if life events are targeted.
        Overall, the survey results suggest that large state primary public DC and hybrid systems
are offering a variety of education programs and that the sponsors play a large role in their
development. Plans are interested in measuring success but are more likely to use standard
approaches like satisfaction surveys than more rigorous methods like tracking behavior or field
studies. Nevertheless, the responses indicate an interest in improving educational approaches and
measuring performance.
        Finally, we did gather data on 40 primary state defined benefit only plans, representing
about 5 million active members and $1 trillion in market assets. We close this section by
contrasting our previous findings with this sample. To create our target population of defined
benefit only plans we used Boston College’s Public Plans Database (PPD). This database
provides actuarial, financial, and membership data on 107 state plans, representing over 90
percent of total actives and assets covered by state plans. From the database, we identified 92 ‘DB
only’ plans. This target sample excludes the plans classified as ‘DB Choice’ and encompasses
about 10 million active members and $2 trillion in market assets.16 As a result, our DB only
sample from the survey represents 43 percent of the PPD sample of DB only plans, and about 50
percent of its active members and market assets. We find that not all of the DB only plans
surveyed offer financial education, 80 percent of our surveyed sample does compared to 100
percent of our DC and hybrid sample. Plans not offering education were asked whether they
would like to know about what other plans are doing with financial education. Interestingly, two
DB plans not offering financial education specifically asked about the legal implications of
offering education. Both were interested in learning more about the regulation, which indicates
that there is some confusion about what is acceptable. Turning to those DB plans offering
education, it is not surprising that the relative importance of some goals are different relative to
the DC and hybrid plans. For example, when we look at our sample of 32 defined benefit only
plans offering education, the importance of helping people make better investment decisions is
only listed by about 40 percent of the plans. That said improving overall retirement outcomes (81
percent) and highlighting the importance of retirement saving (69 percent) are still chosen by a
large number of plans and are consistent with the earlier sample. In general, comments from all
types of DB plans echoed concerns voiced by earlier plans, such as how to engage the younger
population. Finally, one plan expressed interest in how plans successfully locate member e-mails.
Anecdotally, the researchers found that some very large plans had similar issues, making use of
targeted e-mails and follow ups very difficult.

6. Conclusions and Implications
        Prior literature suggests that financial literacy is low in the United States. This is a concern
as the shift from defined benefit plans to defined contribution and hybrid arrangements continues
in both the private and public sector. While the shift is near complete in the private sector, the
public sector has lagged behind and only now is experiencing a major transition. Given the
complicated decisions employees face in non-DB plans, employers must carefully consider


16   When possible we provided data updates to the database results.


                                                                                                     13
whether to offer financial education and advice to help their members with important choices. The
literature suggests that these efforts can be helpful and new research applying more rigorous
testing of effectiveness through field studies promises to provide greater insight into what
methodologies will lead to better outcomes.
        While surveys addressing financial education in private plans are available, little is known
about what is offered in public plans. In addition, given the different characteristics of public
sector workers and the variable legal environment facing public plans with respect to education
and advice programs, it cannot be assumed that the private plan findings apply directly to public
plans. To address this, this paper provides a new analysis of the public market, specifically
focusing on large state systems with primary DC and/or hybrid plans. We find that some form of
education or advice is offered in every surveyed plan and that the sponsoring entity is very
involved in the development of the program. However, it appears that legal uncertainties may be a
problem for a few plans.
         While many plans attempt to measure success, these plans most frequently use methods
such as seminar attendance and surveys to judge performance, which at times can be poor
measures of effectiveness. Only 41 percent tracked the default rate on important decisions and 35
percent tracked actual post education behavior. These low percentages leave room in many plans
for more rigorous evaluation.
        The text responses by survey respondents provide further insight into the challenges
facing public plans and indicate that many plans are seeking ways to improve their financial
education. In some cases, budget issues can make this a difficult task. In fact, seventy one
percent of our sample indicate that with an unlimited budget they would direct more to financial
education. Additionally, many plans of different types indicated in the survey that they would be
willing to allow further analysis of their approaches to education. In light of this expressed
interest, budgetary concerns and desire for improvement, public plans may benefit by forming
partnerships with academics interested in testing financial education delivery methods. Such
partnerships would allow plans to rigorously test their offerings in a cost effective manner while
providing academics an opportunity to further research in their field. Published research would
also benefit other plans developing programs.
        For academics, studying financial education in public plans provides many interesting
research opportunities. Important areas of study that require more in depth analysis include
determining what types of members are attracted to various types of educational programs. Is
there a bias? Are members that are more inclined to act also more likely to attend events or use
resources available? If so, are there effective ways to reach those who do not voluntarily attend or
seek assistance? Could mandatory training work? Given the documented risk aversion of public
employees, are there more effective ways of reaching this group? What role can e-mail reminders
and just-in-time education play in nudging members into action? Can financial education and
advice lead to more long-term satisfaction with the decisions that are made? What particular
educational methods are most likely to engage and motivate younger employees? These are just a
few of the important unanswered questions in this area.
        In conclusion, this paper provides a basic review of current educational and advice
practices in the public sector and identifies areas in need of improvement. These areas of concern
present opportunities for academics and sponsors of public plans to work together to help
members achieve better retirement outcomes. Given the new analysis methods being used in the
research literature and the advances in the behavioral finance field, the future for better program




                                                                                                 14
evaluation and the potential for developing new and innovative ways to educate and provide
advice looks promising.




                                                                                             15
References:

Agnew, Julie R. 2009. Personalized retirement advice and managed accounts: Who uses
   them and how does advice affect behavior in 401(k) plans? Working Paper.
Agnew, J.R., Szykman, L.R., 2005. Asset allocation and information overload: The influence of
    information display, asset choice, and investor experience. Journal of Behavioral Finance 6,
    57–70.
Agnew, J.R., Szykman, L. R., 2011. Annuities, financial literacy and information overload, in:
    Mitchell, O.S., Lusardi, A. (Eds.) Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security
    and the Financial Marketplace. Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 158-180.
Agnew, J.R., Szykman, L.R., Utkus, Stephen P., Young, Jean A., 2012. Trust, plan knowledge
    and 401(k) savings behavior. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 11, 1-20.
Ameriks, J., 2001. The response of TIAA-CREF participants to software driven asset allocation
    guidance. TIAA-CREF Working Paper 3-080101.
Bayer, P.J., Bernheim, B.D., Scholz, J.K., 2009. The Effects of Financial Education in the
    Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Employers. Economic Inquiry 47, 605–624.
Bernheim, B.D., 1998. Financial illiteracy, education and retirement savings, in: Mitchell, O.S.,
    Schieber, S.J. (Eds.), Living with Defined Contribution Pensions. University of Pennsylvania
    Press, Philadelphia, pp. 38–68.
Beshears, J., Choi, J.J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B.C., 2011. Behavioral economics perspectives on
    public sector pension plans. Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10, 315–336.
Beshears, J., Choi, J.J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B.C., 2012. Simplification and Savings. Review of
    Finance, 1–38.
Bernheim, B.D., Garrett, D.M., 2003. The effects of financial education in the workplace:
    evidence from a survey of households. Journal of Public Economics 87, 1487–1519.
Bhattacharya, U., Hackethal, A., Kaelser, S., Loos, B., Meyer, S., 2012. Is unbiased financial
    advice to retail investors sufficient? Answers from a large field study. Review of
    Financial Studies 25, 975‐1032.
Bonaccio, S., Dalal, R.S., 2006. Advice taking and decision‐making: An integrative literature
    review, and implications for the organizational sciences. Organizational Behavior and
    Human Decision Processes 101, 127–151.
Brown, J.R., Farrell, A.M., Weisbenner, S.J., 2011. The downside of defaults. Working Paper.
Calvet, L.E., Campbell, J.Y., Sodini, P., 2009. Measuring the Financial Sophistication of
    Households. The American Economic Review 99, 393–398.
Chalmers, J., Reuter, J. 2012. What is the impact of financial advisors on retirement portfolio
    choices and outcomes? Working Paper.
Chan, S., Stevens A. H., 2008. What you don't know can't help you: Pension knowledge and
    retirement decision-making. The Review of Economics and Statistics 90, 253-266.
Choi, J.J., Haisley, E., Kurkoski, J., Massey, C., 2012. Small cues change savings choices.
    Working Paper.
Choi, J.J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B.C., Metrick, A. 2002. Defined contribution pensions: Plan
    rules, participant decisions and the path of least resistance, in: Poterba, J. (Ed.) Tax Policy
    and the Economy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 67-113.
Choi, J.J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B.C., Metrick, A. 2006. Saving for retirement on the path of
   least resistance, in: McCaffrey, E. and Slemrod, J. (Eds.) Behavioral Public Finance: Toward
   a New Agenda, New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 304-351.


                                                                                                16
Choi, J.J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B.C., 2011. $100 bills on the sidewalk: suboptimal investment in
    401(k) plans. The Review of Economics and Statistics 93, 748–763.
Clark, R. L., d'Ambrosio, M.B., 2003. Ignorance is not bliss: The importance of financial
    education.TIAA-CREF Institute Research Dialogue 78, 1-14.
Clark, R.L., Morrill, M.S., Allen, S.G., 2012. Effectiveness of Employer‐Provided Financial
    Information: Hiring to Retiring. American Economic Review 102, 314–318.
Financial Engines and Hewitt Associates. 2010. Help in defined contribution plans, Industry
    Report. website:
    http://corp.financialengines.com/employer/DCHelpReport_Jan2010.pdf
Goda, G.S., Manchester, C.F., 2012. Incorporating employee heterogeneity into default rules for
    retirement plan selection. NBER Working Paper 16099.
Gustman, A.L., Steinmeier, T.L., 2004. What people don't know about their pensions and Social
    Security, in: Gale, W.G., Shoven, J.B., Warshawsky, M. (Eds.), Private Pensions and Public
    Policies. Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.
Haliassos, M., Hackethal, A., Jappelli, T., 2011. Financial Advisors: A Case of Babysitters?,
    Working Paper.
Hastings, J.S., Madrian, B.C., Skimmyhorn, W.L., 2012. Financial Literacy, Financial Education
    and Economic Outcomes. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18412.
Hilgert, M.A., Hogarth, J.M., Beverly, S.G., 2003. Household financial management: The
    connection between knowledge and behavior. Federal Reserve Bulletin.
Hung, A. A., Yoong, J.K.,2010. Asking for help: Survey and experimental evidence on financial
    advice and behavior change. Rand Working Paper WR-714-1.
ING Retirement Research Institute. 2011. Public employees in focus: ING studies the economic
    outlook of today's government workers. website:
    https://ing.us/rri/sites/ing.us.rri/files/versioned/Public-Employees-in-Focus-White-Paper.pdf
ING Retirement Research Institute. 2010. The ING Educator's Economic Index: Lessons learned
    about today's educators. website: http://ing.us/rri/ing-studies/ing-educators-economic-index
Lusardi, A. 2004. Saving and the effectiveness of financial education, in: Mitchell, O.S.,Utkus, S.
    (Eds.), Pension Design and Structure: New Lessons from Behavioral Finance. Oxford
    University Press: Oxford, pp. 157-184.
Lusardi, A., Beeler, J., 2007. Redefining retirement: How will boomers fare? in: Madrian, B.C.,
    Mitchell, O.S., Soldo, B. (Eds.), Redefining Retirement: How Will Boomers Fare. Oxford
    University Press, pp. 271–295.
Lusardi, A, Keller, P. A., Keller, A. M.. 2008. New ways to make people save: A social
    marketing approach. in: Lusardi, A. (Eds.) Overcoming the saving slump: How to increase
    the effectiveness of financial education and savings programs, Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press. 209–36.
Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O.S., 2007a. Financial literacy and retirement preparedness: Evidence and
    Implications for Financial Education. Business Economics 42, 35–44.
Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O.S., 2007b. Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The Roles of Planning,
    Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth. Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 205–224.
Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O.S., 2011a. Financial literacy and retirement planning in the United States.
    Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10, 509–525.
Lusardi, A., Mitchell, O.S., 2011b. Financial literacy around the world: an overview. Journal of
    Pension Economics and Finance 10, 497–508.
Madamba, A., Utkus, S., 2012. Professionally managed allocations: Participant usage and impact.


                                                                                                 17
   Vanguard Center for Retirement Research. website: institutional.vanguard.com
Mitchell, O.S., 1988. Worker Knowledge of Pension Provisions. Journal of Labor Economics 6,
   21–39.
Mullainthan, S., Noeth, M., Schoar, A., 2012. The Market For Financial Advice: An Audit Study.
   NBER Working Paper 17929, 1–34.
Munnell, A.H., 2004. Why are so Many Older Women Poor? Boston College CRR‐JTF Working
   Paper No. 10.
Munnell, A, H. 2012 (forthcoming). State and Local Pensions: What Now? Brookings
   Institution Press: Washington D.C.
PSCA. 2010. PSCA’s 54th Annual Survey of Profit Sharing and 401(k) Plans. website
   http://www.cvent.com/events/54th-annual-survey/event-summary-
   b54e57da73624d14a27e681d848eb068.aspx
Public Plans Database. 2000‐2010. Center for Retirement Research at Boston College and
   Center for State and Local Government Excellence. Chestnut Hill, MA, and Washington,
   D.C.
Smeeding, T., Thompson,J. Levanon,A., Esra Burak, E., 2011. Poverty and Income Inequality in
   the Early Stages of the Great Recession. in: Grusky, D., Western, B. and Wimer, C. (Eds.)
   The Great Recession. New York, Russell Sage,pp. 83-126.
Tyson, W.A., Palumbo, M. 2011. DOL issues final participant advice regulations. Vanguard
   Strategic Retirement Consulting Regulatory Brief.
Mottola, G. R., Utkus, S.P. 2008. Red, Yellow and Green: Measuring the Quality of 401(k)
   Portfolio Choices, in: Lusardi, A. (Ed.) Overcoming the Saving Slump: How to Increase the
   Effectiveness of Financial Education and Savings Programs. Chicago: University of Chicago
   Press, pp. 119-139.
Vanguard Institutional Investor Group, 2011. How America Saves 2010.




                                                                                           18
Table 1: Primary State Plans
This table provides a summary of all the major primary statewide retirement savings plans and also includes many smaller state plans
administered only for certain employee groups. In addition, public university plans that are listed in the financial reports of state
governments are included.17 It is the most comprehensive list of these plans to date but may omit some smaller plans that could not be
identified. All discovered plan design changes through June 2012 are reflected in the table, including prospective changes that have been
recently legislated. The table includes a list of employee types covered by the plans, the date the plans began and an indicator (*C) for plans
that are closed to new members. If the state offers many plans under one large system, the state plan options are indented under the main
system heading. The plan options may include closed plans. In addition, the column entitled Primary Plan Options provides details
regarding how NEW members in currently active plans choose their plan. For closed plans, it highlights how the plan was chosen by NEW
employees when it was open. ‘DB only’ indicates that a defined benefit plan is the only plan available to employees. ‘DC choice’, ‘DB
choice’ and ‘Hybrid choice’ labels indicate defined contribution, defined benefit, and hybrid plans that are part of a choice set. In some
cases, a plan can be a ‘DB only’ option for a majority of the employees but then for a subset of employees exist as a plan offered in a choice
set. In this case, the plan categorization that comes first applies to most employees. Plans that are part of a choice set for employees are
bolded. The default plan in a choice set is denoted with a D superscript. A * indicates that the information could not be located. This table
was carefully constructed after reviewing state and plan-level CAFRs, the Public Plans Database, legal statutes, and other plan
documents. On February 13, 2013, the table was sent out for review to representatives from all state pension systems for which we could
identify a contact. All changes suggested before February 25 have been incorporated into the table. Extensive table notes are available upon
request.




17
  Note a more comprehensive list of public university plans can be found in Brown and Weisbenner (2013, forthcoming). Brown and
Weisbenner includes plans that are not reported in state financial reports. The authors’ notes on these plans are available on request.



                                                                                                                                             19
Table 1 Primary State Plans: Alabama to Arizona
State                       Plan Name                         Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                          Eligibility
AL1
        Retirement Systems of Alabama (RSA)
          Employees’ Retirement System of Alabama                   DB only          General state employees, state police, and certain local employees     1945-
             (ERS)
          Judicial Retirement Fund of Alabama (JRF)                 DB only          Judges, justices, and judicial employees                               1973-
          Teachers’ Retirement System of Alabama (TRS)              DB only          Teachers and employees of educational institutions                     1939-
AK
        Alaska Judicial Retirement System (JRS)                     DB only          Judges and justices                                                    1963-
        Alaska Elected Public Officers Retirement System            DB only          Governor, Lieutenant Governor, and legislators                       1976-1976
          (EPORS) *C
        Alaska National Guard and Alaska Naval Militia              DB only          Members of the Alaska National Guard and Alaska Naval Militia          1973-
          Retirement System (NGNMRS)2
        Alaska Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS)
          Defined Benefit Plan (PERS-DB) *C                        DB only           General state and local employees                                    1961-2006
          Defined Contribution Retirement Plan                   Mandatory DC        General state and local employees                                      2006-
            (PERS-DCR)
        Alaska Teachers’ Retirement System (TRS)
          Defined Benefit Plan (TRS-DB) *C                         DB only           Mainly teachers                                                      1955-2006
          Defined Contribution Retirement Plan (TRS-DCR)         Mandatory DC        Mainly teachers                                                        2006-
AZ
        Arizona Public Safety Personnel Retirement System
        Trust3
          Arizona Corrections Officer Retirement Plan               DB only          Local detention officers and certain State corrections officers        1986-
             (CORP)
          Arizona Elected Officials’ Retirement Plan (EORP)         DB only          State, county, and elected city officials and judges                   1981-
          Arizona Public Safety Personnel Retirement System         DB only          Fire fighters and police officers                                      1968-
             (PSPRS)
        Arizona State Retirement System (ASRS)4
          System Plan *C                                        Mandatory DC         State, public school, and certain local employees                    1953-1971
          Defined Benefit Plan                                DB only, DB choiceD    State, public school, and certain local employees                      1971-
        Arizona Universities’ Retirement Plans                    DC Choice          Faculty, academic and service professionals, and administrative
                                                                                       staff of three universities




                                                                                                                                                            20
Table 1 Primary State Plans: Arkansas to California
State                       Plan Name                        Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                         Eligibility
AR
        Arkansas Judicial Retirement System (AJRS)5                DB only          Judges and justices                                                   1953-
        Arkansas Public Employee Retirement System
        (APERS)
          Arkansas Public Employee Retirement System          DB only, DB choice    State and local employees, college and university employees,          1957-
            (APERS)                                                                   certain non-teaching school employees, and judges
          Arkansas State Police Retirement System (ASPRS)6         DB only          Police officers                                                       1951-
          Arkansas District Judge Retirement System                DB only          District judges                                                     2005-2007
            (ADJRS) *C7
        Arkansas State Highway Employees Retirement                DB only          Employees of the Arkansas State Highway Department                    1949-
          System (ASHERS)
        Arkansas Teacher Retirement System (ATRS)                 DB only           Teachers, and public school, education, and university employees      1937-
        Arkansas Higher Education Retirement Plans8              DC choiceD         Higher education employees who work at least 20 hours per week        1923-
CA
        California Public Employees’ Retirement System
        (CalPERS)
          Public Employees’ Retirement Fund (PERF)                 DB only          General, industrial, and California Highway Patrol employees,         1932-
                                                                                      peace officers and fire fighters, and other safety members
          Judges’ Retirement Fund (JRF) *C                         DB only          Judges and justices                                                 1937-1994
          Judges’ Retirement Fund II (JRF II)                      DB only          Judges and justices                                                   1994-
          Legislators’ Retirement Fund (LRF) *C                    DB only          Legislators and constitutional and legislative statutory officers   1947-1990
        California State Teachers’ Retirement System               DB only          Teachers and other public school employees                            1913-
          (CalSTRS)9




                                                                                                                                                          21
  Table 1 Primary State Plans: Colorado to Connecticut
State                      Plan Name                        Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                          Eligibility
CO
        Colorado Fire and Police Pension Association
        (FPPA)10
          Fire & Police Members’ Benefit Investment Fund
             Defined Benefit System11
               Statewide Defined Benefit Plan                   DB choice          Firefighter and police employees                                      1978-12
               Statewide Hybrid Plan                           Hybrid choice       Firefighter and police employees                                       2004-
             Affiliated Local Defined Benefit Plans *C13         DB only           Firefighter and police employees                                     Pre- 1978
          Fire & Police Members’ Self-Directed Investment
          Fund
             Members’ Statewide Money Purchase Plan              DC choice         Firefighter and police employees                                       1995-
        Colorado Public Employees’ Retirement Association
        (PERA)
          Colorado PERA Defined Contribution Retirement          DC choice         State employees and certain community college employees                2006-
             Plan (PERAChoice)14
          Colorado PERA Judicial Division Trust Fund             DB only           Judge and judicial employees                                           1949-
          Colorado PERA Local Govt. Division Trust Fund          DB only           Municipal employees                                                    1944-
          Colorado PERA School Division Trust Fund               DB only           Public school employees                                                1944-
          Colorado PERA State Division Trust Fund               DB ChoiceD         General state employees and state troopers                             1931-
          Denver Public Schools Division Trust Fund15            DB only           Public school employees                                                2010-
CT
        Connecticut Alternate Retirement Program (CARP)16        DC choice         Teachers and professional staff in higher education                    1975-
        Connecticut Judicial Retirement System (JRS)              DB only          Judges, magistrates, and commissioners                                 1981-
        Connecticut Municipal Employees Retirement System         DB only          Firemen, policemen, and other municipal (non-teacher)                  1945-
          (CMERS)                                                                     employees
        Connecticut Probate Judges and Employees’                 DB only          Judges and employees of probate courts                                 1968-
          Retirement System (CPJERS)
        Connecticut State Employees’ Retirement System
        (SERS)
          Tier I *C                                              DB only           All state employees, elected officials, and their appointees         1939-1984
          Tier II *C                                             DB only           All state employees, elected officials, and their appointees         1984-1997
          Tier IIA *C                                            DB only           All state employees, elected officials, and their appointees         1997-2011
          Tier III                                          DB only, DB choiceD    All state employees, elected officials, and their appointees           2011-
          Hybrid Plan17                                         DB choice          Teachers and professional staff in higher education                    2011-
        Connecticut Teachers’ Retirement System (TRS)            DB only           Public school teachers and faculty; certain professional employees     1917-
                                                                                     in higher education




                                                                                                                                                             22
Table 1 Primary State Plans: Delaware to Georgia
State                      Plan Name                        Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                         Eligibility
DE
        Delaware Public Employees’ Retirement System
        (DPERS)18
          County and Municipal Other Employees’ Pension           DB only          County and municipal employees other than police and firemen          1987-
            Plan
          County and Municipal Police and Firefighters’           DB only          County and municipal police officers and firemen                      1985-
            Pension Plans
          Diamond State Port Corporation Pension Plan             DB only          Employees of the Diamond State Port Corporation                       1996-
          Judiciary Pension Plans19                               DB only          Members of the Delaware Judiciary                                     1970-
          State Employees’ Pension Plan                           DB only          State employees                                                       1970-
          State Police Pension Plans20                            DB only          State police officers                                                 1970-
          Delaware Volunteer Firemen’s Pension Plan               DB only          Fire department, ambulance, and ladies auxiliary volunteers           1987-
FL
        Florida Retirement System (FRS)21
          FRS Pension Plan                                      DB choiceD         All state employees and participating local employees                 1970-
          FRS Investment Plan                                   DC choice          All state employees and participating local employees                 2002-
          FRS Investment Plan Hybrid Option                    Hybrid choice       All state employees and participating local employees                 2002-
        Senior Management Service Optional Annuity              DC choice          Members of the Senior Management Service Class and certain            1987-
          Program (SMSOAP)22                                                         legislators, managers, and judges
        State University System Optional Retirement              DC choice         State university faculty, administrators, and administrative and      1984-
          Program (SUSORP)23                                                         professional staff
GA
        Employees’ Retirement System of Georgia
        (ERS System)
          Employees’ Retirement System of Georgia (ERS)24
            Old Plan *C                                          DB only           State employees other than teachers, including police and firemen   1950-1982
            New Plan *C                                          DB only           State employees other than teachers, including police and firemen   1982-2008
            Georgia State Employees’ Pension and Savings      Mandatory Hybrid     State employees other than teachers, including police and firemen     2009-
            Plan (GSEPS)25
               Pension Plan                                    Mandatory DB        State employees other than teachers, including police and firemen     2009-
               401(k) Plan26                                   Mandatory DC        State employees other than teachers, including police and firemen     2009-
          Georgia Judicial Retirement System (GJRS)              DB only           Judges, attorneys, and legislative counsel                            1998-
          Georgia Military Pension Fund (GMPF)                   DB only           Georgia National Guard                                                2002-
          Legislative Retirement System (LRS)                    DB only           General Assembly members                                              1971-
          Public School Employees Retirement System              DB only           Public school employees not covered by the TRS                        1970-
            (PSERS)27
        Regents Retirement Plan                                 DC choice          Eligible university employees choosing not to participate in TRS      1990-
        Teachers Retirement System of Georgia (TRS)         DB only, DB choiceD    Teachers and certain staff of public schools and universities         1945-




                                                                                                                                                         23
Table 1 Primary State Plans: Hawaii to Illinois
State                       Plan Name                        Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                        Eligibility
HI
        Hawaii Employees’ Retirement System (ERS)
          Contributory Plan28                                      DB only          All state and county employees hired before 6/30/1984;               1925-
                                                                                      mandatory occupation groups
          Noncontributory Plan *C                                  DB only          All state and county employees except mandatory Contributory       1984-2006
                                                                                      Plan members
          Hybrid Plan29                                            DB only          All state and county employees except mandatory Contributory         2006-
                                                                                      Plan members
ID
        College and University Optional Retirement Plan         Mandatory DC        Faculty and staff in higher education                                1990-
          (ORP)30
        Department of Labor Retirement Plan *C                     DB only          Idaho Department of Labor employees                                Pre- 1980
        Judge’s Retirement Fund (JRF)                              DB only          Judges and justices                                                    *
        Public Employee Retirement System of Idaho
        (PERSI)
          Public Employee Retirement System Base Plan             DB only31         State and school district employees; city, county, and district      1965-
             (PERSI Base Plan)                                                        employees
          Firemen’s Retirement Fund (FRF) *C32                     DB only          Local firemen                                                      1940s-1980
IL
        Illinois General Assembly Retirement System (GARS)         DB only          General Assembly members and certain elected officials               1947-
        Illinois Judges’ Retirement System (JRS)                   DB only          Judges and Associate Judges                                          1941-
        Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund (IMRF)33                DB only          Local government and non-teaching school district employees,         1941-
                                                                                      excluding those in the city of Chicago and Cook County
        Illinois State Employees’ Retirement System (SERS)         DB only          Most state employee occupations                                      1944-
        Illinois State Universities Retirement System
        (SURS)34
           Traditional Plan                                      DB choiceD         Faculty and staff of state universities, community colleges, and     1941-
                                                                                      related agencies
          Portable Benefit Option Plan                            DB choice         Faculty and staff of state universities, community colleges, and     1998-
                                                                                      related agencies
          Self-Managed Plan                                       DC choice         Faculty and staff of state universities, community colleges, and     1998-
                                                                                      related agencies
        Illinois Teachers’ Retirement System (TRS)                 DB only          Public school teachers                                               1939-




                                                                                                                                                         24
Table 1 Primary State Plans: Indiana to Iowa

State                       Plan Name                          Primary Plan Options                      Type of Employees Covered                       Eligibility
IN
        Indiana Public Retirement System (INPRS)35
          Indiana Public Employees’ Retirement Fund
          (PERF)
             1977 Police Officers’ and Firefighters’ Pension         DB only          Police officers and fire fighters                                    1977-
               and Disability Fund (PFPF)
             Judges’ Retirement System (JRS)                         DB only          Judges and justices                                                  1977-
             Legislators’ Retirement System (LRS)
               Legislators’ Defined Benefit Plan *C                 DB only           General Assembly members                                           Pre- 1989
               Legislators’ Defined Contribution Plan             Mandatory DC        General Assembly members                                             1989-
             Prosecuting Attorneys’ Retirement Fund (PARF)          DB only           Prosecuting attorneys                                                1990-
             Public Employees’ Retirement Fund (PERF)            Mandatory Hybrid     State and local employees                                            1945-
               Pension Benefit                                    Mandatory DB        State and local employees                                            1945-
               Annuity Savings Account (ASA)36                    Mandatory DC        State and local employees                                            1955-
             State Excise Police, Gaming Agent, Gaming              DB only           Certain employees of the Indiana Department of Natural               1971-
               Control Officer and Conservation Enforcement                             Resources, the Indiana Alcohol and Tobacco Commission, and
               Officers’ Retirement Plan (ECRP)                                         certain State excise police officers, conservation enforcement
                                                                                        officers, gaming agents, or gaming control officers
          State Police Retirement Fund (SPRF)                       DB only           State police                                                         1937-
          Indiana Teachers’ Retirement Fund (TRF)                Mandatory Hybrid     Public school teachers and certain employees in higher education     1921-
            Pension Benefit                                       Mandatory DB        Public school teachers and certain employees in higher education     1921-
            Annuity Savings Account (ASA)36                       Mandatory DC        Public school teachers and certain employees in higher education     1955-
IA
        Iowa Public Employees’ Retirement System (IPERS)       DB only, DB choiceD    State, county, and local public employees, employees of school       1953-
                                                                                        districts, and certain elected officials
        Judicial Retirement System (JRS)                             DB only          Judges                                                                 *
        Municipal Fire & Police Retirement System of Iowa            DB only          Municipal police officers and fire fighters                          1992-
        Peace Officers’ Retirement, Accident and Disability          DB only          Peace officers                                                       1949-
          System (PORS)
        Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association (TIAA)           DC choice         Higher education faculty and staff                                     *
          Retirement Program




                                                                                                                                                           25
Table 1 Primary State Plans: Kansas to Kentucky
State                      Plan Name                      Primary Plan Options                      Type of Employees Covered                         Eligibility
KS
        Board of Regents’ Retirement Plan                    Mandatory DC        Employees of state universities and the Board of Regents office        1962-
        Kansas Public Employees Retirement System
        (KPERS)
          Kansas Police and Firemen’s Retirement System         DB only          Police officers and firefighters                                       1966-
            (KP&F)
          Kansas Public Employees Retirement System             DB only          State and public school employees, and employees of counties,          1962-
            (KPERS)                                                                municipalities, and certain other political subdivisions
          Kansas Retirement System for Judges                   DB only          Judges and justices                                                    1975-
KY
        Judicial Form Retirement System
          Judicial Retirement Plan                              DB only          Judges and justices                                                    1960-
          Legislators’ Retirement Plan                          DB only          General Assembly members                                               1980-
        Kentucky Retirement Systems (KRS)
          County Employees Retirement System (CERS)             DB only          Full-time employees of participating counties, cities, school          1958-
                                                                                   boards, and any additional local agencies
          Kentucky Employees Retirement System (KERS)           DB only          Full-time employees of any state department, board, or agency          1956-
          State Police Retirement System (SPRS)                 DB only          Full-time state troopers                                               1960-
        Kentucky Teachers’ Retirement System (KTRS)             DB only          Employees of local school districts and other educational agencies     1938-




                                                                                                                                                        26
  Table 1 Primary State Plans: Louisiana
State                       Plan Name                         Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                          Eligibility
LA
        Louisiana State Employees’ Retirement System
        (LASERS)37
          Regular Employees Plan                                    DB only          Regular state employees and specialty positions not covered by         2011-
                                                                                       the Hazardous Duty or Judicial Plan
            Regular Employees Plan *C                               DB only          Regular state employees                                              1947-2010
          Hazardous Duty Employees Plan                             DB only          Employees in hazardous duty positions                                  2011-
            Alcohol & Tobacco Control Agents Plan *C                DB only          Alcohol and tobacco control officers                                 2007-2010
            Appellate Law Clerks Plan *C                            DB only          Appellate law clerks                                                 Pre- 2010
            Bridge Police Plan *C                                   DB only          Bridge police for Crescent City Connection                           1997-2010
            Corrections Primary Plan *C                             DB only          Correctional officers in Department of Public Safety and             1975-2001
                                                                                       Corrections
            Corrections Secondary Plan *C                           DB only          Correctional officers in Department of Public Safety and             2002-2010
                                                                                       Corrections
            Legislative Plan *C                                    DB only           State legislative officers and elected officials                     1959-2010
            Peace Officers Plan *C                                 DB only           Peace officers                                                       2006-2010
            Wildlife & Fisheries Plan *C                           DB only           Department of Wildlife and Fisheries agents                          1972-2010
          Judicial Plan                                            DB only           Elected judges                                                         1976-
          Optional Retirement Plan (ORP) *C                       DC choice          Certain unclassified employees                                       1999-2007
        Louisiana Lottery Corporation Basic Retirement Plan      Mandatory DC        Employees of the Louisiana Lottery Corporation                         1993-
        Louisiana School Employees’ Retirement System              DB only           School bus drivers, school janitors, school custodians, and school     1947-
          (LSERS)                                                                      maintenance employees
        Louisiana State Police Retirement System (LSPRS)            DB only          Law enforcement officers and the Superintendent of the Office of       1938-
                                                                                       State Police
        Municipal Employees’ Retirement System of                   DB only          Public employees of incorporated villages, towns, and cities           1955-
          Louisiana
        Teachers’ Retirement System of Louisiana (TRSL)38
          TRSL Regular Plan                                   DB only, DB choiceD    Public school teachers, academic employees in higher education,        1936-
                                                                                       and certain board members
          TRSL Plan A *C                                            DB only          School lunch employees without Social Security coverage              1983-2010
          TRSL Plan B                                               DB only          School lunch employees with Social Security coverage                   1983-
          Optional Retirement Plan (ORP)                           DC choice         Academic employees in higher education and certain board               1990-
                                                                                       Members




                                                                                                                                                               27
  Table 1 Primary State Plans: Maine to Massachusetts
State                        Plan Name                          Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                      Eligibility
ME
        Maine Public Employees Retirement System
        (MainePERS)39
          Consolidated Plan for Participating Local Districts         DB only          Municipal and other local employees                                  *
            (PLDs)
          Judicial Retirement System                                  DB only          Judges                                                             1984-
          Legislative Retirement Program                              DB only          Legislators                                                        1986-
          State Employee and Teacher Program (SETP)40                 DB only          State employees, public school teachers, and administrators        1947-
MD41
        Maryland State Retirement System and Pension
        System (SRPS)
          Correctional Officers’ Retirement System (CORS)             DB only          Municipal correctional officers                                      *
          Employees’ Combined System (ECS)
             Employees’ Retirement System *C                         DB only           State and municipal employees                                    1941-1979
             Employees’ Pension System                          DB only, DB choiceD    State and municipal employees                                      1980-
          Judges’ Retirement System                                  DB only           Judges and members of the State Workers’ Compensation Comm.        1969-
          Law Enforcement Officers’ Pension System                   DB only           Law enforcement officers                                           1990-
             (LEOPS)
          Optional Retirement Program (ORP)42                        DC choice         Professional employees of public higher education institutions     1975-
          State Police Retirement System                              DB only          State police officers                                              1949-
          Teachers’ Combined System (TCS)
             Teachers’ Retirement System *C                           DB only          Personnel of Maryland public schools, public libraries, and      1927-1979
                                                                                         certain colleges
            Teachers’ Pension System                            DB only, DB choiceD    Personnel of Maryland public schools, public libraries, and        1980-
                                                                                         certain colleges
MA
        Optional Retirement Plan (ORP)                              DC choice          Public higher education employees                                  1995-
        State Employees’ Retirement System (SERS)               DB only, DB choiceD    Employees of the Commonwealth                                      1911-
        Teachers’ Retirement System (MTRS)                           DB only           Municipal teachers                                                 1914-




                                                                                                                                                             28
Table 1 Primary State Plans: Michigan
State                       Plan Name                       Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                            Eligibility
MI43
        Municipal Employees’ Retirement System of
        Michigan (MERS)44
          MERS Defined Benefit Plan                             DB choice          Employees of cities, counties, hospitals, and other local gov. units     1945-
          MERS Defined Contribution Plan                        DC choice          Employees of cities, counties, hospitals, and other local gov. units     1996-
          MERS Hybrid Plan                                     Hybrid choice       Employees of cities, counties, hospitals, and other local gov. units     2006-
        Public School Employees’ Retirement System
        (MPSERS)
          Contributory Plan *C                                   DB only           Employees of public schools, libraries, and certain colleges           1945-1977
          Basic Plan *C                                          DB only           Employees of public schools, libraries, and certain colleges           1977-1986
          Member Investment Plan (MIP) *C                        DB only           Employees of public schools, libraries, and certain colleges           1987-2010
          Pension Plus Plan (PPP)                             Mandatory Hybrid     Employees of public schools, libraries, and certain colleges             2010-
        State of Michigan Defined Contribution Retirement      Mandatory DC        All employees formerly eligible for the SERS, JRS, or LRS                1997-
        Plan                                                                         DB plans
          Judges’ Retirement System (JRS) *C                      DB only          Judges and elected State officials45                                   1992-1997
          Legislative Retirement System (LRS) *C                  DB only          Legislators                                                            1957-1997
          State Employees’ Retirement System (SERS) *C            DB only          Civil service employees, appointed officials in the Executive          1943-1997
                                                                                     branch, employees of the Legislature and Judiciary
        State Police Retirement System (SPRS)                     DB only          Sworn State Police officers                                              1987-




                                                                                                                                                            29
  Table 1 Primary State Plans: Minnesota
State                       Plan Name                        Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                           Eligibility
MN
        Minnesota State Colleges and Universities (MnSCU)
         State Colleges and Universities Retirement Fund         DC choiceD         Unclassified teachers and certain other full-time staff                   *
            (CURF)                                                                    members in higher education
        Minnesota State Retirement System (MSRS)46
         Correctional Employees Retirement Plan                    DB only          Correctional officers and certain employees in the Departments of       1973-
                                                                                      Corrections and Human Services
          Elective State Officers Retirement Plan *C               DB only          State constitutional officers                                         1967-1997
          General Employees Retirement Plan                   DB only, DB choice    Most state employees, University of Minnesota non-faculty               1929-
                                                                                      employees, and selected metropolitan agency employees
          Judges Retirement Plan                                   DB only          Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, and district court judges              1931-
          Legislators Retirement Plan *C                           DB only          Certain members of the House of Representatives and Senate            1965-1997
          State Patrol Retirement Plan                             DB only          State troopers, conservation officers, and certain crime bureau and     1943-
                                                                                      gambling enforcement agents
          Unclassified Retirement Plan47                        Mandatory DC,       Employees in “unclassified service” of the state, various               1971-
                                                                 DC choiceD           statutorily designated employees, legislators, and certain judges
        Public Employees Retirement Association of
        Minnesota (PERA)
          General Employees Retirement Fund (GERF)           DB only, DB choiceD    Employees of counties, cities, school districts, and related units      1931-
          Minneapolis Employees Retirement Fund                   DB only           Regular employees of Minneapolis, certain personnel at                1919-1978
             (MERF) *C48                                                              Minneapolis schools, some employees of the MnSCU and the
                                                                                      Metropolitan Airports Commission
          Public Employees Police and Fire Fund (PEPFF)            DB only          Police officers and firefighters of local government units and          1959-
                                                                                      subdivisions of the state
          Public Employees Correctional Fund (PECF)                DB only          Certain employees of county correctional facilities                     1999-
          Public Employees Defined Contribution Plan          DC only, DC choice    Physicians, elected local government officials, city managers, and      1987-
            (PEDCP)49                                                                 governmental ambulance service personnel
          Statewide Volunteer Firefighter Retirement               DB only          Employees of municipal volunteer fire departments                       2010-
            Plan (SVF)50
        Teachers Retirement Association of Minnesota (TRA)
          Teachers Retirement Fund (TRF)                      DB only, DB choice    Teachers and related professionals                                      1931-




                                                                                                                                                               30
  Table 1 Primary State Plans: Mississippi to Missouri
State                       Plan Name                        Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                         Eligibility
MS
        Public Employees’ Retirement System of Mississippi
        (the System)51
           Mississippi Highway Safety Patrol Retirement            DB only          Sworn Officers of the Mississippi Highway Safety Patrol               1958-
             System (MHSPRS)
           Mississippi Public Employees’ Retirement System         DB only          Employees of the state, state universities, community and junior      1952-
             (PERS)                                                                   colleges, and public school teachers and employees
           Municipal Retirement Systems (MRS) *C                   DB only          Municipal employees, fire fighters, and police officers who were    Pre- 1987
                                                                                     not already members of PERS
MO52
        Missouri County Employees’ Retirement Fund                 DB only          Elective or appointee officers and other county employees             1994-
         (CERF)53
        Missouri Department of Transportation and Highway          DB only          Qualified employees of the Missouri Department of                     1955-
         Patrol Employees’ Retirement System (MPERS)                                  Transportation, members of the Missouri State Highway Patrol,
                                                                                      and MPERS staff
        Missouri Local Government Employees’ Retirement            DB only          General employees and police and fire employees of political          1967-
          System (LAGERS)                                                             Subdivisions
        Missouri State Employees’ Retirement System
        (MOSERS)
          Judicial Plan                                            DB only          Certain judges, justices, and court commissioners                     1976-
          Missouri State Employees Plan’ (MSEP)                    DB only          Full-time state employees                                             1957-
        Public School and Education Employee Retirement
        Systems of Missouri (PSRS/PEERS)
          Public School Retirement System of Missouri              DB only          Certified, full-time employees of public schools, public two-year     1946-
             (PSRS)                                                                   colleges, PSRS, and certain non-profit associations
          Public Education Employee Retirement System of           DB only          Certain employees of public schools, public two-year colleges,       1965-54
             Missouri (PEERS)                                                         and PEERS not covered by PSRS




                                                                                                                                                             31
Table 1 Primary State Plans: Montana to Nebraska
State                       Plan Name                      Primary Plan Options                       Type of Employees Covered                          Eligibility
MT
        Public Employees’ Retirement Board (PERB)
          Firefighters’ Unified Retirement System (FURS)          DB only           Municipal firefighters and firefighters hired by the Montana           1981-
                                                                                      Air National Guard on or after October 1, 2001
          Game Wardens’ and Peace Officers’ Retirement            DB only           Game wardens, warden supervisory personnel, and state peace            1963-
            System (GWPORS)                                                           officers
          Highway Patrol Officers’ Retirement System              DB only           Members of the Montana Highway Patrol, including supervisory           1945-
            (HPORS)                                                                   personnel
          Judges’ Retirement System (JRS)                         DB only           Judges of district courts, justices of the Supreme Court, and the      1967-
                                                                                      Chief Water Judge
          Municipal Police Officers’ Retirement System            DB only           Municipal police officers                                              1974-
            (MPORS)
          Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS)
            Defined Benefit Retirement Plan (PERS-DBRP)         DB choiceD          Almost all public employees not covered by another plan,               1945-
            Defined Contribution Retirement Plan                DC choice           Almost all public employees not covered by another plan                2002-
               (PERS-DCRP)
            Optional Retirement Program55                        DC choice          Employees of the Montana University System                             2002-
          Sheriffs’ Retirement System (SRS)                       DB only           Sheriffs and certain State Dept. of Justice investigators and          1974-
                                                                                      detention officers
          Volunteer Firefighters Compensation Act (VFCA)          DB only           Volunteer firefighters of qualified volunteer fire companies in        1965-
                                                                                      unincorporated areas
        Optional Retirement Program (ORP)55                    Mandatory DC         Faculty and staff of the Montana University System                     1988-
        Teachers Retirement System (TRS)                         DB only            Teachers and professional staff of public schools, state agencies,     1937-
                                                                                      Community colleges, and units of the university system
NE
        Nebraska Public Employees Retirement Systems
        (PERS)
          County Employees Pension Plan
            Defined Contribution Plan *C                      Mandatory DC          County public employees                                              1966-2002
            Cash Balance Plan                              Mandatory Cash Balance   County public employees                                                2002-
          Judges Pension Plan                                     DB only           Judges                                                                 1955-
          School Pension Plan                                     DB only           Permanent public school employees                                      1945-
          State Employees Pension Plan56
            Defined Contribution Plan *C                      Mandatory DC          State employees not covered by another plan                          1964-2002
            Cash Balance Plan                              Mandatory Cash Balance   State employees not covered by another plan                            2002-
          State Patrol Pension Plan                               DB only           State Patrol employees                                                 1947-




                                                                                                                                                           32
  Table 1 Primary State Plans: Nevada to New Jersey
State                       Plan Name                        Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                         Eligibility
NV
        Public Employees Retirement Board
          Judicial Retirement System of Nevada (JRS)               DB only          Justices of the Supreme Court, district judges, municipal             2001-
                                                                                      court judges, and justices of the peace
          Legislators’ Retirement System of Nevada (LRS)           DB only          State legislators                                                     1967-
          Public Employees’ Retirement System of Nevada            DB only          Full-time state and local government employees                        1947-
            (PERS)
NH
        Judicial Retirement Plan                                   DB only          Judges of supreme courts, district courts, and probate courts         2005-
        New Hampshire Retirement System                            DB only          State employees, public school teachers and administrators,           1967-
                                                                                      permanent firefighters, and police officers
NJ57
        Judicial Retirement System (JRS)                          DB only           Members of the New Jersey judiciary system                            1973-
        New Jersey Defined Contribution Retirement Program      Mandatory DC        State or local officials and certain PERS, TPAF, PFRS,                2007-
          (DCRP)58                                                                    and SPRS members
        Police and Firemen’s Retirement System (PFRS)              DB only          County and municipal policemen and firemen and state firemen          1944-
        Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS)                 DB only          Most full-time employees of the state or any county,                  1955-
                                                                                      municipality, school district, or public agency that do not
                                                                                      participate in another state plan
        State Police Retirement System (SPRS)                      DB only          Uniformed officers and troopers of the New Jersey State Police        1965-
        Teachers’ Pension and Annuity Fund (TPAF)                  DB only          Most full-time certified teachers or professional staff of public     1955-
                                                                                      school systems in the state




                                                                                                                                                             33
Table 1 Primary State Plans: New Mexico to New York
State                      Plan Name                       Primary Plan Options                    Type of Employees Covered                       Eligibility
NM
        New Mexico Educational Retirement Board (ERB)59
          New Mexico Educational Employees’ Retirement
          System (EERS)
            Alternate Retirement Plan (ARP)                     DC choice         Faculty and professional employees of the state’s higher           1991-
                                                                                    education institutions and community colleges
            Defined Benefit Plan                            DB only, DB choice    Certified teachers and other employees of educational              1957-
                                                                                    and technical-vocational institutions and junior colleges
        New Mexico Public Employees’ Retirement
        Association (PERA)
          Judicial Retirement System (JRS)                       DB only          Judges and justices                                                  *
          Magistrate Retirement System (MRS)                     DB only          Magistrates                                                          *
          Public Employees Retirement System (PERS)              DB only          General state and municipal employees, state policemen,            1947-
                                                                                    and other hazardous duty employees, municipal policemen
                                                                                    and firemen, and employees of the state legislature
          Volunteer Firefighter Retirement System (VFRS)         DB only          Volunteer non-salaried firefighters                                1983-
NY60
        New York State and Local Retirement System
          New York State and Local Employees’ Retirement         DB only          State and local employees in non-teaching positions, including     1921-
            System (ERS)                                                            uniformed services personnel
          New York State and Local Police and Fire               DB only          Police officers and firefighters who work for participating        1966-
            Retirement System (PFRS)                                                employers
          New York State Teachers Retirement System              DB only          Most New York State public school teachers and administrators      1921-
            (NYSTRS)




                                                                                                                                                     34
Table 1 Primary State Plans: North Carolina to North Dakota
State                       Plan Name                       Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                           Eligibility
NC
        Consolidated Judicial Retirement System (CJRS)            DB only          Elected judges and justices, district attorneys, clerks, and public    1985-61
                                                                                     defenders
        Firemen’s and Rescue Squad Workers’ Pension Fund          DB only          Certified firemen and rescue squad workers                              1959-
        Legislative Retirement System (LRS)                       DB only          Members of the General Assembly                                         1983-
        Local Governmental Employees’ Retirement System           DB only          Employees of the cities, towns, counties, boards, commissions,         1945-62
           (LGERS)                                                                   and other entities of local government
        North Carolina National Guard Pension Fund               DB only           National Guardsmen                                                     1979-63
        Teachers’ and State Employees’ Retirement System    DB only, DB choiceD    Full-time teachers and state employees in public schools,               1941-
           (TSERS)                                                                   universities, departments, institutions, and state agencies
        Optional Retirement Program64                            DC choice         Faculty and administrators with faculty rank in institutions of the     1971-
                                                                                     UNC System
ND
        North Dakota Public Employees Retirement System65
          North Dakota Highway Patrolman’s Retirement             DB only          Substantially all sworn officers of the North Dakota Highway            1949-
            System (NDHPRS)                                                          Patrol
          North Dakota Defined Contribution Retirement           DC choice         State employees in unclassified positions                               2000-
            Plan
          North Dakota Public Employees’ Retirement         DB only, DB choiceD    Most employees of the state, its agencies, and various political        1966-
            System (PERS)66                                                          subdivisions; certain judges, the National Guard Security
                                                                                     officers and Firefighters, local peace officers, and corrections
                                                                                     officers
          Retirement Plan for the Employees of Job                DB only          Employees of Job Service North Dakota                                 1961-1980
            Service North Dakota (JSND) *C
        North Dakota Teachers’ Fund for Retirement (TFFR)         DB only          All North Dakota public teachers and certain non-public teachers        1913-
        Teachers’ Insurance and Annuity Association               DC only          Faculty and administrative staff in higher education                      *
          (TIAA-CREF)




                                                                                                                                                           35
  Table 1 Primary State Plans: Ohio
State                       Plan Name                       Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                            Eligibility
OH
        Alternative Retirement Plan (ARP)67                      DC choice         Higher education faculty and staff, and certain unclassified civil       1997-
                                                                                     service employees
        Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund (OP&F)                  DB only          Full-time municipal police officers; full-time state and municipal       1967-
                                                                                     firefighters
        Ohio Public Employees Retirement System
        (OPERS)68
          Traditional Pension Plan                              DB choiceD         Public employees of Ohio not covered by another state                    1935-
                                                                                     retirement system or by the Cincinnati Retirement System
          Member-Directed Plan                                   DC choice         Public employees of Ohio not covered by another state                    2003-
                                                                                     retirement system or by the Cincinnati Retirement System
          Combined Plan                                        Hybrid choice       Public employees of Ohio not covered by another state                    2003-
                                                                                     retirement system or by the Cincinnati Retirement System
        Ohio School Employees Retirement System (SERS)            DB only          Non-teaching employees of public schools and certain public              1937-
                                                                                     institutions of higher education
        State Highway Patrol Retirement System (SHPRS)            DB only          Members of the Ohio State Highway Patrol                                 1944-
        State Teachers Retirement System of Ohio (STRS)69
          Defined Benefit Plan                                  DB choiceD         Teachers and faculty of public education boards, state-supported         1919-
                                                                                     colleges and universities, and the state of Ohio and its political
                                                                                     subdivisions
          Defined Contribution Plan                              DC choice         Teachers and faculty of public education boards, state-supported         2001-
                                                                                     colleges and universities, and the state of Ohio and its political
                                                                                     subdivisions
          Combined Plan                                        Hybrid choice       Teachers and faculty of public education boards, state-supported         2001-
                                                                                     colleges and universities, and the state of Ohio and its political
                                                                                     subdivisions




                                                                                                                                                               36
Table 1 Primary State Plans: Oklahoma to Oregon
State                       Plan Name                         Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                      Eligibility
OK70
        Oklahoma Firefighters Pension and Retirement                DB only          Municipal firefighters                                             1981-
          System (OFPRS)
        Oklahoma Law Enforcement Retirement System                  DB only          Qualified law enforcement officers                                 1947-
          (OLERS)
        Oklahoma Police Pension and Retirement System               DB only          Qualified police officers of participating municipalities          1981-
          (OPPRS)
        Oklahoma Public Employees Retirement System
         (OPERS)
          Oklahoma Public Employees Retirement System               DB only          Most employees of the state not covered by another plan and        1964-
            (OPERS)                                                                    employees of participating counties and local agencies
          Uniform Retirement System for Justices and Judges         DB only          Judges and justices                                                1968-
            (URSJJ)
        Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association (TIAA)         DC choice          Certain employees in higher education institutions                   *
        Teachers’ Retirement System of Oklahoma               DB only, DB choiceD    Public education employees in the common schools, career           1943-
                                                                                       technology centers, colleges and universities, and other
                                                                                       educational agencies
OR
        Optional Retirement Plan (ORP)71                           DC choice         Unclassified faculty and staff of the Oregon University System     1996-
        Oregon Health and Science University Pension Plan          DC choice         Employees of Oregon Health and Science University                  1996-
          (UPP)72
        Oregon Public Employees Retirement System
        (PERS)73
          Tier 1 Defined Benefit Plan *C                         Mandatory DB        Employees of the State, school districts, community colleges,    1967-1995
                                                                                       and political subdivisions
          Tier 2 Defined Benefit Plan *C                         Mandatory DB        Employees of the State, school districts, community colleges,    1996-2003
                                                                                       and political subdivisions
          Oregon Public Service Retirement Plan (OPSRP)        Mandatory Hybrid,     Employees of the State, school districts, community colleges,      2003-
                                                                Hybrid choiceD         and political subdivisions
            Pension Program                                     Mandatory DB         Employees of the State, school districts, community colleges,      2003-
                                                                                       and political subdivisions
            Individual Account Program (IAP)74                   Mandatory DC        Employees of the State, school districts, community colleges,      2003-
                                                                                       and political subdivisions




                                                                                                                                                        37
  Table 1 Primary State Plans: Pennsylvania to South Carolina
State                       Plan Name                          Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                          Eligibility
PA
        Pennsylvania Public School Employees’ Retirement             DB only          Public school employees of the Commonwealth                            1917-
          System (PSERS)
        Pennsylvania State Employees’ Retirement System              DB only          Employees of the Commonwealth and certain other public                 1923-
          (SERS)                                                                        agencies
RI75
        Employees’ Retirement System of Rhode Island
        (ERSRI)
          Employees’ Retirement System (ERS)
            Defined Benefit *C                                      DB only           Most state employees                                                 1936-2012
            Hybrid                                               Mandatory Hybrid     Most state employees                                                   2012-
          Judicial Retirement Benefits Trust (JRBT)                 DB only           Judges and justices                                                    1989-
          Municipal Employees’ Retirement System (MERS)
            Defined Benefit *C                                       DB only          Employees of municipalities, housing authorities, water and          1951-2012
                                                                                        Sewer districts, and certain municipal police and fire persons
            Hybrid                                               Mandatory Hybrid     Employees of municipalities, housing authorities, water and            2012-
                                                                                        Sewer districts, and certain municipal police and fire persons
          State Police Retirement Benefits Trust (SPRBT)            DB only           State police and superintendents                                       1987-
        Higher Education Defined Contribution Plans               Mandatory DC        Certain faculty and staff of the University of Rhode Island,             *
                                                                                        Rhode Island College, and the Community College of Rhode
                                                                                        Island
SC
        South Carolina Retirement Systems
          National Guard Retirement System (NGRS)                    DB only          National Guard members who served in South Carolina                    1975-
          Retirement System for Judges and Solicitors of the         DB only          Judges, solicitors, and circuit public defenders of the State          1979-
            State of South Carolina (JSRS)
          Retirement System for Members of the General               DB only          Members of the South Carolina General Assembly                         1966-
            Assembly of the State of South Carolina (GARS)
          South Carolina Police Officers’ Retirement System          DB only          State and local police officers and fire fighters, peace officers,     1962-
            (PORS)                                                                      coroners, probate judges, and magistrates
          South Carolina Retirement System (SCRS)                  DB choiceD         Teachers and employees of the State and political subdivisions         1945-
          State Optional Retirement Program (State ORP)76          DC choice          Newly hired state, public school, and higher education                 2002-
                                                                                        employees




                                                                                                                                                                38
  Table 1 Primary State Plans: South Dakota to Texas
State                      Plan Name                        Primary Plan Options                      Type of Employees Covered                       Eligibility
SD77
        South Dakota Retirement System (SDRS)78                    DB only           Employees of the State and its political subdivisions              1974-
TN
        Optional Retirement Plan (ORP)                            DC choice          Certain faculty and staff of the Tennessee Board of Regents        1978-
                                                                                       institutions and the University of Tennessee system
        Tennessee Consolidated Retirement System (TCRS)79
          Political Subdivision Pension Plan (PSPP)               DB only            Public employees of participating political subdivisions           1972-
          State Employees, Teachers, and Higher Education    DB only, DB choiceD     Employees of the state, teachers with Local Education Agencies     1972-
            Employees Pension Plan (SETHEEPP)                                          (LEAs) and higher education employees
TX80
        Employees Retirement System of Texas (ERS)
          Employees Retirement System of Texas Plan                DB only           State employees and officers                                       1947-
            (ERS Plan)
          Judicial Retirement System of Texas (JRS)
            Plan One (JRS1) *C                                     DB only           Judges                                                           1949-1985
            Plan Two (JRS2)                                        DB only           Judges                                                             1985-
          Law Enforcement and Custodial Officer                    DB only           Certain law enforcement officers and certified custodial           1979-
            Supplemental Retirement Plan (LECOS)                                       Officers
        Optional Retirement Program (ORP)                         DC choice          Full-time faculty, librarians, and certain professionals and       1967-
                                                                                       administrators employed in public higher education
        Texas County & District Retirement System (TCDRS)   Mandatory Cash Balance   County public service officers, emergency service providers,       1967-
                                                                                       nurses, county judges, and commissioners
        Texas Emergency Services Retirement System                 DB only           Volunteer municipal fire fighters and EMS personnel                1977-
          (TESRS)81
        Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS)            Mandatory Cash Balance   Employees of participating municipalities                          1947-
        Teacher Retirement System of Texas (TRS)             DB only, DB choiceD     Employees of public education institutions                         1937-




                                                                                                                                                           39
   Table 1 Primary State Plans: Utah
State                       Plan Name                         Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                          Eligibility
UT
        Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association-College       Mandatory DC        Faculty and staff of state colleges and universities                     *
          Retirement Equities Fund (TIAA-CREF) and
          Fidelity Investments
        Utah Retirement Systems (URS)
          Firefighters Retirement System *C                         DB only          State and local govt. employees directly involved in fire fighting   1970s-2011
          Judges Retirement System                                  DB only          Judges and justices                                                    1997-
          Public Safety Retirement System *C                        DB only          State and local govt. employees directly involved in law             1970s-2011
                                                                                       enforcement
          Tier 2 Public Safety and Firefighters Retirement
          System82
            Tier 2 Hybrid Retirement System                      Hybrid choiceD      State and local govt. employees directly involved in law               2011-
                                                                                       enforcement or fire fighting
            Tier 2 Defined Contribution Plan                       DC choice         State and local govt. employees directly involved in law               2011-
                                                                                       enforcement or fire fighting
          Tier 1 Public Employees Contributory                      DB only          Public employees and public education employees of Utah and          1967-201183
            Retirement System *C                                                       its political subdivisions
          Tier 1 Public Employees Noncontributory                   DB only          Public employees and public education employees of Utah and          1986-2011
            Retirement System *C                                                       its political subdivisions
          Tier 2 Public Employees Contributory Retirement
          System84
            Tier 2 Hybrid Retirement System                      Hybrid choiceD      Public employees and public education employees of Utah and            2011-
                                                                                       its political subdivisions
            Tier 2 Defined Contribution Plan                       DC choice         Public employees and public education employees of Utah and            2011-
                                                                                       its political subdivisions
          Utah Governors and Legislative Retirement Plan *C         DB only          Governors and legislators                                             Pre- 2011




                                                                                                                                                               40
   Table 1 Primary State Plans: Vermont
State                      Plan Name                        Primary Plan Options                    Type of Employees Covered                      Eligibility
VT85
        Vermont Municipal Employees’ Defined Contribution          DC86            Certain groups of employees eligible for VMERS                    2000-
          Plan
        Vermont Municipal Employees’ Retirement System            DB only          School districts and other municipal employees                    1975-
          (VMERS)
        Vermont State Defined Contribution Plan                 DC choice          Exempt state employees eligible for VSERS                         1999-
        Vermont State Employees’ Retirement System          DB only, DB choiceD    Substantially all general State employees and State police        1944-
          (VSERS)
        Vermont State Teachers Retirement System (VSTRS)          DB only          Most public day school and nonsectarian private high school       1947-
                                                                                    teachers and administrators; teachers in schools and teacher
                                                                                    training institutions




                                                                                                                                                        41
   Table 1 Primary State Plans: Virginia
State                       Plan Name                        Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                       Eligibility
VA87
        Virginia Retirement System (VRS)
          Plan 1
             Judicial Retirement System (JRS) *C                   DB only          Judges and certain judicial employees                             1970-2010
             Optional Retirement Plan for Higher Education        DC choice         Full-time faculty and certain administrative staff of the         1985-2010
               (ORPHE) *C                                                             Commonwealth’s colleges and universities
             Optional Retirement Plan for Political               DC choice         Elected or appointed officers, executive branch chief deputies,   1998-2010
               Appointees (ORPPA) *C                                                  and confidential assistants
             Optional Retirement Plan for School                  DC choice         School superintendents                                            2001-2010
               Superintendents (ORPSS) *C
             State Police Officers’ Retirement System              DB only          State police officers                                             1950-2010
               (SPORS) *C
             Virginia Law Officers’ Retirement System              DB only          Virginia law officers other than State police                     1999-2010
               (VaLORS) *C
             Virginia Retirement System (VRS) *C             DB only, DB choiceD    State and local employees, teachers, and other school employees   1942-2010
          Plan 288
             Judicial Retirement System (JRS)                      DB only          Judges and certain judicial employees                               2010-
             Optional Retirement Plan for Higher Education        DC choice         Full-time faculty and certain administrative staff of the           2010-
               (ORPHE)                                                                Commonwealth’s colleges and universities
             Optional Retirement Plan for Political               DC choice         Elected or appointed officers, executive branch chief deputies,     2010-
               Appointees (ORPPA)                                                     and confidential assistants
             Optional Retirement Plan for School                  DC choice         School superintendents                                              2010-
               Superintendents (ORPSS)
             State Police Officers’ Retirement System              DB only          State police officers                                               2010-
               (SPORS)
             Virginia Law Officers’ Retirement System              DB only          Virginia law officers other than State police                       2010-
               (VaLORS)
             Virginia Retirement System (VRS)                DB only, DB choiceD    State and local employees, teachers, and other school employees   2010-2013
          Hybrid Plan89
             Virginia Retirement System (VRS)                 Mandatory Hybrid,     State and local employees, teachers, and other school employees     2014-
                                                               Hybrid choiceD




                                                                                                                                                           42
Table 1 Primary State Plans: Washington

State                       Plan Name                    Primary Plan Options                    Type of Employees Covered                         Eligibility
WA
        Higher Education Retirement Plans (HERP)90           DC choiceD         Certain employees in higher education                                  *
        Volunteer Fire Fighters’ and Reserve Officers’        DB only           Volunteer fire fighters, emergency workers, and reserve officers     1945-
          Relief and Pension Fund (VFFRPF)
        Washington Department of Retirement Systems
        (WDRS)
          Judges’ Retirement Fund *C                           DB only          Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, and Superior Court judges         1937-1971
          Judicial Retirement System *C                        DB only          Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, and Superior Court judges         1971-1988
          Law Enforcement Officers’ and Fire Fighters’
          Retirement System (LEOFF)
            Plan 1 *C                                          DB only          Full-time local law enforcement commissioned officers,             1970-1977
                                                                                  firefighters, and eligible emergency medical technicians
            Plan 2                                             DB only          Full-time local law enforcement commissioned officers,               1977-
                                                                                  firefighters, and eligible emergency medical technicians
          Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS)91
            Plan 1 *C                                       Mandatory DB        State and local employees, elected officials, and employees        1947-1977
                                                                                  of courts, legislative groups, colleges and universities
            Plan 2                                            DB choice         State and local employees, elected officials, and employees          1977-
                                                                                  of courts, legislative groups, colleges and universities
            Plan 3                                          Hybrid choiceD      State and local employees, elected officials, and employees          2002-
                                                                                  of courts, legislative groups, colleges and universities
          Public Safety Employees’ Retirement System
          (PSERS)
            Plan 2                                             DB only          Corrections officers and certain employees of the Gambling           2006-
                                                                                  Commission, Liquor Control Board, Parks and Recreation
                                                                                  Commission, Washington State Patrol, and Department of
                                                                                  Natural Resources
          School Employees’ Retirement System (SERS)92
            Plan 2                                            DB choice         Classified employees of school districts and educational service     2000-
                                                                                  districts
            Plan 3                                          Hybrid choiceD      Classified employees of school districts and educational service     2000-
                                                                                  districts




                                                                                                                                                    43
     Table 1 Primary State Plans: Washington (continued) to Wisconsin
State                        Plan Name                        Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                       Eligibility
WA
         Teachers’ Retirement System (TRS)93
           Plan 1 *C                                             Mandatory DB        Certain certificated public school employees                      1938-1977
           Plan 2                                                  DB choice         Certain certificated public school employees                        1977-
           Plan 3                                                Hybrid choiceD      Certain certificated public school employees                        1996-
         Washington State Patrol Retirement System (WSPRS)
           Plan 1 *C                                                DB only          Any commissioned employee of the Washington State Patrol          1947-2002
           Plan 2                                                   DB only          Any commissioned employee of the Washington State Patrol            2003-
WV
         Consolidated Retirement Board of West Virginia
           Deputy Sheriff Retirement System (DSRS)                  DB only          Deputy sheriffs                                                     1998-
           Emergency Medical Services Retirement System             DB only          Eligible emergency medical service officers                         2008-
             (EMSRS)
           Judges’ Retirement System (JRS)                          DB only          Judges and justices                                                 1949-
           Municipal Police Officers and Firefighters               DB only          Police officers in any municipality or municipal subdivision        2010-
             Retirement System (MPFRS)
           Public Employees’ Retirement System (PERS)               DB only          Employees of the state and political subdivisions                   1961-
           Public Safety, Death, Disability, and Retirement         DB only          State troopers                                                    1935-1994
             Fund (PSDDRF) *C
           State Police Retirement System (SPRS)                    DB only          State troopers                                                      1994-
           Teachers’ Retirement System (TRS)94                      DB only          Public school and certain higher education employees              1941-1991;
                                                                                                                                                         2005-
             Teachers’ Defined Contribution Retirement           Mandatory DC        Public school and certain higher education employees              1991-2005
                System (TDCRS) *C
         Great-West Retirement Services – New Educators            DC choice         State college and university faculty and staff                      2003-
           Money Plan95
         Teachers’ Insurance and Annuity Association and/or        DC choice         State college and university faculty and staff                        *
           College Retirement Equities Fund (TIAA-CREF)
WI
         Wisconsin Retirement System (WRS)                          DB only          State and local government public employees, excluding those of    1982-96
                                                                                       the City of Milwaukee and Milwaukee County




                                                                                                                                                            44
   Table 1 Primary State Plans: Wyoming
State                       Plan Name                        Primary Plan Options                     Type of Employees Covered                           Eligibility
WY
        Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association-College        DC choice         Eligible University of Wyoming employees                                  *
          Retirement Equities Fund (TIAA-CREF)
        Wyoming Retirement System (WRS)
          Air Guard Firefighters Plan                             DB only           Employees of the Wyoming Air National Guard                             2001-
          Paid Firemen’s Pension Plan A *C                        DB only           Paid firemen                                                          Pre- 1981
          Paid Firemen’s Pension Plan B                           DB only           Paid firemen                                                            1981-
          Public Employees Pension Plan                      DB only, DB choiceD    Most employees of the State and its public school systems               1949-
          State Patrol, Game & Fish Warden & Criminal             DB only           Certain highway patrol, law enforcement, and peace officers               *
            Investigator Pension Plan
          Volunteer Emergency Medical Technician Pension           DB only          Volunteer EMTs                                                          2008-
            Plan
          Volunteer Firemen’s Pension Plan                         DB only          Volunteer firemen                                                         *
          Wyoming Judicial Pension Plan                            DB only          Judges and justices                                                     1998-
          Wyoming Law Enforcement Retirement Plan                  DB only          Certain sheriffs, police officers, correctional officers, probation     2002-
                                                                                      and parole agents, dispatchers, and investigators




                                                                                                                                                               45
Table 2: Targeted DC and Hybrid Plans
For the survey, we targeted large state primary DC and hybrid plans and newly introduced plans
that are expected to cover a substantial number of members in the future. All plans were opened
prior to June 2012. Plans that have active members but are closed to new employees are denoted
with a *C following their name. The tables include the year the plan was enacted for new hires,
approximate current active members and approximate plan assets. Panel A presents DC and
hybrid plans that are mandatory plans for their employees. Panel B presents DC and hybrid plans
that are offered as part of an employee’s choice set.


Panel A. Mandatory DC and Hybrid Plans
                                                                                                   Approx.       Approx. Assets
                                                                                                             1                1
                                                                        Date Enacted               Actives       (in Thousands)
Mandatory DC
Alaska PERS-DCR                                                             2006                      11,182           $183,702
Alaska TRS-DCR                                                              2006                       2,738             $83,972
Nebraska County Employees Defined Contribution Plan *C                      1966                       1,982           $179,370
Nebraska State Employees Defined Contribution Plan *C                       1964                       5,224            $706,461
State of Michigan Defined Contribution Plan                                 1997                      26,822          $1,555,608
                                                                         Subtotal Mandatory DC        47,948          $2,709,113
Mandatory Hybrid
Georgia ERS-GSEPS                                                            2009                     11,093             $13,462
Indiana PERF - ASA                                                           1997                    147,933          $2,805,023
Indiana STRF - ASA                                                           1997                     71,343          $3,094,797
Michigan - MPSERS-PPP                                                        2010                      9,424              $1,423
Oregon PERS - IAP                                                            2003                    183,349          $4,036,837
                                                                      Subtotal Mandatory Hybrid      423,142          $9,951,542

                                             Total for All Primary Mandatory DC and Hybrid Plans     471,090        $12,660,655




                                                                                                                        46
Panel B. DC and Hybrid Offered as a Choice Set




                                                 47
Table 3: Representation of Survey Sample
This table provides an overview of the representation of the surveyed sample versus the targeted
population. Panel A aggregates the DC and hybrid primary plans and Panel B highlights the DB
plans that are offered as part of a choice set.

Panel A: Hybrid and DC Plans: Mandatory Plans and Plans Offered as part of a Choice Set
                                                                                                    Approx.          Approx.
                                                                                                             1                1
                                                                          Number of Plans          Actives           Assets
Mandatory DC and Hybrid Primary Plans
Mandatory DC and Hybrid Plans Surveyed                                             8                251,814          $6,760,836
Mandatory DC and Hybrid Plans Total                                               10                471,090         $12,660,655
% of Total                                                                      80.0%                53.5%               53.4%

DC Choice and Hybrid Choice Primary Plans
Primary Plan Choice Plans Surveyed                                                13                274,109         $17,296,314
Primary Plan Choice Total                                                         15                286,646         $17,815,516
% of Total                                                                      86.7%                95.6%               97.1%

Total DC and Hybrid Primary Plans
Plans Surveyed                                                                    21                525,923         $24,057,150
Plans Total                                                                       25                757,736         $30,476,171
% of Total                                                                      84.0%                69.4%               78.9%

Panel B: DB Plans Offered as part of a Choice Set
                                                                                                    Approx.          Approx.
                                                                                                             1                1
                                                                          Number of Plans          Actives           Assets

DB Choice Plans
Primary Plan Choice Plans Surveyed                                                 9                 1,370,373     $271,055,616
Primary Plan Choice Total                                                         10                 1,543,656     $334,172,320
% of Total                                                                      90.0%                88.8%               81.1%

1
 The total assets and actives reported in the tables are approximations and may be from sources as far back as 2010. Percentages
reported are only guidelines.




                                                                                                                                  48
Table 4: Plan Features of Plans Surveyed
This table reports the percentage of plans surveyed that offer specific plan features and whether
these features are available to most employees or just new hires. The ‘New Hires Only’ and ‘Most
Employees’ column sum to the percentage of plans offering the feature (any differences observed
are due to rounding).




                                                                                              49
Table 5: Financial Education and Advice Offerings in DC and Hybrid Primary State Plans
This table ranks financial education and advice offerings based on the actives eligible for each
program and displays the percentage of plans offering each provision.




                                                                                                   50
Table 6: Who Develops the Financial Education and Advice Programs?
This table reports the number of plans that offer each type of educational and advice program by who develops the program. The
program can be developed in-house by the plan, outsourced to a third party or developed in conjunction with a third party. The
percentages by row sum to 100 percent as they represent the percentage of plans surveyed that offer each specific type of education or
advice.




                                                                                                                                    51
Table 7: What are the Most Popular Topics Covered By Programs?
Panel A: Ranking of Plan Specific Topics




                                                                 52
Panel B: Ranking of General Topics




                                     53
Table 8: How is Success Measured?
This table reports how plans measure success in their financial education and advice
programs. The percentage is based on the number of plans who report measuring success.




                                                                                   54
Figure 1: Type of Financial Education Topics Covered Within Each Type of Educational/Advice Program
This figure shows the type of topics covered by different plans within each type of financial education and advice program.




                                                                                                                              55
Figure 2: Florida Retirement System (FRS) Enrollments by Newly-Hired Employees
This table tracks the plan choice default rate from June 2003 to June 2012 for newly hired employees in the FRS.




* Includes active enrollments into hybrid choice ** Up to 41 percent of defaulters may be using this option as their active election to
the Pension Plan. Source: Fact Sheet: Update on Choice in the Florida Retirement System,” June 30, 2012




                                                                                                                                      56
