                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           RETHINKING ELDERLY POVERTY:
                  TIME FOR A HEALTH INCLUSIVE POVERTY MEASURE?

                                           Sanders Korenman
                                             Dahlia Remler

                                         Working Paper 18900
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18900


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2013




An early version of this paper, titled, “Medicare, Medicaid, MOOP and the Supplemental Poverty
Measure: Have We Lost Our Minds?” was presented to the Association for Public Policy Analysis
and Management Fall 2012 Conference. This paper would not have been possible without the cooperation
of several scholars who provided unpublished results and additional tabulations in response to our
requests, as well as those who answered our questions about their research: Mark A. Levitan of the
New York City Center for Economic Opportunity, Sheldon Danziger, Helen Levy, and Robert Schoeni
of the University Michigan, and Bruce Meyer of the University of Chicago. We thank Adam Atherly
for discussions of Medicare Advantage Plans and Sherry Glied for discussion of ACA exchanges.
We also thank participants in seminars at the Baruch College School of Public Affairs and NYU Center
for Advanced Social Science Research and the APPAM 2012 Conference for their comments, particularly
Jonathan Fisher, David Johnson, Karl Kronebusch, Mark Levitan, and Cordelia Reimers. All errors
and interpretations are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Sanders Korenman and Dahlia Remler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Rethinking Elderly Poverty: Time for a Health Inclusive Poverty Measure?
Sanders Korenman and Dahlia Remler
NBER Working Paper No. 18900
March 2013
JEL No. I13,I32

                                           ABSTRACT

Census’s Supplemental Poverty Measure (SPM) nearly doubles the elderly poverty rate compared
to the “Official” Poverty Measure (OPM), a result of the SPM subtraction of medical out-of-pocket
(MOOP) expenditures from income. Neither the SPM nor OPM counts health benefits or assets as
resources. Validation studies suggest that subtracting MOOP from resources worsens a poverty measure’s
predictive validity and excluding assets exacerbates this bias, since assets fund MOOP.

The SPM is based on a 1995 NAS report that recommended a health-exclusive poverty measure, despite
considering it, conceptually, a “second best” to a Health-Inclusive Poverty Measure (HIPM). We analyze
the reasons for the NAS recommendation and argue that constructing a HIPM is now feasible if we
conceptualize health needs as a need for health insurance, and if plans with non-risk-rated premiums
and caps on MOOP are universally available, a condition largely met by the Affordable Care Act and
Medicare Advantage Plans.

We describe four HIPM variants and present analyses that suggest the SPM treatment of MOOP results
in a less valid measure of elderly poverty and an overstatement of the elderly poverty rate (by up to
5.5 percentage points or 50 percent). Many elderly classified as poor by the SPM’s unlimited MOOP
deduction are not poorly insured persons with incomes near the poverty line, but well-insured persons
with incomes well above the poverty line.


Sanders Korenman
School of Public Affairs
Baruch College
City University of New York
One Bernard Baruch Way
Box D-901
New York, NY 10010
and NBER
sanders.korenman@baruch.cuny.edu

Dahlia Remler
School of Public Affairs
Baruch College
City University of New York
One Bernard Baruch Way
Box D-901
New York, NY 10010
and NBER
Dahlia.Remler@baruch.cuny.edu
Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself
and of his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care.
From Article 25, The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted by the United Nations, December 1948.



I. Introduction

Emerging from the Great Recession, the United States faces critical decisions about fiscal and
social priorities. Current policy is unsustainable even under optimistic growth scenarios: the
Federal fiscal imbalance—the present value of deficits projected under current tax and
spending law—is estimated to be $70 trillion (Kotlikoff 2009; Kotlikoff and Burns 2012).
Laurence Kotlikoff (2009) estimates that expenditures on the elderly1 already average over
$30,000 per person aged 65 and older, and…

        by 2030, when baby boomers are fully retired, the average benefit per oldster…will be
        at least $50,000 (measured in today’s dollars) and represent more than 100 percent of
        per capita United States GDP. The remarkably high levels of oldster benefits, current
        and projected, are due, in the main, to the growth in the health care component of total
        Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid outlays
In 2007, expenditures on these three programs exceeded $1.2 trillion, the vast majority of
which flow to the benefit of older persons (Ben‐Shalom, Moffitt and Scholz, 2011, Table 1), and
are projected to climb sharply in the years ahead with growth in the population over age 65 and
particularly the continued escalation of health care costs.

Beyond receiving increasing public transfers, successive cohorts of elderly have experienced
higher lifetime earnings and have arrived at older ages with greater wealth than the preceding
cohorts (e.g. Scholz and Seshardi, 2008), and some cohorts have experienced increases in
wealth at older ages, at least between age 65 and 75 (Poterba, Venti and Wise, 2012).

Exhibit 1, based on the Federal Reserve’s Survey of Consumer Finances (Bricker, Kennickell,
Moore & Sabelhaus, 2012), shows the striking change in the age‐distribution of net worth over
the past 10 years. In 2001, 2004 and 2007, median wealth rises with age at younger ages,
peaks at age 55 to 64, and falls with age at older ages, consistent with standard life‐cycle
savings behavior. The decline at older ages reflects both the tendency of retirees to draw down


                                                                                                            2
assets to finance consumption, and higher lifetime earnings and wealth enjoyed by younger
cohorts as a result of economic growth. However, in 2010 the inverse‐u‐shape that typically
characterizes age‐wealth profiles had disappeared, and the oldest age group (aged 75+) is now
the richest (at least at the median).

The change in the age‐wealth profile occurred in part because of cyclical factors: cohorts under
age 75 were hit harder by the Great Recession than those aged 75 and older. But it also
represents a trend of increasing wealth among the older population. For example, median net
worth of the older population increased notably between 2001 and 2007, while gains at other
ages were modest or non‐existent (Exhibit 1). The increase in the wealth of the elderly relative
to other age groups goes back at least to 1984 (Fry, et al., 2011). Moreover, younger cohorts
will be asked to foot the bill for Social Security and Medicare for the baby‐boom retirees, and to
begin to fill in the enormous fiscal hole that grew deeper in the Great Recession.

Exhibit 1: Wealth by age, 2001 to 2010




Source: Bricker, J., Kennickell, A., K. Moore & J. Sabelhaus. 2012. Changes in US family finances from 2007 to 2010:
Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances. Federal Reserve Bulletin 98(2): June. Table 4.

The combination of increasing public transfers and increasing wealth has driven down poverty
rates among the elderly by more than 25 percentage points over the past 50 years, from over


                                                                                                                   3
35% in 1960 to 9% in 2010 (Exhibit 2; US Bureau of the Census, figure 5, 2011). The poverty
rate for older persons, mostly retired, has been lower than the poverty rate for working‐age
adults since 2000, and is currently less than half the poverty rate for children, which stands at
22%.

Elderly poverty also appears largely immune to economic recessions (periods shaded in Exhibit
2), most strikingly, falling through the severe recessions of the early 1980s and late 2000s, as
rates for children spiked. Moreover, these are trends in a poverty measure that does not count
assets, health insurance or health care provided by government or employers as income or
“resources” available to the elderly. Yet, as we have seen, the elderly have substantial assets
and transfers in the form of health insurance are the largest and arguably most valuable
transfers to the elderly since, due to chronic conditions and health risks of advanced age, many
would have difficulty purchasing private health insurance. Although traditional Medicare has
many gaps in coverage, if an elderly person is poor and has few assets, her out‐of‐pocket
medical expenses will be covered by Medicaid. Thus, Medicaid serves as backstop “Medigap”
(secondary) insurance and means‐tested long‐term care for many persons who did not have
low incomes over the working ages (i.e., the middle class).

Exhibit 2: Poverty rates by age




                                                                                                    4
In contrast, approximately 18% of persons under the age of 65—10 percent of children and 22
percent of adults aged 18 to 64—were uninsured in 2010 (U.S. Census 2011; Table 8). Although
poor children are generally eligible for Medicaid, until the Medicaid provisions of the ACA go
into effect in 2014, many low‐income adults will not be entitled to Medicaid.2 Thus, not only do
the elderly on average have more wealth and lower poverty rates than children and working‐
aged adults, all else the same, counting health insurance (public or private) as a resource would
widen further their economic advantages. Thus, scholars generally agree that increases in real
transfer expenditures on the elderly coupled with private income growth have markedly
reduced their poverty (Scholz, Moffitt and Cowen, 2009; Engelhardt and Gruber, 2004) relative
to other age groups.


Surprisingly, however, cracks in this consensus have begun to appear, centered on poverty
measurement. Flaws in the OMB/Census poverty measure (OPM) are well known with the first
critiques dating to nearly its birth (e.g., Friedman, 1965). The Census Bureau has for many years
pursued efforts to improve its poverty measure and has published alternative poverty series. In
2011, the Bureau began to publish the Supplemental Poverty Measure (SPM; see box) as part of
its P60‐series Current Population Reports (Short, 2011).


Exhibit 3: Key SPM adjustments to the OPM

       1. New poverty thresholds, set to 33% of the median expenditures on “FCSU” (food,
       clothing, shelter and utilities)1

       2. A new measurement unit (economic unit) that includes all related individuals, co‐
       resident unrelated children, cohabiters and their children.

       3. A new resource measure that includes the value of many near‐cash in‐kind
       government benefits (e.g., food and housing assistance), but subtracts taxes (or adds tax
       credits), some work expenses, child support payments, and Medical Out‐of‐Pocket
       (MOOP) expenditures.

The SPM shows the elderly to be far poorer than previously thought (US Bureau of the Census
2011b, NYCCEO 2011). The Census Bureau's SPM for 2010 put the elderly poverty rate at 15.9%
far higher than the OPM rate of 9.0% (Exhibit 4, first and second row). Although the OPM rate


                                                                                                 5
for the elderly falls substantially below the OPM rate for non‐elderly adults (13.7%) and
children (22.0%), the SPM rate of for the elderly slightly exceeds the corresponding rate for
non‐elderly adults, and approaches the SPM rate for children (18.2%).

Exhibit 4: Official and Supplemental Poverty Rates (%), 2010

                                   ALL      <18       18‐64     65+

OPM                                15.1     22.0      13.7      9.0

SPM                                16.0     18.2      15.2      15.9

SPM, not subtracting               12.7     15.4      12.4      8.6
MOOP


Source: Official: Census 2011, Table 4. Supplemental: Short 2011, Table 3a.

Results such as these have fueled calls to sustain or even develop new policies for the elderly,
as in Butrica, Murphy and Zedlewski (2006):

        Higher alternative poverty rates among older adults and especially high rates among
        some subgroups show the importance of protecting low‐income older adults when
        considering reforms that reduce the cost of government programs for retirees. They
        also underscore the importance of considering new policies to boost the incomes of the
        poorest older adults. Medicare reforms that increase cost sharing should exclude the
        lowest‐income older adults.
In short, the SPM figures imply that, despite spending an amount equal to 70% of per capita
GDP on each person over age 65, on average, the elderly remain among the most economically
vulnerable groups of American society. How can that be?

Empirically, the entire difference between the OPM and SPM elderly poverty rate results from
their different treatment of MOOP expenditures. The SPM subtracts MOOP expenditures from
family income, while the OPM ignores MOOP expenditures altogether. When the Census makes
all SPM adjustments to the OPM other than subtracting MOOP expenditures from resources,
the elderly poverty rate falls slightly, from 9.0% to 8.6% (compare the first and third rows of
Exhibit 4, rightmost column). When it then subtracts MOOP expenditures (shown in the second
row), the elderly poverty rate rises to 15.9%, the SPM elderly poverty rate (Short 2011, Table

                                                                                                   6
3a; see Exhibit 4). Clearly, many older persons have substantial MOOP expenditures, making
elderly poverty rates highly sensitive to their treatment.

Many SPM adjustments have proven relatively uncontroversial, particularly the redefinition of
the measurement unit, the revised equivalence scales and the inclusion of near‐cash in‐kind
benefits that can be used to meet FCSU (food, clothing, shelter & utilities) needs. More
controversial are the linking of thresholds to national consumption expenditures, which
effectively converts the poverty measure from an indicator of absolute deprivation to one of
relative deprivation, and the exclusion from resources of a recipient value of health insurance
and the deduction from resources of actual MOOP expenditures.3 The choice between a
relative and absolute poverty measure is predominantly philosophical and disagreements about
it are unlikely to be resolved by analysis.4 The treatment of health insurance and expenditures
in poverty measurement, though also partly philosophical, is more conceptual and empirical,
and is our focus.5

The SPM’s revisions to the OPM were guided by recommendations of a 2010 inter‐agency
working group on poverty measurement (US Bureau of the Census, 2010) which, in turn, based
recommendations of an expert panel published in a 1995 National Academy of Sciences (NAS)
report, Measuring Poverty: A New Approach (Citro and Michael, 1995) as well as research over
the 15 years since its publication. The exclusion of health insurance benefits from resources in
the SPM is noteworthy in light of the recommendation to include the value for other in‐kind
benefits such as food and housing assistance. The exclusion of both MOOP expenditures and
health insurance from resources results from the decision to base the SPM thresholds on non‐
medical (FCSU) needs. This recommendation was not based on empirical evidence that the
exclusion of health benefits and expenditures improves the poverty measure’s predictive
validity compared to the OPM. Indeed, to our knowledge, at the time of the implementation of
the SPM, no study had compared the (empirical) predictive validity of the OPM and SPM.
Rather, the recommendation was based on the practical difficulties of implementing a
threshold that included health—difficulties that stemmed in large part from the structure of the
US health care system.


                                                                                                   7
Deducting MOOP from resources likely exacerbates another shortcoming of the income‐based
poverty measures: not counting assets as resources. Most people save explicitly to fund
consumption in retirement, including MOOP expenditures (DeNardi et al., 2001). Someone who
uses her financial assets to purchase better medical insurance or care would, all else the same,
be deemed poorer according to the SPM.

The first purpose of this paper is to assess whether the SPM treatment of health insurance and
MOOP expenditures results in an improved measure of poverty, especially for the elderly. In
Section II, we examine a variety of evidence suggesting that the poverty rates of the elderly
should be lower, perhaps far lower, than indicated by the OPM. This evidence raises questions
about the validity of the SPM, since, as have seen, the SPM raises the elderly poverty rate, both
in absolute terms and relative to other ages, compared to the OPM. In fact, the SPM stands
alone in suggesting the OPM elderly poverty rate is substantially downward biased.

We next examine evidence on the predictive validity of the OPM and SPM. We conclude that
the existing evidence, including analyses conducted at our request, suggests that subtracting
MOOP expenditures from resources worsens a poverty measure’s ability to predict hardship
among the elderly. A possible explanation for this finding is linked to the exclusion of assets
from resources, since assets both reduce hardship and fund MOOP expenditures. Finally, health
shocks do not appear to result in reported material hardship for the elderly but do for the near‐
elderly.

One might argue that our goal of assessing whether the SPM treatment of MOOP expenditures
improves its predictive validity is inappropriate because, as the name suggests, the SPM is
intended to supplement, not replace the OPM. We disagree. First, many proponents of the
SPM clearly hope that it will come to be regarded as superior to the OPM and, over time,
replace the OPM. Second, the decision to base the SPM on non‐medical needs and resources is
sometimes justified by the claim that health care deprivation is best measured separately from
“material” deprivation (Citro and Michael, Chapter 4; Blank, 2008). Blank (2008) in particular
argues that multiple measures of deprivation provide a more complete picture of need than



                                                                                                   8
any one measure can.6 We agree, but nonetheless believe that calculation of multiple measures
does not reduce the importance of creating the best official measure of poverty possible.

Therefore, the second purpose of the paper is to explore the possibility of constructing a Health
Inclusive Poverty Measure (HIPM). In Section III, we first analyze the reasons that the NAS panel
recommended that health benefits be excluded from, and MOOP expenditures subtracted
from, resources for the SPM. We find that the rationales for these recommendations, although
sensible at the time, are less compelling today. We identify conditions that make a HIPM
feasible and illustrate four approaches to constructing a HIPM. The key conceptual insight for a
HIPM is to consider “health needs” as the need for health insurance, rather than health care.
The key practical development that makes a HIPM possible is the universal availability of health
insurance plans with non‐risk‐rated premiums and caps on MOOP.

In Section IV, we show how the practical conditions for HIPM implementation are met for the
non‐elderly by the full implementation of the Affordable Care Act scheduled for 2014 and, with
the exception of holes in prescription drug coverage, are virtually met for the elderly by recent
changes to Medicare Advantage Plans. We also include sample HIPM calculations. We present
preliminary analyses that suggest the SPM’s unlimited deduction of MOOP results in an
overstatement of poverty by up to 5.5 percentage points (50 percent) and that those elderly
classified as poor due to the unlimited MOOP deduction are not poorly insured persons with
incomes near the poverty line, but well insured persons with incomes well above the poverty
line. Section V discusses caveats to and critiques of our proposed HIPM. Section VI concludes.

The construction of a Health Inclusive Poverty Measure is timely. First, we believe that it would
be instructive to have a HIPM to demonstrate the effect of health benefits, including benefits
provided by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), on poverty. Ironically, in subtracting MOOP
expenditures (including premiums) from resources, the SPM may show the ACA’s provision of
highly subsidized health insurance to be immiserating for some low‐income families.7

More importantly, to make good use of limited government funds in a time of continuing fiscal
and economic distress, we need accurate information about the costs and benefits of
government programs and the economic welfare of our citizens. Knowing who is poor is critical
                                                                                                 9
to protecting the neediest to the greatest extent possible as we seek to restore fiscal balance.
Clearly, for judging changes in economic inequality, and the effects of policy and priorities for
intervention, it is a matter of some importance whether the poverty rate of the elderly is about
the same as the shamefully high child poverty rate (as with the SPM), or about half the child
poverty rate (as with the OPM), or approaching zero (as suggested by evidence reviewed in the
next section). While social spending prioritizes health and long‐term care for the elderly,
technological and globalization shocks to the labor market have led to calls for shifting
resources elsewhere, particularly for education and training (Autor, 2010) or income support
for working‐aged adults and their children.

II. Validity

Premises and Definitions

The answer to the question: Does the SPM’s treatment of health insurance and medical out‐of‐
pocket expenses result in a “better” measure of poverty? depends in part on the answers to a
set of inter‐related questions: What is poverty? What constitutes a “better” measure? What is
the purpose of poverty measurement? Although different scholars and analysts have answered
these questions differently, we begin with a set of premises, definitions and priorities that we
believe are widely accepted.


We believe there is broad consensus that poverty is the inability or failure to attain “basic
needs.” Basic needs may simply reflect social norms about a minimally acceptable level of
subsistence or, in principle, be derived from scientific study of the resources required for
survival, full human function or full participation in society. For the purposes of this paper,
however, it suffices to agree on the following: First, there is some minimum material
consumption deemed “basic.” This is generally influenced by social norms. Second, health care
is an essential part of basic needs.8 The latter might seems obvious, since health care is often
essential for survival, full human function or full participation in society, but its meaning is
complicated by the differences between and inter‐relationships among health, health care and
health insurance. Conceptually, one may define “needs” as resources needed to maintain

                                                                                                    10
survival or function, but for some individuals in some medical conditions, that is impossible. For
example, some forms of cancer are incurable, no matter what resources are used. So, we
cannot define health care needs purely in terms of health. In modern society, health care is
often largely funded through health insurance. Is, then, health insurance a basic need? We
defer this issue until later, but note that it is essential to distinguish health care and health
insurance, as well as to understand their inter‐relationships.


Having defined poverty as the inability or failure to attain a set of basic needs that includes
health care, what would constitute a good measure of poverty? There are, broadly speaking,
two measurement approaches. The first determines whether a family actually “consumes” an
amount greater than the level of basic need. (If the set of basic needs includes different
dimensions—health care, shelter, food‐‐ then a determination may need to be made about
consumption on more than one dimension.) The second method determines whether the
family has adequate resources overall to support consumption at or above the basic needs
level, whether or not it actually consumes the level and types of goods deemed “basic needs.”
Conceptually, resources are anything that allows the family to meet basic needs, no matter the
source (market, government, gifts), form (cash, in‐kind) or period earned (current income,
savings out of past income).


The quality of a statistic cannot be judged apart from how it is used. Different measures may be
needed for different uses. We believe there is broad consensus that a poverty measure should
adequately reflect the overall level of deprivation in society, and, perhaps more importantly,
describe differences in deprivation between groups at a given time, changes in deprivation over
time, and changes over time in group differences in deprivation (i.e., group specific trends and
differences). Trends and group differences in deprivation help analysts judge the health of the
economy as well as social and political institutions, and to understand the impact of social
programs and other policies on material hardship or deprivation.9




                                                                                                    11
Because our analysis combines the poverty and health economics literature, we need to explain
and clarify some terms. In the poverty literature, MOOP refers to both health insurance
premium payments and payments for medical care made out‐of‐pocket. In the health
economics literature, by contrast, MOOP often refers only to payments for medical care, which
we will refer to as “non‐premium MOOP.”10 We will use the term “premium MOOP” to mean
out‐of‐pocket payments by individuals towards the purchase of insurance.


Are the elderly much poorer than we thought?

As we have seen, the SPM practice of subtracting MOOP expenditures from income markedly
increases elderly poverty. Is it plausible that the elderly are much poorer than the OPM
indicates? We now review evidence to suggest that an improved poverty measure would raise,
not lower, elderly poverty rates. First, the OPM fails to count both health insurance and assets
as resources, yet the elderly have substantial amounts of each. Second, consumption‐based
poverty measures show rates of elderly poverty far lower than the OPM.


Health insurance. Not surprisingly, adding the value of health insurance to resources would
markedly reduce elderly poverty. Adding health insurance to resources is problematic,
however, because it is not clear that health insurance or care is included in the needs threshold,
an inconsistency. But as an accounting exercise, it illustrates the magnitude of the transfers of
health insurance to the low‐income elderly.


Several studies found that adding a value of Medicaid and Medicare to income reduced elderly
poverty rates, sometimes to near zero (e.g., those cited by Ellwood & Summers 1985; see
Meyer and Sullivan 2010a for estimates that add an insurance value of Medicare and Medicaid
to consumption for calculation of rates of consumption‐poverty).11 For example, in 1986, the
elderly poverty rate would have fallen (approximately) from 12.4 percent to 4.1 percent if a
market value of Medicaid and Medicare were added to income (Citro and Michael, 1995, Table
4‐2).


                                                                                                12
More recent data confirm the magnitude of transfers to the low‐income elderly, including in
health insurance. Ben‐Shalom, Moffitt and Scholz (2011; Tables 4 through 6) show that, in 2004,
the pre‐transfer monthly poverty gap among the elderly (the aggregate amount by which the
elderly’s pre‐transfer income fell below the poverty line) was $8.8 billion in 2007 dollars. The
post‐transfer poverty gap—calculated by adding to pre‐transfer income cash and near‐cash
transfers, but not Medicare or Medicaid—was $0.6 billion. Therefore, cash and near‐cash
transfers eliminated 93% of the pre‐transfer poverty gap among the elderly. Further adding a
value for Medicaid based on the costs of HMO plans eliminates $10 billion of the monthly US
poverty gap for persons of all ages, though that figure includes spending on poor pregnant
women and children in addition to the low‐income elderly. Adding a value of Medicare (based
on the costs of PPO plans) would close $10 to $11 billion of the US poverty gap for persons of
all ages, though that figure includes spending on non‐elderly disabled individuals. Nonetheless,
it is quite likely that $20+ billion in monthly Medicaid and Medicare spending on the poor
through programs that overwhelmingly target the elderly would, if counted, eliminate the
remaining $0.6 billion elderly poverty gap, even if heavily discounted to reflect a recipient or
fungible value.


Assets As Exhibit 1 demonstrates, median wealth is greater among the elderly than at any other
age. Furthermore, wealth grew faster between 2001 and either 2007 or 2010 at older ages than
at any other age, and has done so at least since the early 1980s (Fry et al. 2011). Clearly,
counting assets (in some fashion) would only lower elderly poverty rates, both absolutely and
relative to younger persons.


Deducting MOOP exacerbates the shortcomings of not counting assets. Consider two people
with the same income, one of whom has higher assets and uses them to purchase better
(higher premium) health insurance and/or better care conditional on insurance. Using the SPM
approach, that individual would be deemed poorer that than the person with fewer assets and
lower quality health insurance or care. The magnitude of the overstatement of poverty in the
SPM from the combination of MOOP deduction and asset exclusion is unknown. But, due to the


                                                                                                   13
generally greater wealth and worse health that accompany old age, the SPM treatment of
MOOP expenses will likely bias upward the elderly poverty rate relative to rates at younger
ages. Particularly relevant is the elasticity of MOOP with respect to wealth. Several studies
show that, among the elderly, MOOP (not including premiums) is sensitive to wealth, although
more sensitive to health status (Goldman and Zissimopolous, 2003; Marshall, McGarry and
Skinner, 2010; Webb and Zhivan, 2010). For example, Webb and Zhivan (2010) find, all else the
same, that being in the top wealth quintile raises MOOP by 28% relative to the middle
quintile.12 Marshall, McGarry and Skinner (2010) show that end‐of‐life MOOP spending on long‐
term care (nursing home, home care, helpers, home modifications) is particularly sensitive to
wealth.


However, it is the impact of wealth (and transfers) on the status of low‐income elderly that is
most relevant for poverty measurement.


How poor are the low‐income elderly?

Several studies demonstrate that the “income poor” elderly, on average, consume much more
than their income (Meyer and Sullivan, 2010a; Charles et al., 2006; Fisher et al. 2009). For
example, Fisher et al. (2009) report that nearly three quarters of income‐poor persons aged 65
and older were not “consumption poor” (i.e., consume or spend less than the OPM‐‐Official
Poverty Measure‐‐threshold).13 Among the income poor who were not consumption poor,
median assets (and net worth) totaled $70,000 to $80,000, in dollars of 2003, based on data
from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) averaged over 1983‐2003 (Fisher et al. 2009,
Table 5). Yet, median assets of the elderly today are substantially higher than in the 1980s and
1990s, suggesting that asset holdings for the low‐income elderly are higher today.


Not surprisingly, rates of consumption poverty are far lower than rates of income poverty,
standing at about 5% to 6% of the older population roughly twenty years ago (Fisher et al.
2009); or 4% or today (Meyer and Sullivan 2010a). Furthermore, although they are needier on
average than the income‐poor elderly, the consumption‐poor elderly are not all needy: many
                                                                                                  14
have incomes that exceed poverty line, and have assets, but are “thrifty” (Charles et al., 2006;
Meyer and Sullivan, 2010a; Fisher et al., 2009).14 The joint occurrence of income and
consumption poverty is rare, with prevalence around 1% to 4% of the older population. For
example, Charles et al. (2006), using data from the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS), report
that two to three percent of the older population is both consumption poor and income poor.
Hurd and Rohwedder (2006) report a corresponding figure of 1.4% based on a different sample
from HRS. The corresponding figure for those aged 65 and over in the CEX is three to four
percent (Fisher et al. 2009, Table 3), though, again, this study averaged data from 1983 to 2003.


Thus, the weight of the evidence suggests that the elderly poverty rate should be lower,
perhaps much lower, than the OPM rate. That the SPM results in a much higher elderly poverty
rate than the OPM due to the deduction of MOOP expenditures from resources should raise
concerns about validity of that adjustment and the SPM measure. However, the possibility
remains that subtracting MOOP expenditures could improve the predictive validity of the SPM
relative to the OPM—the correspondence of the poverty measure to other indicators material
hardship—an issue that we examine in the next section.


Material Hardship Validations of the SPM and OPM

If we built a better measure of poverty, how would we know? Researchers have attempted to
validate poverty measures empirically by examining how measures correlate with indicators of
“material deprivation” or hardship of various types. In this section, we summarize key results
from five studies that use this approach, some of which also explore the treatment of health
insurance and MOOP expenditures among the elderly: Meyer and Sullivan (2010a); Charles et
al. (2006); Levy (2009); Butrica et al. (2008); Butrica et al. (2009). We provide more detailed
reviews and summaries of these studies in the Appendix because, in some instances, the
authors furnished updated, new, or unpublished results at our request. These results may not
have been discussed elsewhere. We also discuss Butrica et al. (2008) in detail in the Appendix
because we believe that their conclusion‐‐that subtracting MOOP expenditures from income


                                                                                                  15
results in poverty measures that accord better with material hardship‐‐rests on a faulty
interpretation of some of their data, which, in fact, is inconclusive.


These assessments generally consist of comparisons of correlations between different poverty
measures and reported experiences of material hardship of various types, an approach (to our
knowledge) pioneered by Christopher Jencks and colleagues Susan Mayer and Barbara Boyle
Torrey (Mayer and Jencks 1989; Jencks and Torrey, 1988).15 Material hardship is measured by
indicators such as missed meals, delayed or foregone medical care or dental care due to lack of
resources, substandard housing conditions or crowding, and the absence of household durables
such as washing machines. The studies we review consider the sensitivity of results to the
inclusion or exclusion of MOOP expenditures from consumption or income, or to the addition
of an estimate of the fungible value of employer‐provided or public health insurance. The key
results for the older population from this literature are the following:


1. Subtracting MOOP expenditures from income does not improve prediction of material
hardship (Levy 2009). Subtracting MOOP from income weakens the relationship between
income and both food hardship and medicine hardship, suggesting that it is increases in income
(not income net of MOOP) that reduces hardship. Interestingly, subtracting MOOP from income
also reduces the estimated effect of poverty (not income) on food hardship, but not on
medication hardship. This finding suggests that elderly persons may protect other dimensions
of material well‐being from the effects of medical expenditures, though, admittedly, Levy
presents information on only one non‐medical hardship dimension (food). Nonetheless, this
evidence clearly raises doubts about the idea that MOOP expenditures represent non‐
discretionary (e.g., health‐shock‐driven) reductions in resources available to support non‐
medical dimensions of material well‐being.


2. Among the elderly, and even the low‐income elderly, health care spending does not “crowd
out” other types of spending. Specifically, in HRS data that follows the same individuals over
time, increases in the number of reported health conditions do not significantly or substantively

                                                                                                 16
reduce non‐medical expenditures among those over age 65 (Butrica et al. 2009). In fact, this
study concludes:

       “The results suggest that high out‐of‐pocket health care spending does not generally
       force older Americans to reduce their living standards. However, low‐income adults in
       their fifties and early sixties appear to curtail their non‐health spending in response to
       high health care expenses when they develop multiple medical conditions. These
       findings suggest that Medicare and Medicaid generally protect older adults from high
       out‐of‐pocket health care costs, but that important gaps in the health care safety net
       exist for older people who have not yet reached the Medicare eligibility age of 65”
       (emphasis added).

This conclusion is all the more surprising since the last year covered by their data is 2005, a year
before Medicare Part‐D began paying for prescription drugs.


3. Assets matter for older persons’ experience of material hardship, controlling for income
(Levy 2009; and, indirectly, Meyer and Sullivan 2010a).

Indeed, the importance of integrating income, consumption and wealth in poverty
measurement is emphasized by the Commission on the Measurement of Economic
Performance and Social Progress (Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi, 2009, Executive Summary): "But for
many purposes, it is also important to know what is happening at the bottom of the
income/wealth distribution (captured in poverty statistics), or at the top. Ideally, such
information should not come in isolation but be linked, i.e. one would like information about
how well‐off households are with regard to different dimensions of material living standards:
income, consumption and wealth. After all, a low‐income household with above‐average
wealth is not necessarily worse‐off than a medium‐income household with no wealth."

In sum, these studies show that subtracting MOOP from income does not improve the
correspondence between income poverty and non‐medical material hardship among the
elderly. Furthermore, older persons use their savings/assets to support their consumption (and
MOOP expenditures) and material well‐being, so ignoring assets and subtracting MOOP from
income distorts measures of the material status of the elderly. Although additional study is



                                                                                                 17
warranted, we find little empirical evidence to support the SPM treatment of medical care and
insurance.

III. Barriers to Constructing a HIPM

NAS Rationale: MOOP Expenditures, Insurance & Poverty Measurement

We have argued that deducting MOOP from resources, not crediting health insurance in
resources and not including health care or insurance in needs distorts the poverty
measurement of the elderly, relative to the non‐elderly. Why did the NAS expert panel
recommend this approach? In fact, the panel commissioned Moon (1993) to describe
approaches to including health care or insurance into poverty measurement—to create a
HIPM—and considered these approaches. They found a variety of conceptual and practical
barriers and complications that made a HIPM impractical and/or invalid. Some of these barriers
are direct while others barriers and complications are indirect and emerged only in analysis of
particular proposed approaches. Many interact with one another. We briefly describe each of
the issues, focusing first on health care and then on health insurance.

#1 Difficulty valuing heterogeneous health needs Health care needs vary enormously with
health status, even minute clinical detail. A healthy person might need nothing; someone with
diabetes needs regular outpatient care and supplies; and someone who had a heart attack
needs large amounts of intensive hospital care. Thus, adding an expected/average health care
need to the threshold would represent poorly the needs of both the healthy and the sick.

#2 The distribution of MOOP expenditures has a high variance and is skewed (i.e., a small
number of people have very large expenditures). Because health status varies greatly and sick
people consume vastly more health care than healthy people (Berk and Monheit 2001; Cohen
and Yu, 2012), MOOP also has high variance and is skewed. Thus, substantial spending may be
required meet actual health care needs.

#3 Needs must be met ex post, not ex ante One approach to incorporating health care into
poverty measurement is to include expected (ex ante) health care costs in the needs threshold.
However, as discussed above, actual (ex post) health care needs may be much higher than


                                                                                                18
expected. Alternatively, in principle, people could meet their needs by purchasing health
insurance ex ante, but in practice, that is not always possible. As discussed below in #5,
insurance premiums may be related to health status (i.e. risk‐adjusted) and thus not truly ex
ante to health status. Additionally, cost‐sharing (e.g., deductibles) associated with insurance
plans means that some out‐of‐pocket health care spending still depends on actual ex post
health status.

#4 Health care expenditures are non‐discretionary According to this view, health care
expenditures are not a matter of choice but are exogenous, due to exogenous health status.
Non‐discretionarity itself is not a barrier to constructing a HIPM, but in combination with
barriers #1‐#3, it makes some proposed HIPMs, such as measures that would add average
health care needs to thresholds, unacceptable. Non‐discretionarity was used to justify the
decision to deduct MOOP expenditures from resources.

#5 Health insurance value and availability varies widely An alternative approach to valuing
health care needs is to value health insurance needs. However, the actuarially fair premium for
health insurance depends on age and health status, making insurance, like health care, difficult
to value as both a need and a resource. Moreover, the availability of health insurance and
premiums vary with health status and other factors such as employment status. Determining
the resources needed to purchase sufficient health insurance for each individual has thus been
a daunting task.

#6 Health insurance is not fungible Health insurance, however valuable, can be used only for
health care, and is not available for purchases of other basic needs, such as FCSU.

#7 Poverty measurement requires consistent resource and needs definitions If neither health
insurance nor health care is included in needs, then it is inconsistent to include the value of
health insurance in resources. Lack of fungibility compounds this problem.16

Ultimately, the difficulty of valuing health care/insurance needs seemed insurmountable. If
health care/insurance could not be added to needs and resources, then, the panel concluded,
consistency demands that MOOP expenditures be deducted from resources (see #4 and #7).

                                                                                                  19
The panel recognized that excluding health care/insurance entirely would mean that the
revised poverty measure would not register unmet health care/insurance needs, nor the
fulfillment of those needs. And one committee member, Cogan dissented, asserting that
consuming health care is a choice, similar to other economic goods (Citro and Michael, pp.388‐
390) and therefore discretionary.

The Report acknowledged many of these drawbacks and noted that, as the structure of the
health care and insurance system changes, their recommendations should be revisited (page
69):

       Finally, as changes are made to the US system of health care, it will be important to
       reevaluate the treatment of medical care expenses in the definition of family resources.
       As an example, if relatively generous health insurance coverage is made available to
       everyone, the amount of out‐of‐pocket costs that is subtracted from income should likely
       be subject to an upper limit or cap.

In light of the changes to health care system that have occurred since the mid‐1990s and the
fundamental changes that will soon occur as the provisions of the ACA go into effect, we
believe that it is time to reconsider the approach. Due to the continued complexity of the US
health care system, we first consider at a conceptual level the conditions needed to surmount
the barriers to creating a HIPM.

Health Care System Conditions that enable a HIPM

In order to incorporate health care and health insurance into poverty measurement, two kinds
of conditions must be met. The first are conditions about the health care and insurance system.
The second is agreement about what constitutes “needs” for health care and/or insurance—a
partially philosophical and political issue. By specifying health needs as a need for health
insurance, it becomes practical to incorporate health care and insurance into poverty measures.
Therefore, we first describe conditions that enable a HIPM and later discuss insurance as a
need. In considering the conditions that permit incorporation of health care and insurance into
poverty, we initially focus on general conditions. We later analyze how well our current and
near future systems match these general conditions.



                                                                                                20
Consider first a universally provided health care system similar to those of some European
countries. Everyone is able to select a health insurance policy that has no premium or non‐
premium MOOP. The plan covers a certain class of medical care—that which is socially defined
as essential. We will define “non‐discretionary” care (tautologically) as the care covered by this
plan.17 Since the plan requires no premiums or cost‐sharing, then all MOOP expenditures are by
definition discretionary, representing a decision to pay for care outside the plan. Individuals
may also choose to purchase other plans that have premium and/or non‐premium MOOP (cost‐
sharing), and which may cover non‐essential care. Anyone who chooses one of these other
plans has thus chosen to have MOOP, making it discretionary. Moreover, all health care needs
deemed essential by society can be met ex ante, rather than ex post, simply by not choosing
one of the other plans.18

Consider how under this system health could be incorporated into poverty measurement: a
HIPM. Assume that the government funds the ordinary plan for everyone who wants it. To
construct a HIPM, both needs and resources would include the plan full cost—the actuarially
fair premium plus administrative costs. As the NAS Report noted, however, in such systems,
health needs and resources are equal, making the inclusion of health into poverty
measurement seem uninformative. (However, such a measure does demonstrate the
contribution of publicly‐provided health benefits to closing the “poverty gap.”)

Consider now a health care system in which everyone has available a less‐than‐comprehensive
basic plan, which we will refer to as the basic capped plan (BCP). The BCP covers all care
determined essential by society, so that it is “complete” in the events, treatments and
procedures covered. However, it is “incomplete” in two respects. First, a premium MOOP
payment is required to purchase the BCP. But that premium is not risk‐rated: it does not
depend on health status. Second, the BCP has cost sharing (non‐premium MOOP) with strict
limits. Specifically, non‐premium MOOP is capped at a moderate level, no matter health
status.19

In such a system, premium MOOP for the BCP is non‐discretionary, while higher premium
MOOP (for some other plan) or non‐premium MOOP above the BCP cap are both clearly

                                                                                                  21
discretionary—not needed to meet essential health needs. We now describe how a BCP
eliminates the three insurance‐related barriers to constructing a HIPM and substantially
reduces other care‐related barriers and complications.

#5 The value and availability of health insurance varies widely Since everyone can purchase the
BCP, and the premium does not depend on health status, its availability does not vary. While
health insurance is, in some sense, more valuable to those in poor health, since the price of
health insurance does not depend on health status, the addition to poverty thresholds or
resources to account for health insurance also does not depend on health status.

#6 Health insurance is not fungible Health insurance is, of course, still not fungible. Therefore,
no matter how generous a government‐ or employer‐provided health insurance plan, it cannot
increase resources available to meet basic needs (including basic health insurance needs) by
more than value of the BCP. However, if we limit the contribution of health insurance to
resources to the health insurance amount included in the threshold, fungibility is no longer an
issue. In fact, the panel (pages 231‐235) considered a single poverty index that incorporated
health insurance/care in roughly this manner, but rejected it as impractical for the US health
care system at the time.

#7 Consistent resource and needs definition By including health insurance in both resources and
needs, consistency is achieved.

The following barriers remain, but are much reduced by the existence of a BCP.

#1 Difficulty valuing heterogeneous health needs Measuring full health care needs is no longer
essential for poverty measurement. The only expenditures that vary with health status, and
thus are difficult to value, are non‐premium MOOP expenditures up to the cap of the BCP.

#2 The distribution of MOOP expenditures has a high variance and is skewed Premium MOOP
under the BCP has no or limited variance (e.g., limited age and geographical variance). Non‐
premium MOOP up to the BCP has much lower variance and is much less skewed than it would
for a population that also included the uninsured, the poorly insured and the well insured with
no caps; the BCP cuts the tail off MOOP expenditures.

                                                                                                     22
#3 Needs must be met ex post, not ex ante Most health care needs can be met ex ante through
the BCP, but some non‐premium MOOP (below the cap) will be essential and will depend on ex
post health status.

#4 Health care expenditures are non‐discretionary Even if health care expenditures are largely
non‐discretionary, MOOP expenditures above premium MOOP for BCP plus non‐premium
MOOP above the cap are discretionary since they result from insurance choice: One could have
chosen the BCP and strictly limited MOOP expenses.

Thus, a health care system with a universally available plan whose premiums do not vary with
health status, which covers all essential care and whose non‐premium MOOP is capped,
eliminates or substantially reduces the barriers that lead the NAS panel to give up on a HIPM.

Incorporating Health Care and Insurance into Poverty Measurement

Under a BCP system, incorporating health insurance and care into poverty measurement is
possible but more complicated than under the simple universal government system. With a
BCP, government or employers may pay directly for insurance (partially or fully), rather than
providing funds to the individual to purchase insurance. A HIPM must therefore carefully
account for plan costs in both needs and resources. Again, we use the term “plan full cost” to
refer to the total cost of the insurance, irrespective of who pays. The plan full cost is often
referred to as the “actuarially fair premium”—the average cost of all medical care—plus
essential administrative costs.20

Under the BCP health care system, the SPM could be modified to create a HIPM in the following
manner:

      Add the Plan Full Cost for the BCP to the needs threshold for everyone
      For those provided insurance by employers or government, add the Plan Full Cost of the
       BCP to resources less the actual premium MOOP payment required (but only up to the
       premium MOOP that would be required to obtain the BCP)
      Several approaches to non‐premium MOOP are possible:

       HIPM‐a: Deduct non‐premium MOOP expenditures from resources, up to the cap
       (maximum) for the BCP

                                                                                                  23
        HIPM‐b: Add expected non‐premium MOOP under the BCP to the threshold (or deduct
        expected non‐premium MOOP from resources)

        HIPM‐c: Treat non‐premium MOOP as the SPM treats FCSU needs

        HIPM‐d: Make no deductions for non‐premium MOOP

None of these approaches to non‐premium MOOP is perfect but the problem of incorporating
health care/insurance into the poverty measure with potential for huge errors in measurement
has been reduced to the more manageable problem of handling the limited non‐premium
MOOP expenditures under the BCP. Capping the MOOP deduction at the BCP maximum (HIPM‐
a) is similar to the SPM and avoids mis‐classifying people who are poor due to health care
needs as non‐poor. However, to the extent that non‐premium MOOP is discretionary, including
discretionary through plan choice, this approach classifies those buying more care as poorer
than they “truly” are. This is exactly the source of bias in the SPM but it is reduced in HIPM‐a by
capping non‐premium MOOP deductions. This approach can be considered an upper‐bound
HIPM.

Adding expected non‐premium MOOP under the BCP to the threshold (HIPM‐b) risks mis‐
classifying people for a different reason. Those with higher‐than‐expected non‐premium MOOP
due to worse health status are poorer than measured, while those with lower non‐premium
MOOP due to better health status are wealthier than measured. The same type of error was
described in the NAS Report when the panel considered adding a value for expected MOOP
expenditures for health care to the needs thresholds. With a BCP available, however, the
magnitude of this type of error is far smaller since non‐premium MOOP is capped. However, to
the extent that non‐premium MOOP spending below the cap is discretionary, HIPM‐b will
overstate poverty less than HIPMa. Deducting expected non‐premium MOOP has the same
effect and is thus another, equivalent means of implementing this approach (Burtless and
Siegel, 2004).

Treating non‐premium MOOP in the same manner as FCSU (HIPM‐c) has different problems.
This approach would set poverty thresholds at 33% of the median family spending on
“FCSU+non‐premium MOOP.” However, the empirical distribution of non‐premium MOOP


                                                                                                 24
includes expenditures by people who have plans with higher caps than the BCP. Thus, the
resulting threshold is likely to be overly generous.

Making no deduction for non‐premium MOOP (HIPM‐d) will systematically reduce measured
poverty. This approach can be considered a lower‐bound HIPM.

An advantage of HIPMs‐b, ‐c and –d is that they do not require data about non‐premium
MOOP. Indeed, many datasets used in poverty research lack such data.21 The less sensitive cost‐
sharing—and thus non‐premium MOOP—is to health status, the fewer problems produced by
HIPM‐b and HIPM‐c. For purposes of discussion, unless otherwise noted, we will focus on HIPM‐
a, because it is most similar to the current SPM. When our analysis applies to all approaches,
we will refer to the HIPM.

Although implementation depends critically on health care policy, and the health care market,
it is possible to illustrate the basic functioning of our approach. Suppose that for a family of
four, plan full cost is $15,000 for the BCP22 and that the FCSU needs threshold is $22,000. The
HIPM‐a needs threshold would then be $37,000. A family with no employer or government
provided insurance and no government subsidies towards their insurance would need $37,000
to escape poverty, an amount that far exceeds the OPM or SPM threshold. However, a family
with fully government provided insurance would have resources equal to their income plus
$15,000.

In other scenarios, however, additions to needs and resources could differ, illustrating the value
of a HIPM in measuring hardship. For example, a family with an employer‐provided insurance
policy similar to the BCP but that requires $5000 in premium MOOP to obtain would have
$15,000 added to needs, but only $10,000 ($15,000 ‐ $5,000) credited to their resources.

In summary, we have described a health care and insurance system that makes incorporating
health care and insurance into the SPM feasible. That system includes a BCP available to all with
the following features: (1) All essential care (as defined by society) is covered. (2) The premium
is not risk‐rated. (3) The non‐premium MOOP is capped. However, the feasibility of this HIPM
rests on the premise that it is appropriate to consider health insurance as a basic need.

                                                                                                   25
Health Insurance as a Need

Our approach to constructing a HIPM requires that health insurance, rather than health care,
be considered a basic need, no matter an individual’s health status. This means health
insurance is something essential and not wasted even if ex post an individual has used little or
no health care, and even for someone with little ex ante expected health care usage. This
approach has philosophical and political implications to which some may object.

In contrast to our approach, the NAS panel conceptualized health needs as a need for care. It
noted that the need could be met through health insurance, as well as through payment for
care, but the fundamental need was for care. Indeed, the Report implied that health insurance
was wasted if, ex post, the individual did not need health care: “someone in a high‐risk health
category may have a good year and need only minimal medical care, but no one can have a
year in which he or she does not need to eat” (p. 235). Even Moon (1993), who was concerned
that the poverty measure be sensitive to the value of health insurance in meeting needs and
reducing poverty, conceptualized the need as care, not insurance. However, like fire insurance,
which has value even if there is no fire, health insurance is valuable no matter the outcome in
any period (Blinder, 1985).

The panel also tied this issue to fungibility when it wrote, “the ‘extra’ benefits received from
insurance (or free care) to cover, say, expensive surgery are not likely to free up money
commensurately” (p. 68). Essentially they are comparing two individuals with limited means:
one who has insurance and one who does not, both of whom have a condition that would
benefit from surgery. The covered individual receives expensive surgery, aiding his health. The
uncovered individual does not have sufficient funds to pay for the surgery. The uncovered
individual would likely have to do some of the following: go without surgery (common for
cancer), receive free care (common for heart attack or trauma, conditions for which hospitals
are required to treat patients irrespective of ability to pay), use up available assets, or go into
debt. In many of those scenarios, having surgery paid for by insurance does not “free up money
commensurably,” because, in the counterfactual (uninsured) situation, the individual would not
have had sufficient resources to pay for the surgery. But if we view health insurance as a basic

                                                                                                      26
need, then being provided insurance frees up funds that would have been needed for insurance
premiums.

Considering care, rather than insurance, to be the fundamental need is understandable.
Poverty is not having sufficient resources to maintain health and well‐being and care can be
obtained through means other than insurance. We believe, however, that insurance should be
considered a need. First, although obvious, it is worth stating that health care is largely
obtained through insurance. Second, for the elderly we have recognized this need and, since
1965, have increasingly met it, through public insurance. Third, for poor children (and many of
their parents) and pregnant women we have recognized and implemented this need through
Medicaid. Fourth, with the ACA, we have recognized this need for all poor adults and for nearly
the entire citizenry.23 Fifth, the NAS panel clearly wished to include health in poverty
measurement if it were feasible to do so, but they could not solve the problems of assigning
needs and valuing health for practical reasons. We have shown that solving those problems is
feasible (under certain insurance system conditions) by conceptualizing the need as a need for
insurance—a practical argument.

IV. Implementing a HIPM

Will the conditions be met for the non‐elderly in 2014?

Recall our conditions for construction of a HIPM are that the system makes available to
everyone a BCP with the following features: (1) All necessary care (as defined by society) is
covered. (2) Premium MOOP is not‐risk‐rated. (3) Non‐premium MOOP is capped. To what
extent will the conditions for the non‐elderly be met in 2014 when the main ACA features are
implemented?

The full implementation of the ACA involves two major kinds of change: Medicaid expansion
and a cluster of insurance reforms: a mandate to purchase health insurance, income‐based
subsidies for both premiums and cost‐sharing, insurance exchanges for those not eligible for
Medicaid, and others (Focus on Health Reform, 2011a).



                                                                                                27
For those who will be provided Medicaid, all conditions are clearly met. The HIPM is
implemented for the vast majority of the Medicaid eligible by adding the same dollar amount to
resources and needs (i.e., their health insurance needs are fully met). For those who are
Medicaid eligible but required to pay premiums (e.g., qualified disabled persons and working
individuals with income above 150% of the poverty line in states that charge such persons
premiums), required premiums are subtracted from resources. For those who are Medicaid‐
eligible but do not report being covered by Medicaid, we nonetheless treat their health
insurance needs as fully met.24

Those who are not Medicaid‐eligible will have access to plans on the exchanges. All three
conditions are basically met by the exchanges. First, the exchange plans will cover all essential
care, as determined by social norms, the political process and the medical profession. Second,
premium MOOP cannot be tied to health status but may be tied to age, with a maximum
variation of 3 to 1.25 Third, non‐premium MOOP is capped according to the maximum for the
high‐deductible plan associated with a Health Savings Account (HSA), which is roughly $6,000
for an individual. Some plans may, of course, have lower non‐premium MOOP caps. For those
with income below 400% of the poverty line, the cap is reduced according to a sliding scale
based on income (Focus on Health Reform 2011a, 2011b) enabled through government cost‐
sharing subsidies. For example, for incomes up to 200% of poverty, the maximum is one third of
the HSA maximum, now around $2,000.26

With the exchanges, identifying the BCP is relatively easy. Premium information is readily
available to both the agency responsible for measuring poverty and to households making plan
choices: the exchanges have all necessary information about premiums and caps. Required
premium MOOP—and thus implicit government subsidies—depend on income and are clearly
specified in the legislation through a premium schedule. Thus, the age and income information
in the CPS (Current Population Survey) or other surveys, the premium MOOP schedules in the
legislation, and the insurance plan features posted in the exchanges provide everything
required for construction of a HIPM. Since among exchange plans premiums will be traded off
against both the level and form of cost‐sharing, as well as other plan features, identifying the


                                                                                                   28
BCP still involves some judgment. However, since much of the ACA legislation uses the “second
cheapest silver plan” as a benchmark, it could be considered the BCP.

Using the ACA legislation, and the premiums observed on the exchanges (and thus plan full
costs), HIPM calculation is straightforward. Consider a family of four with income of 28,600
(1.33 times the 2010 OPM threshold of about $22,000) that purchases insurance in the
exchange and receives the government subsidies of the ACA. Suppose that the plan full cost is
$15,000. (We would observe it, in fact, as the market premium for the second least expensive
silver plan in the exchange in the household’s state of residence.). The HIPM needs threshold
for the family would therefore be $37,000 ($22,000 plus $15,000).

The family’s resources are their income plus the plan full cost minus their legislatively‐specified
premium MOOP minus their actual non‐premium MOOP up to the income related cap
(determined indirectly through the legislation’s actuarially defined, income‐based cost‐sharing
subsidies). The non‐premium MOOP cap for a family at this income level is $4000 (one third of
the HSA maximum, as estimated by Kaiser 2011). The required premium MOOP is 3% of
income, or $858. To summarize:

       Resources = Income + (Plan Full Cost for BCP – required premium MOOP) – actual non‐
       premium MOOP (up to cap)

If the family spent the maximum possible non‐premium MOOP of $4000, their resources would
be $28,600 + ($15,000 ‐ $858) ‐$4000 = $38,742, a bit above the $37,000 HIPM threshold.27

Our HIPM approach can also be calculated for low‐income individuals who receive employer‐
provided health insurance, even when that health insurance has substantial premium MOOP
and/or non‐premium MOOP maxima. We simply use the actual premium MOOP and non‐
premium MOOP of the employer provided insurance, but cap deductions for both at the
premium and non‐premium MOOP available to that individual on the exchange, and use the
plan full cost of the BCP on the exchange for the HIPM threshold.

We treat those eligible for subsidies for use in the exchanges but who choose to remain
uninsured (and pay penalties) as having their needs met through the subsidies and exchanges.


                                                                                                 29
Undocumented immigrants, however, are not eligible for the exchanges. It is the universal
availability of the exchange and its subsidies that justifies the HIPM calculations. Therefore, we
will not be able to calculate a HIPM for undocumented persons and others who are not eligible
for a BCP.28

Are the conditions met for the elderly today?

To what extent are the conditions met for the elderly today? Traditional fee‐for‐service
Medicare had many of these characteristics—universal availability of plans with non‐risk rated
premiums—but not all: prescription drugs were not covered until Part D was implemented in
2006, and cost‐sharing is not capped and can be substantial. However, today’s Medicare
Advantage–Part D (MA‐PD) plans meet nearly all the HIPM criteria. These plans cover all
necessary care, including prescription drugs, and generally vision and dental. Their premiums
are not risk rated. As of 2011, (non‐premium) MOOP for all medical care provided by MA and
MA‐PD plans is capped at $6700 (the 95th percentile in costs in the traditional Medicare fee‐for‐
service) and CMS encourages plans to make the cap $3400, the 85th percentile in the traditional
Medicare program (Biles, Nicholas and Guterman 2006).

The only shortcoming of present MA‐PD plans relative to the ideal BCP is the lack of an explicit
cap on prescription drug non‐premium MOOP spending. (The Federal government funds and
regulates the prescription drug coverage part of MA‐PD plans separately, as part of the Part D
benefits.) However, several features of the plans and of Federal government reduce
prescription drug non‐premium MOOP and create virtual de facto caps. First, for all
beneficiaries, once the catastrophic level of nonpremium MOOP is reached (currently $4700),
cost‐sharing is substantially reduced (MedPAC, 2012). Second, the Medicare Part D low income
subsidy program reduces or eliminates cost‐sharing for Medicare beneficiaries with low income
and low assets (Summer, Hoadley and Hargrave, 2010). Third, many MA‐PD plans offer
“enhanced” prescription drug coverage that eliminates the deductible and substantially reduces
co‐pays, particularly for generic drugs, meaning high prescription drug expenditures are, to
some extent, discretionary. Finally, in future years, even conventional Part D plans will reduce



                                                                                                   30
the extensive prescription drug coverage cost‐sharing in the “donut‐hole,” so we expect MA‐PD
enhanced coverage could have even less cost‐sharing (Focus on Health, 2011).

Thus, while present prescription drug coverage for the elderly is not quite complete, the elderly
have plan choices available that make significant non‐premium MOOP expenditures on
prescription drug coverage largely discretionary, particularly for those with low income.
Because tail‐risk has been and will continue to be reduced, several HIPM approaches to treating
prescription drug non‐premium MOOP are available. For example, prescription drug non‐
premium MOOP could be added to FCSU distribution (as for HIPM‐c). The smaller the tail risk,
the better this option. Alternatively, a HIPM‐a could be implemented with a somewhat
arbitrary, and income‐dependent, cap for prescription drug non‐premium MOOP.

A further difficulty is identifying which of the MA‐PD plans should be regarded as “the” BPC.
The terms and features of MA‐PD plans vary considerably. Plans may trade‐off premium MOOP
and non‐premium MOOP. Major metropolitan areas have plans with little or no premium above
the Part B premium and little, if any cost‐sharing. For example, New York City (NYC)) has MA‐PD
plans with: no premium MOOP above the Part B premium (now roughly $1200 per year); the
recommended $3400 cap on medical non‐premium MOOP; and very limited cost‐sharing terms
(no co‐pays for medical care, no deductibles, and small co‐pays for prescription drugs).29 Since
these NYC plans with their low premium MOOP match well our theoretical ideal of a basic
capped plan, we will use NYC figures for our examples and illustrative calculations for the
elderly. However, not all areas have such generous plans and some rural areas have no HMO
MA‐PD plans but only PPO or fee‐for‐service plans.

Once the BCP is identified for an elderly individual, how would the poverty calculation proceed?
First, we must determine the plan full cost, including the government contribution. Since our
approach bases the plan full cost on a broad population with all health statuses and since actual
government contributions to MA‐PD plans reflect positive selection (Brown et al, 2011), we
would simply use total government Medicare expenditures on the elderly divided by total
elderly Medicare beneficiaries, as the government contribution to plan full cost. This amount is
now approximately $10,000.30 To determine plan full cost, we add to the government

                                                                                                31
contribution the premium MOOP enrollees must pay, which depends on the plans available. For
NYC, required premium MOOP for the BCP is only the $1200 Part B premium. Thus, the plan full
cost would be $11,200. If the HIPM is built from the SPM, then the HIPM poverty threshold for
an elderly person is the SPM threshold, approximately $10,000 for a single person,31 plus the
$11,200 plan full cost, for a total of $21,200.

To calculate resources, we could begin with the SPM measure (pre‐MOOP deduction), but add
the value of government insurance provided, $10,000. Treatment of non‐premium MOOP
should separate prescription drug and medical non‐premium MOOP, since the caps do. For a
HIPM‐a, we would limit the deduction for medical non‐premium MOOP to the $3400 cap. Thus,
resources for an elderly person with $15,000 of income and $5000 in medical non‐premium
MOOP would be $21, 600 = $15,000 + $10,000 ‐ $3400. Since her resources exceed the HIPM
poverty threshold of $21,200, she would not be poor. In this calculation, we have ignored
prescription drug non‐premium MOOP. This could be handled by increasing the poverty
threshold by adding it to the FCSU threshold (possibly age‐adjusted), or by giving it its own cap.
Setting a specific cap for prescription drug non‐premium MOOP will require further
investigation.

Two further complications come to mind: employer‐provided supplementary insurance and
Medicaid as supplementary insurance. Since employer‐provided supplementary insurance
creates an alternative to MA‐PD plans often without providing as complete insurance, it is
difficult to incorporate in resources and we do not do so.32 Regarding Medicaid as
supplementary insurance, some might argue that, by definition, anyone eligible for Medicaid is
poor. However, like the SPM, the HIPM is a post‐transfer (including health insurance) poverty
measure. Therefore, it is appropriate to include the value of Medicaid in resources for
calculation of the HIPM.33 Most elderly Medicaid beneficiaries pay no premium MOOP for
Medicaid, and Medicaid pays their Medicare Part B premiums.34 For such beneficiaries, their
health needs are fully met by the government program and therefore the amount added to
resources should be equal to their full health insurance needs. For those Medicaid beneficiaries




                                                                                                32
who pay some premiums, such as the Medically Needy in some states, resources are equal to
their health insurance needs minus their required premium MOOP payments.

Several objections could be made to applying this approach today. First, studies characterizing
MOOP expenditures among the elderly, even among MA‐PD plan members, show substantial
MOOP (e.g., Biles, Nicholas and Guterman 2006). But the actual MOOP of the elderly is not
relevant; what matters is their MOOP had they chosen the BCP. Second, choosing among many
plans is a cognitively difficult task, particularly for elderly with some cognitive impairment
(McWilliams et al. 2011). This is not a conceptual objection to the HIPM, but rather a pragmatic
concern. Moreover, this problem has a policy implication: if we are concerned about
impoverishment from high MOOP expenditures due to poor plan choice among cognitively
impaired (or misinformed) persons, the government should make the basic capped plan the
default choice, warning those who would select another plan that they face greater MOOP risk.
Third, the non‐premium MOOP cap is still quite high, often $3,400 and possibly as high as the
legal maximum of $6,700. A cap this high raises the possibility of “discretionary” expenditures
below the cap. Even if this case, the cap would reduce but not eliminate this source of bias in
the SPM.35

How much does a cap on MOOP deductions affect elderly poverty rates?

Implementing the HIPM is a major undertaking, beyond the scope of this paper. For example, it
requires identifying a BCP for each person in the sample and (for the elderly) separately
identifying prescription drug and medical non‐premium MOOP, which is currently not done in
the CPS SPM supplement. To get a sense of the potential effects of implementing a HIPM, we
test the sensitivity of the elderly poverty rate to capping the MOOP deduction. For an estimate
based on a HIPM‐d, we allow no non‐premium MOOP deduction and cap the MOOP deduction
at the required premium MOOP ($1200). For an estimate based on a HIPM‐a, we cap the MOOP
deduction at $4600, the sum of the premium MOOP ($1200) and the non‐premium medical
MOOP cap ($3400). 36 We used the IPUMS March CPS files (Ruggles et al. 2010) for the Census
Bureau’s 2011 SPM calculations for all elderly persons. For simplicity, we focus most of our
analysis on a sub‐sample of households consisting of one or two elderly persons.

                                                                                                  33
The SPM poverty rate is 15.9% for the elderly population as a whole and also for elderly
persons who live in 1‐ or 2‐person households with no non‐elderly persons (See Exhibit 5, first
and second rows). When we cap MOOP deductions at the $1200 per person Part B premium,
the elderly SPM poverty rate falls 5.5 percentage points, from 15.9% to 10.4% (fourth row). This
approach is analogous to the HIPM‐d, a lower bound, which allows no non‐premium MOOP
deduction. Next, to simulate a more generous approach (analogous to HIPM‐a), again for areas
such as NYC, we capped deductions at $4600 ($1200 for the premium plus $3400 for the
medical non‐premium MOOP cap), resulting in an elderly poverty rate of 14.1%‐‐a 1.8 point
reduction (fifth row). While these are only illustrative calculations, they show the potential for
capping MOOP deductions to have a substantial effect on elderly poverty. These calculations
suggest that the SPM’s unlimited MOOP deductions may overstate elderly poverty by up to 50
percent.37,38

Exhibit 5: SPM Elderly Poverty Rates in 2010

                                               Poverty                 Poverty         Sample
Sample                                         Measure                 Rate (%)        Count

All persons 65+                                SPM                     15.9            21,946

Persons 65+ in SPM resource‐sharing units      SPM                     15.9            14,800
of 1 or 2 persons aged 65 or older

                                               SPM, no                  7.9            14,800
                                               MOOP deduction

                                               SPM, MOOP capped
                                               @ 1200/person            10.4           14,800

                                               SPM, MOOP capped
                                               @4,600/person            14.1           14,800

Source: Authors’ calculations from the IPUMS March CPS file, 2011 (Ruggles et al. 2010), SPM weights.

Validity of the SPM MOOP deduction: How poor are those with high MOOP?

We next examined the validity of the SPM practice of deducting MOOP expenditures from
resources without limit. We focused on elderly persons classified as SPM poor due to the
MOOP deduction. Among this group, we compare poverty‐related characteristics of those who

                                                                                                        34
remain poor even when their MOOP deduction is capped—the “Not Capped Out”—to those
who are “Capped Out” of SPM poverty when we cap the MOOP deduction. We present results
for the two caps described above: $4,600 per person and $1,200 per person, corresponding,
respectively, to the Plan B premium plus MA‐PD medical non‐premium MOOP limit for NYC and
the Plan B premium. If those “Capped Out” of poverty look considerably advantaged compared
to other poor elderly, this suggests low validity for the unlimited MOOP deduction. These
validity checks are in the spirit of those conducted by Jencks and Torrey (1988), Meyer and
Sullivan (2012) and others, although their concern is not the validity of the uncapped MOOP
deduction in the SPM. We also describe characteristics of the elderly who are SPM‐poor even
before MOOP expenditures are deducted from income. We performed these analyses
separately for one‐person and two‐person elderly households. We emphasize that this exercise
is intended to demonstrate the effect of limiting MOOP deductions for the elderly, and is not a
comparison of a fully‐implemented HIPM to the SPM.

Exhibit 6A presents results for the higher MOOP cap. Clearly, those “Capped Out” of SPM
poverty by capping MOOP at $4,600 per person are far better off than the “Not Capped Out”
according to a variety of indicators (comparing the second to the third column or the fifth to
the sixth column). Not surprisingly, among two‐person elderly households, the Capped Out
average much higher income, $29,928 in SPM non‐health resources (first row), over twice the
SPM poverty threshold, compared to $18,884 among the Not Capped Out. Perhaps surprisingly,
what most distinguishes the Capped Out from the Not Capped Out is their high rates of
coverage by private health insurance: 82% of two‐person elderly households are privately
insured among Capped Out compared to 62% among Not Capped Out and 37% among those
poor before MOOP deductions (column 4). Among one‐person elderly households, the figures
are 78%, 51% and 34%, respectively. The high rate of private insurance among those classified
as SPM poor as a result of MOOP deductions is consistent with the interpretation that those
who are better off purchase better insurance (e.g., privately purchased Medigap) or purchase
more or better medical care, induced by better insurance.




                                                                                                 35
Exhibit 6A: Effect of Capping MOOP Deductions at $4,600 per person
Means or Proportions (% unless indicated) for Households of One or Two Persons Aged 65 or older

                                           One‐Person Households                  Two‐Person Households
                                                     SPM Poor Due to                       SPM Poor Due to
                                                     MOOP Deduction                        MOOP Deduction
                                      SPM Poor,       Not                    SPM Poor,      Not
                                      Pre‐MOOP      Capped     Capped        Pre‐MOOP     Capped    Capped
                                      Deduction1     Out2        Out3        Deduction1    Out2       Out3
SPM Total Resources, Before MOOP
    Deduction ($)                        7,031         12,180      19,390        9,051       18,884        29,928
SPM Threshold                           10,974         10,518      10,749        15,750      14,888        14,030
MOOP ($)                                 1,666         3,614       13,936        4,018       11,938        22,884
Capped MOOP ($)                           755          3,036        4,600        1,599       6,517         9,200
                              4
Covered by Private Insurance             33.9           51.0        78.3          36.8        61.8          82.1
Covered by Group Insurance4              15.3           12.5        21.6          15.7        17.7          31.7
Medicaid                                 19.8           15.6         1.8          23.0         4.9           0.0
Medicare                                 90.0           98.2        98.2          89.6        98.4          97.0
Public housing or rental subsidy          6.2           16.3         7.7           2.6         4.6           0.0
Heat subsidy                              5.7           10.6         5.2           4.0         5.3           2.1
Food Stamps (SNAP)                       11.8           14.2         3.8          12.2         3.8           0.0
SSI                                       6.4            5.7         0.0           9.2         3.1           0.0
Interest/Dividend income ($)              163           255          967          350         708          2,114
Any other pension / source of
   retirement income5                     6.2           12.1        17.5           8.6         9.7          30.0
Any business or rental income?            3.1            7.1        10.2           8.9         5.6          14.6
Mortgage Status
 Rent                                    37.2           37.5        33.2          24.7        13.7           5.7
 Own w/mortgage                          18.9           13.5        14.0          21.8        24.9          22.1
 Own, no mortgage                        43.9           48.9        52.8          53.4        61.4          72.2
Female                                   72.1           82.3        80.0          51.2        50.3          51.4
Age (years)                              76.2           76.8        77.7          75.3        76.4          74.6
Black racial identification              18.7           12.5         7.0           8.6         8.1           1.6
Number of observations                    855           494          110          431         422           154
Source: Authors’ calculations from IPUMS March CPS files, 2011 (Ruggles et al. 2010), SPM weights.

1. SPM‐poor, even if MOOP expenditures are not deducted from resources.
2. SPM‐poor if MOOP expenditures are deducted from resources, even when the MOOP deduction is
capped at $4600/person.
3. SPM‐poor if all MOOP is deducted from resources but not if the MOOP deduction is capped at
$4600/person.
 4. Private: either individually purchased (usually Medigap) or employer‐provided (usually
supplemental). “Group” is private insurance provided by a group, usually an ex‐employer.
5. Any other pension/ source of retirement income: company, union, federal, state or local government
pension; regular payments from an annuity, IRA, KEOGH, or 401K, etc.



                                                                                                      36
The “Capped Out” do not look particularly disadvantaged in other dimensions. For example,
among two‐person households, the Capped Out report virtually no means‐tested assistance
(Medicaid, housing, Food Stamps, or SSI), 72% own their own homes outright, and they report
over $2,000 of asset/dividend income, on average, even though asset (and other) income is
known to be underreported. Given the low interest rates that prevailed in 2010, $2,000 of
income would indicate ownership of financial assets valued at $50,000 to $100,000, or more.

Although “capped out” single persons (column 3) look similarly well‐off, with mean SPM
resources of $19,390, 78% privately insurance coverage, and high rates of home ownership and
asset income, they are slightly more likely than 2‐person Capped Out households to report
receipt of means‐tested assistance (e.g., 3.8% report Food Stamp receipt and 7.7% live in public
or subsidized housing).

Exhibit 6B presents results for the lower, $1200 cap, analogous to HIPM‐d. This represents a
more conservative validity test since a lower cap should make the Capped Out group appear
less advantaged. Nonetheless, especially among 2‐person households, when the MOOP
deduction is capped at $1,200 per person, those removed from SPM poverty continue to
appear relatively advantaged. Nearly three quarters are covered by private health insurance,
compared to 37 and 44 percent among the other two groups of SPM poor elderly couples.
Similarly, about two‐thirds of single‐person elderly households who are Not Capped Out by the
$1,200 cap have private health insurance, compared to roughly one third of other single‐person
households.




                                                                                               37
Exhibit 6B: Effect of Capping MOOP Deductions at $1,200 per person
Means or Proportions (% unless indicated) for Households of One or Two Persons Aged 65 or older

                                           One‐Person Households                  Two‐Person Households
                                                     SPM Poor Due to                       SPM Poor Due to
                                                     MOOP Deduction                        MOOP Deduction
                                      SPM Poor,       Not                    SPM Poor,      Not
                                      Pre‐MOOP      Capped     Capped        Pre‐MOOP     Capped    Capped
                                      Deduction1     Out2        Out3        Deduction1    Out2       Out3
SPM Total Resources, Before MOOP
    Deduction ($)                        7,031         11,139      14,948        9,051       16,932        23,452
SPM Threshold                           10,974         10,519      10,586        15,750      15,615        14,345
MOOP ($)                                 1,666         2,513        7,353        4,018       5,671         17,881
Capped MOOP ($)                           755          1,132        1,200        1,599       2,307         2,400
Covered by Private Insurance4            33.9           36.3        67.6          36.8        44.4          74.7
                             4
Covered by Group Insurance               15.3           13.1        14.9          15.7         7.8          25.9
Medicaid                                 19.8           19.5         8.0          23.0         8.6           2.0
Medicare                                 90.0           96.4        99.2          89.6        97.1          98.3
Public housing or rental subsidy          6.2           19.6        11.8           2.6         9.7           1.3
Heat subsidy                              5.7            9.9         9.4           4.0        10.4           2.5
Food Stamps (SNAP)                       11.8           15.9        10.1          12.2         7.8           1.2
SSI                                       6.4            9.2         2.0           9.2         5.9           1.1
Interest/Dividend income ($)              163           147          532          350         285          1,347
Any other pension / source of
   retirement income5                     6.2            7.1        16.6           8.6         2.8          19.1
Any business or rental income?            3.1            6.4         8.5           8.9         2.3           9.8
Mortgage Status
 Rent                                    37.2           39.0        35.4          24.7        18.6           9.2
 Own w/mortgage                          18.9           12.7        14.2          21.8        30.8          22.0
 Own, no mortgage                        43.9           48.3        50.4          53.4        50.6          68.8
Female                                   72.1           81.4        82.1          51.2        51.3          50.3
Age (years)                              76.2           75.7        77.7          75.3        76.3          75.8
Black racial identification              18.7           16.9         8.3           8.6        11.9           4.5
Number of observations                    855           224          380          431         150           426
Source: Authors’ calculations from IPUMS March CPS files, 2011 (Ruggles et al. 2010), SPM weights.

1. SPM‐poor, even if MOOP expenditures are not deducted from resources.
2. SPM‐poor if MOOP expenditures are deducted from resources, even when the MOOP deduction is
capped at $1200/person.
3. SPM‐poor if all MOOP is deducted from resources but not if the MOOP deduction is capped at
$1200/person.
 4. Private: either individually purchased (usually Medigap) or employer‐provided (usually
supplemental). “Group” is private insurance provided by a group, usually an ex‐employer.
5. Any other pension/ source of retirement income: company, union, federal, state or local government
pension; regular payments from an annuity, IRA, KEOGH, or 401K, etc.



                                                                                                      38
While these analyses incorporate only one feature of a HIPM (capping MOOP) and do not
attempt to determine the drivers of the high MOOP expenditures of the Capped Out,39 they
suggest that capping MOOP deductions can improve validity. Interestingly, especially among
one‐person households and with the lower cap value, the Not Capped Out in some respects
appear more disadvantaged than those “SPM Poor, pre‐MOOP Deduction” (for example
compare Food Stamps/SNAP, SSI and interest/dividend income across the first two columns of
Exhibit 6B). This pattern likely reflects underreporting of income, particularly among widows
(Hurd and Rohwedder, 2006), that can cause those classified as “deep poor” by the SPM
(having resources less than half the poverty line) to appear better off than the SPM‐poor as a
whole (Meyer and Sullivan, 2012).

V. Discussion: Caveats, Critiques and Ambiguities

The foregoing discussion has pointed the way toward a measure of poverty that includes health
(insurance) in both the thresholds and in resources, a HIPM. Although we believe a HIPM
represents an improvement over the SPM and OPM, ultimately that judgment rests on
empirical predictive validity evaluations such as those conducted for the OPM. And, although
we believe the advantages of the HIPM outweigh the disadvantages, we should not overlook its
potential weaknesses. Awareness of weaknesses will guide revision of the HIPM and the
interpretation of statistics that involve the HIPM. Some weaknesses are specific to a HIPM while
others are shared by the OPM and SPM. We discuss five priority issues: 1. Discretionarity of
non‐premium MOOP; 2. Independence of insurance value and health status; 3. Savings/assets;
4. long‐term care and over‐the‐counter medications; 5. Ex‐ante vs. ex‐post perspectives in
poverty measurement.

Is non‐premium MOOP nondiscretionary?

Central to our proposed HIPM is individual choice among insurance options, specifically the
idea that MOOP expenditures that result from the choice of plans other than the BCP are
discretionary. We postponed our discussion of the discretionarity of health care, which,
philosophically and empirically, determines the merits of the various approaches to non‐
premium MOOP in poverty measurement.
                                                                                                 39
While almost everyone considers some health care discretionary and some care non‐
discretionary, perspectives vary on the quantitative importance of discretionary care. The NAS
panel’s discussion represents one extreme in the treatment of care as nondiscretionary, citing
as examples of discretionary care, “elective cosmetic surgery…extra laboratory tests or
ineffective drugs” (p.232). This extreme regards nearly all care to be essential or at least largely
outside of an individual’s control (footnote 29, p. 236). At the other extreme, in his dissent
Cogan advocates a consumer choice approach to health care and describes “health as an
economic good, responsive to both income and price changes,” citing work by health
economists Pauly, Grossman and Newhouse. Indeed, in an economic framework, it makes little
sense to describe anything as essential without specifying the outcome for which it is essential.
We recognize that not only does insurance involve choice but that some health care decisions
are choices made by individuals based on preferences, income, wealth and price. And we know
of no generally accepted conceptual description of socially defined medical care needs, above
which care will be deemed “discretionary.”

The following suggest that relatively little health care is discretionary to individuals. First, the
Rand Health Insurance Experiment estimated that the overall price elasticity of health care is ‐
0.2—relatively inelastic (Newhouse and the Insurance Experiment Group, 1993). However, as
Aron‐Dine, Einav and Finkelstein (2012) caution, there is greater uncertainty surrounding these
elasticity estimates than is generally appreciated. Second, only certain forms of health care
(such as initial doctor’s visits) and certain kinds of individuals respond elastically to price
(Remler and Greene, 2009). Third, physicians and other providers largely drive health care
decisions (e.g., Wennberg et al. 2002); individuals may have little control or information for
making decisions.

Although a particular instance of health care might not be discretionary to individuals, it may
still be discretionary from the perspective of societal resource allocation if it does not, in
expectation, improve health or does not improve health sufficiently to justify its cost.
Wennberg et al. (2002) suggest that there is a significant amount of such care. It is quite
possible, therefore, that our ideal BCP for a HIPM would be less generous than even the least


                                                                                                       40
expensive MA‐PD plans. However, determining ideally covered care, even conceptually, is
difficult since basic health care needs must inevitably be defined socially and politically, and will
be ever changing due to advances in medical technology. While health plans can define and
enforce standards through coverage policies, utilization management and other cost
containment techniques, government will need to play a role, perhaps through cost‐
effectiveness studies and regulation, in ensuring that truly basic plans exist. Although this is an
important issue for resource allocation, between elderly and non‐elderly, between health care
and other goods, it cannot be addressed through poverty measurement.

Still, we believe that the amount of basic care, however defined, in both the BCP and other
plans, determines the best approach to non‐premium MOOP. HIPM‐a, in deducting all non‐
premium MOOP below the cap of the BCP, leads to an overstatement of poverty. However, the
extent of overstatement must be reduced relative to the SPM. As our preliminary analysis
showed, even using a relatively generous cap reduces the measured elderly poverty rate by 1.8
percentage points.

Insurance value independent of health status

Our proposed HIPM would use a health insurance needs threshold that does not vary with
health status. An objection is that the value of health insurance greatly depends on health
status. However, as a practical matter, it is not value that should determine the poverty
threshold but price—what the individuals must pay. Food is more valuable to someone who is
hungry, but we do not vary the food needs threshold, because the price of food does not vary
with hunger. Moreover, the cost of food also does not vary with hunger. But since sicker people
use more health care, the cost (actuarially fair premium) of their insurance is higher. If the
differences in costs are reflected in differences in prices (premiums) paid by individuals, as they
are today for many non‐elderly, then the threshold should vary. However, if premiums are not
risk rated then the poverty threshold need not vary.40




                                                                                                  41
Saving, Assets, Retirement and MOOP

The empirical evidence reviewed earlier in this paper demonstrates both that, on average, the
elderly have substantial assets (net worth), and that they use those assets to avoid material
hardship and to fund MOOP expenditures. Yet neither the OPM, SPM nor the different versions
of the HIPM counts assets as resources. As noted, HIPM‐a allows substantial non‐premium
MOOP deductions, and therefore may suffer from the same bias as the SPM but to a lesser
extent. While deducting MOOP upwardly biases the poverty rate and not counting assets
exacerbates this bias, particularly for the elderly, including assets in resources is difficult for
both practical and conceptual reasons. People of all ages need savings for precautionary
reasons. Indeed, the exclusion of assets from resources for the non‐elderly may reflect a norm
that younger people must save for retirement and other purposes, and therefore face a
hardship if they cannot meet basic needs from current incomes. However, we would argue that
the corollary to a normative “need” to save for old age expenses when young is an expectation
to meet some basic needs in old age by drawing down those savings. Thus, the elderly would
not necessarily be poor simply because their current income net of MOOP expenditures falls
below the poverty line if their savings are adequate. Perhaps reflecting these norms, the ACA’s
new eligibility rules for Medicaid eliminated the asset test for the non‐elderly while maintaining
it for the population over age 65.

As noted, arguments for accounting for assets in poverty measurement have gained
prominence recently (Stiglitz, Sen and Fitouzzi, 2009). How best to do so is a subject of
continuing research and no consensus exists (Brandolini, Magri and Smeeding 2009). Three
possibilities come immediately to mind, although others are possible: (1) Count all assets as
fully available in any period. Once assets are exhausted, the only resource available to meet
basic needs is income. (2) Calculate an annuity equivalent of assets, based on life expectancy,
with perhaps a margin of error for longer life and precautionary savings. This approach converts
assets into a flow that is larger than the annual income flow from the assets since the principle
would be drawn‐down and, on average, depleted by the end of life. Brandolini, Magri and
Smeeding (2009) call this the “income net‐worth concept,” which they attribute to Weisbrod


                                                                                                      42
and Hansen (1968). However, they hesitate to recommend this option because: “We might be
reluctant to impose so much structure on the measurement, especially when we take into
account the profound implications that such a measure has for the age structure of poverty.
Accumulated assets at older ages with a shorter annuity horizon increase the income net worth
of the elderly as compared to younger person with longer time horizons and fewer
accumulated assets.” However, we believe that decision to use the income net‐worth approach
should rest on predictive validity including whether the resulting age structure of poverty more
accurately describes the true ability to meet needs at different ages. (3) Do not count assets.

Although options (1) and (3) are upper‐ and lower‐bounds for counting assets as resources
available to meet basic needs, more research is needed on this topic. At this point, we simply
note that ignoring assets in poverty measurement amounts to a normative position that the
elderly should be able to meet their basic needs from current income, despite having
accumulated assets during their working lives for the express purpose of meeting needs in old
age. As we noted, using the SPM procedures, greater assets can make one poorer by allowing
higher expenditures on MOOP. If one takes this approach to its logical conclusion, one might
argue that, if government’s role is to fight poverty, then government should protect the elderly
from having to use savings to meet basic needs including health needs. Setting eligibility
standards for public assistance accordingly, the result would be to make eligible for means‐
tested assistance elderly persons who were rich and middle‐class on a lifetime basis, even if
they continue to have substantial savings in old age. Such eligibility standards would, in effect,
transfer income from the average taxpayer to the asset‐rich elderly, protecting not only their
assets but the fortunes of their heirs. Arguably, this is not an appropriate objective for means‐
tested assistance programs. Recognizing this, our safety‐net programs for the elderly
(Medicaid, SSI) include asset tests for eligibility. If including an asset test reflects social norms
about need, then perhaps our poverty measure should do the same.

Long‐term care and over the counter drugs
The SPM implementation of MOOP deductions does not include long term care (LTC)
expenditures (Short 2012). Much LTC, whether at home or in an institution, consists of help


                                                                                                        43
with personal care and housekeeping. As such, quality can vary just as with any service or
amenity. One would expect, therefore, that the scope for discretionary LTC is great. Indeed,
Marshall, McGarry and Skinner (2011) find that LTC is highly wealth elastic. On the other hand,
LTC can certainly be essential and a basic need for those unable to care for themselves. So, not
including LTC in the threshold or deductions understates poverty. Nonetheless, we agree with
the SPM treatment of LTC. Not only is much LTC discretionary, but long‐term care is provided
through Medicaid for low‐income elderly persons, subject to an asset test. Arguably, Medicaid
is available to remove from poverty those who would fall into (pre‐transfer) poverty as a result
of basic long‐term care needs.

On the other hand, the SPM MOOP implementation includes spending on over the counter
(OTC) drugs. While some OTC drugs may clearly be essential (e.g., children’s acetaminophen),
others are not. Moreover, since spending on OTC drugs is not likely to be skewed or even very
high variance, it might be best to incorporate them into the HIPM by including them in an
expanded FCSU threshold (FCSUO for OTC medications).

Ex post Poverty Measurement Only?

The HIPM includes the price of the capped basic health insurance plan in both the resource
measure and the threshold. All HIPMs, even the most generous, HIPM‐a, do not allow unlimited
deductions of MOOP from resources. Someone who has extensive MOOP because they
unwisely (in retrospect) did not choose the BCP might not be counted as poor under the HIPM
but would be under the SPM. Betson (2000) has argued that, in this case, the SPM approach is
correct since poverty measurement should take an ex post perspective. For example, he notes,
poverty measures take the number of children in a family as “given” in poverty measurement
(p. 14) so that families with many children and low income are considered poor even if their
income would allow them to escape poverty had they chosen to have fewer children. Similarly,
such measures consider a family with unemployed members poor even if it would not be poor
had they worked (p. 15). By analogy, he argues, poverty measures should deduct MOOP
expenditures from income ex post because, at that point, families with high MOOP
expenditures will have less to spend on FCSU.

                                                                                               44
However, it is unclear that the examples of unemployment and large families provide an
analogy useful for thinking about the treatment of health insurance as a need and resource in a
HIPM. First, the analogy to family size is inappropriate because government does not offer
families the option to buy highly subsidized insurance that would protect them from
impoverishing themselves though “excessive” childbearing. And while the SPM subtracts MOOP
from resources, it does not subtract out‐of‐pocket expenditures related to other insurable
events such as damage to a family’s house from fire or water, or damage to their cars from
traffic accidents. Instead, it takes an ex ante perspective (at least in principle) by including the
cost of home insurance as a shelter expense in the FCSU threshold, and the cost of automobile
insurance in the “1.2 multiplier” of FCSU intended to capture necessary transportation
expenses. In these cases, if a family has sufficient income to cover fire and auto insurance
expenses, they are not counted as poor even if an event occurs that requires the family to pay a
substantial amount out of pocket because they were uninsured or underinsured. So it is not
true that the SPM (or OPM) consistently takes an ex post perspective.

Nonetheless, we understand that some will object to our taking an ex ante (insurance)
perspective. The most obvious objection is that the HIPM will not measure hardship among
people who fail to take advantage of opportunities to substantially reduce the risk of high
MOOP expenses. Yet if they had resources sufficient to purchase the BCP and the plan was
available to them, and if that purchase would have allowed them to avoid substantial MOOP
expenses and therefore escape poverty, can we say that they lacked adequate resources to
meet their basic needs? In SPM poverty measurement, no one monitors whether families
actually spend their income on FCSU items up to the FCSU poverty threshold, only whether they
have resources sufficient to do so.

Any disadvantage in taking the ex ante insurance perspective must be weighed against the
ability to value the benefit of public and private health insurance as a resource, to show their
impacts in reducing poverty, and to have poverty thresholds that reflect health (insurance)
needs. The HIPM also has the advantage of reducing the distortion in the SPM caused by the
combination of a failure to count assets as resources and the deduction of all MOOP from


                                                                                                       45
annual income. Finally, recognizing the cognitive and other difficulties in making health
insurance choices and borrowing on the insights from behavioral economics, rather than
change the poverty measure to recognize shortsighted decisions, we would advocate making
the low MOOP‐risk insurance option (i.e., the BCP) the default plan choice in Medicaid and, at
least for lower‐income persons, in Medicare and ACA insurance exchanges.




VI. Summary and Conclusions

At the time of the NAS Report, a HIPM was regarded as desirable but unattainable (Moon,
1993; Citro & Michael 1995). The NAS panel’s recommendation to exclude health care entirely
was made despite several drawbacks: “an objection to our proposed approach, voiced by Moon
(1993), is that it does not explicitly acknowledge a basic necessity, namely, medical care that is
just as important as food and housing. Similarly, the approach devalues the benefits of having
health insurance, except indirectly” (Citro & Michael, 1995, p. 236). Yet the panel anticipated
the day when the US health care system would provide universal health insurance, permitting
the construction of a HIPM. We believe that day is drawing close. Recent and future changes to
the MA‐PD plans mean that the elderly nearly have universal availability of non‐risk‐rated
insurance plans that cap most non‐premium MOOP, while the ACA will bring such coverage to
all non‐elderly, other than the undocumented.

The SPM improves poverty measurement in many respects, but takes a step backward in
excluding all health insurance benefits and deducting all MOOP expenditures. The MOOP
deduction upwardly biases the measure of poverty among the elderly by as much as 50 percent
(Exhibit 5). The SPM treatment of health, in raising the elderly poverty rate far above the OPM
rate, strains credibility since substantial evidence suggests the elderly may be much less poor
than the OPM indicates and existing studies find that subtracting MOOP expenditures from
resources does not improve the predictive empirical validity of poverty measures. Our
preliminary analysis suggests that capping the MOOP deduction would improve the validity of
the SPM, since those who are Capped Out—no longer SPM poor—appear to be well insured,


                                                                                                  46
have incomes well above the poverty line, receive comparatively little public assistance and are
relatively likely to own their own homes and have assets.

The NAS panel and others have advocated a multi‐index approach, with separate “material
poverty” and “health poverty” measures. Although multiple measures may provide a more
accurate picture of each of several dimensions of need, the calculation of multiple measures
does not reduce the importance of creating the best possible overall measure of poverty. As
Douglas Bernheim (1998) has pointed out in discussing various problems of poverty
measurement:

       I suspect that we have focused on poverty rates primarily to satisfy the demands of
       politicians and the press, who generally seem to limit their attention to single numbers.
       To the extent that economists wish to affect the policy process, it may be necessary to
       cater to the demand for oversimplification; thus one justifies the exercise in this paper
       by arguing that, if politicians insist on using a single number, we should make sure that it
       is the best number possible.

The HIPM we have described, while not perfect, is a practical first step to incorporating health
needs and resources into poverty measurement. It has several advantages.

First, unlike the SPM, a HIPM would directly measure unmet health insurance needs, and,
therefore, the poverty that results from the unavailability of a basic health plan to some
families. Take, for example, a low‐income couple that has no access to private insurance and
that resides in a state that elects not to extend Medicaid eligibility to families with no children.
For this family, the health insurance need amount added to the poverty threshold could be
estimated from the ACA exchange even if the family is not eligible for a subsidy in the
exchange. Non‐premium MOOP expenses would then be deducted from income up to the cap
of the basic capped plan. This procedure would improve poverty measurement relative to the
SPM by showing how poverty decreases (i.e., the poverty gap is reduced) when basic health
needs are met by Medicaid or the ACA insurance exchanges.

Second, a HIPM can show the great benefits received by those who have government‐provided
health insurance, notably the elderly today (Burtless and Siegel, 2001). Insurance is valuable
both in providing tremendously valuable health care (e.g., Cutler 2004) and in protecting assets.

                                                                                                   47
Related to both these advantages, a HIPM would allow us to better assess the economic
protection that health policies including the ACA provide to low‐income populations. For
example, a HIPM can show the effect on poverty rates of state decisions to take up the ACA
option to extend Medicaid eligibility to new populations such as low‐income childless adults
under age 65. Likewise, a HIPM could show the effect of gaining private health insurance
coverage through the ACA.

Third, the HIPM improves comparisons of poverty between age groups. Burkhauser, Larrimore
and Simon (2010, 2012) make a similar point in showing that including the value of employer‐
provided insurance in income reduces income inequality. In principle, our HIPM framework
could be applied cross‐nationally to allow international comparisons of poverty rates that take
into consideration the effects of health insurance programs.

Perhaps the chief insight undergirding the HIPM is the conceptualization of health insurance as
the core health need. If health needs are conceptualized as health care, it is exceedingly
difficult to describe and measure basic health care needs appropriate to individuals. The “tails”
of health care expenditures are notoriously long. Moreover, where an individual fits in the
tails—the amount of expenditure—is sensitive to a great deal of clinical detail and virtually
impossible to define with sufficient precision without health care databases with huge sample
sizes. And the distribution and its relationship to individual clinical characteristics changes over
time as technology changes. The purpose of health insurance, however, is to deal with those
tails. If everyone has insurance, then we know that their health needs can be met, even if they
should require large expenditures. We believe that the US is moving toward a social consensus
that everyone needs basic insurance that caps MOOP, though they also need sufficient
resources to pay for (limited) MOOP expenditures should they get seriously ill.

The new information a HIPM could provide should help inform social policy debates. Tight
budgets will make it increasingly important to improve the targeting of public assistance
spending. Funds available for redistribution are likely to remain strained due to the effects of
the Great Recession, slow economic growth, mounting public debt, the difficult politics of
increasing taxes, and the growth of popular social insurance entitlement programs. Yet, labor

                                                                                                   48
market shocks due to technology changes and trade suggest that working‐age adults and their
children may need increased human capital investments and the protection of social insurance.
Thus, it is particularly important that our poverty measures be accurate and valid. A health‐
inclusive poverty measure will reduce bias in the SPM and, unlike the SPM, demonstrate the
marked progress made toward reducing poverty among the elderly through meeting their
substantial health needs. For children and non‐elderly adults, a HIPM can demonstrate both the
contributions of the ACA to reducing poverty and how far we have to go before we can declare
victory in the War on Poverty.




                                                                                                49
References

Arno‐Dine, Aviva, Liran Einav and Amy Finkelstein. 2012. The RAND Health Insurance
Experiment, Three Decades Later. NBER Working Paper No. 18642.

Atherly, Adam and Kenneth E. Thorpe. 2005. Value of Medicare Advantage to Low‐Income and
Minority Medicare Beneficiaries. Working paper.

Autor, David. (2010). The Polarization of Job Opportunities in the US Labor Market: Implications
for Employment and Earnings. The Hamilton Project and the Center for American Progress.
Available online at http://www.brookings.edu/papers/2010/04_jobs_autor.aspx

Bavier, R. 2000. Medical Out‐of‐Pocket Spending and Poverty Thresholds. Mimeo.

Ben‐Shalom, Y., R. Moffitt and J. K. Sholz, 2011. An Assessment of the Effectiveness of Anti‐
Poverty Programs in the United States. University of Wisconsin, IRP Discussion Paper 1392‐11.
June (Revised).

M. Berk and A. Monheit. “The Concentration of Health Care Expenditures, Revisited.” Health
Affairs 20, no.2 (2001): 9‐18.

Bernheim, B. Douglas. 1998. Comment on Deaton and Paxson’s “Measuring poverty among the
elderly,” in D.A. Wise, ed. Inquiries in the economics of aging. Chicago: NBER/University of
Chicago Press.

Betson, D. 2000. Response to Bavier’s Critique of the NRC Panel’s Recommendations.
       Retrieved from
http://www.census.gov/hhes/povmeas/publications/medical/comonbavier.pdf

Biles, Brian, Lauren Hersch Nicholas and Stuart Guterman. Medicare Beneficiary Out‐of‐Pocket
Costs: Are Medicare Advantage Plans a Better Deal? Commonwealth Fund pub. 927 Vol. 19.

Blank, R. 2008. Presidential Address: How to improve poverty measurement in the United
States. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 27(2): 233‐254.

Blinder, A. 1985. Commentary on Ellwood and Summers. In U.S. Department of Commerce,
Bureau of the Census, Proceedings of the Conference on the Measurement of Noncash Benefits,
Volume I. Williamsburg, VA. December 12‐14: pp. 28‐31.

Brandolini, A., S. Magri & T. Smeeding. 2009. Asset‐Based Measurement of Poverty. Institute
for Research on Poverty Discussion Paper 1372‐10. November.




                                                                                              50
Bricker, Jesse, Arthur B. Kennickell, Kevin B. Moore, and John Sabelhaus. 2012. Changes in U.S.
Family Finances from 2007 to 2010: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances. Available
at http://www.federalreserve.gov/Pubs/Bulletin/2012/articles/scf/scf.htm

Brown, Jason, Mark Duggan, Ilana Kuziemko, and William Woolston. How does Risk Selection
Respond to Risk Adjustment? Evidence from the Medicare Advantage Program. National
Bureau of Economic Research working paper 16977.

Burkhauser, R.V., J. Larrimore, and K.I. Simon. 2012. "A “Second Opinion” on the Economic
Health of the American Middle Class" National Tax Journal, 65: 7‐32.

Burkhauser, R.V. and K.I. Simon. 2010. Measuring the Impact of Health Insurance on Levels and
Trends in Inequality. NBER Working Paper 15811.

Burtless, G. and S. Siegel. 2001. Medical Spending, Health Insurance, and the Measurement of
American Poverty. Focus 21(3): 17‐22.

Burtless, G. and S. Siegel. 2004. Medical Spending, Health Insurance, and Measurement of
American Poverty. In C. M. Henry, ed. Race, Poverty and Domestic Policy. New Haven: Yale
University Press.

Butrica, B., D. Murphy & S. Zedlewski. 2008. How many struggle to get by in retirement? Urban
Institute DP 08‐01, January.

Butrica, B., R. Johnson and G. Mermin. 2009. Do Health Problems Reduce Consumption at Older
Ages? Urban Institute DP 09‐02. March.

Charles, K. C., S. Danziger, L. Pounder & R. Schoeni. 2006. Consumption, income, and well‐being
among the mature population.” National Poverty Center, University of Michigan. April (with
supplemental tables).

Citro, C. and R. T. Michael, eds. 1995. Measuring Poverty: A New Approach. National Research
Council of the National Academy of Sciences. National Academy Press.

Cohen, Steven B. and William Yu. 2012. The Concentration and Persistence in the Level of
Health Expenditures over Time: Estimates for the U.S. Population, 2008‐2009. MEPS Statistical
Brief #354. Available at
http://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data_stats/Pub_ProdResults_Details.jsp?pt=Statistical+Brief&
opt=2&id=1036.

Corbett, T. 1999. Poverty: Improving the measure after 30 years. Focus 20(2), 51‐55.

Cutler, D.M. 2004. Your Money or Your Life. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

                                                                                              51
Deaton. A. 1985. Notes on updating the poverty line. Mimeo. Princeton University.

Deaton, A. and C. Paxson. 1998. Measuring Poverty Among the Elderly Poverty. In D. Wise, ed.
Inquiries in the Economics of Aging. NBER/Chicago. 169‐204.

DeNardi, M., E. French, J. Bailey Jones & A. Gooptu. 2001. MEDICAID AND THE ELDERLY. NBER
Working Paper 17689, December.

Ellwood, David T. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1985. “Measuring income: What kind should be
in?“ in U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Proceedings of the Conference on
the Measurement of Noncash Benefits, Volume I. Williamsburg, VA. December 12‐14, pp. 8‐27.

Engelhardt, G. and J. Gruber. 2004. Social Security and the evolution of elderly poverty. NBER
Working Paper 10466, March.

Fisher, G.M. 1992. The Development and History of the Poverty Thresholds. Social Security
Bulletin 55(1): 43‐46.

Fisher, J., D. Johnson, J. Marchand, T. Smeeding & B. Torrey. 2009. Identifying the poorest older
Americans. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences 64B(6): 758‐766.

Focus on Health Reform. 2011a. Summary of New Health Reform Law. Last modified April 15,
2011.

Focus on Health Reform. 2011b. What the Actuarial Values in the Affordable Care Act Mean.
April 2011.

Fry, R., D. Cohn, G. Livingston & P. Taylor. 2011. The Old Prosper Relative to the Young: The
Rising Age Gap in Economic Well‐being. Pew Research Center.

Friedman, Rose D. 1965. Poverty: Definition and Perspective .Washington DC. The American
Enterprise Institute.

Goldman, Dana P. and Julie M. Zissimopolous. 2003. “High Out‐of‐pocket Health Care Spending
By the Elderly” Health Affairs 22(3): 194‐202.

Gruber, J. and I. Perry. 2011. Realizing Health Reform’s Potential: Will the Affordable Care Act
Make Health Insurance Affordable? Commonwealth Fund publication 1493. Vol. 2

Hurd, Michael D. and Susan Rohwedder. 2006. Some Answers to the Retirement Consumption
Puzzle. NBER working paper 12057.




                                                                                                   52
Jencks, C. and B. Torrey. 1988. Beyond income and poverty: Trends in social welfare among
children and the elderly since 1960. In J. Palmer, T. Smeeding and B. Torrey, eds. 1988. The
Vulnerable Washington DC: The Urban Institute Press.

Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Education Trust. 2012. Employer Health
Benefits 2012 Annual Survey, Retrieved from http://ehbs.kff.org/.

Kotlikoff, L. 2009. Fixing health care before it fixes us. Urological Clinics of North America 36:
29‐36.

Kotlikoff, L. and S. Burns. 2012. The Clash of Generations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Levy, H. 2009. Income, material hardship and use of public programs among the elderly.
University of Michigan Retirement Research Center, 2009‐208, September (with additional
tables).

Marshall, Samuel, Kathleen M. McGarry and Jonathan S. Skinner. 2010. “The Risk of Out‐of‐
Pocket Health Care Expenditure at the End of Life” National Bureau of Economic Research
working paper 16170.

Mayer, S. & C. Jencks. 1989. Poverty and the distribution of material hardship. Journal of
Human Resources 24(1):88‐114.

McWilliams, J.M., C.C. Afendulis, T.G.McGuire and B.E.Landon. 2011. “Complex Medicare
Advantage choices May Overwhelm Seniors—Especially Those with Impaired Decision Making”
Health Affairs. Published online before print August 2011, doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2011.0132

Medicare Payment Advisory Commission (MedPAC). 2012. “Status Report on Part D, with Focus
on Beneficiaries with High Drug Spending” in Medicare Payment Report to Congress, March
2012.

Meier S. and B. Wolfe. 2011. Conceptual Framework for Measuring the Medical Care Economic
Risk. In National Research Council and Institute of Medicine (forthcoming 2012). Measuring
Medical Care Economic Risk. Panel to Develop a Measure of Medical Risk as a Companion
Measure to the New Supplemental Income Poverty Measure. Committee on National Statistics,
Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, and Board on Health Care Services,
Institute of Medicine. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press (version dated October
20, 2011).

Meyer, B. and J. Sullivan. 2010a. Consumption and income of the poor elderly since 1960.
NBER. September




                                                                                                     53
Meyer, B. and J. Sullivan. 2012. Identifying the Disadvantaged: Official Poverty, Consumption
Poverty and the New Supplemental Poverty Measure. Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(3):
111‐136.

Moon, Marilyn. 1993. Incorporating Health Issues in the Measurement of Poverty. Urban
Institute.

Musumeci, M. 2012. A Guide to the Supreme Court’s Affordable Care Act Decision. Kaiser Family
     Foundation. July.

Newhouse, Joseph P. and Insurance Experiment Group. 1993. Free for All? Lessons from the
RAND Health insurance Experiment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

NYCCEO. 2012. The CEO Poverty Measure 2005‐2010. New York City Center for Economic
Opportunity. April.

Poterba, J., S. Venti and D. Wise. 2012. Were they prepared for retirement? Financial status at
advanced ages in the HRS and AHEAD Cohorts. NBER, February.

Ravallion, M. and S. Chen. 2011. Weakly relative poverty. Review of Economics and Statistics 93:
1251‐61.

Remler, Dahlia K. and Jessica Greene. Cost‐sharing: A Blunt Instrument. Annual Review of Public
Health, 30:293‐311, 2009.

Ruggles, S. J., T, Alexander, K. Genadek, R. Goeken, M.B. Schroeder, and M. Sobek. 2010.
Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine‐readable database]. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota.

Scholz, J.K, R. Moffitt and B. Cowan. 2009. Trends in income support. In M Cancian and S.
Danziger, eds. Changing poverty, changing policies, New York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Scholz, J.K. and A. Seshardi. 2008. Are all Americans saving “optimally” for retirement?
Michigan Retirement Research Center. 2008‐189. September.

Short, K. 2011. The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2010. Current Population Reports
P60‐241, U.S. Census Bureau. November.

Short, Kathleen. 2012. The Research Supplemental Poverty Measure: 2011. Current Population
Reports P60‐244, U.S. Census Bureau. November.

Smeeding, T. 2006. Poor people in rich nations: The United States in Comparative Perspective.
Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(1): 69‐90.


                                                                                                54
Stiglitz, Joseph E., Amartya Sen and Jean‐Paul Fitoussi, 2009. Report by the Commission on the
Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress. Available at www.stiglitz‐the
commission.


Summer, Laura, Jack Hoadley and Elizabeth Hargrave. 2010. The Medicare Part D Low‐Income
Subsidy Program: Experience to Date and Policy Issues for Consideration. Henry J. Kaiser Family
Foundation.

US Bureau of the Census. 2010. Observations from the Interagency Technical Working Group on
Developing a Supplemental Poverty Measure. March.
http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/poverty/SPM_TWGObservations.pdf.

US Bureau of the Census. 2011. Income, poverty and health insurance coverage in the United
States: 2010. Current Population Reports. P60‐239. September.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services.
2012. CMS Statistics 2012. CMS Publication No. 03504 June.

Webb, Anthony and Natalia Zhivan. 2010. “How Much is Enough? The Distribution of Lifetime
Health Care Costs” Center for Retirement Research at Boston College working paper 2010‐1.

Weisbrod, B. A., & Hansen, W. L. 1968. An income‐net worth approach to measuring economic
welfare. American Economic Review 58(5): 1315–1329

Wennberg, J.E., E.S. Fisher, and J.S. Skinner. 2002. Geography and the debate over Medicare
reform. Health Affairs Web Exclusive: W96‐W113.




                                                                                              55
Appendix: Detailed Literature Review on Poverty and Hardship Measures of the Elderly

Meyer and Sullivan (2010a)

Meyer and Sullivan use data from the CPS and CEX (Consumer Expenditure Survey) to explore
of the sensitivity of poverty levels and trends to analytical choices in poverty measurement
such as the price index, equivalence scale, valuation of in‐kind benefits, exclusion of tax
payments from and inclusion of tax credits in income, use of consumption or expenditures,
inclusion of owned housing services flows in consumption, and the inclusion of a “fungible
value” of health insurance in income and consumption. As they and others have found (Meyer
and Sullivan, various; Cutler and Katz; Slesnick 1993; Charles et al. 2006), consumption‐based
poverty rates are lower than income‐based poverty rates. Furthermore, among the elderly,
consumption‐poverty rates have fallen much faster than income‐poverty rates since 1980.
Strikingly, the elderly consumption “deep poverty” rate has fallen markedly but elderly income
“deep poverty” rate has increased. The income‐poverty gap increased significantly, while the
consumption poverty gap declined among the elderly.41

Meyer and Sullivan note several advantages of consumption over income in poverty
measurement including under‐reporting of income (especially distributions from retirement
investments such as IRAs) and the importance of savings in financing consumption of the
elderly. Indicators of material well‐being such as ownership of homes, cars, appliances, central
air conditioning as well as indicators of housing quality are substantially higher among the
income‐poor elderly than the consumption‐poor elderly (Table 3). Although reported median
financial wealth is low among both groups, at and above the 75th percentile, financial wealth is
much higher for the income‐poor than the consumption‐poor.

Meyer and Sullivan show considerable evidence of improvement in the material well‐being of
both the consumption poor and the income poor over the past 50 years, consistent with the
trends in consumption‐poverty but in contradiction to increases in deep income‐poverty and
the income‐poverty gap. Finally, consistent with Charles et al. (2006, summarized below),
figures on material well‐being suggest that the income poor who are not consumption poor are
not a particularly needy group.
                                                                                                 56
Meyer and Sullivan also investigate the impact on poverty trends of adding a value of health
insurance to income and consumption, though they exclude MOOP from consumption. In
discussing their treatment of health insurance and MOOP expenditures they write:

       “Differences across individuals in their spending are not a good measure of well‐being if
       they reflect differences in health or differences in coverage. These types of differences
       are likely to generate cases where more spending means worse well‐being. A better
       approach is to omit out of pocket spending… and account for a value of health insurance
       provided through an employer or by the government.”

While we agree with much of what Meyer and Sullivan have written, we believe they err in
equating higher MOOP expenditures to “worse” insurance coverage and, thus, diminished well‐
being. In fact, among the elderly in Medicare, the opposite situation may well pertain; an older
person with adequate resources may choose a Medicare plan that, in return for higher quality
care (better physician choice, wider out‐of‐ network coverage, greater control over service
intensity, etc.), requires more MOOP expenditures (at least in expectation).

Meyer and Sullivan show the sensitivity of trends in income poverty and consumption poverty
to the inclusion or exclusion of a value for employer‐provided or government‐provided health
insurance. For income‐poverty, they add the CPS‐imputed value of health insurance to income.
However, they note that “Census imputes a fungible value of Medicare and Medicaid only when
income exceeds an amount they assume families will spend on food and housing. Thus, these
fungible values imply that public health insurance has no value for families whose income is
below this level, which surely understates the value of health insurance for this group.” For
consumption‐poverty Meyer and Sullivan impute separate values for employer‐provided and
public health insurance. To arrive at a fungible value, which should be lower for people with
lower incomes, they cap the insurance value at one‐third of total family expenditures (though
they plan to refine this procedure; p. 12).

To gauge the effect of adding the value of health insurance to income, Meyer and Sullivan first
adjust the OPM using several SPM revisions. This “adjusted” elderly poverty rate declines much
more rapidly after 1980 than the OPM (see their Figure 2). However, when they add a fungible
value of health insurance to income, the adjusted poverty rate declines much more slowly,


                                                                                                57
though still a bit faster than the OPM. As they write: “If the CPS’s imputed value of health
insurance is also included, the result shows a more modest decline in poverty than is evident
for a money income based measure starting in the late 1980s, due to Medicaid and Medicare
becoming less important for the poor elderly at this time” [emphasis added].

Given the explosion in per capita spending on the elderly through Medicare and Medicaid since
1980, this result is counter‐intuitive, to say the least. The dampening of the decline in the
adjusted elderly poverty rate when the fungible value of health insurance is added to income
likely results from the increase in the measured income deep‐poverty and the resulting
assignment of a fungible value of zero to health insurance for an increasing fraction of the poor
elderly.42 In contrast, Meyer and Sullivan’s consumption poverty measure declines more rapidly
when they add a value of health insurance to consumption, using their method that caps the
fungible value at one‐third of expenditures (see their Figure 3).




Charles, Danziger, Pounder and Schoeni (2006, and updated tables)

Charles et al. challenge the conclusion that consumption‐based poverty measures are superior
to income‐based measures. They use data from the HRS to compare relations between
poverty, defined by either low income or low consumption, with the experiences of material
hardship of “mature people” (age 53+). They consider the sensitivity of some of their results to
excluding MOOP expenditures from consumption (but not from income).

Charles et al. find a higher fraction of older persons are income poor than consumption poor
(9.6% versus 4.6%).43 Only one‐quarter of the income poor are also consumption poor,
whereas about half of the consumption poor are also income poor (revised Table 1). Thus,
2.3% of the mature population is both income and consumption poor, 7.3% are income‐poor,
consumption non‐poor, and only 2.3% are consumption poor, income‐nonpoor. If being poor
according to both income and consumption is a better indicator of “true deprivation” than
either alone, we should prefer consumption poverty to income poverty for its greater sensitivity
to true deprivation.

                                                                                                58
When they exclude MOOP expenditures from consumption, consumption poverty rises to 5.8%,
the fraction of the income poor that is consumption poor rises slightly, to 28%, and the fraction
of the consumption poor that is income poor falls slightly, to 48%. The percentiles of the two
measures of resources‐to‐need (income/poverty threshold and consumption/poverty
threshold) are moderately correlated (0.54), (p. 8).

Charles et al. compare the bottom quintiles of each distribution and show that socio‐
demographic characteristics and economic well‐being are similar (Table 3 revised). They find
small and not statistically significant differences in 12 indicators of physical health; five
indicators of mental health; and three indicators of housing and neighborhood quality. Material
well‐being for the bottom quintile of the “consumption minus MOOP” distribution also differs
little from that of the bottom quintile of the income distribution (revised Table 4).

Charles et al. compare how income/needs percentiles and consumption/needs percentiles
correlate with well‐being using separate multiple regression models (revised Table 5). Nearly
always, the estimated effect per‐percentile of income/needs is larger (in absolute value) than
the effect per‐percentile of consumption/needs, which suggests to the authors that income
tracks material wellbeing better than consumption. However, these results are reversed when
income and consumption are measured in dollars rather than percentiles (revised Table 6),
indicating that, when both are measured in dollars, consumption is more highly correlated with
well‐being than is income.44

Charles et al. cross‐classify the sample according to the two poverty measures. As they note
(page 14) “…the most interesting numbers in Table 7 are for those persons who are poor by one
definition, but not poor by the other. Are income‐poor/consumption non‐poor households
worse off than consumption poor/income non‐poor households? And what does the difference
in their objective indicators of wellbeing suggest about the degree to which low consumption
among the elderly reflects an aspect of choice rather than of resource constraint?” In a
supplemental table similar to Table 7 but in which the sample is restricted to families with a
head aged 65 or older (supplemental Table 8, not revised), they present statistics for two
groups: the income‐poor/consumption‐non‐poor and the consumption‐poor/income‐non‐poor.

                                                                                                 59
For simplicity, we call the first group “the dis‐savers” and the second “the thrifty.” On average,
the dis‐savers have MOOP expenditures of $4,200, which amounts to 14.4% of their total
consumption of $29,166. Assuming an average household size of two persons, the poverty line
would be, on average, about $11,000. Since the dis‐savers are all income poor, their average
income must be well below $11,000, so they must be consuming roughly triple their annual
income, on average. In contrast, the thrifty group spends only $800 on MOOP, or 10.9% percent
of their total consumption of $7,339. Although the low‐income, higher‐consumption group has
much higher MOOP expenses, greater MOOP expenses account for only about one‐fifth of the
difference in overall consumption between the dis‐savers and the thrifty. Between 2000 and
2002, mean wealth fell by 61% for the dis‐savers, while it rose by 86% for the thrifty group.
(The change in median wealth for the two groups was 0% and +26%, respectively.)

Despite much lower levels of consumption, the thrifty group appears to experience higher
levels of material well‐being than the dis‐savers. For example, the thrifty are less likely to be
food insecure (3% vs. 9%), in poor/fair health (37% vs. 42%), or to live in homes in fair/poor
condition (12% vs. 21%). (Significance levels are not indicated in this table.) Figures such as
these lead Charles et al. to conclude that “…the elderly consumption poor who are not income
poor do not seem to be particularly needy.” Yet we must also ask whether we should consider
particularly needy the dis‐saver group (income poor/consumption non‐poor) who manage to
consume nearly triple the poverty line, on average, despite their low incomes. They argue that:
“For mature persons, a complete picture of poverty seems to require knowing about both the
degree to which both household income and consumption do not rise to particular levels (p.
4).” If the neediest elderly are both income poor and consumption poor, the good news is that
this population comprises about half the consumption poor and only one quarter of the income
poor, and, in the HRS, only 2% to 3% of the mature population (aged 53+).

Charles et al. also conclude that “consumption seems to [do] a worse—and certainly does not
do a better—job of identifying hardship for mature persons than do income based measures.”
However, we believe this conclusion needs to be tempered by the recognition that their




                                                                                                    60
updated analyses show that this result is reversed when resources are measured in dollars
rather than in percentiles.

In sum, while combining income and consumption should provide a better measure of need
than either measure alone, these figures (and others) also seem to make a strong case for the
incorporation of wealth or assets into measures poverty and economic wellbeing of the elderly,
given the important role of assets in financing the consumption of the low‐income elderly.
Most importantly, information on assets can help to identify low consumption levels that result
from thrift rather than lack of resources (i.e., need).

Levy (2009)

Levy (2009) uses HRS data to estimate regression models that relate the elderly’s experience of
material hardship to their income and health. Material hardship is measured by indicators of:
A. food cutbacks (“not always had enough money to buy the food you need”; or “skipped meals
or eaten less that you felt you should because there was not enough food in the house”); B.
Medication cutbacks (“ended up taking less medication than was prescribed for you because of
the cost”); or C. Either A or B.

Levy finds that better health and higher income reduce material hardship (Table 5). In
discussing alternative interpretations of the health effect on hardship, Levy notes that one
“…explanation is that the burden of out‐of‐pocket spending for medical care reduces resources
available for food and medicine; this is the notion underlying criticisms of the fact that the
official poverty measure does not take out‐of‐pocket medical spending into account (p. 12),”
However, in supplemental analyses45, Levy finds that subtracting MOOP expenditures from
income weakens the statistical relationship between income and hardship (the coefficient of
log income is reduced by one‐third to two‐thirds). Interestingly, subtracting MOOP from
income weakens the effect of poverty on “food cutbacks,” but strengthens considerably the
effect of poverty on “medication cutbacks.” Taken at face value, these results suggest that
what matters most for an elderly person’s experience of food hardship is how much income she
has, not how much income she has net of MOOP expenditures. But income net of MOOP
expenditures matters most for medication cutbacks. Together these results suggest that low‐
                                                                                                 61
income elderly reduce the impact of MOOP expenditures on non‐medical hardship by cutting
back on medication.

Levy also finds little evidence that MOOP expenditures mediate or explain the relationship
between bad health and material hardship, controlling for income. Specifically, controlling for
either income or income net of MOOP expenditures does not weaken the health‐hardship
relationship. This finding is inconsistent with the idea that, among the low‐income elderly,
MOOP expenditures typically result from health shocks (or declines in health) that, ultimately,
cause material hardship.

Other supplemental analyses (Table 5A) demonstrate that assets matter for the elderly’s
experience of material hardship. Higher assets are associated with reduced material hardship,
whether or not income is controlled. Controlling for assets reduces the effect of income on
“food cutback” by half, and the effect of income on “medication cutbacks” by nearly one
quarter. Finally, controlling for assets weakens slightly the health‐hardship relationship.

In combination with our reading of Meyer and Sullivan and Charles et al., Levy’s findings
provide evidence that combing income and assets holds higher promise for predicting material
hardship than either income alone or consumption alone.

Butrica et al. (2008)

Butrica et al. (2008) use HRS data to test whether several alternative measures of poverty
correspond more closely than the OPM to subjective assessments of wellbeing. We focus on
their “Alternative IV” which, among other adjustments, subtracts MOOP expenditures from
income. In their HRS sample, the elderly poverty rate is 6.5% according to the OPM but 12.3%
according to Alternative IV, similar to the comparison between the OPM and SPM in other
contexts (Short 2011; NYC CEO 2012).

Butrica et al. attempt to validate poverty measures against six subjective measures of well‐
being: 1. Difficulty paying bills; 2. Have enough money for food; 3. Skipped meals (among those
without enough money for food); 4. Depression; 5. Retirement satisfaction; 6. Self‐reported
health status.

                                                                                               62
They write:

       Comparing the alternative poverty measures with subjective measures of well‐being
       collected in the HRS can help us evaluate the measures’ ability to capture self‐reported
       economic need. The alternatives generally track individuals’ assessments of well‐being
       better than the official poverty measure (table 7). For example, 47.8 percent of older
       adults who are classified as poor when health expenses are accounted for (measures III
       and IV) report having extreme difficulty paying bills, compared with only 31.5 percent
       using the official measure.

It is clear that, in the quote above, the authors have misinterpreted a result reported in their
Table 7; the 47.8 and 31.5 figures are clearly poverty rates and not proportions of the poor in
different categories of well‐being. In particular, 31.5 is not the percentage of the poor that has
extreme difficulty paying bills, but rather the fraction of those who have extreme difficulty
paying bills that is classified as poor under this measure. Since the poverty rate for Alternative
Measure IV is higher overall than the OPM rate (12.3 vs. 6.5), it is not surprising that the
Alternative Measure IV rate is higher than the OPM within each category of well‐being. A
poverty measure should be considered “better” than another if it discriminates better between
the needy and non‐needy. It is difficult to make such an assessment from the information
provided in the table.

Butrica et al. offer what we believe to be a correct interpretation of other figures in the table.
They note that “…20.9 percent of those saying they do not have enough to pay for food are
poor using the official measure, compared with one quarter or more using measures III through
IV.” This would appear to show that Alternative Measure IV better identifies the needy as
needy. However, their figures also demonstrate that the OPM is better than Alternative
Measure IV at identifying the non‐needy as non‐needy: only 5.8% of those who have enough
money for food are classified as poor by the OPM compared to 11.3% for Alternative Measure
IV. Again, it is difficult to assess whether one poverty measure better distinguishes between the
needy and non‐needy from the information they present.

Finally, Butrica et al. write: “Higher alternative poverty rates among older adults and especially
high rates among some subgroups show the importance of protecting low‐income older adults
when considering reforms that reduce the cost of government programs for retirees. They also

                                                                                                     63
underscore the importance of considering new policies to boost the incomes of the poorest
older adults. Reforms to the SSI program that increase asset limits from levels set back in 1972
should also be considered to allow more of the poorest older adults to gain eligibility (p. vi‐vii).”
Of course, this conclusion is justified only if the alternative measure of poverty is a better
indicator of need than the OPM.




Butrica et al. (2009)

Butrica et al. (2009) examine the responsiveness of health care spending and total spending to
medical conditions for a panel from the HRS in 2001, 2003 and 2005. They use two health care
spending variables: total MOOP and MOOP less premium payments (since they do not expect
premiums to vary much with health status for older persons). They also examine two total
spending outcomes: spending other than MOOP, and spending other than MOOP or housing.
When they restrict the sample to low‐income (<$15,000 per capita in $2007) elderly
households, they find that the presence of health conditions increases MOOP expenditures
substantially, especially non‐premium MOOP expenditures. However, more health conditions
do not reduce non‐MOOP expenditures; in contradiction to the idea that non‐discretionary
MOOP expenditures crowd out other spending, the coefficients are positive, though not
statistically significant. These results come from regression models that control for income and
assets. Although one might attribute this (null) result to measurement problems or the like, the
same analyses for low‐income 51 to 64 year olds yields the expected result: among this younger
group, more medical conditions associate with much higher MOOP expenditures and lower
non‐medical expenditures.

They conclude:

       It is no surprise, then, that low‐income people in their fifties and sixties would have to
       lower their living standards to cover their health expenses when they develop medical
       problems. Many are uninsured or underinsured, generally causing out‐of‐pocket health
       care costs to increase sharply when they develop chronic conditions. They typically lack
       the financial resources to maintain their consumption levels when medical costs surge,
       such as by dipping into their savings. Unlike many people ages 65 and older with adult

                                                                                                   64
children who are well‐established in their careers, people in their fifties and sixties may
lack family members who are able to provide financial help.

More surprising is our finding that health care spending does not crowd out other types
of household spending for adults ages 65 and older, even among those with low
incomes. Although virtually all Americans ages 65 and older receive Medicare benefits,
the coverage gaps are well known. Beneficiaries usually face substantial cost‐sharing
requirements, including high deductibles and significant copays. Premiums for coverage
of outpatient services are expensive. And several services are excluded from the basic
Medicare package, most notably prescription drug coverage during the period covered
by this study. Although Medicare began covering prescription drugs in 2006, coverage
remains incomplete today (Schneeweiss et al. 2009). Many older adults supplement
Medicare with private coverage from former employers or insurance companies, but
premiums for supplemental coverage are expensive.




                                                                                          65
Endnotes


1
  We use the term “elderly” to refer to those aged 65 and over.
2
  Some states may not expand Medicaid eligibility. We return to this issue in the conclusions.
3
  John Cogan, a member of the Panel on Poverty and Family Assistance responsible for the 1995 NAS report, raised
several of these objections in a dissent (Citro and Michael, 1995, Appendix A).
4
  However, it is often noted that relative poverty measures have the uncomfortable feature that they can rise
during economic booms (Smeeding 2006) and may fail to register economic downturns (e.g., NYC CEO 2012,
Appendix B). See also Ravallion and Chen,(2011).
5
  Burtless and Siegel (2004, footnote 2) note that Corbett (1999) reported that only about one quarter of all
participants at a conference on poverty measurement approved of the NAS recommended treatment of medical
expenses.
6
  Meier and Wolfe (2011) discuss the development of a measure of financial risk due to health risk that could be of
use to those who seek to create a health dimension of poverty as part of a multi‐measure program.
7
  Consider two uninsured families, slightly above the poverty line, one of which will become relatively sick and
have substantial health care spending, while the other will be healthy with little spending on health care. After ACA
implementation, both will have access to health insurance whose premiums and cost sharing are modest, due to
government subsidies. The sick family’s MOOP will likely be reduced by the ACA as the modest rise in premiums is
offset by the large reduction in non‐premium MOOP. The SPM approach would correctly record them as being less
poor since gaining insurance reduces their MOOP. However, the healthy family will see an increase in MOOP due
to the modest required premiums. Thus, the SPM will record the healthy family as poorer than they would be
without the ACA; yet the SPM would not count in any way the valuable insurance that they have received as a
result of the ACA.
8
  The OPM thresholds are based on the Emergency Food Plan of the 1950s, intended to capture the amount of
income necessary to provide a nutritionally adequate diet on an emergency basis. This is a diet intended to
maintain nutritional health. In a background paper for NAS report, Angus Deaton (1985) argued that early research
showed the Emergency Food Budget to exceed the income required to avoid malnutrition and nutrition‐related
disease. He further explained why using the food budget share at the average family income (1/3) does not
provide a logically consistent (scientific) basis for defining or updating poverty thresholds as long as the average
income exceeds the poverty line. Although it may lack a firm scientific basis, there is no denying the appeal of a
definition of poverty linked to inadequate nutrition (i.e., suboptimal health).
9
  Our focus is on population‐level poverty measures, rather than on measures used directly to determine eligibility
for means‐tested benefits.
10
   Non‐premium MOOP includes both cost‐sharing payments, such as co‐payments and deductibles, and payments
for uncovered care.
11
   Burtless and Siegel (2004) show that adding predicted “reasonable” MOOP expenditures to the poverty
threshold has a similar effect on poverty rates as subtracting actual MOOP expenditures from resources.
12
   Two caveats to interpreting these results as causal stand out. First, all these studies control for insurance status,
but as we describe later, insurance choice is likely a major mediating pathway from wealth/income to MOOP.
Insurance status should not be controlled if the objective is to determine the total effect of wealth/income on
MOOP expenditures. Second, since health and wealth are known to be associated, it is possible that these
estimates ascribe to health status what are in fact wealth effects mediated by prior medical care, psychosocial
variables or other factors. In principle, both effects could increase the causal effect of wealth on MOOP.
13
   The three‐quarter figure is our calculation based on figures that Fisher et al. (2009) report separately for those
aged 65‐74 and 75+ in their Table 3, page 6. Although both Meyer and Sullivan (2010a) and Fisher et al. use CEX
data, Fisher et al. include MOOP expenditures in consumption but Meyer and Sullivan do not.
14
   Evidence of asset holdings for this small group is mixed; for example, Fisher et al. (2009 Table 5) report median
net worth of $3,140 and $34,311 for this group at age 65‐74 and 75+, respectively.
15
   Although they do not study the effects of subtracting MOOP expenditures, Mayer and Jencks (1989, p. 111)
conclude “Official poverty statistics appear to exaggerate the extent of material hardship among the elderly and
underestimate its extent among children.”


                                                                                                                     66
16
   As originally developed by Mollie Orshankski in the early 1960s (Fisher, 1992), the OPM threshold includes
spending on necessities other than food through the use of a multiplier of food needs, thus implicitly including out‐
of‐pocket health expenditures, but excluding health care funded through insurance or charity. Leaving aside
whether the MOOP component of the OPM threshold is obsolete, it would be illogical to include the value of
government or employer‐provided insurance in resources if the thresholds include only MOOP needs.
17
   The care covered is not simply determined by the formal coverage terms but also by the clinical context, the
clinical standards applied and the procedures used to implement them.
18
   Since health status evolves over time, ex ante cannot be thought of as before a one‐year insurance contract.
Rather, it should be thought of as behind the “veil of ignorance,” before one knows health status at all.
19
   We have in mind that cost‐sharing takes the form of co‐pays for doctor’s visits and medications, rather than high
deductibles for inpatient (hospital) care, so that even non‐premium MOOP under the cap is not too sensitive to
health status.
20
   The actuarially fair premium depends, of course, on the population that is pooled. The pooling should be across
the population for the country, or at least a broad group, not selected based on health status, such as all non‐
elderly in a particular state.
21
   We thank Trudi Renwick for pointing this out.
22
   This past year, the average plan full cost for employer‐provided insurance was $15,745 (Kaiser Family
Foundation and Health Research and Education Trust, 2012). http://www.kff.org/insurance/ehbs091112nr.cfm
23
   However, the Supreme Court decision National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius (e.g., Musucemi
2012) allows states to opt out of the Medicaid expansion without penalty. As of this writing, the vast majority of
states are projected to offer Medicaid coverage for all low‐income persons.
24
   Unlike most forms of insurance, those eligible for Medicaid may retroactively acquire insurance coverage, and
hospitals and clinics will often perform the paperwork to get such individuals enrolled. Therefore, we consider the
uncovered but Medicaid eligible to have their health insurance needs met for the purpose of poverty
measurement.
25
   Variation of premiums due to tobacco use is also permitted, with a maximum range of 1.5 to 1.
26
   Although the reduced non‐premium MOOP maxima schedule for those below 400% of FPL is part of the ACA
legislation, there is some possibility that maxima may end up higher since the actuarial value enhancement that
would fund the schedule may be inadequate. See Focus on Health Reform 2011b.
27
   In fact, we performed HIPM calculations at many income levels and found that the ACA ensured that no one was
made HIPM poor through provision health insurance. See also Gruber and Perry (2011).
28
   Our HIPM approach does not count free clinics as resources, although they do effectively provide a form of
insurance. Some areas have a significant system of such clinics available to undocumented individuals.
29
   Such information can be obtained by searching the CMS interactive Plan Finder Web Site
https://www.medicare.gov/find‐a‐plan/questions/home.aspx The web site for 2013 showed multiple plans
available in NYC with no premium MOOP for either the drug or health components of the plan and a non‐premium
MOOP maximum of $3400.
30
   See US Department of Health and Human Services 2012 Tables 1.1 and 3.5. Our figure of $10,000 is based on our
approximation of expenditures on elderly enrollees in Part D since the aged/disabled split is not available.
31
   $10,000 is approximately the average of FCSU threshold for a single person who owns her home with no
mortgage ($9206) and a single person who rents ($10,966), see Short 2012. In the IPUMS‐CPS March file for 2011,
the weighted mean SPM poverty threshold for SPM resource sharing units consisting of one person aged 65 or
older is $10,437 (authors’ calculation).
32
   Employer‐provided supplementary insurance has the direct effect of decreasing non‐premium MOOP relative to
traditional Medicare, but it increasing it relative to MA‐PD plans. It may result in greater care or be richer
insurance than MA‐PD plans, but is difficult to incorporate in our framework. Because there is a gap between the
needs (a full MA‐PD plan) and the resources (only government contribution to Medicare) that the employer‐
provided supplemental insurance fills to some degree, this will lead us to overstate elderly poverty to some extent.
33
   An extreme version of this argument would hold that since all elderly persons can qualify for Medicaid
eventually if their income and assets are low enough, then no elderly person can become (post‐transfer) poor
through medical expenditures, other than during the transition onto Medicaid.


                                                                                                                  67
34
   States are allowed to charge some Medicaid beneficiaries premiums. The rules are given at:
http://www.medicaid.gov/Medicaid‐CHIP‐Program‐Information/By‐Topics/Cost‐Sharing/Cost‐Sharing.html.
35
   Some may worry about making the MA‐PD plans the default when so many do not use them. In fact, MA‐PD
plans will not be attractive to many: those with either Medicaid or generous employer‐provided supplementary
insurance may have better insurance (in different ways), and better‐off people may prefer to purchase good
supplemental policies that allow more choice (Atherly and Thorpe, 2005). MA‐PD plans do not need to be chosen
by many for construction of a HIPM; they simply need to be available.
36
   We have not distinguished premium and non‐premium MOOP in these illustrative calculations. In some cases,
combining the two allows a too‐generous MOOP deduction for our examples using a higher cap. For example, a
healthy person with no non‐premium MOOP who chooses a high quality Medigap plan may have their premium
MOOP fully deducted.
37
   The MOOP measures used for the SPM include over‐the‐counter (OTC) medications and supplies. In our
numerical examples, we have included OTC with other MOOP. However, see section V for an explanation of how
we would treat OTC in HIPM implementation.
38
   We have limited our application to very simple household structures. A practical difficulty of the HIPM is
meshing individual or partial household insurance plans with household‐level poverty measurement. We believe
with careful implementation, these complexities are manageable (see the discussion Meier and Wolfe 2011).
39
   On this point, Meyer and Sullivan (2012, p. 126) call for “more research on the relationship between health
spending and health status.”
40
   However, if the concern is not poverty measurement but redistribution, one could argue that this approach fails
to value the redistribution from healthy to sick within the insured pool. This criticism is certainly valid. On the
other hand, even from a redistribution perspective, if we take a truly ex ante lifetime perspective, going behind the
“veil of ignorance” to where no one knows anything of their health status in life, then the value of health insurance
is the same for everyone.
41
   In Meyer and Sullivan (pages 22‐23), the “deep poverty” rate is the proportion of elderly with family income or
consumption below half the poverty threshold; the “poverty gap” is the average (per poor family) difference
between income or consumption and the poverty threshold.
42
   In a personal communication, Meyer and Sullivan agreed that this is a possible explanation of their evidence.
43
   When possible, we use figures from the revised and updated tables generously provided to us by the authors.
44
   This reversal most likely reflects a more compressed consumption distribution compared to the income
distribution so that a one percentile increase in consumption is smaller in dollar terms than a one percentile
increase in income. Charles et al. do not repeat this exercise using non‐MOOP consumption. For our purposes, it
would be useful to estimate models that focus on effects of income and consumption on wellbeing for those below
or near the poverty line.
45
   See supplemental Table 5B. We thank Helen Levy for her generosity in responding to our questions and requests
for supplemental analyses.




                                                                                                                  68
