                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               INFORMATIONAL FRICTIONS AND COMMODITY MARKETS

                                           Michael Sockin
                                            Wei Xiong

                                        Working Paper 18906
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18906


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2013




This paper supersedes an earlier paper circulated under the title "Feedback Effects of Commodity Futures
Prices." We wish to thank Thierry Foucault, Lutz Kilian, Jennifer La'O, Matteo Maggiori, Joel Peress,
Ken Singleton, Kathy Yuan, and seminar participants at Asian Meeting of Econometric Society, Bank
of Canada, Chicago, Columbia, Emory, HEC-Paris, INSEAD, NBER Meeting on Economics of Commodity
Markets, Princeton, the 6th Annual Conference of the Paul Woolley Center of London School of Economics,
and Western Finance Association Meetings for helpful discussion and comments. We are especially
grateful to Bruno Biais, an Associate Editor, and three referees for many constructive suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Michael Sockin and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Informational Frictions and Commodity Markets
Michael Sockin and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 18906
March 2013, Revised December 2013
JEL No. F3,G1,G14

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper develops a model to analyze information aggregation in commodity markets. Through centralized
trading, commodity prices aggregate dispersed information about the strength of the global economy
among goods producers whose production has complementarity, and serve as price signals to guide
producers' production decisions and commodity demand. Our analysis highlights important feedback
effects of informational noise originating from supply shocks and futures market trading on commodity
demand and spot prices, which are ignored by existing empirical studies and policy discussions.


Michael Sockin
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
msockin@princeton.edu

Wei Xiong
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Bendheim Center for Finance
Princeton, NJ 08450
and NBER
wxiong@princeton.edu
       The boom and bust cycles of commodity markets in 2007-2008 have stimulated intense
academic and policy debate regarding the e¤ects of supply and demand shocks and the role
of futures market speculation. Despite the attention given to these issues, the academic
literature largely ignores a key aspect of commodity markets— informational frictions— by
treating di¤erent types of shocks as observable to market participants. The markets for
key industrial commodities, such as crude oil and copper, have become globalized in recent
decades, with supply and demand now stemming from across the world. This globalization
exposes market participants, who face signi…cant informational frictions regarding the global
supply, demand, and inventory of these commodities, to heightened uncertainty as to the
strength of the global economy. In such an environment, commodity prices often serve as
important price signals regarding the strength of the global economy for market participants.1
       This important informational role of commodity prices motivates several conceptual ques-
tions not yet addressed by the existing economic literature: How do commodity markets
aggregate information about the global economy? How do informational frictions a¤ect
commodity prices and demand? In response to signi…cant commodity price volatility in
recent years, policy circles have been concerned with speculation in commodity futures mar-
kets. How does trading in futures markets a¤ect spot prices and demand in the presence of
informational frictions?
       This paper develops a theoretical framework to address these questions. Our framework
integrates the standard models of asset market trading with asymmetric information, e.g.,
Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) and Hellwig (1980), with an international macro setting, e.g.,
Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (1996) and Angeletos and La’O (2013). In this global economy, a
continuum of specialized goods producers whose production has complementarity - which
emerges from their need to trade produced goods with each other - demand a key commodity,
such as copper, as a common production input. Through trading the commodity, the goods
producers aggregate dispersed information regarding unobservable global economic strength,
which ultimately determines their demand for the commodity. We start with a baseline model
with only a spot market for the commodity to illustrate the key mechanism for informational
   1
    For example, in explaining the decision of the European Central Bank (ECB) to raise its key interest
rate in March 2008 on the eve of the worst economic recession since the Great Depression, ECB policy
reports cite high prices of oil and other commodities as a key factor, suggesting the signi…cant in‡uence of
commodity prices on monetary policies. Furthermore, Hu and Xiong (2013) provide evidence that in recent
years, stock prices across East Asian economies display signi…cant and positive reactions to overnight futures
price changes of a set of commodities traded in the U.S., suggesting that people across the world react to
information contained in commodity futures prices.


                                                      1
frictions to a¤ect commodity markets, and then extend the model to incorporate a futures
market to further characterize the role of futures market trading.
   Our baseline model focuses on a centralized spot market, through which the goods pro-
ducers acquire the commodity from a group of suppliers, who are subject to an unobservable
supply shock. The supply shock prevents the commodity price from perfectly aggregating
the goods producers’ information as to the global economic strength. Nevertheless, the
commodity price provides a useful signal to guide the producers’production decisions and
commodity demand. Despite the non-linearity in the producers’ production decisions, we
derive a unique log-linear, noisy rational expectations equilibrium in closed form. In this
equilibrium, each producer’s commodity demand is a log-linear function of its private signal
and the commodity price, while the commodity price is a log-linear function of the global
economic strength and supply shock. This tractability originates from a key feature: the
aggregate demand of a continuum of producers remains log-linear as a result of the law of
large numbers.
   Through its informational role, a higher commodity price motivates each goods producer
to produce more goods and thus demand more of the commodity as input, which o¤sets
the usual cost e¤ect of a higher price leading to a lower quantity demanded. The comple-
mentarity in production among goods producers magni…es this informational e¤ect through
their incentives to coordinate production decisions. Under certain conditions, our model
shows that the informational e¤ect can dominate the cost e¤ect and lead to a positive price
elasticity of producers’demand for the commodity.
   Again through its informational role, the commodity price allows the supply shock to
have a subtle feedback e¤ect on commodity demand and price. In a perfect-information
benchmark in which global economic strength and supply shocks are both observable, a
higher supply shock leads to a lower commodity price and a larger quantity demanded
by goods producers. However, in the presence of informational frictions, goods producers
partially attribute the lower commodity price to a weaker global economy, which in turn
induces them to reduce their commodity demand. This feedback e¤ect thus further ampli…es
the negative price impact of the supply shock and undermines its impact on commodity
demand.
   To estimate the e¤ects of supply and demand shocks in commodity markets, it is common
for the empirical literature to adopt structural models that ignore informational frictions by



                                              2
letting agents directly observe both demand and supply shocks. As highlighted by our
analysis, the price elasticity of demand and the e¤ects of supply shocks are likely to be
misspeci…ed when informational frictions are severe.
   In practice, trading commodity futures is appealing as it facilitates hedging and specula-
tion without necessarily involving any physical delivery. However, whether and how traders
in futures markets might a¤ect commodity prices without taking or making any physical
delivery remains illusive. To address this issue, our extended model incorporates a futures
market, which allows one round of information aggregation among the goods producers be-
fore commodity suppliers observe their supply shock and make physical delivery in the spot
market. We also introduce to the futures market a group of …nancial traders, who always
unwind their futures position before delivery and whose aggregate futures position is subject
to random noise unrelated to the commodity.
   Interestingly, the futures price serves as a useful signal to the goods producers even
though they also observe the spot price because the spot price and futures price are traded
at di¤erent times and are subject to di¤erent noise: the spot price contains noise from
commodity suppliers’ supply shock, while the futures price contains noise from …nancial
traders’futures position. As a result, the futures price is not simply a shadow of the spot
price. Instead, it has its own informational e¤ects on commodity demand and the spot price.
   This result clari…es a simple yet useful notion that futures market participants, even
if not involved in physical delivery, can nevertheless impact commodity markets. It also
cautions against a commonly used empirical strategy based on commodity inventory to
detect speculative e¤ects, e.g., Kilian and Murphy (2010), Juvenal and Petrella (2012), and
Knittel and Pindyck (2013). This strategy is premised on a widely held argument that if
speculators distort the spot price of a commodity upward through futures market trading,
consumers will …nd the commodity too expensive and thus reduce consumption, which in
turn causes inventories of the commodity to spike. By assuming that consumers are able
to recognize the commodity price distortion, this argument ignores realistic informational
frictions faced by consumers, which are particularly relevant in times of great economic
uncertainty. In contrast, our model shows that informational frictions may cause consumers
to react to the distorted price by increasing rather than decreasing their consumption.
   Taken together, our analysis systematically illustrates how both spot and futures prices of
key industrial commodities can serve as price signals for the strength of the global economy,



                                              3
which in turn allows supply shocks and noise from futures markets to feed back to commodity
demand and spot prices. In doing so, our analysis provides a coherent argument for how the
large in‡ow of investment capital to commodity futures markets might have ampli…ed the
boom and bust of commodity prices in 2007-2008 by interfering with the price signals.
   Our model complements the recent macro literature that analyzes the role of informa-
tional frictions on economic growth. Lorenzoni (2009) shows that by in‡uencing agents’
expectations, noise in public news can generate sizable aggregate volatility. Angeletos and
La’O (2013) focus on endogenous economic ‡uctuations that result from the lack of central-
ized communication channels to coordinate the expectations of di¤erent households. Our
model adopts the setting of Angeletos and La’O (2013) for the goods market equilibrium to
derive endogenous complementarity in goods producers’production decisions. We analyze
information aggregation through centralized commodity trading, which is absent from their
model, and the feedback e¤ects of the equilibrium commodity price.
   The literature has long recognized that trading in …nancial markets aggregates informa-
tion and the resulting prices can feed back to real world activities, e.g., Bray (1981) and
Subrahmanyam and Titman (2001). More recently, the literature points out that such feed-
back e¤ects can be particularly strong in the presence of strategic complementarity in agents’
actions. Morris and Shin (2002) show that in such a setting, noise in public information has
an ampli…ed e¤ect on agents’actions and thus on equilibrium outcomes. In our model, the
spot and futures prices of the commodity serve such a role in feeding back noise to the goods
producers’production decisions. Similar feedback e¤ects are also modeled in several other
contexts, such as from stock prices to …rm capital investment decisions and from exchange
rates to policy choices of central banks (e.g., Ozdenoren, and Yuan (2008), Angeletos, Loren-
zoni and Pavan (2010) and Goldstein, Ozdenoren, and Yuan (2011, 2012)). The log-linear
equilibrium derived in our model makes the analysis of feedback e¤ects particularly tractable.
   This paper also contributes to the emerging literature that analyzes whether the large
in‡ow of …nancial investment to commodity futures markets in recent years may have a¤ected
commodity prices, e.g., Stoll and Whaley (2010), Tang and Xiong (2012), Singleton (2012),
Cheng, Kirilenko, and Xiong (2012), Hamilton and Wu (2012), Kilian and Murphy (2012),
and Henderson, Pearson, and Wang (2012). Building on realistic informational frictions, our
model describes a speci…c mechanism for trading in futures markets to a¤ect commodity
demand and spot prices. This mechanism echoes Singleton (2012), which emphasizes the



                                              4
                          Figure 1: Structure of the Baseline Model



importance of accounting for agents’ expectations in order to explain the boom and bust
cycles of commodity prices in 2007-2008.
    The paper is organized as follows. We …rst present the baseline model in Section 1, and
then the extended model in Section 2. Section 3 concludes the paper. We provide all the
technical proofs in the Appendix.


1     The Baseline Model
In this section we develop a baseline model with two dates  = 1 2 to analyze the e¤ects of
informational frictions on the market equilibrium related to a commodity. One can think of
this commodity as crude oil or copper, which is used across the world as a key production
input. We adopt a modi…ed setup of Angeletos and La’O (2013) to model a continuum of
islands of total mass 1 Each island produces a single good, which can either be consumed at
“home”or traded for another good produced “away”by another island. A key feature of the
baseline model is that the commodity market is not only a place for market participants to
trade the commodity but also a platform to aggregate private information about the strength
of the global economy, which ultimately determines the global demand for the commodity.

1.1    Model setting
Figure 1 illustrates the structure of the model. There are three types of agents: households on
the islands, goods producers on the islands, and a group of commodity suppliers. The goods

                                              5
producers trade the commodity with commodity suppliers at  = 1 and use the commodity
to produce goods at  = 2. Their produced goods are distributed to the households on their
respective islands at  = 2. The households then trade their goods with each other and
consume.

1.1.1   Island households

Each island has a representative household. Following Angeletos and La’O (2013), we assume
a particular structure for goods trading between households on di¤erent islands. Each island
is randomly paired with another island at  = 2 The households on the two islands trade
their goods with each other and consume both goods produced by the islands. For a pair of
matched islands, we assume that the preference of the households on these islands over the
consumption bundle (   )  where  represents consumption of the “home” good while
 consumption of the “away” good, is determined by a utility function  (   ). The
utility function increases in both  and   This utility function speci…es all “away”goods
as perfect substitutes, so that the utility of the household on each island is well-de…ned
regardless of the matched trading partner. The households on the two islands thus trade
their goods to maximize the utility of each. We assume that the utility function of the island
households takes the Cobb-Douglas form
                                                    1¬
                                                        
                              (   ) =                                               (1)
                                              1¬

where   2 [0 1] measures the utility weight of the away good. A greater     means that each
island values more of the away good and thus relies more on trading its good with other
islands. Thus,   eventually determines the degree of complementarity in the islands’goods
production.

1.1.2   Goods producers

Each island has a locally-owned representative …rm to organize its goods production. We
refer to each …rm as a producer. The production requires the use of the commodity as an
input. To focus on the commodity market equilibrium, we exclude other inputs such as
labor from production. Each island has the following decreasing-returns-to-scale production




                                              6
function2 :
                                                =                                        (2)

where  is the output produced by island  and  is the commodity input. Parameter
  2 (0 1] measures the degree to which the production function exhibits decreasing returns to
scale. When      = 1 the production function has constant returns to scale.  is the common
productivity shared by all islands. For simplicity, we ignore the idiosyncratic component of
each island’s productivity. This simpli…cation is innocuous for our qualitative analysis of
how information frictions can a¤ect commodity demand.
      For an individual goods producer,  has a dual role— it determines its own output as
well as other producers’output. To the extent that demand for the producer’s good depends
on other producers’ output,  represents the strength of the global economy. We assume
that  is a random variable, which becomes observable only when the producers complete
their production at  = 2 This is the key informational friction in our setting. We assume
that  has a lognormal distribution:
                                                     ¬
                                            log  v N     ¬1
                                                            

                                        ¬1
where  is the mean of log  and            is its variance. At  = 1 the goods producer on each
island observes a private signal about log :

                                              = log  + 

where  v N (0    ¬1
                     )    is random noise independent of log  and independent of noise in other
producers’signals.        is the precision of the signal. The signal allows the producer to form
its expectation of the strength of the global economy, and determine its production decision
and commodity demand. The commodity market serves to aggregate the private signals
dispersed among the producers. As each producer’s private signal is noisy, the publicly
observed commodity price also serves as a useful price signal to form its expectation.
      At  = 1 the producer on island  maximizes its expected pro…t by choosing its commodity
input  :
                                      max  [  j I ] ¬                                (3)
                                       

where  is the price of the good produced by the island. The producer’s information set
I = f   g includes its private signal  and the commodity price  . The goods price  
  2
   One can also specify a Cobb-Douglas production function with both commodity and labor as inputs.
The model remains tractable although the formulas become more complex and harder to interpret.

                                                   7
which one can interpret as the terms of trade, is determined at  = 2 based on the matched
trade with another island.

1.1.3      Commodity suppliers

We assume there is a group of commodity suppliers who face a convex labor cost
                                             ¬      
                                                                  1+
                                                         ( )    
                                           1+
in supplying the commodity.  is the quantity supplied,  2 (0 1) is a constant parameter,
and      represents random noise in the supply. As a key source of information frictions in our
model, we assume that         is observable to the suppliers themselves but not by other market
participants. We assume that from the perspective of goods producers, has Gaussian
              ¬
distribution N  ¬1 with as its mean and ¬1 as its variance. The mean captures the
part that is predictable to goods producers, while the variance represents uncertainty in
supply that is outside goods producers’expectations.
       Thus, given a spot price   the suppliers face the following optimization problem:
                                                     ¬       
                                                                           1+
                                 max   ¬                      ( )                              (4)
                                                 1+
It is easy to determine the suppliers’optimal supply curve:

                                                =                                                (5)

which shows       as uncertainty in the commodity supply and  as the price elasticity.3

1.1.4      Joint equilibrium of di¤erent markets

Our model features a noisy rational expectations equilibrium of a number of markets: the
goods markets between each pair of matched islands and the market for the commodity. The
equilibrium requires clearing of each of these markets:
   3
    By letting the suppliers sell the commodity according to their marginal cost, our setting ignores any
potential feedback e¤ect from the commodity price to the supply side. In a more general setting with multiple
rounds of spot market trading, suppliers (or other agents) may have incentives to store the commodity over
time based on their expectations of future demand. Then, the commodity price can feed back to these agents’
storage decisions. We leave an analysis of such a feedback e¤ect on the supply side to future research and
instead focus on the feedback e¤ect on the demand side.




                                                     8
        At  = 2 for each pair of randomly matched islands f g, the households of these
        islands trade their produced goods and clear the market for each good:

                                                 +       =  
                                                 +  =  


        At  = 1 in the commodity market, the goods producers’ aggregate demand equals
        the supply:                  Z   1
                                              (   )  ( ) =  ( ) 
                                       ¬1

        where each producer’s commodity demand  (   ) depends on its private signal 
        and the commodity price   The demand from producers is integrated over the noise
         in their private signals.

1.2      The equilibrium
1.2.1     Goods market equilibrium

We begin our analysis of the equilibrium with the goods markets at  = 2 For a pair of
randomly matched islands,  and , the representative household of island  possesses 
units of the good produced by the island while the representative household of island  holds
 units of the other good.4 They trade the two goods with each other to maximize the
utility function of each given in (1). The following proposition, which resembles a similar
proposition in Angeletos and La’O (2013), describes the goods market equilibrium between
these two islands.

Proposition 1 For a pair of randomly matched islands,  and , their representative house-
holds’optimal consumption of the two goods is

                       = (1 ¬ )    =    = (1 ¬ )    =  

The price of the good produced by island  is

                                                        
                                                 =           .                                          (6)
                                                        
   4
    Here we treat a representative household as representing di¤erent agents holding stakes in an island’s
goods production, such as workers, managers, suppliers of inputs, etc. We agnostically group their preferences
for the produced goods of their own island and other islands into the preferences of the representative
household.

                                                       9
       Proposition 1 shows that each household divides its consumption between the home and
away goods with fractions 1 ¬ and  respectively. When                      = 12 the household consumes
the two types of goods equally. The price of each good is determined by the relative output of
the two matched islands.5 One island’s good is more valuable when the other island produces
more. This feature is standard in the international macroeconomics literature (e.g., Obstfeld
and Rogo¤ (1996)) and implies that each goods producer needs to take into account the
production decisions of producers of other goods.6

1.2.2      Production decision and commodity demand

By substituting the production function in (2) into (3), the expected pro…t of the goods
producer on island , we obtain the following objective:
                                        h              i
                                   max       ¬   
                                     


In a competitive goods market, the producer will produce to the level that the marginal
revenue equals the marginal cost:

                                          E [ j    ]  ¬1 =  

By substituting in  from Proposition 1, we obtain
                                      8  h                      i 91(1¬    (1¬ ))
                                      < E                =
                                =                                                                         (7)
                                      :                        ;

                                             h                                   i
which depends on the producer’s expectation                                 regarding the product of
global productivity  and the production decision                   of its randomly matched trading
partner, island . This expression demonstrates the complementarity in the producers’pro-
duction decisions. A larger         makes the complementarity stronger as the island households
engage more in trading the produced goods with each other and the price of each good
depends more on the output of other goods.
   5
     The goods price  given in (6) is the price of good  normalized by the price of good  produced by the
other matched island.
   6
     Decentralized goods market trading is not essential to our analysis. This feature allows us to conveniently
capture endogenous complementarity in goods producers’ production decisions with tractability. Alterna-
tively, one can adopt centralized goods markets and let island households consume goods produced by all
producers. See Angeletos and La’O (2009) for such a setting. We expect our key insight to carry over to
this alternative setting.


                                                       10
   The commodity price  is a source of information for the producer to form its ex-
              h           i
pectation of      , which serves as a channel for the commodity price to feed
back into each producer’s commodity demand. The presence of complementarity strength-
ens this feedback e¤ect relative to standard models of asset market trading with asymmetric
information.

1.2.3   Commodity market equilibrium

By clearing the aggregate demand of goods producers with the supply of suppliers, we derive
the commodity market equilibrium. Despite the nonlinearity in each producer’s production
decision, we obtain a unique log-linear equilibrium in closed form. The following proposition
summarizes the commodity price and each producer’s commodity demand in this equilibrium.

Proposition 2 At  = 1 the commodity market has a unique log-linear equilibrium: 1) The
commodity price is a log-linear function of log  and :

                                   log  =  log  +       + 0                       (8)

with the coe¢ cients  , and  given by

                                  (1 ¬ )  + (1 ¬ (1 ¬ )) ¬1    3
                            = ¬                                    0                  (9)
                                             1 +  (1 ¬ )
                                  1 ¬ + (1 ¬ (1 ¬ )) ¬1      2
                             = ¬                                 0                   (10)
                                           1 +  (1 ¬ )

where   0 is given in equation (40), and 0 given in equation (41).
   2) The commodity purchased by goods producer  is a log-linear function of its private
signal  and log  :
                                   log  =   +  log  + 0                     (11)

with the coe¢ cients  , and  given by

                                     = ¬  0  =  + ¬1                          (12)

and 0 by equation (42).

   Proposition 2 shows that each producer’s commodity demand is a log-linear function of
its private signal and the commodity price, while the commodity price log  aggregates the
producers’ dispersed private information to partially reveal the global productivity log .

                                                  11
The commodity price does not depend on any producer’s signal noise as a result of the
aggregation across a large number of producers with independent noise. This feature is
similar to Hellwig (1980). The commodity price also depends on the supply side noise 
which serves the same role as noise trading in the standard models of asset market trading
with asymmetric information.
       It is well-known that asset market equilibria with asymmetric information are often in-
tractable due to the di¢ culty in aggregating di¤erent participants’positions. The existing
literature commonly adopts the setting of Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) and Hellwig (1980),
which features CARA utility for agents and normal distributions for asset fundamentals and
noise trading. Under this setting, the equilibrium asset price is a linear function of the asset
fundamental and the noise from noise trading, while each agent’s asset position is a linear
function of the price and his own signal. This setting is, however, unsuitable for analyzing
real consequences of asset market trading as agents’ investment and production decisions
tend to make asset fundamentals deviate from normal distributions.
       The log-linear equilibrium derived in Proposition 2 resembles the linear equilibrium of
Grossman and Stiglitz (1980) and Hellwig (1980) but nevertheless incorporates real conse-
quences of commodity market trading. In fact, each producer’s commodity demand has a
log-normal distribution (e.g., equation (11)). As shown by equation (33) in the Appendix,
the producers’aggregate demand remains log-normal as a result of the law of large numbers.
This is the key feature that ensures the tractability of our model.7

1.3       E¤ects of informational frictions
1.3.1      Perfect-information benchmark

To facilitate our analysis of the e¤ects of informational frictions, we …rst establish a bench-
mark without any informational friction. Suppose that the global fundamental  and com-
modity supply shock         are both observable by all market participants. Then, the goods
producers can choose their optimal production decisions without any noise interference. The
following proposition characterizes this benchmark.
   7
    It is also worth noting that our setting is di¤erent from the setting of Goldstein, Ozdenoren, and Yuan
(2012). Their model features stock market trading with asymmetric information and a feedback e¤ect from
the equilibrium stock price to …rm investment. While the equilibrium stock price is non-linear, they ensure
tractability by assuming each trader in the asset market is risk-neutral and faces upper and lower position
limits. Our model does not impose any position limit and instead derives each producer’s futures position
through his interior production choice.



                                                    12
Proposition 3 When both  and           are observed by all market participants, there is a unique
equilibrium. In this equilibrium: 1) the goods producers share an identical commodity demand
                            1
                       A   1¬
curve:  =  =    
                                , 8 and ; 2) the commodity price is given by

                             1                 1¬                1
            log  =                log  ¬              +              log ;
                       1 +  (1 ¬ )         1 +  (1 ¬ )   1 +  (1 ¬ )
and the aggregate quantity demanded by the goods producers is
                                                 1              
            log  =                log  +              +              log 
                       1 +  (1 ¬ )         1 +  (1 ¬ )   1 +  (1 ¬ )

   In the absence of any informational frictions, the benchmark features a unique equi-
librium despite the complementarity in the goods producers’production decisions because
competition between goods producers leads to a downward sloping demand curve for the
commodity. This demand curve intersects the suppliers’ upward sloping supply curve at
the unique commodity price  given in the proposition. As a result, the complementar-
ity between goods producers does not lead to multiple equilibria, in which goods producers
coordinate on certain high or low demand levels.
   Proposition 3 derives the equilibrium commodity price and aggregate quantity demanded.
Intuitively, the global fundamental log  increases both the commodity price and aggregate
quantity demanded, while the supply shock             reduces the commodity price but increases
aggregate quantity demanded.
   The following proposition compares the equilibrium derived in Proposition 2 with the
perfect-information benchmark.

Proposition 4 In the presence of informational frictions, coe¢ cients   0 and  
0 derived in Proposition 2 are both lower than their corresponding values in the perfect-
information benchmark, and converge to these values as            ! 1.

   In the presence of informational frictions, the commodity price deviates from that in
the perfect-information benchmark, with the supply shock having a greater price impact
(i.e.,  being more negative) and the global fundamental having a smaller impact (i.e., 
being less positive). Through these price impacts, informational frictions eventually a¤ect
goods producers’production decisions and island households’goods consumption, which we
analyze step-by-step below.


                                                 13
1.3.2    Price informativeness

In the presence of informational frictions, the equilibrium commodity price log  =  log +
   + 0 serves as a public signal of the global fundamental log . This price signal is con-
taminated by the presence of the supply noise . The informativeness of the price signal is
determined by the ratio of the contributions to the price variance of log  and :
                                                  2 =   
                                              =               
                                                  2 =

The following proposition characterizes how the price informativeness measure                 depends on
several key model parameters:        ,   , and 

Proposition 5        is monotonically increasing in              and   and decreasing in 

    As      increases, each goods producer’s private signal becomes more precise. The com-
modity price aggregates the goods producers’ signals through their demand for the com-
modity and therefore becomes more informative.                     measures the amount of noise in the
supply shock. As       increases, there is less noise from the supply side interfering with the
commodity price re‡ecting log . Thus the price also becomes more informative.
    The e¤ect of     is more subtle. As      increases, there is greater complementarity in each
goods producer’s production decision. Consistent with the insight of Morris and Shin (2002),
such complementarity induces each producer to put a greater weight on the publicly observed
price signal and a smaller weight on its own private signal, which in turn makes the equilib-
rium price less informative.

1.3.3    Price elasticity

The coe¢ cient   derived in (12), measures the price elasticity of each goods producer’s
commodity demand. The standard cost e¤ect suggests that a higher price leads to a lower
quantity demanded. The producer’s optimal production decision in equation (7), however,
also indicates a second e¤ect through the term in the numerator— a higher price signals a
stronger global economy and greater production by other producers. This informational e¤ect
motivates each producer to increase its production and thus demand more of the commodity.
The price elasticity  nets these two o¤setting e¤ects. The following proposition shows that
under certain necessary and su¢ cient conditions, the informational e¤ect dominates the cost
e¤ect and leads to a positive  

                                                    14
Proposition 6 Two necessary and su¢ cient conditions ensure that   0: …rst
                                                              ¬
                                               =       4 ¬1 1 ¬     +  ¬1 ;

and, second, parameter              within a range
                            1                                         1            
                     1¬         +         2
                                               (1 ¬ )2           1¬       +        2
                                                                                          (1 + )2 
                                     4                                         4    

               12 ¬12 p
where      =                   =      ¬ 4 ¬1 (1 ¬       +  ¬1 )

       In order for the informational e¤ect to be su¢ ciently strong, the commodity price has to
be su¢ ciently informative. The conditions in Proposition 6 re‡ect this observation. First,
the supply noise needs to be su¢ ciently small (i.e.,                       su¢ ciently large relative to      )   so
that the price can be su¢ ciently informative. Second,                      needs to be within an intermediate
range, which results from two o¤setting forces. On one hand, a larger                                 implies greater
complementarity in producers’production decisions and thus each producer cares more about
other producers’production decisions and assigns a greater weight on the public price signal
in its own decision making. On the other hand, a larger                             also implies a less informative
price signal (Proposition 5), which in turn motivates each producer to be less responsive to
the price. Netting out these two forces dictates that                    needs to be in an intermediate range
in order for   0.8
       This second condition implies that when                    = 0,   0 In other words, in the absence
of production complementarity, the price elasticity is always negative, i.e., the cost e¤ect
always dominates the informational e¤ect.

1.3.4      Feedback e¤ect on demand

In the perfect-information benchmark (Proposition 3), the supply shock                                 decreases the
commodity price and increases the aggregate quantity demanded through the standard cost
e¤ect. In the presence of informational frictions, however, the supply shock, by distorting
the price signal, has a more subtle e¤ect on commodity demand.
       By substituting equation (8) into (11), the commodity demand of producer  is

                            log  =   +   log  +               +  0 + 0 
   8
    Upward sloping demand for an asset may also arise from other mechanisms even in the absence of
informational frictions highlighted in our model, such as income e¤ects, complementarity in production, and
complementarity in information production (e.g., Hellwig, Kohls and Veldkamp (2012)).

                                                             15
Then, the producers’aggregate commodity demand is
           Z 1
                                                                                1                   ¬1
      log       (   )  ( ) =   + ( +   ) log  + 0 +  0 + 2                 
            ¬1                                                                  2
Note that   0 (Proposition 2) and the sign of  is undetermined (Proposition 6). Thus,
the e¤ect of     on aggregate demand is also undetermined.
       Under the conditions given in Proposition 6, an increase in                decreases the aggregate
quantity demanded, which is the opposite of the perfect-information benchmark. This e¤ect
arises through the informational channel. As               rises, the commodity price falls. Since goods
producers cannot di¤erentiate a price decrease caused by                  from one caused by a weaker
global economy, they partially attribute the reduced price to a weaker economy. This,
in turn, motivates them to cut the quantity of the commodity they demand. Under the
conditions given in Proposition 6, this informational e¤ect is su¢ ciently strong to dominate
the e¤ect of a lower cost to acquire the commodity, leading to a lower aggregate quantity of
the commodity demanded.
       Furthermore, through its informational e¤ect on aggregate demand,                      can further push
down the commodity price, in addition to its price e¤ect in the perfect-information bench-
mark. This explains why  is more negative in this economy than in the benchmark (Propo-
sition 4): informational frictions amplify the negative price impact of .9

1.3.5      Social welfare

By distorting the commodity price and aggregate demand, informational frictions in turn dis-
tort producers’production decisions and households’goods consumption. We now evaluate
the unconditional expected social welfare at time 1:
                      "Z                           #
                           1        1¬
                                                     ¬                      
                                                                                        1+
                =                              ¬                                     
                         0   1¬                        1+

which contains two parts: the …rst part comes from aggregating the expected utility from
goods consumption of all island households and the second part comes from the commodity
suppliers’cost of supplying labor.
   9
     One can also evaluate this informational feedback e¤ect of the supply noise by comparing the equilibrium
commodity price relative to another benchmark case, in which each goods producer makes his production de-
cision based on only his private signal  without conditioning on the commodity price   In this benchmark,
the commodity price log  is also a log-linear function of log  and . Interestingly, despite the presence
                                                             1¬
of informational frictions, the price coe¢ cient on is ¬ 1+(1¬   )  the same as that derived in Proposition 3
for the perfect-information benchmark. This outcome establishes the informational feedback mechanism as
the driver for  to be more negative than that in the perfect-information benchmark.

                                                      16
   The next proposition proves that informational frictions reduce the expected social wel-
fare relative to the perfect-information benchmark.

Proposition 7 In the presence of informational frictions, the expected social welfare is
strictly lower than that in the perfect-information benchmark.

1.3.6   Implications for structural models

The feedback e¤ect of supply shock on commodity demand has important implications for
studies of the e¤ects of supply and demand shocks in commodity markets. For example,
Hamilton (1983) emphasizes that disruptions to oil supply and the resulting oil price in-
creases can have a signi…cant impact on the real economy, while Kilian (2009) argues that
aggregate demand shocks have a bigger impact on the oil market than previously thought. As
supply and demand shocks have opposite e¤ects on oil prices, it is important to isolate their
respective e¤ects. The existing literature commonly uses structural models to decompose
di¤erent types of shocks and then estimate their e¤ects, e.g., Kilian (2009). The premise
of these structural models is that, while researchers cannot directly observe the shocks that
hit commodity markets, agents in the markets are able to perfectly observe the shocks and
optimally respond to them. As a result, by imposing certain restrictions on how di¤erent
types of shocks a¤ect the price of a commodity and its demand, researchers can infer realized
shocks from observing the price and quantity of commodity transactions.
   As we discussed before, it is unrealistic to assume that agents in commodity markets can
perfectly di¤erentiate di¤erent types of shocks. Our model shows that in the presence of
informational frictions, supply shocks and demand shocks can have e¤ects in sharp contrast
to standard intuitions developed from perfect-information settings. For example, the price
elasticity of commodity demand can be positive rather than negative, and supply shocks
can reduce rather than increase demand for the commodity. These implications challenge
identi…cation restrictions commonly used in the existing structural models, such as the price
elasticity of demand being negative and supply shocks having a positive impact on demand.
Furthermore, our model shows that, by ignoring informational frictions, standard structural
models are likely to underestimate the price impact of supply shocks.
   Taken together, our model motivates structural models to explicitly build in informational
frictions in order to systematically isolate e¤ects of supply and demand shocks.



                                             17
2        An Extended Model with Futures
In practice, spot markets of commodities are typically decentralized, while centralized trad-
ing often occurs in futures markets. As a result, futures markets play an important role in
aggregating information regarding supply and demand of many commodities.10 In this sec-
tion, we extend our baseline model to incorporate a futures market. This extension allows
us to examine how commodity futures prices can serve as price signals even when goods
producers also observe spot prices.

2.1       Model setting
We again keep our extension to a minimal setting for analyzing the role of futures market
trading in aggregating information. Speci…cally, we introduce a new date  = 0 before the
two dates  = 1 and 2 in the baseline model, and a centralized futures market at  = 0
for delivery of the commodity at  = 1 All agents can take positions in the futures market
at  = 0, and can choose to revise or unwind their positions before delivery at  = 1 The
‡exibility to unwind positions before delivery is an advantage that makes futures market
trading appealing in practice.
       We keep all of the agents in the baseline model: island households, goods producers,
and commodity suppliers and add a group of …nancial traders. These traders invest in the
commodity by taking a long position in the futures market at  = 0 and then unwinding this
position at  = 1 without taking delivery.
       To focus on information aggregation through trading in the futures market, we assume
that there is no spot market trading at  = 0. At  = 1 a spot market naturally emerges
through commodity delivery for the futures market. Commodity suppliers take a short
position in the futures market at  = 0 and then make delivery at  = 1 The suppliers’
marginal cost of supplying the commodity determines the spot price. When a trader chooses
to unwind a futures position at  = 1 his gain/loss is determined by this spot price.



  10
    Roll (1984) systematically analyzes the futures market of orange juice in e¢ ciently aggregating informa-
tion about weather in Central Florida, which produces more than 98% of the U.S. orange output. Garbade
and Silber (1983) provides evidence that futures markets play a more important role in information discovery
than cash markets for a set of commodities.




                                                     18
                           Table 1. Time Line of the Extended Model

                                t=0                      t=1                   t=2
                        futures market               spot market           goods market

     Households                                                        trade/consume goods
                        observe signals             take delivery
        Producers
                          long futures              produce goods
                                              observe supply shock
   Com Suppliers         short futures
                                                deliver commodity
     Fin Traders       long/short futures        unwind position

   Table 1 speci…es the timeline of the extended model. We keep the same speci…cation
for the island households, who trade and consume both home and away goods at  = 2
as described in Section 1.1. We modify some of the speci…cations for goods producers and
commodity suppliers and describe our speci…cations for …nancial traders below.

2.1.1     Goods producers

As in the baseline model, we allow goods producers to have the same production technology
and receive their private signals at  = 0. Each producer takes a long position in the futures
market at  = 0 and then commodity delivery at  = 1. The timing of the producer’s
information ‡ow is key to our analysis. At  = 0 producer ’s information set I0 = f   g
includes its private signal  and the traded futures price  . At  = 1, its information set
I1 = f    g includes the updated spot price  .
   We allow the producer to use its updated information set at  = 1 to revise its futures
position for commodity delivery. That is, its production decision is based on not only its
private signal and the futures price but also the updated spot price. Thus, it is not obvious
that noise in the futures market can a¤ect the producer’s production decision and commodity
demand. We will examine this key issue with our extended model.
   At  = 1 the producer optimizes its production decision  (i.e., commodity demand)
based on its updated information set I1 :

                                                               ~
                          max    j I1 ¬   + ( ¬  )
                           

The …rst two terms above represent the producer’s expected pro…t from goods production and
the last term is gain/loss from its futures position. Then, the producer’s optimal production

                                               19
decision is
                                 n    h               i.        o1(1¬   (1¬ ))
                           =       E       I1                                    (13)

   When deciding its futures position at  = 0 the producer faces a nuanced issue in
that, because it does not need to commit its later production decision to the initial futures
position, it may engage in dynamic trading. In other words, it could choose a futures
position to maximize its expected trading pro…t at  = 0. This trading motive is not
essential for our focus on analyzing aggregation of the producers’information but signi…cantly
complicates derivation of the futures market equilibrium. To avoid this complication, we
make a simplifying assumption that the producers are myopic at  = 0 That is, at  = 0
each producer chooses a futures position as if it commits to taking full delivery and using
the good for production, even though the producer can revise its production decision based
on the updated information at  = 1. This simplifying assumption, while it a¤ects each
producer’s trading pro…t, is innocuous for our analysis of how the futures price feeds back to
the producers’later production decisions because each producer still makes good use of its
information and the futures price is informative by aggregating each producer’s information.
                                                                  ~  to maximize the following
    Speci…cally, at  = 0 the producer chooses a futures position 
expected production pro…t based on its information set I0 :

                                                           ~
                                     max    j I0 ¬  
                                      ~
                                      

                ~  as its production input at  = 1. Throughout the rest of the paper, we
where it treats 
use a tilde sign to denote variables and coe¢ cients associated with the futures market at
 = 0. We maintain the same notations without the tilde sign for variables related to the
spot market at  = 1 Then, the producer’s futures position is
                               n    h          i. o1(1¬ (1¬                ))
                         ~ =
                                   ~ I0                                            (14)
                                         


2.1.2   Financial traders

Since the mid-2000s, commodity futures markets experienced a large expansion of …nancial
traders as a result of a …nancialization process through which commodity futures became a
new asset class for portfolio investors such as pension funds and endowments (e.g., Tang and
Xiong, 2012). These investors regularly allocate a fraction of their portfolios to investing in
commodity futures and swap contracts. They take only long positions and typically close out
positions without taking any physical delivery. As a result, their trading does not directly

                                                20
a¤ect the supply and demand of commodities. During the same period, hedge funds also
expanded their trading operations in commodity futures markets. They are ‡exible in taking
both long and short positions and usually do not hold physical commodities, even though
they are allowed to in practice.
       To examine whether these …nancial traders can a¤ect commodity prices, we introduce a
group of …nancial traders, who trade in the futures market at  = 0 and unwind their position
at  = 1 before delivery. For simplicity, we assume that the aggregate position of …nancial
traders and goods producers is given by the aggregate position of producers multiplied by a
            log +
factor              :                               Z   1
                                           log +           ~  (   )  ( ) 
                                                             
                                                     ¬1
                          log +
where the factor                  represents the contribution of …nancial traders. This multiplicative
speci…cation is useful for ensuring the tractable log-linear equilibrium of our model.11
                                                                            log +
       We allow the contribution of …nancial traders                                to contain a component   log 
with       0 to capture the possibility that the trading of …nancial traders is partially driven
by their knowledge of the global fundamental log .
       The trading of …nancial traders also contains a random component , which is unob-
servable by other market participants. This assumption is realistic in two aspects. First,
in practice, the trading of …nancial traders is often driven by portfolio diversi…cation and
risk-control purposes unrelated to fundamentals of commodity markets. Second, market
participants cannot directly observe others’positions.12 Speci…cally, we assume that                          has a
normal distribution independent of other sources of uncertainty in the model:
                                                               ¬
                                                     vN               ¬1



                                            ¬1
with a mean of           and variance            
  11
      From an economic perspective, this speci…cation implies that the position of …nancial traders tends to
expand and contract with the producers’futures position, which is broadly consistent with the expansion and
contraction of the aggregate commodity futures positions of portfolio investors and hedge funds in the recent
commodity price boom-and-bust cycle (e.g., Cheng, Kirilenko, and Xiong, 2012). Also note that  log +
can be less than one. This implies that …nancial traders may take a net short position at some point, which
is consistent with short positions taken by hedge funds in practice.
   12
      Despite the fact that large traders need to report their futures positions to the CFTC on a daily basis,
ambiguity in trader classi…cation and netting of positions taken by traders who are involved in di¤erent
lines of business nevertheless make the aggregate positions provided by the CFTC’s weekly Commitment
of Traders Report to the public imprecise. See Cheng, Kirilenko, and Xiong (2012) for a more detailed
discussion of the trader classi…cation and netting problems in the CFTC’s Large Trader Reporting System
and a summary of positions taken by commodity index traders and hedge funds.



                                                              21
       The presence of …nancial traders introduces an additional source of uncertainty to the
futures market, as both goods producers and commodity suppliers cannot observe                   at  = 0
At  = 1 …nancial traders unwind their positions, and commodity suppliers make delivery
only to goods producers.

2.1.3      Commodity suppliers

                                             ~  in the futures market at  = 0 and then
Commodity suppliers take a short position of 
make delivery of  units of the commodity at  = 1 We keep the same convex cost function
                                         1+
                      
for the suppliers:   1+
                         ¬    ( )         where the supply shock      has a Gaussian distribution
   ¬
N  ¬1 
       We assume that the suppliers observe their supply shock              only at  = 1 which implies
that the supply shock does not a¤ect the futures price at  = 0 and instead hits the spot
market at  = 1. Due to this timing, the supply shock provides a camou‡age for the un-
winding of …nancial traders’aggregate futures position at  = 1 That is, even after …nancial
traders unwind their position, the commodity spot price does not reveal their position.13
       In summary, the suppliers’ information set at  = 0 is I0 = f g, and at  = 1 is
I1 = f   g  At  = 1 the suppliers face the following optimization problem:
                                                  ¬    
                                                               1+
                                                                              ~ 
                          max   ¬                         + ( ¬  ) 
                                              1+
where they choose  , the quantity of commodity delivery, to maximize the pro…t from
delivery in the …rst two terms. The last term is the gain/loss from their initial futures
position. It is easy to determine the suppliers’optimal supply curve:  =    which is
identical to their supply curve in the baseline model.
       At  = 0 like the goods producers, the suppliers also face a nuanced issue related to
dynamic trading. As their initial futures position does not necessarily equal their later
commodity delivery, they may also choose to maximize the trading pro…t from  = 0 to  = 1
To be consistent with our earlier assumption about the myopic behavior of goods producers,
we assume that at  = 0 the suppliers believe that goods producers will take full delivery of
their futures positions and that the suppliers choose their initial short position to myopically
  13
     This timing may appear special in our static setting with only one round of futures market trading
followed by physical commodity delivery, as there is no particular reason to argue whether letting the
suppliers observe the supply shock at  = 0 or 1 is more natural. However, if we view this setting as one
module of a more realistic setting with many recurrent periods and a supply shock arriving in each period,
then there is always a supply shock hitting the market when …nancial traders unwind their futures position.


                                                        22
maximize the pro…t from making delivery of ¬(                  log + )   ~  units of the commodity to goods
                                                                           
producers:
                   h                          i             ¬                                     1+

           max         ¬( log + )   ~   0
                                         I ¬                      
                                                                             ¬( log + )   ~
                                                                                            
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                          I0 
            ~
                                                         1+

Since     is independent of           and log  it is easy to derive that
                                      n                            h                              io
                 ~ =    ¬   2 2
                                                                       ¬ 1+
                                       ¬(   log + )
                                                          I0          
                                                                             ( log + )
                                                                                            I0                (15)

which is a function of the futures price 

2.1.4     Joint equilibrium of di¤erent markets

We analyze the joint equilibrium of a number of markets: the goods markets between each
pair of matched islands at  = 2, the spot market for the commodity at  = 1, and the futures
market at  = 0. The equilibrium requires clearing of each of these markets:

        At  = 2 for each pair of randomly matched islands f g, the households of these
        islands trade their produced goods and clear the market of each good:

                                                   +        =  
                                                   +  =  


        At  = 1 the commodity supply equals the goods producers’aggregate demand:
                              Z 1
                                   (    )  ( ) =  (  ) 
                                        ¬1


        At  = 0 the futures market clears:
                                        Z 1
                                log +      ~  (   )  ( ) = 
                                                                    ~  ( ) 
                                                 ¬1


2.2      The equilibrium
The goods market equilibrium at  = 2 remains identical to that derived in Proposition 1 for
the baseline model. The futures market equilibrium at  = 0 and the spot market equilibrium
at  = 1 also remain log-linear and can be derived in a similar procedure as the derivation
of Proposition 2. The following proposition summarizes the key features of the equilibrium
with explicit expressions for all coe¢ cients given in the Appendix.

                                                          23
Proposition 8 At  = 0 the futures market has a unique log-linear equilibrium: The futures
price is a log-linear function of log  and :

                                             ~  log  + 
                                     log  =            ~         ~ 0
                                                                  +                       (16)

                     ~   0, and 
with the coe¢ cients             ~  0, while the long position taken by goods producer  is
a log-linear function of its private signal  and log  :

                                         ~  = ~  + ~ log  + ~0 
                                     log                                                  (17)

with the coe¢ cient ~  0
   At  = 1 the spot market also has a unique log-linear equilibrium: The spot price of the
commodity is a log-linear function of log  log  and :

                            log  =  log  +  log  +                 + 0          (18)

with the coe¢ cients   0,   0, and   0, while the commodity consumed by producer
 is a log-linear function of   log  and log  :

                               log  =   +  log  +  log  + 0                 (19)

with the coe¢ cients   0 and   0 and the sign of  undetermined.

   There are two rounds of information aggregation in the equilibrium. During the …rst
round of trading in the futures market at  = 0, goods producers take long positions based
on their private signals. The futures price log  aggregates producers’ information, and
re‡ects a linear combination of log  and , as given in (16). The futures price does not
fully reveal log  due to the        noise originated from the trading of …nancial traders. The
spot price that emerges from the commodity delivery at  = 1 represents another round of
information aggregation by pooling together the goods producers’demand for delivery. As a
result of the arrival of the supply shock  the spot price log  does not fully reveal either
log  or , and instead re‡ects a linear combination of log  and , as derived in (18).
   Despite the updated information from the spot price at  = 1, the informational content
of log  is not subsumed by the spot price, and still has an in‡uence on goods producers’
expectations of log . As a result of this informational role, equation (19) con…rms that
each goods producer’s commodity demand at  = 1 is increasing with log  as   0, and
equation (18) shows that the spot price is also increasing with log  , as   0 This is the

                                                     24
key feedback channel for futures market trading to a¤ect commodity demand and the spot
price despite the availability of information from the spot price.
    The simplifying assumptions we made regarding the myopic trading of goods producers
and commodity suppliers at  = 0 are innocuous to the informational role of the futures price
at  = 1 As long as goods producers trade on their private signals, the futures price would
aggregate the information, which in turn establishes the futures price as a useful price signal
for the later round at  = 1. Our simplifying assumptions have quantitative consequences on
goods producers’trading pro…ts and the e¢ ciency of the futures price signal, but should not
critically a¤ect the qualitative feedback channel of the futures price, which we characterize
in the next subsection.14
    Interestingly, Proposition 8 also reveals that  can be either positive or negative, due to
the o¤setting cost e¤ect and informational e¤ect of the spot price, similar to our character-
ization of the baseline model.

2.3     Real e¤ects of futures market trading
2.3.1    Feedback on commodity demand

As …nancial traders do not take or make any physical delivery, their trading in the futures
market does not have any direct e¤ect on either commodity supply or demand. However,
their trading a¤ects the futures price, through which it can further impact commodity de-
mand and spot prices. By substituting equation (16) into (18), we express the spot price
log  as a linear combination of primitive variables log ,  and :

                                     ~  log  +  
                    log  =  +                ~            +          ~ 0 + 0 
                                                                        +                           (20)

The                                                          ~  0  the noise from
        term arises through the futures price. As   0 and 
…nancial traders’trading in the futures market has a positive e¤ect on the spot price.
    Furthermore, by substituting the equation above and (16) into (19), we obtain an indi-
vidual producer’s commodity demand as

                             ~  +   +  
         log  =   +                  ~                                   ~
                                                             log  + ( +   )       +  
                                      ~ 0 +  0 + 0 
                      + ( +   ) 
   14
      Note that despite the futures price containing di¤erent information content from the spot price, there
is no arbitrage between the two prices because the two prices are traded at di¤erent points in time and the
spot price is exposed to the supply shock realized later.


                                                    25
and the producers’aggregate demand as
    Z 1                            h                            i
log                                                ~          ~                        ~
          (    )  ( ) =  +   +   +    log  + ( +   )              +  
         ¬1

                                                        ~ 0 +  0 + 0 + 1 2
                                        + ( +   )                          ¬1
                                                                                                         (21)
                                                                           2
By using equation (61) in the proof of Proposition 8, the coe¢ cient of                 in the aggregate
commodity demand is
                                        +   =   0

Thus,      also has a positive e¤ect on aggregate commodity demand.
       The e¤ects of   on commodity demand and the spot price clarify a simple yet important
conceptual point that traders in commodity futures markets, who never take or make physical
commodity delivery, can nevertheless impact commodity markets through the informational
feedback channel of commodity futures prices.

2.3.2      Detecting speculative e¤ects

In the ongoing debate on whether speculation in commodity futures markets a¤ected com-
modity prices during the commodity market boom and bust of 2007-2008, many studies, e.g.,
Kilian and Murphy (2010), Juvenal and Petrella (2012), and Knittel and Pindyck (2013),
adopt an inventory-based detection strategy. This strategy builds on a widely-held argument
that if speculators arti…cially drive up the futures price of a commodity, say crude oil, then
the price spread between the futures price and the spot price of crude oil will motivate the
standard textbook cash-and-carry trades by some arbitrageurs. This in turn will cause the
spot price to rise with the futures price. Then, consumers will …nd consuming the commodity
too expensive and thus reduce consumption, causing oil inventory to spike.
       Under this argument, price increases in the absence of any inventory increases are ex-
plained by fundamental demand. Thus, price e¤ects induced by speculation should be limited
to price increases accompanied by contemporaneous inventory increases. Motivated by this
argument, the literature, as reviewed by Fattouh, Kilian and Mahadeva (2012), tends to use
the lack of any pronounced oil inventory spike before the peak of oil prices in July 2008 as
evidence to rule out any signi…cant role played by futures market speculation during this
commodity price boom.15
  15
    An exception in this structural VAR literature is Lombardi and Van Robays (2012), who allow non-
fundamental shocks to futures prices to cause the futures-spot spread to deviate from its no arbitrage
relationship because of frictions to inventory buildup.

                                                 26
   Despite the intuitive appeal of this inventory-based detection strategy, it ignores impor-
tant informational frictions faced by consumers in reality. In particular, it implicitly assumes
that oil consumers observe the global economic fundamentals and are thus able to recognize
whether current oil prices are too high relative to the fundamentals in making their con-
sumption decisions. This assumption is strong and may prove unrealistic in certain periods
with great economic uncertainty and informational frictions.
   Our model illustrates a contrasting example in the presence of informational frictions. In
this environment, commodity futures prices serve as important price signals. By in‡uencing
consumers’beliefs about global economic fundamentals, noise from futures market trading
can distort commodity demand and spot prices in the same direction, rather than opposite
directions. This insight thus weakens the power of the widely-used, inventory-based detection
strategy and cautions against over-interpreting any conclusion building on it.
   Our model also conveys a broader message that in the presence of informational frictions,
commodity futures prices are not simply the shadow of the spot prices that re‡ect the spot
prices based on the standard no-arbitrage principle. Instead, commodity futures markets
may serve as central platforms for aggregating information, and the resulting futures prices
can feed back both valuable information and noise to commodity demand and spot prices.

2.3.3   Understanding the commodity price boom in 2007-2008

In the aftermath of the synchronized price boom and bust of major commodities in 2007-
2008, a popular view posits that the commodity price boom was the result of a bubble
caused by speculation in commodity futures markets (e.g., Masters (2008) and US Senate
Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations (2009)). According to this view, the large in‡ow
of investment capital to the long side of commodity futures markets before July 2008 led to
a huge price bubble detached from economic fundamentals that collapsed in the second half
of 2008. As we discussed earlier, the lack of evidence for reduced oil consumption during the
boom makes it di¢ cult for many economists to accept the oil price boom as a bubble.
   Another view attributes the price boom to the combination of rapidly growing demand
from emerging economies and stagnant supply (e.g., Hamilton (2009)). This argument is
compelling for explaining the commodity price increases before 2008. However, oil prices
continued to rise over 40% from January to July 2008, to peak at $147 per barrel, at a time
when the U.S. had already entered a recession, Bear Stearns had collapsed in March, and
most other developed economies were already showing signs of weakness. While China and

                                              27
other emerging economies remained strong at the time, it is di¢ cult to argue, in hindsight,
that their growth sped up enough to be able to o¤set the clear weakness of the developed
economies and cause oil prices to rise another 40%.
   The informational frictions faced by market participants can help us understand this
puzzling price episode. Due to the lack of reliable data on the strength of emerging economies,
it was di¢ cult at the time to precisely measure the strength of the emerging economies. As a
result, the prices of crude oil and other commodities were regarded as important price signals
(see evidence referenced in Footnote 1). This environment makes our model particularly
appealing in linking the large commodity price increases in early 2008 to the concurrent
large in‡ow of investment capital, motivated by the intention of many money managers
to diversify their portfolio out of declining stock markets into more promising commodity
futures markets, e.g., Tang and Xiong (2012). By pushing up commodity futures prices, and
sending a wrong price signal, the large investment ‡ow might have confused goods producers
across the world into believing that emerging economies were stronger than they actually
were. This distorted expectation could have prevented the producers from reducing their
demand for the commodity despite the high commodity prices, which in turn made the high
prices sustainable. To the extent that more information corrected the producers’expectations
over time, the high commodity prices persisted for several months and eventually collapsed
in the second half of 2008. Interestingly, after oil prices dropped from its peak of $147 to $40
per barrel at the end of 2008, oil demand largely evaporated and inventory piled up, despite
the much lower prices.
   Taken together, the commodity price boom in 2007-2008 is not necessarily a price bubble
detached from economic fundamentals. Instead, it is plausible to argue that, in the presence
of severe informational frictions in early 2008, the large in‡ow of investment capital might
have distorted signals coming from commodity prices and led to confusion among market
participants about the strength of emerging economies. This confusion, in turn, could have
ampli…ed the boom and bust of commodity prices, which echoes the emphasis of Singleton
(2012) to account for agents’ expectations in explaining the price cycle. To test this hy-
pothesis would require estimating a structural model that explicitly takes into account these
informational frictions.




                                              28
2.3.4      Implication for market transparency

Information frictions in the futures market, originating from the unobservability of the po-
sitions of di¤erent participants, are essential in order for the trading of …nancial traders to
impact the demand for the commodity and spot prices. The following proposition con…rms
that as      ! 1 (i.e., the position of …nancial traders becomes publicly observable), the spot
market equilibrium converges to the perfect-information benchmark.

Proposition 9 As           ! 1 the spot price and aggregate demand converge to the perfect-
information benchmark.

       Proposition 9 shows that by improving transparency of the futures market, one can
achieve the perfect-information benchmark because by making the position of …nancial
traders publicly observable, the       noise no longer interferes with the information aggregation
in the futures market. As a result, the futures price fully reveals the global fundamen-
tal, which, in turn, allows goods producers to achieve the same e¢ ciency allowed by the
perfect-information benchmark. This nice convergence result relies on the assumption that
the supply noise     does not a¤ect the futures market trading at  = 0 and hits the spot mar-
ket only at  = 1. Nevertheless, this result highlights the importance of improving market
transparency.16
       Imposing position limits on speculators in commodity futures markets has occupied much
of the post-2008 policy debate, while improving market transparency has received much less
attention. By highlighting the feedback e¤ect originating from information frictions as a
key channel for noise in futures market trading to a¤ect commodity prices and demand,
our model suggests that imposing position limits may not address the central information
frictions that confront participants in commodity markets and thus may not be e¤ective in
reducing any potential distortion caused by speculative trading. Instead, making trading
positions more transparent might be more e¤ective.
  16
    While our analysis focuses on the noise e¤ect of their trading, …nancial traders can also contribute to
information aggregation. As increases, the futures position of …nancial traders builds more on the global
economic fundamental log . Then, the futures price log  becomes more informative of log . This is
                                                  ~  
because one can prove based on Proposition 8 that     ~ , the ratio of the loadings of log  on log  and ,
increases with .




                                                    29
3     Conclusion
This paper develops a theoretical framework to analyze information aggregation in commod-
ity markets. Our baseline model features a commodity spot market to show that, through
the informational role of spot prices, the aggregate demand from goods producers can in-
crease with the spot price and the supply shock can have an ampli…ed e¤ect on the price
and an undetermined e¤ect on the quantity demanded. Our extended model further incor-
porates one round of futures market trading to show that futures prices can serve as an
important price signal, even though goods producers also observe spot prices. Through the
informational role of futures prices, noise in futures market trading can also interfere with
goods producers’expectations and distort their production decisions. Taken together, our
analysis cautions empirical and policy studies of commodity markets to fully incorporate
realistic informational frictions faced by market participants across the world. Our analysis
also provides a coherent argument for how the large in‡ow of investment capital to commod-
ity futures markets, by jamming the commodity price signals and leading to confusion about
the strength of emerging economies, might have ampli…ed the boom and bust of commodity
prices in 2007-2008.




Appendix               Proofs of Propositions
A.1     Proof of Proposition 1
Consider the maximization problem of the household on island :
                                                        1¬
                                                            
                                   max
                                        1¬
subject to the budget constraint

                                         +   =                             (22)

The two …rst order conditions with respect to  and  are

                                              1¬
                                                              =                      (23)
                                       
                                        1¬               1¬
                                
                                                              =                      (24)
                                           1¬

                                                   30
where      is the Lagrange multiplier for his budget constraint. Dividing equations (23) and
                            
(24) leads to   1¬ 
                         =    
                                 ,   which is equivalent to   =        1¬
                                                                                   By substituting this
equation back to the household’s budget constraint in (22), we obtain  = (1 ¬ )  .
   The market clearing of the island’s produced goods requires  +  =  , which implies
that  =  . The symmetric problem of the household of island  implies that  =
(1 ¬ )  , and the market clearing of the goods produced by island  implies  =  .
    The …rst order condition in equation (23) also gives the price of the goods produced by
island  Since the household’s budget constraint in (22) is entirely in nominal terms, the
price system is only identi…ed up to             ,   the Lagrange multiplier. Following Angeletos and
La’O (2013), we normalize               to 1 Then,

                                       1¬                        1¬                   
                  =                            =                               =             
                                                     (1 ¬ )                           

A.2     Proof of Proposition 2
We …rst conjecture that the commodity price and each goods producer’s commodity demand
take the following log-linear forms:

                                         log  = 0 +  log  +                                     (25)
                                         log  = 0 +   +  log                                (26)

where the coe¢ cients 0      0    and  will be determined by equilibrium conditions.
   De…ne
                             log  ¬ 0 ¬                ¬
                                              = log  +       ¬
                                                       
which is a su¢ cient statistic of information contained in the commodity price   Then,
conditional on observing its private signal  and the commodity price   goods producer
’s expectation of log  is
                                                                                   !
                                                          1                   2
       [log  j   log  ] =  [log  j   ] =         2   +   + 2   
                                                       +  +   2
                                                                              
                                                                     


and its conditional variance of log  is
                                                                                !¬1
                                                                   2
                            [log  j   log  ] =       + + 2                 
                                                                   

According to equation (7),
                            1      n           h                 i        o
            log  =                log + log   j   log  ¬ log                             (27)
                        1 ¬ (1 ¬ )

                                                         31
By using equation (26), we obtain
       h                 i
       j   log 
     =  fexp [log  +          (0 +   +  log  ) j   ]g
     = exp [     (0 +  log  )]  [exp ((1 +                 ) log  +           ) j  log  ]
                                        (
                                                                                                    (1 +           ) 2
     = exp [     (0 +  log  )] exp (1 +                   )  [log  j   log  ] +                                [log  j   log  ]
                                                                                                              2
               2 2 2
                  
          +              [ j   log  ] + (1 +           )          [ log  j   log  ] 
                2

By recognizing that  [ log  j   log  ] = 0 and substituting in the expressions of
 [log  j   log  ]   h [log  j   log i], and   [ j   log  ], we can further sim-
plify the expression of   j   log  . Then, equation (27) gives

                        1                                   1
         log  =             log +             0 +              (  ¬ 1) log 
                   1 ¬ (1 ¬ )        1 ¬ (1 ¬ )      1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
                                          !¬1                                      !
                1 +                 2                     2 log  ¬ 0 ¬ 
         +                    + + 2              +   + 2
              1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                                               
                                          !¬1
              (1 +  )2              2              2 2 2
                                                                ¬1
         +                    +   +         +                      
           2 (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))              2
                                                2 (1 ¬ (1 ¬ )) 

For the above equation to match the conjectured equilibrium position in (26), the constant
term and the coe¢ cients of  and log  have to match. We thus obtain the following
equations for determining the coe¢ cients in (26):
                                                                                             !¬1                                     !
                                      1 +                         2                                           ¬
0 =                        0 +                               + + 2                              ¬              0 +           (28)
          1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                                                         2
                                                              !¬1
                 (1 +  )2                            2                          2 2 2
                                                                                                  ¬1           1
          +                             +       +                    +                                +              log ;
              2 (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))                           2                   2 (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))                   1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
                                                             !¬1
                1 +                                2
 =                                   +       +                                                                                 (29)
              1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                             2
                                                                                                                  !¬1
                            1                                   1 +                                 2                  
    =             ¬            +                                                           +  +                             (30)
        1 ¬ (1 ¬ )      1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                            1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                              2                   2

By substituting (29) into (30), we have

                                                     1 + (1 ¬ )  2               ¬1
                                             =                                                                                 (31)
                                                     1 ¬ (1 ¬ ) 

                                                               32
By manipulating (29), we also have that
                                                                !¬1
                                 1¬                  2                        
                    =    +                     +                                               (32)
                              1 ¬ (1 ¬ )             2               1 ¬ (1 ¬ )

We now use the market clearing condition for the commodity market to determine three other
equations for the coe¢ cients in the conjectured log-linear commodity price and demand.
Aggregating (26) gives the aggregate commodity demand of the goods producers:
 Z 1                        Z 1
      (   )  ( ) =      exp [0 +   +  log  ]  ( )
  ¬1                         ¬1
                            Z 1
                          =      exp [0 +  (log  +  ) +  (0 +  log  +  )]  ( )
                                ¬1
                                                                                    1      ¬1
                          = exp ( +   ) log  +              + 0 +  0 + 2          (33)
                                                                                    2

Equation (5) implies that log  =  log  +  Then, the market clearing condition
                             Z 1
                        log       (   )  ( ) = log  ( )
                                ¬1

requires that the coe¢ cients of log  and   and the constant term be identical on both sides:

                                         +   =                                            (34)
                                                       = 1 +                                  (35)
                                          1          ¬1
                              0 +  0 + 2           = 0                                    (36)
                                          2
Equation (35) directly implies that

                                         =  + ¬1                                               (37)

Equations (34) and (35) together imply that

                                         = ¬¬1                                                (38)

By combining this equation with (32), and de…ning  = ¬ = ¬1   we arrive at
                                                                       ¬1
                                   1¬                     ¬1                
                   3 +    +                                 +                   = 0            (39)
                                1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                          1 ¬ (1 ¬ )

 is a real root of a depressed cubic polynomial of the form 3 ++ = 0, which has one real
and two complex roots. As  and  are both positive, the LHS is monotonically increasing
with  while the RHS is …xed. Thus, the real root  is unique and has to be negative:   0.

                                                 33
  Following Cardano’s method, the one real root of equation (39) is given by
                                v     v
                          !     u     u                     !¬2
                            13 u
                ¬1
                                u     u     4
                                                     ¬1
                                                                            1¬
                                                                                        3
 =
                   
                                t¬1 + t1 +
                                3                       
                                                                     +               
        2 (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))                     27 1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
                          v       v
                     !    u       u                     !¬2
          ¬1          13 u       u            ¬1                                 3
                         u
                          3       t     4                             1¬
+                         t  ¬1 ¬ 1 +                         +                   (40)
   2 (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))                      27 1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                1 ¬ (1 ¬ )

Since  = ¬1   we have  = ¬1   which, together with our expression for  and
equations (31) and (37), imply that expressions for  and  given in (9) and (10). With
 and  determined,  is then given by (32),  by (37), 0 by (28) as

                             1              1 ¬ (1 ¬ ) ¬1 ¬
               0 =                  log ¬              b    ¬ b                         (41)
                       1 +  (1 ¬ )         1 +  (1 ¬ ) 
                         1 1 ¬ (1 ¬ )      1¬ + 2 2                        ¬1
                       +                                +   ¬1             
                         2 1 +  (1 ¬ )    1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
and 0 by equation (36) as
                                                      1      ¬1
                                   0 = ( ¬  ) 0 ¬ 2                               (42)
                                                      2

A.3     Proof of Proposition 3
We keep the same setting outlined in the main model, except letting  and         be observable
by all market participants. We …rst derive the equilibrium. In this setting, each producer’s
private signal  becomes useless as  is directly observable. We can still use equation
(7) to derive producer ’s optimal commodity demand. As the producers now share the
same information about , they must have the same expectation about their future trading
partners’ production decisions. As a result,  =  for any  and  Then, equation (7)
                                           1
                                      A   1¬
implies that in equilibrium  =    
                                               
   Market clearing of the commodity market requires that the producers’aggregate demand
equals the commodity supply, i.e.,  =  . From equation (5), we must have log  =
 log  + . Then, we obtain log  and log  stated in the Proposition 3. It is clear that
this equilibrium is unique.

A.4     Proof of Proposition 4
As  ! 1 equation (39) implies that  goes to ¬ 1¬1  Consequently, as  ! 1 equation
                       1                                            1¬
(9) gives that  ! 1+(1¬ )
                              and equation (10) gives that  ! ¬ 1+(1¬ )
                                                                            Therefore, both
 and  converge to their corresponding values in the perfect-information benchmark.

                                                   34
   That j j is larger than it is in the perfect-information benchmark is apparent since the
numerator of j j in equation (10) is positive and larger than 1 ¬  That  is lower follows
by substituting equation (39) into equation (9) to arrive at
                                                                  ¬1
                                                   1+              (1 ¬ (1 ¬ )) 
                                       =                                          
                                                                  1 +  (1 ¬ )
                                                 1
Since   0 it follows that               1+(1¬ )
                                                                 which is the value of  in the perfect-information
benchmark.

A.5     Proof of Proposition 5
                                                   2 =
As  = ¬¬1  from (38),                =        2 =
                                                            
                                                                = 2            
                                                                                      Since   0 it is su¢ cient to study the
behavior of how  varies with               and               to understand how                          changes with          and  To see
that  is monotonically increasing in                          we note that  = ¬ with  as the only real and
negative root of equation (39). Then, by the Implicit Function Theorem it is apparent that
                 1¬                                                                                              ¬1
             1¬ (1¬ )   + 1¬                       (1¬ )             ¬1
                                                                                                   3 +                         ¬1
          =¬                                                                    =                                                     0
           32 +  + 1¬ 1¬(1¬ )                               ¬1
                                                                                      32 +            +      1¬             ¬1
                                                                                                          1¬ (1¬ ) 

Similarly, we also have
                                                                                                1
                                                         (1 ¬ (1 ¬ )  ) (1¬                (1¬ ))2
                                                  ¬1
                              =                                                                                 0
                                                      32 +                 +        1¬                  ¬1
                                                                                    1¬ (1¬ ) 

Thus,  is increasing in        and decreasing in , which in turn implies that                                              is increasing in
  and decreasing in 

   To analyze the dependence of                        on         , we have
                                         1                         1                                    
                                  = 2           + 2              =    +2                                         
                                                                                                       
By applying the Implicit Function Theorem again, we obtain
                                                             ¬1
                        1¬             ¬1                         
               +   1¬ (1¬ ) 
                                              +           1¬ (1¬ )                                             ¬3
                                                                             ¬1                                                     ¬1
       =                                                                             =                                                    0
             32     +       +     1¬                       ¬1
                                                                                         32   +            +     1¬          ¬1
                                 1¬ (1¬ )                                                                    1¬ (1¬ ) 

                                                                                       
By substituting this into the above expression for                                     
                                                                                            we …nd that
                                              0                                                             1
                                                                                   1¬                  ¬1
                                     2
                                       @          2 +                  +      1¬ (1¬ ) 
                                  =                                                                         A  0
                                                32       +             +        1¬                  ¬1
                                                                                1¬ (1¬ ) 

Therefore,   is monotonically increasing in                                  

                                                                          35
A.6     Proof of Proposition 6
                                                                                                                      ¬ 1 ¬ 1 
Based on  and  given in equations(37) and (10),   0 is equivalent to 2                                        1¬ (1¬ )
                                                                                                                                 
                                                     r
                                                                                       ¬1
                                                                               ¬ 1         
which, as  = ¬  0 is in turn equivalent to    = 1¬ (1¬ )  In words, this condition
states that the commodity price has to be su¢ ciently informative. As  is the unique real
and negative root of equation (39), this condition is equivalent to the following condition
on the left hand side of equation (39): (¬ )  0 By substituting  into the LHS, we
obtain the following condition:
                                                                                       s
             ¬32 ¬1                                                                              ¬1
                                     1¬                          ¬1 ¬12                             
        ¬            ¬           +                                              +                            0
          1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                                              1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
                                                             p
which, as 1 ¬ (1 ¬ )  0 and by de…ning  =                       1 ¬ (1 ¬ ), can be rewritten as
                                  ¬1
                                       p         ¬                             ¬1
                         2 ¬ u              + 1¬              +  ¬1               0

Note that the left hand side of this condition  () is a quadratic form of  which has
                        p
its minimum at  = 2 1    Thus, this condition is satis…ed if and only if the following
occurs. First,  ( )  0, which is equivalent to                       =        4 ¬1 (1 ¬            +  ¬1 )  the …rst
condition given in Proposition 6. Second,
                                              ¬
                  () = ( ¬  )2 ¬ ( )2 ¬ 1 ¬                         +  ¬1           ¬1
                                                                                                0

which is equivalent to
                                             p
                                      ¬ 2 1           
                                    p                                          2 (¬1 1) 
                         1 12   ¬1
                         2           ¬ 4 (1 ¬             +  ¬1 )      

This leads to the second condition given in Proposition 6.

A.7     Proof of Proposition 7
We …rst evaluate the …rst component of the social welfare from the island households’goods
consumption. We denote this component by
                               "Z                                                           #
                                   1                         1¬
                                      ()                           ()
                       =                                                             
                                 0   1¬

In the perfect-information benchmark, by substituting the symmetric consumption of all
island households, the expected social welfare from consumption is
                                         Z 1                h      i
                           
                      log  = log        = log   
                                                0


                                                    36
Given log  derived in Proposition 3, we have
                                                                                               2
                            k               1+         1                        1+               ¬1
       log    =              log +              +                                            
                      1 +  (1 ¬ )       1 +  (1 ¬ )    2                    1 +  (1 ¬ )
                                                                     2
                                         1                               ¬1
                        +              +                                      
                          1 +  (1 ¬ )   2       1 +  (1 ¬ )
Note that the total goods output in this economy is given by
                                   Z 1           Z 1
                                                           
                    [ ] =        =        =  
                                       0                0

which indicates that in this symmetric equilibrium with perfect information, the expected
social welfare from consumption is equal to the expected aggregate goods output.
   In the presence of informational frictions, by using Proposition 1, the expected social
welfare from consumption is given by
                            Z 1Z 1
                                                    (1¬ )
          log  = log               (   )             (   )          ( )  ( )
                                ¬1   ¬1

where in the second line, an integral over   i.e., noise in the signal of goods producer of
island , is taken to compute expectation over uncertainty in  . By substituting

              log  ( ) = 0 +  log  +   = 0 +  log  +  (log  +  )

and log  = 0 +  log  +  , with our expressions for      and  and 3 from
equation (39), we obtain
                       k               1+         1
  log   =                  log +               + (1 + k )2 ¬1
                                                                 +
                1 +  (1 ¬ )       1 +  (1 ¬ )    2                 1 +  (1 ¬ )
                  1 ¬            2 ¬1    1      1
                + 2 1 + ¬1        +      1 ¬ ¬ 2 (1 ¬ ) 2 2 ¬1
                  2                      2
                  1  (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))          1¬ + 2 2
                ¬                    1¬                +     b ¬1
                                                                  
                  2 1 +  (1 ¬ )            1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
The logarithm of the expected total output in this economy is given by
                          Z 1                            Z 1
          
 log  [      ] = log           = log                 ( )  ( )
                           ¬1                             ¬1
                                                           Z 1
                            l0 + l log  +(1+ l ) log 
                 = log                                        l   ( )
                                                        ¬1
                       1                                        1   2 2 2 ¬1
                 = l0 + 2 2 ¬1
                               +  0 +                +                   + (1 +  +   ) 
                       2                                        2
                    1
                   + (1 +  +   )2 ¬1
                                         
                    2
                                                37
Again by substituting the expressions for      and   we have
                                                     1+           1
      log  [  ] =                     log +                + (1 +                               k )2    ¬1
                                                                                                                 
                              1 +  (1 ¬ )        1 +  (1 ¬ )      2
                                         1          1   ¬          2 ¬1                               1
                              +                   + 2 1 + ¬1        ¬                               (1 ¬ ) 2          ¬1
                                                                                                                           
                                   1 +  (1 ¬ )     2                                                 2
                                1 k (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))         1¬ + 2 2                                            ¬1
                              ¬                    1¬               +                                  b     
                                2 1 +  (1 ¬ )           1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
Then, it is easy to compute
                                                                2                        ¬1
                               log  [  ] ¬ log  = 2          (1 ¬ ) 2                 0

We now compare expected aggregate goods output with and without informational frictions:
                                          
               log  [  ] ¬ log  [ ]
                                                                        !
                                                                    2
               1                                          k
           =           (1 + k )2 ¬ 1 +                                    ¬1
                                                                            
               2                                   1 +  (1 ¬ )
                                                                                     !
                                                                                 2
                   1        ¬                 2               1¬                          ¬1        1
               +       2
                             1 + ¬1           ¬ 1¬                                        ¬      (1 ¬ ) 2       ¬1
                                                                                                                      
                   2                                       1 +  (1 ¬ )                             2
                   1  (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))                                                           ¬1
               ¬                    (1 ¬ (1 ¬               +       (1 +         )) ) b       
                   2 1 +  (1 ¬ )
Substituting with equations (9) and (39), we arrive at
                               
    log  [  ] ¬ log  [ ]
                             ¬1
    1 k (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))                         1
  =                        2     (1 +  ¬ b) ¬   (1 ¬ ) 2 ¬1
                                                           
    2    (1 +  (1 ¬ ))                        2
                                                                2 2
      1  (1 ¬ (1 ¬ )) ¬1       
                                   2
                                         1¬         2 2
    +                                            +      +              ¬1                                          (1 ¬ ) 
      2       1 +  (1 ¬ )            1 ¬ (1 ¬ )            1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
                   2 2
Notice that    1¬ (1¬ )
                              1 and that the …rst term is negative since   0 We further note that
                         1 k (1 ¬ (1 ¬ )) ¬1  
                                                 2
                                                      1¬        1                                           ¬1
                                                             ¬    (1 ¬ ) 2                                 
                         2     1 +  (1 ¬ )        1 ¬ (1 ¬ ) 2
                                1¬        1
                       = ¬                     (1 ¬ ) 2 ¬1
                                                           0
                            1 +  (1 ¬ ) 2
and                                                 ¬1 2
                         1 k (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))                 2 2          ¬ (1 + ) ¬1
                                                                    ¬                                 0
                         2     1 +  (1 ¬ )                             1 +  (1 ¬ )
            2 2                                                                                2 2
because                   and, since     1 and 0    ¬ 1¬1   (1 ¬ )                            + (1 + ) ¬1  0 To
see that   ¬ 1¬1  we rewrite equation (39) as
                                                                                 ¬1
                                         ¬1                                 
                              3 +            + ((1 ¬ )  + 1)                              = 0
                                                                    1 ¬ (1 ¬ )

                                                           38
from which it follows that   ¬ 1¬1  Therefore, we see that
                                                           
                                log  [  ] ¬ log  [ ]  0
                                                         
Given that the expected social welfare from consumption  is equal to expected ag-
                    
gregate output  [ ] in the perfect-information benchmark and that in the presence of
informational frictions the expected social welfare from consumption   is strictly less than
the expected aggregate goods output  [  ], the expected social welfare from consumption
is lower in the presence of information frictions than in the perfect-information benchmark.
   Now we return to the second part of the expected social welfare from commodity suppliers’
disutility of labor. We denote this part by
                                                ¬                  1+
                                   =                     
                                                                       
                                              1+
In the perfect-information benchmark, by using log  derived in Proposition 3, we have

                                   1+                1+
     log  = log           +             log +              +
                           1 +  1 +  (1 ¬ )       1 +  (1 ¬ )    1 +  (1 ¬ )
                                              2                                  2
                       1         1+              ¬1     1                           ¬1
                     +                                +                                  
                       2     1 +  (1 ¬ )                2        1 +  (1 ¬ )
In the presence of informational frictions, aggregate demand  is given by

                   log  =  log  + =  log  + ( + 1) + 0 

and therefore the suppliers’disutility of labor reduces to
                               
            log   = log          + (1 + ) 0 + (1 + )   + (1 + (1 + )  )
                              1+
                            1                  1
                           + (1 + )2 2 ¬1
                                           +    (1 + (1 + )  )2 ¬1 
                            2                  2
We now analyze the overall social welfare  =   ¬   . We can express the relative
welfare in the two economies as
                 ¬                  1 ¬             1 ¬    
              =         
                               =                    
                                                                         
                                                                                
          ¬     1 ¬     1 ¬  

where the last inequality follows from    
                                              
                                                     as proved above.
   Note that in the perfect-information benchmark,

                                                                        k
                              log  ¬ log  = log                  
                                                                         1+
                                  k
Thus, 1 ¬   = 1¬     1+
                                         0 Therefore, it is su¢ cient to show that    
                                            
  in order to establish that    
                                                        1.

                                                  39
   With some manipulation of our expressions for log   and log    by substituting our
expressions for  and  and making use of equation (39), we arrive at
              ¬
          log    
                k    1          ¬1
                                     ¬¬         2       2 2                       2
        = log      + b               1¬            +         +        +               (1 ¬ )  ¬ (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))
              1+ 2
                                                1                                            ¬
            ¬ (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))           ¬1 2
                                          ¬     (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))2                       ¬2 2
                                                                                                  +   2 
                                                2
Finally, by invoking equation (39) to rewrite the last term, we …nd that
                                          ¬                                 k
                                       log     = log                      
                                                                           1+
         ¬              ¬ 
Thus, log     = log    
                                  which in turn establishes the proposition.

A.8     Proof of Proposition 8
We follow the same procedure as in the proof of Proposition 2 to derive the futures market
equilibrium at  = 0. We …rst conjecture the log-linear forms for the futures price and each
                                                                      ~ 0 
island producer’s long position in (16) and (17) with the coe¢ cients     ~  
                                                                                ~  ~0  ~  and ~
to be determined by equilibrium conditions.
   De…ne  as a su¢ cient statistic of the information contained in  :
                                          ~0 ¬ 
                                  log  ¬     ~                                      ~ ¬
                                                                                      
                                                             = log  +                   ¬
                                         ~
                                                                                     ~
                                                                                      
Then, conditional on observing  and  producer ’s expectation of log  is
                                                                                                                           !
                                                                              1                                  ~2
                                                                                                                  
      [log  j   log  ] =  [log  j   ] =                                                    +   + 2    
                                                                                       ~2
                                                                                                                ~
                                                                     +          +    ~2
                                                                                       
                                                                                         



                                                         ~0 ¬ 
                               = 0 +   +  log  ¬     ~                                                               (43)

where
                                                        !¬1                                               !
                                       ~2
                                                                           ~2
                                                                                            ~0 + 
                                                                                                 ~
                                                                             
                    0 =          + + 2                               ¬                                   
                                       ~                                   ~2                 ~
                                                                                                
                                                        !¬1
                                          ~2
                                           
                     =           +  +                         
                                          ~2
                                                        !¬1
                                       ~2
                                                                 ~
                                                                  
                                         
                     =          + + 2                                 
                                       ~                         ~2
                                                                  


                                                          40
Its conditional variance of log  is
                                                                                            !¬1
                                                                              ~2
                                                                               
                     ~ =   [log  j   log  ] =               +  +                                     (44)
                                                                              ~2

By substituting equation (17) into producer ’s optimal production decision in equation (14),
we obtain
    ~ =         1                             ~0 +       1           ~ ¬ 1 log 
log                   log +
            1 ¬ (1 ¬ )       1 ¬ (1 ¬ )               1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
                          !                                         ~
                                                                          2
                 1 + ~                         log          1 +                        2 2 ~2
                                                                                                                        ¬1
            +                 0 +    +            +                   ~ +                                        
               1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                          ~
                                                          2 (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))           2 (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))

For the above equation to match the conjectured equilibrium position in equation (17), the
constant term and the coe¢ cients of  and log  have to be identical:
                                                                      !                      ~
                                                                                                        2
                                                     1 + ~                           1+
             ~0 =                         ~0 +                          0 +                              ~
                      1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                   1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                      2 (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))
                                  2 2 ~2
                                                 ¬1           1
                     +                                 +              log                                        (45)
                         2 (1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))                     1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
                                    !
             ~ =          1 + ~
                                                                                                                (46)
                         1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
                                                                                             !
            ~                ~ ¬     1                                      1 + ~
                  =                             +                                                               (47)
                    1 ¬ (1 ¬ )       1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                               1 ¬ (1 ¬ )

By substituting equation (46) into (47), we have
                                                       ~ ~2
                                      ~ = 1 + (1 ¬ )                 
                                                                              ¬1
                                                                                                                  (48)
                                            1 ¬ (1 ¬ )   ~
By manipulating equation (46), we also have that
                                                                          !¬1
                                       1¬                       ~2
                                                                                       
                     ~ =       +                          +   
                                                                                                                  (49)
                                    1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                  ~2              1 ¬ (1 ¬ )

We now use the market clearing of the futures market to determine three other equations
for the coe¢ cients. Aggregating equation (17) gives the producers’aggregate position:
     Z 1
          ~  (   )  ( ) = exp ~ + ~ 
                                               ~  log  + ~              ~ 0 + 1 ~2 ¬1 
                                                                ~ + ~0 + ~                 (50)
      ¬1                                                                            2 
                    ~   De…ne
Equation (15) gives 
                                          ~0 ¬ 
                                  log  ¬     ~    ~
                                                      
                                                   =    (log  ¬ ) + 
                                         ~
                                                     ~
                                                      

                                                            41
Then, the suppliers’conditional expection of is
                                            !¬1 "                                                        !#
                                       ~2                            ~2
                                                                                          ~0 
                                                                                   log  ¬    ~
     [ j log  ] =  [ j  ] =    + 2                              + 2                    ¬               
                                      ~
                                                                     ~
                                                                                      ~
                                                                                              ~
                                                                                               
                                                                        

                                                                ~2       ¬1
                                                                
and conditional variance is   [ j log  ] =              +   ~2
                                                                             Their conditional expectation
                                                                 
of log  is
                                                           !¬1 "                                              !#
                                              ~2
                                                                         ~2
                                                                                                  ~0 ¬ 
                                                                                           log  ¬     ~
                                                                           
  [log  j log  ] =  [log  j  ] =      + 2                       + 2                                        
                                              ~                          ~                      ~
                                                                                                  
                                                                         ~2       ¬1
                                                                         
and conditional variance is   [log  j log  ] =            + 
                                                                    
                                                                   ~2           Thus, we obtain an ex-
pression for log    ~  in a linear of log  and 
                                                     h          R1                        i
    Then, the market clearing condition log             log +       ~                          ~  re-
                                                                       (   )  ( ) = log 
                                                                 ¬1
quires that the coe¢ cients of log  and and the constant term be identical on both sides:
                                                     !¬1                   !
                                                ~2
                                                             ~
                                                              
            + ~ + ~ 
                        ~  =   ~ +        + 2                  +                              (51)
                                                ~
                                                             ~ 
                                                              
                                                  
                                                     !¬1                         !
                                               ~2
                                                          ~
                                                               ~
                                                                
                1 + ~ 
                        ~ =     ~ +         + 2                      +                          (52)
                                               ~
                                                          ~ 
                                                               ~ 
                                                 
                                                     !¬1              !
                  1                            ~2
                                                                  ~
                                                                   
  ~0 + ~ 
            ~ 0 + ~2 ¬1 =      ~0 +        + 2           1+                                     (53)
                  2                          ~
                                                
                                                                  ~
                                                                  
                                                 !¬1                  !
                                            ~2
                                                     ~
                                                                 ~
                                                                                     2
                                 ¬      + 2                1+            + ¬         2
                                           ~        ~         ~
                                             
                                                              !¬1                               !¬1
                                    2                   ~2
                                                                      1                    ~2
                                                                                            
                                 ¬ (1 + 2)  + 2                 ¬     (1 + 2)         + 2       
                                   2                   ~
                                                                     2                    ~
                                                                                             

Equation (52) directly implies that
                                                     !¬1                      !
                                           ~2
                                                                ~
                                                                 
                           ~ =  +      + 2                      ¬1            ~ ¬1 
                                                                                                                 (54)
                                           ~
                                                                ~
                                                                 
                                             

Equations (51) and (52) together imply that

                                           ~ = 
                                                 ~ ¬1 
                                                      ~ ¬ :

By combining this equation with (49), we arrive at
                                                                                       ¬1
           ~3 + 2 ~2 +    ¬1            1¬           ¬1            2    ~ ¬              
                               +                         +                                    = 0            (55)
                                       1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                                 1 ¬ (1 ¬ )

                                                  42
By making the convenient substitution  = ~ + 32 ; called the Tschirnhaus transformation,
one can arrive at the depressed cubic polynomial

                                                    3 +  +  = 0

where

                     ¬1                 1¬      ¬1    1 2
              =               +                  ¬     
                                     1 ¬ (1 ¬ )       3
                                                                                                   ¬1
                   2            ¬1       2    1¬      ¬1      2                       3                 
              = ¬                   ¬                   ¬                              ¬                    
                   3                     3 1 ¬ (1 ¬ )        27                               1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
                            2        3
It is easy to verify that   4
                                 +    27
                                            0 and therefore  is a real root of this depressed cubic
polynomial, which has one real and two complex roots. Following Cardano’s method, the
one real root of equation (55) is then given by
                         s        r             s    r
                         3           2    3  3      2 3   2
                    ~ = ¬ +            +     + ¬ ¬      +   ¬   :
                             2       4     27     2    4    27 3

Since the coe¢ cients of equation (55) change sign only once, by Descartes’Rule of Signs the
real root must be positive.
    Since ~ = 
                ~ ¬1 
                     ~  ¬ ; we have that

                                                                     ¬1
                                                ~ = ~ +
                                                                         ~ 
                                                                          

which, together with our expression for ~ and equations (48) and (54), implies that
                0                                                              1

         ~ =B                              ¬1              1¬                  C                   ~ ~ +
           @(1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))                      +                2             A                                          (56)
                                                        ~ +                      1 +  (1 ¬ )
                                                                     +     

and therefore
                0                                                              1

        ~ = B                             ¬1              1¬                  C                   ~ ~ +
                                                                                                                   2
            @(1 ¬ (1 ¬ ))                     +                2             A                                          (57)
                                                        ~ +                      1 +  (1 ¬ )
                                                                     +     


Since by equation (55), ~  0 one has that 
                                              ~  and 
                                                      ~ must have the same sign. With 
                                                                                      ~
    ~ determined, ~ is then given by equation (54):
and 
                                                               !¬1                  !
                                                     ~2
                                                                         ~
                                                                          
                          ~ =  +                 + 2                     ¬1           ~ ¬1 
                                                                                          
                                                     ~
                                                                         ~
                                                                          
                                                       



                                                            43
~ 0 by equation (45):

                                         !¬1
                   1 ¬  (1 ¬ )        ~
                                      
 ~0
     =   ¬ ~ +             ~ ¬1
                                    ~2
                       1¬             
        0                                                                   !                             !¬1
                                                                         ~2             ~2
        @ 1 log ¬ + 2 2 + 1 (1 + 2) 1 +                             2               
                                                                                       + 2            
          1¬                         2                                  ~2
                                                                                       ~
                                                                                        
                                                                                         
                                                                          !!
                                             2 2~
           1 ~ 1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                       
          +    +             1 + ~ +              ~                             ¬1
                                                                                      
           2         1¬                  1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
           0                              !¬1        !1                                                         1
             1 ¬ (1 ¬ ) ~ ¬1      ~
                                  2           ~
                                                
          +@              +        +           +  A                                       ¬ ~ +         A
                 1¬               ~
                                   2           ~
                                                

and ~0 by equation (53):
                                                                            !¬1                   !
                                                                 ~2
                                                                                        ~
                                                                                         
              ~0 =             ~0 + ¬
                         ¬ ~                  2
                                                      2 +    + 2                   1+
                                                                 ~
                                                                                        ~
                                                                                         
                                                                   
                                            !¬1                 !
                                  ~2
                                                 ~
                                                             ~
                                                                             1
                      ¬          + 2                    1+               ¬ ~2    ¬1
                                                                                      
                                  ~
                                                 ~
                                                             ~
                                                                             2
                                    
                                                         !                  !¬1
                        1             ~2                        ~2
                                     2                         
                      ¬ (1 + 2) 1 +                           + 2               
                       2             ~2
                                                               ~
                                                                
                                                                 

We now derive the spot market equilibrium at  = 1 We again …rst conjecture that the spot
price  and a goods producer’s updated commodity demand take the log-linear forms as
given in equations (18) and (19) with the coe¢ cients 0        0      and  to be
determined by equilibrium conditions.
   The mean and variance of producer ’s prior belief over log  carried from  = 0 is derived
in (43) and (44). De…ne
                            log  ¬ 0 ¬  log  ¬                            ¬
                    =                                            = log  +        ¬             
                                                                              
Then, after observing the spot price  at  = 1 the producer’s expectation of log  is

 [log  j   log  log  ] =  [log  j   log   ]
                                                   !¬1                                                               !
                                           2                        2              log  ¬ 0 ¬  log  ¬ 
                                =  ~ + 2               ~   + 2                                                
                                                                                                 

and its conditional variance is
                                                                                           !¬1
                                                                             2
                         =   [log  j   log  log  ] =     ~ + 2                  
                                                                             

                                                         44
We use (13) to compute log   and obtain a linear expression of  , log  , and  . By
matching the coe¢ cients of this expression with the conjectured form in (19), we obtain

          1              (1 +  )2                                 1            2 2 2 ¬1         1 +           ¬
  0   =           log +                               +                                ¬                   0 + 
         1¬               2 (1 ¬ )                              2 (1 ¬ )                           1¬            2
               1                                             ~0 + 
                                                                  ~
          +         (1 +        )      ~     0 ¬                             
              1¬
                    ~ 
   =                                                      
          (1 ¬ (1 ¬ )) ¬1  ¬                   ~ 
                                                                       !
          1                                          
     =           (1 +       )        ~  ¬ 2                                                                     (58)
         1¬                                          
           1                                  1
   =             (1 +       )       2
                                             ¬                                                                                (59)
          1¬                                  1¬
                                                                    R1
Market clearing of the spot market requires                          ¬1
                                                                              ( ) =   which implies

                                            1                         ¬1
                     ( ¬  ) log  = 0 + 2                           +  log  +  log  ¬ 
                                            2
By matching coe¢ cients on both sides, we have
                                                               1                        ¬1
                                           ( ¬  ) 0 = 0 + 2                       
                                                               2
                                           ( ¬  )  =                                                                   (60)
                                           ( ¬  )  =                                                                   (61)
                                            ( ¬  )              = ¬1                                                      (62)

From equations (60) and (62), we have that  = ¬   and given our expression for 0 and
 above, we also see that
                                                  !¬1
                   1 +                                        1               (1 +  )2                       1      2 2 2 ¬1
0 =       ¬  +                      2                                log +                       +                  
                    1¬                                          1¬                2 (1 ¬ )                    2 (1 ¬ )
                                                                                                                               !
            1                                               ~0 + 
                                                                 ~                        1 +                  1      ¬1
         +         (1 +       )      ~      0 ¬                             ¬             2       + 2           
           1¬                                                                              1¬                     2
                                                     !¬1
           1¬         ¬1             
 =                   ( ¬  ) + 2                         ~                                                            (63)
          1 +                      

From our expression for  above and  = ¬   we have
                                                                                         ¬1
                              ¬1                        ~                             ~ 
                     3 +             ~ ¬                                    ¬               = 0                        (64)
                                                    1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                         1 ¬ (1 ¬ )

                                                                    45
This is a depressed cubic polynomial whose unique real and positive root is given by
        v                        v
        u                        u                     !2
        u        ¬1              u1     ¬1                                                           3
        u   1       ~                 ~                   1 ¬3                 ~ 
                              +t
        3                                       
 = t¬                                                      +          ~ ¬
            2 1 ¬ (1 ¬ )           4 1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                27               1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
          v
          u
          u                      ! v u                         !2
          u   1
                     ¬1
                         ~      u1          ¬1
                                                     ~               1 ¬3                   ~ 
                                                                                                               3
                                    ¬t
          3                                               
        +t¬                                                       +            ~ ¬                              
              2 1 ¬ (1 ¬ )             4 1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                  27               1 ¬ (1 ¬ )

It follows that   0 and from equation (62) that
                                                                         ¬1 2
                            (1 ¬ )  + (1 +  ) (~ + 2 )            
                        =                                                         0
                                         1 + (1 ¬ ) 
and, since  = ¬   0 that
                                                                        ¬1
                                 1¬     + (1 +  ) (~ + 2 )            
                          =¬                                                      0
                                             1 + (1 ¬ ) 
We now prove that   0 Given the expression for  in (58) and that   0 it is su¢ cient
for   0 if
                                                       
                                           ~         
                                                       2
Given the expression for  in (63), and recognizing that ~  0 and   0 the above
condition can be rewritten as
                                                                         !¬1
                                      1¬        ¬1             
                            1 2                   ( ¬  ) + 2               
                                      1 +                     
Furthermore, from the expressions for       and   this condition can be further expressed as
                                            
                                                               !
                             1                            2        
                                 (1 +  (1 ¬ )) ~ + 2           2
                          1 +                                     

Since  = ¬  , given our expression for   0, the condition reduces to
                                      1¬    ¬
                                             ~ + 2           0
                                     1 + 
which is always satis…ed. Therefore,   0 In addition, since ( ¬  )  =  implies that
    we see from ( ¬  )  =  that   0
   We now examine the sign of   By substituting  = ¬  and the expressions of                 and
 into (59), we have
                          1         ¬            ¬1 ¬
            = ¬                    ~ + 2       ¬ ( ¬  ) 2 ¬ ~ 
                   (1 + (1 ¬ ) )
Consequently,  can be positive or negative depending on the sign of  ¬(              ¬   ) 2 ¬~ 

                                                  46
A.9      Proof of Proposition 9
In (20), log  is a linear expression of log   and . We need to show that as                                                            ! 1, the
coe¢ cients of log  and        converge to their corresponding values in the perfect-information
benchmark (Proposition 3), and the variance of the                                        term
                                                             ~2
                                                      = 2                    ¬1
                                                                                      ! 0

We rewrite equation (55) as
                                                                                                               ¬1
                  ~ +
                           2
                               ~ +      ¬1                        1¬                        ~ =                    
                                                        +                                                                     
                                                                 1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                             1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
As     becomes su¢ ciently large, the RHS converges to zero and therefore, since the cu-
bic polynomial has a unique real solution, ~ ! 0 By substituting equation (55) into our
               ~   one can express 
expression for                      ~  as
                                                !
      1 ¬   (1 ¬    )            (1 ¬   ) ~                          1¬
~ =
                      ¬1
                           1+                                ¬   +
                                                                                      ~
                                                                                     
                                             ~
      1 +  (1 ¬ )             1 ¬ (1 ¬ )       1 ¬ (1 ¬ )         1 ¬ (1 ¬ )

As      ! 1 ~ ! 0 then 
                           ~ !                   1
                                               1+(1¬ )
                                                                   In addition, we can rewrite (64), by substituting
for   as
                                                                   ~2 
                                    3  + ~  = (1 +  )              
                                                               1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
                                                                           ¬                                                                         ¬1
Since     ( + )2 grows as            increases, one also has that ~ =  +                                            +        ( + )2              !
0 as   ! 1 It then follows that  ! 0.
   By substituting (64) and our expression for  into our expression for   we have
                                       1¬         1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
                           =¬                  ¬                                                 ¬1
                                                                                                      (~  )2 
                                    1 + (1 ¬ )  1 + (1 ¬ ) 
                                                ~2                                                       1¬
As      ! 1 ~  = (1 +             ) 1¬ 
                                                (1¬          )
                                                                  ¬        3 ! 0 and therefore  ! ¬ 1+(1¬ )
                                                                                                                  Given
that  = ¬  and our expression for   we have that as                                       ! 1 the coe¢ cient of                        in (20)

                                 1                                                     1           1
                   = ¬                  (1 +               )           ¬        !
                                1¬                                                    1¬     1 +  (1 ¬ )
which is its value in the perfect-information benchmark.
                                                                       1¬
   Since  = ¬   and that as       ! 1  ! 0 and  ! ¬ 1+(1¬      )
                                                                             we have  ! 0 By
                                     ~  
substituting for       and     ~  we can rewrite  
                                                                ~  as

        ~  = 1 ¬ (1 ¬
      
                                )   ¬1
                                               ( + )2 
                                    
              1 +  (1 ¬        )
              1 ¬ (1 ¬          )   ¬1                                                                ¬ ¬1 32        2
            =                                 (1 +               )                         ¬         ~             ¬(          +    )     
              1 +  (1 ¬        )                                       1 ¬ (1 ¬ )

                                                                         47
                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                     32
where we use substitution with equation (64). As       ! 1  ! 0 and ~¬1         ! 0, the
                                   ~ !
coe¢ cient of log  in (20)  +        1
                                                  which is its value in the perfect-information
                                        1+(1¬ )
benchmark.
   By using the expressions of           ~  and 
                                                                   ~ in Proposition 8 and by
manipulating terms, we have

                                          ~ =     1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                 ¬1              ~ +
                                                                                                        
                                                  1 +  (1 ¬ )
Consequently, we can write  as
                                                                                2
                                                1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                                                2
                                    =                                  ¬1
                                                                                     2 ~ +                   
                                                1 +  (1 ¬ )
We can rewrite equation (55) as

                         ~ +
                                        2
                                                                      ~¬1 ¬                          1¬
                                            =                                                 +                              
                                                1 ¬ (1 ¬ )                                          1 ¬ (1 ¬ )
By applying the Implicit Function Theorem to equation (55),
                                                                                2
                                                                  ~ +               ~2
                                        ~                                            
                                             =¬                                                           0
                                               2              ~ +        ~2 +               
                                                                                      1¬ (1¬ )

                                   2
Consequently,          ~ +           is growing in              Now we can rewrite equation (64) by substituting
for ~ and   as
                                            v
                                            u                                                                 ¬1
                                            u                           ~
                                                                                                     2
                                            u    3   +         +  +  +                                                 r
                               2            t                                                                                                 
               ~
        +  +  +                                                                                                        =                          
                                                                        1+                                                       1 ¬ (1 ¬ )

As     ! 1  ! 0 Thus, for this equation to hold, we must have                                                          ( + )2 ! 1. Then,
the LHS of the above equation can be expressed as
                                         v
                                         u                                                                                          ¬1
                                         u 3                                                                                   2
                                         u  +  +  + ~ +                                                                            
                                     2   t
                             ~
                   +  +  +
                                                       1 + 
                         2
                                 r                       ¬2
           t       ~ +   32          +  ¬1 ~ +      
                                   1 + 
                                                                                                                                                          2
This suggests that 
                        32
                               must be shrinking at approximately the same rate as                                                            ~ +           is
growing for the LHS to remain …nite. Therefore,                                 2    must be shrinking at a faster rate and
 ! 0 as       ! 1.

                                                                       48
   Taken together, we have shown that as     ! 1, log  converges with its counterpart
in the perfect-information benchmark. We can similarly prove that the producers’aggregate
demand also converges.



   References
 Angeletos, Marios and Jennifer La’O (2009), Noisy business cycles, NBER Macroeconomics
    Annual 24, 319-378.
 Angeletos, Marios and Jennifer La’O (2013), Sentiment, Econometrica 81, 739-780.
 Angeletos, George-Marios, Guido Lorenzoni, and Alessandro Pavan (2010), Beauty contests
    and irrational exuberance: A neoclassical approach, Working paper, MIT.
 Bray, Margaret (1981), Futures trading, rational expectations, and the e¢ cient markets
     hypothesis, Econometrica 49, 575-596.
 Cheng, Ing-haw, Andrei Kirilenko, and Wei Xiong (2012), Convective risk ‡ows in com-
     modity futures markets, Working paper, Princeton University.
 Fattouh, Bassam, Lutz Kilian, and Lavan Mahadeva (2012), The role of speculation in oil
     markets: What have we learned so far?, Working paper, University of Michigan.
 Garbade, Kenneth and William L. Silber (1983), Price movements and price discovery in
     futures and cash markets, Review of Economics and Statistics 65, 289-297.
 Goldstein, Itay, Emre Ozdenoren, and Kathy Yuan (2011), Learning and complementarities
     in speculative attacks, Review of Economic Studies 78, 263-292.
 Goldstein, Itay, Emre Ozdenoren and Kathy Yuan (2012), Trading frenzies and their impact
     on real investment, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
 Grossman, Sanford and Joseph Stiglitz (1980), On the impossibility of informationally
     e¢ cient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393-408.
 Hamilton, James (1983), Oil and the macroeconomy since World War II, Journal of Political
    Economy 91, 228-248.
 Hamilton, James (2009), Causes and consequences of the oil shock of 2007-2008, Brookings
    Papers on Economic Activity, 215-259.
 Hamilton, James and Cynthia Wu (2012), E¤ects of index-fund investing on commodity
    futures prices, Working paper, University of California, San Diego.
 Hellwig, Martin (1980), On the aggregation of information in competitive markets, Journal
     of Economic Theory 22, 477-498.
 Hellwig, Christian, Sebastian Kohls, and Laura Veldkamp (2012), Information Choice Tech-
     nologies, American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 102(3), 35-40.
 Henderson, Brian, Neil Pearson, and Li Wang (2012), New evidence on the …nancialization
    of commodity markets, Working paper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.


                                           49
Hu, Conghui and Wei Xiong (2013), The informational role of commodity futures prices,
    Working paper, Princeton University.
Juvenal, Luciana and Ivan Petrella (2012), Speculation in oil market, Working paper, Fed-
    eral Reserve Bank of Saint Loius.
Kilian, Lutz (2009), Not all oil price shocks are alike: Disentangling demand and supply
     shocks in the crude oil market, American Economic Review 99, 1053-1069.
Kilian, Lutz and Daniel Murphy (2012), The role of inventories and speculative trading in
     the global market for crude oil, Working paper, University of Michigan.
Knittel, Christopher and Robert Pindyck (2013), The simple economics of commodity price
    speculation, Working paper, MIT.
Lombardi, Marco J. and Ine Van Robays (2011), Do …nancial investors destabilize the oil
   price?, Working paper, ECB.
Lorenzoni, Guido (2009), A theory of demand shocks, American Economic Review 99,
    2050-84.
Masters, Michael (2008), Testimony before the Committee on Homeland Security and Gov-
   ernmental A¤airs, U.S. Senate, May 20.
Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (2002), The social value of public information, Amer-
    ican Economic Review 92, 1521-1534.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Ken Rogo¤ (1996), Foundations of International Macroeconomics,
    MIT Press.
Ozdenoren, Emre and Kathy Yuan (2008), Feedback e¤ects and asset prices, Journal of
    Finance 63, 1939-1975.
Roll, Richard (1984), Orange juice and weather, American Economic Review 74, 861-880.
Singleton, Kenneth (2012), Investor ‡ows and the 2008 boom/bust in oil prices, Working
    paper, Stanford University.
Stoll, Hans and Robert Whaley (2010), Commodity index investing and commodity futures
     prices, Journal of Applied Finance 20, 7-46.
Subrahmanyam, A and Sheridan Titman (2001), Feedback from stock prices to cash ‡ows,
    Journal of Finance 56, 2389-2413.
Tang, Ke and Wei Xiong (2012), Index investment and …nancialization of commodities,
    Financial Analysts Journal 68 (6), 54-74.
U.S. Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations (2009), Excessive speculation in
    the wheat market, Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental A¤airs, June
    24.




                                          50
