NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NO NEWS IS NEWS:
DO MARKETS UNDERREACT TO NOTHING?
Stefano Giglio
Kelly Shue
Working Paper 18914
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18914
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013

We thank Mark Mitchell and Todd Pulvino for their detailed comments and generosity in sharing data.
We also thank Vikas Agarwal, Shane Corwin, and Narayan Naik for their generosity in sharing data.
We are grateful for comments from John Cochrane, Shane Corwin, Scott Davis, Ben Golez, David
Hirshleifer, Steve Kaplan, Bryan Kelly, Charles Lee, Mike Lemmon, David McLean, Toby Moskowitz,
Lubos Pastor, Michael Roberts, Noah Stoffman, Dick Thaler, Pietro Veronesi, and Rob Vishny. We
thank Keith Henwood and Menaka Hampole for excellent research assistance. We thank seminar participants
at U Chicago, FRA, INSEAD, Jackson Hole, Miami Behavioral, NBER Behavioral, Norwegian School
of Economics, TAU, UBC, UNC Roundtable, USC, UT Dallas, Wash U, CITE, and Utah Winter Finance
Conference. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Stefano Giglio and Kelly Shue. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

No News is News: Do Markets Underreact to Nothing?
Stefano Giglio and Kelly Shue
NBER Working Paper No. 18914
March 2013
JEL No. G02,G14,G34
ABSTRACT
As illustrated in the tale of “the dog that did not bark,” the absence of news and the passage of time
often contain information. We test whether markets fully incorporate this information using the empirical
context of mergers. During the year after merger announcement, the passage of time is informative
about the probability that the merger will ultimately complete. We show that the variation in hazard
rates of completion after announcement strongly predicts returns. This pattern is consistent with a
behavioral model of underreaction to the passage of time and cannot be explained by changes in risk
or frictions.
Stefano Giglio
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
stefano.giglio@chicagobooth.edu
Kelly Shue
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
kelly.shue@chicagobooth.edu

1

Introduction
“The dog did nothing in the night time ... that was the curious incident.”
- Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
The absence of news reports and the passage of time often contain important information.

For example, a citizen who lives through a sustained period without terrorist attacks should
update positively on the eﬀectiveness of the government’s anti-terrorism programs. A manager
who observes that an employee has executed a diﬃcult task without incident should update
positively on the employee’s quality.
“No news” is also news in many financial contexts. For example, if a firm does not lay oﬀ
workers or declare bankruptcy after a macroeconomic shock, investors should update positively
on the firm’s underlying strength. On the other hand, if a firm repeatedly fails to announce
new investment projects, investors may be justified in updating negatively on the firm’s growth
prospects. Finally, investment returns that seldom display newsworthy variation can reveal
information about the underlying investment decisions. Overly-consistent returns may be
suggestive of fraud, as in the case of Bernie Madoﬀ’s investment fund.
In this paper, we study the extent to which markets incorporate the information content
of “no news”, i.e. the passage of time. We focus on a financial context in which we can easily
quantify the information contained the passage of time: mergers. Mergers oﬀer a convenient
empirical setting for several reasons. First, each merger has a clear starting point: the announcement of the intention to merge. Second, the returns of merger investment strategies
depend heavily on a well-defined and stochastic ending point: the merger either completes,
or the parties withdraw for reasons such as loss of financing, antitrust rulings, or target
shareholder resistance. To best capture this uncertainty, we focus on mergers without known
expiration dates, so that both the timing and outcome of merger resolution are stochastic.
Between merger announcement and resolution, there exists an interim period which usually
lasts several months to a year. We show empirically that the passage of time during this interim period contains information about whether the deal will ultimately complete. We then
compute how prices should move during this interim period if markets fully incorporated the
information tied to the passage of time.
1

Using a sample of over 5000 mergers, we estimate the hazard rate of merger completion,
defined as the probability that a merger will complete in event week n conditional on it not
completing or withdrawing prior to week n. If the hazard rate of completion is non-constant
over the event life of a merger, then the passage of time contains information about merger
completion. We find that hazard rates of completion do indeed vary strongly over event time
and are hump-shaped. Hazard rates rise from zero in the first weeks after announcement, peak
around event week 25, and then decline to zero one year after announcement. In contrast,
hazard rates of withdrawal are essentially flat. These patterns hold throughout the calendar time period of our sample, 1970 to 2010. They also hold after accounting for potential
heterogeneity, such as the form of merger financing or the size of the target.
Rational markets should incorporate all available information, including predictable variation in hazard rates tied to the passage of time. For example, if the market believes the
merger is likely to complete tomorrow, the price of the target should be high today, so that
the mean return between today and tomorrow should be the risk free rate plus compensation
for risk. When we look empirically at returns, we find a strong positive correlation between
hazard rates and returns in the event year following merger announcement. This relationship
is robust and holds even when we estimate hazard rates using an earlier sample and mean
returns using a later sample.1 In other words, returns are predictable and they move with
the hump-shaped hazard rates. For example, a strategy that invests in cash financed mergers
earns a mean return of 20bp per week in the first few weeks after merger announcement.
Returns peak at above 40bp per week around event week 25 and then decline sharply as more
time passes after announcement.
What explains the strong predictability of returns by hazard rates? We explore two possible
explanations: underreaction to the passage of time (the behavioral explanation) and changes
in risk or trading frictions over the event lives of mergers (the rational explanation).
First, we examine the behavioral explanation, motivated by a large literature showing that
agents tend to underreact to less vivid and salient sources of information.2 The passage of
1

For cash financed mergers, the relevant return is the return from holding the target. For equity financed
mergers, the relevant return is that from a strategy in which one takes a long position in the target and a
short position in the acquirer.
2
See for example Gabaix et al. (2006), Giﬀord (2005), Kahneman (1973), Pashler, ed (1998), Radner and
Rothschild (1975), Sargent (1993), Simon (1955), and Tversky and Kahneman (1973) for general theories, and

2

time after merger announcement is likely to be less vivid than explicit news stories covered
by either formal media outlets or rumors. Media outlets typically choose to cover the more
attention-grabbing news stories to increase readership while rumors tend to anticipate the
same explicit news covered by media outlets (we discuss explicit news in detail in Section 5.3).
Information tied to the passage of time that is not covered by explicit news is then likely to
be endogenously less able to grab people’s attention. Therefore, boundedly rational agents
may not fully update on the passage of time. We develop a simple model showing that this
underreaction can explain the observed returns predictability.
The model links movements in the target’s price to market beliefs about event time variation in hazard rates. If agents correctly update using the passage of time and systematic risk
does not change over the event lives of mergers, then mean weekly returns should be constant
in event time. Returns should not vary systematically with the passage of time and they
should not be predicted by the hazard rate.
However, if agents underreact to the information contained in the passage of time, they
will behave as though they believe that the hazard rate of completion does not vary over event
time as much as the true hazard rate. This implies that agents will tend to under estimate
the hazard rate when hazard rates are high and over estimate it when hazard rates are low.
Underreaction to the passage of time further implies that mean returns should be high
when hazard rates are high (since markets underestimate merger completion probabilities
and receive positive surprises on average) and low when hazard rates are low (since markets
overestimate merger completion probabilities and are disappointed on average). In other
words, hazard rates and mean returns should be positively correlated. This matches the data:
mean returns are significantly non-constant over the event lives of mergers and the pattern in
mean returns is aligned with movements in aggregate hazard rates.
Importantly, these predictions hold even if investors observe explicit news in the interim
period between merger announcement and resolution. For example, investors may be exposed
to news reports of target shareholder voting results or insider information leaks about merger
completion probability. By “no news”, we do not refer to the situation in which no explicit
news is released. Rather, we define “no news” to be the information content tied to the passage
Merton (1987), Peng (2005), and Peng and Xiong (2006) for applications to financial markets.

3

of time, i.e. what market participants should know by observing the passage of time even if
they are unable to observe explicit news.
The release of explicit news is not a threat to our methodology because rational investors
should update on both explicit news and the passage of time; the passage of time should still
not predict returns. We do not rule out the possibility that markets underreact to explicit
news. However, we show that, at a minimum, markets underreact to the passage of time. In
fact, any release of explicit news about merger completion probability should be a bias against
our findings that aggregate hazard rates tied to the passage of time predict returns. If agents
receive explicit news, they should estimate merger completion probability with less error, and
therefore aggregate historical hazard rates should be less predictive of returns. This intuition
is discussed in detail in Section 5.3.
Using our simple model, we estimate the market’s beliefs about completion hazard rates
that would generate the observed average returns in each event week. The implied beliefs track
the empirically measured hazard rates but display approximately 25 percent less variation
over time. This is consistent with an underreaction hypothesis in which agents only partially
incorporate the information content of the passage of time when setting prices.
While our results are consistent with the behavioral model of underreaction, the positive
relationship between returns and hazard rates could also reflect compensation for risk or
frictions (the rational explanation). We begin by noting that the correlation between hazard
rates and returns is a phenomenon measured over the event life of the merger, and therefore
cannot be explained by changes in risk or risk premia over calendar time.3 Next, we test
whether our results can be explained by event time variation in three types of risk: (1)
systematic risk as captured by the Fama French factors, (2) downside risk, in which returns
covary more with the market during market downturns, and (3) idiosyncratic risk. To measure
risk, we examine the returns of trading strategies that modify the common merger arbitrage
strategy described in Mitchell and Pulvino (2001): for each calendar month we invest in all
mergers active between certain event windows. We test whether a trading strategy that invests
3

Because mergers occur in waves, we may be concerned that event time is correlated with calendar time,
and therefore changes in risk or risk premia over calendar time may matter. However, in a regression of returns
on hazard rates, the results remain similar after we control for calendar time (year x month) fixed eﬀects,
which removes calendar year-month variation in risk and risk premia.

4

in deals active in event weeks when hazard rates are high (estimated from the aggregate sample
of mergers in a preceding period) delivers a higher alpha than a strategy that invests in deals
in event weeks when hazard rates are low.
Our High Hazard strategy delivers a significant monthly alpha (relative to the three Fama
French factors) of 64bp for cash deals and 146bp for equity deals. This is significantly higher
than the -6bp and 17bp for cash and equity deals, respectively, of strategies that buy deals in
the Low Hazard weeks. This is also significantly higher than the 38bp and 109bp respectively
of the traditional Buy and Hold strategy which invests in deals for their entire event lives.
These alphas represent the economic magnitude of potential mispricing: event time variation
in hazard rates predicts a substantial diﬀerence in alpha of approximately 100bp per month
between the High and Low Hazard strategies for cash and equity mergers.
We also find that all risk exposures (Fama French betas, momentum beta, downside beta,
beta with respect to the option factors of Agarwal and Naik (2004), and idiosyncratic risk)
do not vary significantly in event time. Therefore, while risk is a potential contributor to the
positive returns in the traditional Buy and Hold merger arbitrage strategy, it cannot explain
why returns covary with hazard rates over the event lives of mergers.
Finally, we consider alternative rational explanations based on event-time-varying frictions
and asymmetric information. For example, large institutional investors tend to sell the target
immediately after announcement to lock in capital gains. If not enough arbitrage capital takes
the other side of the deal, the downward price pressure could result in low returns immediately
after announcement, followed by rising returns as arbitrage capital enters. It is also possible
that the degree of asymmetric information changes in event time, such that the buyer’s required compensation for the asymmetric information also changes. These explanations predict
that mean returns should be correlated in event time with proxies for market liquidity and
asymmetric information. Instead, we show that almost all the event time variation in these
market conditions is concentrated in the first two weeks after announcement, while the event
time variation in returns that we document occurs on a diﬀerent time scale, in the months following announcement. Further, we show that potential “last day eﬀects,” frictions associated
with the last day of trading before merger completion, cannot generate our returns patterns.
We conclude that changes in risk, frictions, and asymmetric information in event time are
5

unlikely to drive the relationship between hazard rates and returns. Rather, the empirical
evidence supports the behavioral hypothesis that markets fail to incorporate all information
contained in the passage of time while waiting for merger resolution.
Given that sophisticated investors are likely to exist in these markets, we explore why these
returns patterns are not arbitraged away. We study how the High Hazard strategy performs
when executed on subsamples of mergers for which arbitrage is likely to be more diﬃcult due to
higher transaction costs. We find that the alphas of our High Hazard strategy are significantly
larger for smaller deals, for deals with lower volume and turnover, and for deals with higher
bid-ask spreads. Next, we simulate realistic trading strategies that limit the total exposure
to each deal and account for direct and indirect transaction costs following the procedure
developed in Mitchell and Pulvino (2001). Accounting for trading costs and limitations in the
size of the positions pushes our alphas toward zero, although we still find significant diﬀerences
in the alphas between our High and Low Hazard strategies. This is consistent with a limits
to arbitrage view in which boundedly rational retail investors generate the mispricing and
sophisticated investors are unable to fully arbitrage away mispricing in the subset of deals for
which transaction costs are particularly high.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to empirically investigate underreaction
to the passage of time. However, our findings build upon and complement related findings
in behavioral finance. For example, Da, Gurun and Warachka (2012) show that markets
underreact to the slow release of news. Corwin and Coughenour (2008) and Barber and Odean
(2008) show that investors focus on familiar or attention-grabbing stocks, while Hirshleifer and
Teoh (2003), Hirshleifer et al. (2004), and DellaVigna and Pollet (2009) study limited attention
with respect to firm disclosure. Cohen and Frazzini (2008) and Menzly and Ozbas (2010) find
evidence of limited attention with regard to firms’ economic linkages. Chan (2003), Gilbert
et al. (2012), Hirshleifer, Lim and Teoh (2009), Huberman and Regev (2001), and Tetlock
(2011) study under- and over-reaction to explicit news in diﬀerent financial settings. Overall,
the existing literature argues that investors underreact to less salient news when sifting through
a set of explicit news stories. This paper shows that investors also underreact to the absence
of news, which itself can contain valuable information.
Our research also relates to several recent papers that present rational explanations for
6

price movements in the absence of activity. For example, Marin and Olivier (2008) and Gao
and Ma (2012) find that markets incorporate part of the information tied to the absence
of insider trading. Bagnoli, Kross and Watts (2002) show that prices drop following delays
in earnings reports because delays convey negative information.4 Compared to these papers
which argue that price drift in the absence of news reflects rational updating by the market,
we quantify the extent to which markets underreact to the information content of the passage
of time.
Understanding how agents process the absence of news is economically important because
the passage of time often contains valuable information that can reduce asymmetric information problems (for example, between voters and politicians, employers and employees, and
investors and insiders). Underreaction to no news can therefore lead to misallocation of resources in a variety of contexts. In addition, the distortionary eﬀects of underreaction to no
news can be amplified by the fact that no news tends to be slow-moving and persistent.

2

Data

We combine data on merger activity from two sources. The first data source, generously
shared by Mark Mitchell and Todd Pulvino (MP), covers merger activity from 1970 to 2005.
It is an updated version of the data described in Mitchell and Pulvino (2001). The second data
source is Thomson One (TO), formerly known as the SDC, which covers merger activity from
1985 to 2010. Because MP covers a longer time series while TO oﬀers more comprehensive
coverage of recent years, we combine the two datasets as follows: we use the MP dataset for
years up to and including 1995 and the TO dataset afterward. The exact year of the split is
determined by a comparison of the relative coverage of the two datasets in each year. Our
results are robust to using only MP or TO data.
We define the takeover premium for cash deals as the ratio of the initial oﬀer price at
deal announcement to the price of the target two days before deal announcement. For equity
4

A related theory literature includes Campbell and Hentschel (1992), who show that the absence of major
price movements predicts low future volatility; Galai et al. (2007), who model the relationship between time
spent in distress and liquidation; and Jung and Kwon (1988), who model the information content of the
absence of disclosures.

7

financed deals, the takeover premium is defined as

A
T
⇤ Pt=
2 /Pt= 2 , where

is the exchange

ratio, defined as the number of acquirer shares oﬀered for each share of the target, and P A
and P T are the acquirer’s and target’s share prices, respectively.
We apply the following filters to our initial sample of mergers.
1. The merger is all cash financed or all equity financed. We exclude hybrid forms of
financing or deals with contingency terms (e.g. collar agreements) because they are
more diﬃcult to price using the available data on equity prices. For equity financed
deals, we require that there exists data on the exchange ratio for the deal.
2. The merger takes the form of a simple one-step merger without a known expiration date
for investors to tender shares. We exclude tender oﬀers, which have known expiration
dates, because the information content of the passage of time near and beyond the
expiration date is likely to be obvious to market participants.5
3. For cash financed mergers, equity price data is available for the target from the Center
for Research in Security Prices (CRSP). For equity financed mergers, equity price data
for both the target and acquirer is available from CRSP.
4. We exclude deals for which the typical hazard rates of completion or withdrawal are less
applicable. First, we exclude deals that compete with a previous bid for the same target
that was announced within the past three years because competing bids are relatively
more likely to withdraw and follow more deal-specific heterogeneity in timing. Second,
we exclude deals in which the initial takeover premium is less than one. As we execute
our trading strategies (see Section 6), we also exit out of a deal if the target price
rises above the acquirer oﬀer price (or, for equity financed mergers, the exchange ratio
multiplied by the acquirer stock price). In these cases, the market expects either a
competing oﬀer or a favorable revision of deal terms and deal completion is less likely
to be the primary form of uncertainty.
5

Note that in some cases, one-step mergers have projected completion dates (as opposed to expiration
dates) that are disclosed at merger announcement. Our historical panel of data does not contain information
about projected completion dates. However, discussions with M&A lawyers suggest that these date projections
have limited informativeness because of the many uncertain steps involved in the merger process which can
greatly aﬀect the timing and probability of completion. Therefore, we keep all one-step mergers in the sample.

8

Note that these filters only exclude deals from the sample or investment strategy based upon
information that was publicly available at the time of the deal. After applying these filters, we
are left with 3414 cash financed deals and 1963 equity financed deals, which are summarized
in Table 1. If a deal does not complete, it can either be formally withdrawn on a particular
date or remain pending. 70 percent of cash financed deals complete, with a median time to
completion of 83 days. 77 percent of equity financed deals complete, with a median time to
completion of 97 days.

3

Hazard Rates

In this section, we document how the hazard rate of completion varies over the event lives of
mergers. Variation in hazard rates represents one important reason why the passage of time
after merger announcement should contain information about whether the deal will ultimately
complete. Other reasons why the passage of time may contain information are discussed in
Section 5.4.

3.1

Empirical Hazard Rates

Let t refer to the number of weeks after the merger announcement. Note that t measures
event time rather than calendar time. Let S(t) be the probability that the merger survives
until time t, i.e. it does not complete or withdraw prior to t. Let h(t) be the hazard rate of
completion at time t, i.e. the probability that the merger completes during period t conditional
on surviving up to t. We also estimate a separate hazard rate of withdrawal w(t), although
we will show that this hazard rate remains roughly constant over event time.
We use the standard Kaplan-Meyer estimator of competing hazard rates. We estimate the
hazard rates of completion (withdrawal) as the fraction of deals that complete (withdraw)
during each period t among those that have survived until time t, taking into account that
once a deal has completed it cannot withdraw, and vice versa. The Kaplan-Meyer estimator
assumes that all merger completion and withdrawal events are drawn from the same underlying distribution and provides an estimate of this distribution at each point in event time.
In reality, it is possible that deal completions and withdrawals follow diﬀerent hazard pro9

cesses depending on the observable or unobservable characteristics of each deal. For example,
mergers in regulated utilities are known to take longer on average because of the additional
regulatory hurdles. We explicitly account for one major source of heterogeneity: the financing
of the deal. A large literature has explored the diﬀerences between cash and equity financed
deals. Therefore, we allow the two types of mergers to have diﬀerent hazard rates curves for
completion and withdrawal. We leave a discussion of other potential sources of heterogeneity
for the next subsection.
Figures 1 and 2 show the estimated hazard rates of completion and withdrawal for cash
and equity mergers. We report estimates using the full sample of mergers (1970-2010), and
separately over the early and late parts of the sample (1970-1990 and 1991-2010).
Three main results emerge from these figures. First, the hazard rates of completion are
strongly non-constant. For cash deals, they start at around zero during the first weeks, then
rise to about 7 percent per week around week 20, and gradually decline to zero by the end of
the first year after announcement. A similar pattern is observed for equity deals, for which
the hazard rate reaches 8 percent per week at the peak in week 25. Second, hazard rates
of withdrawal are essentially constant for both cash and equity deals. Third, hazard rate
patterns estimated using the early and late calendar time samples are similar, suggesting that
hazard rate patterns have not changed significantly over the past several decades.

3.2

Heterogeneity in Hazard Rates

Within the categories of cash and equity mergers, the hazard rate for any specific merger may
diﬀer from the hazard rate we estimate using aggregate data because of other observed and
unobserved heterogeneity. While it is impossible to fully account for heterogeneity in hazard
rates, our results are robust to unobserved heterogeneity for two reasons.
First, we will test a behavioral hypothesis that predicts a positive relationship between each
individual merger’s latent hazard rate and returns. To the extent that our measured hazard
rate approximates each merger’s individual hazard rate with noise, this is a bias against our
empirical findings in support of the behavioral hypothesis.
Second, we prove that, under commonly used assumptions (such as those used in the
proportional hazard models) about the nature of the unobserved heterogeneity, the mean
10

individual latent hazard rate must be non-constant over a merger’s event life if the measured
hazard rate (which ignores the heterogeneity) is non-constant. In other words, given that our
measured hazard rate is strongly hump-shaped, the true hazard rate will necessarily display
even more time variation. This implies that even if unobserved heterogeneity is present, there
is information content in the passage of time. In particular, we prove the following proposition
in the Appendix:
Proposition 1. Suppose that the true hazard rate for merger i is hi (t) = ↵i h(t), where h(t)
is an unobserved common component and ↵i is a merger-specific unobservable parameter distributed in the cross-section according to the distribution function G(↵) with mean normalized
to 1. Then, we have
h(t)

h✓ (t) 8t,

where h✓ (t) is the measured hazard rates that ignores the unobserved heterogeneity.
Proposition 1 shows that the mean of the latent individual hazard rates must always lie
weakly above the estimated hazard rate. Based upon conversations with M&A lawyers, we
also assume that individual hazard rates are close to zero at the very beginning of event time
(because a merger cannot complete immediately after announcement due to regulatory restrictions) and at the very end of event time (some period T ). This, combined with Proposition 1,
shows that the mean individual latent hazard rates must have at least as much time variation
as the estimated hazard rate h✓ (t), and therefore, the passage of time contains information
about merger resolution.
In Appendix Figure 11, we account for another explicit source of observed heterogeneity:
the merger arbitrage spread, as measured by the relative diﬀerence between the eﬀective oﬀer
price and the target price two days after merger announcement. A large merger arbitrage
spread usually reflects market beliefs that the merger is unlikely to complete. As expected, we
find that a larger merger arbitrage spread tends to shift the overall hazard rate curve down
proportionally, but the overall hump shape of the hazard rate curve remains similar. Since our
analysis focuses on event time variation in hazard rates rather than the mean level of hazard
rates, we abstract away from this source of heterogeneity in future analysis. In unreported
results, we also check for heterogeneity by size of the target, and find similarly shaped hazard
11

curves across size categories.
Armed with the result that hazard rates of completion vary significantly over the event
lives of mergers, we now study the implications for returns.

4

Returns and Hazard Rates

In this section, we document a surprising positive correlation between hazard rates and average
weekly returns over event time. Further, this relationship continues to hold when we estimate
hazard rates using an aggregate sample in a previous period and returns in a later period. For
cash mergers, the relevant return is the weekly return from investing in the target. For equity
mergers, the relevant return is the weekly return from going long the target and shorting
shares of the acquirer. Each event week’s return includes the gains from any delisting, i.e. the
upside from attaining the acquirer’s oﬀer price if the merger completes in that week. Note
that we use actual returns for each event week, and do not scale any daily return to a weekly
horizon for deals that complete in the middle of a week.6
We start by plotting average returns across deals in event time for cash and equity mergers.
Because very few deals survive until one full year after announcement, and returns are noisy,
we focus on event weeks 1 through 45 in all subsequent analysis.7
Figure 3 plots completion and withdrawal hazard rates in the top panel and mean weekly
returns in the bottom panel. Because of noise in the returns data, we plot returns over event
time by fitting a smoothed local mean to the panel series of returns for each deal in each event
week. The figure shows smoothed returns using the optimal bandwidth. In unreported results,
we also plot the curve using 0.5 and 1.5 times the optimal bandwidth, as well as fitting a local
linear regression, and find qualitatively similar results. The figures show that the hazard
rate of completion and mean weekly returns tend to move together. In the first weeks after
announcement and towards the end of the first year after announcement, completion hazard
6

We test our underreaction hypothesis using stock prices as opposed to option prices. In theory, option
prices may oﬀer insights into the market’s perceptions of completion probabilities, as well as beliefs about
downside and jump risk. Unfortunately, less than 10 percent of our sample consists of deals in which options
for the target are traded. In addition, the options subsample tends to exclude small stocks, for which we find
the greatest degree of underreaction.
7
All results in this paper are substantively unchanged if we include returns after week 45, although the
confidence intervals for average returns (as plotted in Figure 3) are very wide for all weeks after week 45.

12

rates are below the average and returns are below the average as well. In the intermediate
weeks, hazard rates are high and returns are high as well. Finally, returns revert to the average
by the end of the last event week (week 45). This nuance is discussed in detail in Section 5.2
In Figure 3, we also plot 90 percent pointwise confidence bands for each point in the returns
curve. These confidence bands grow wider as we approach one year after merger announcement
because fewer deals survive as time passes after announcement. We also conduct a more formal
test of whether returns are constant over event time. We estimate a regression of returns
on indicators for each event week following deal announcement, with controls for calendar
year-month fixed eﬀects and with standard errors double-clustered by merger and calendar
year-month. We can reject that returns are constant across event weeks with p-values of 0.08
and 0.002 respectively for cash and equity deals.
Next, we test the strength of the relationship between returns and completion hazard rates.
In Table 2, we regress weekly returns on hazard rates, with and without controls for calendar
year-month fixed eﬀects. Observations are at the merger by event week level. The fixed eﬀects
control for possible calendar time variation in unobservables that might aﬀect returns, e.g.
calendar-time variation in risk or risk premia. We allow standard errors to be double clustered
at both the the calendar year-month level and at the merger level. For both cash and equity
deals, we find that hazard rates (estimated from the aggregate sample) significantly predict
returns over event time. The relationship continues to hold when we adopt a split-sample
approach that is free of “look-ahead” bias. In column (3) we show that hazard rates estimated
using the first half of our sample (pre-1991) predict returns in the second half of the sample.
Overall, we find that returns following merger announcement are predictable using aggregate hazard rates. This is surprising because we expect rational markets to incorporate all
available information, including predictable variation in hazard rates. For example, if the
market understands that the merger is likely to complete tomorrow, the price of the target
should be high today, such that the mean return only reflects compensation for risk. What
explains this return predictability? In the remainder of this paper, we explore two possible
explanations: underreaction to the passage of time (the behavioral explanation) and changes
in risk or frictions over the event lives of mergers (the rational explanation).

13

5

A Simple Behavioral Model of Underreaction

To understand what time variation in hazard rates implies for returns when markets imperfectly update on the passage of time, consider the following parsimonious pricing model for
the returns of the target of a cash merger after the announcement of the intention to merge.

5.1

The Model

Let t represent event time after merger announcement. Let r be the constant risk free rate.
Let P̂ (t) be the price of the target’s shares after merger announcement, but before the deal
has completed or withdrawn. If at any point the deal completes, the value of the target jumps
to PC , the amount of cash per share promised to the target’s equity holders. If at any point
the deal is withdrawn, the price jumps to P0 (t), where P0 (t) is some latent process.8 We model
P0 (t) as:
dP0 (t) = µP0 (t)dt + P0 (t)dZ(t),

(1)

where Z(t) is a standard Brownian motion. We assume that there is an end time, T , such that
any deal that does not complete by time T is assumed to never complete (in accordance with
the empirical evidence that shows that hazard rates of completion fall to zero approximately
one year after merger announcement).
If the merger has not completed or withdrawn prior to time t, the price of the target is:
´T
P̂ (t) = Et { t e
´T
+ t e r(z
+ e

r(T t)

e

r(z t)
t)

e

´T
t

e

´z
t

´z
t

[ĥ(k)+ŵ(k)]dk

[ĥ(k)+ŵ(k)]dk

[ĥ(k)+ŵ(k)]dk

ĥ(z)PC dz

ŵ(z)P0 (z)dz

(2)

P0 (T )},

where ĥ(t) and ŵ(t) are risk-neutral hazard rates.
To focus on a possible behavioral explanation, assume for now that all risk is idiosyncratic
and the market believes that all risk is idiosyncratic. This means that we can interpret ĥ(t)
and ŵ(t) as market beliefs about the true hazard rates, as opposed to the risk-neutral hazard
8

Using insights from Malmendier, Opp and Saidi (2011), which shows that merger announcement can
change the underlying value of the target even if the merger never completes, we do not constrain P0 (t) to
represent the value of the target if the merger had never been announced. Rather, P0 (t) represents the value
that the target share price would revert to if the acquirer were to withdraw at time t.

14

rates that also reflect the risk attitude of the market (we postpone a thorough discussion of
risk to a later section).
Let h(t) and w(t) be the true hazard rates, as opposed to the market beliefs represented
by ĥ(t) and ŵ(t). Note that P̂ (t) in equation (2) above is a function of market beliefs about
hazard rates while the average realized one period return from holding the target is a function
of both P̂ (t) and the true hazard rates:

E [rett ] =

PC
P̂ (t)

!

P0 (t)

1 h(t)dt +

P̂ (t)

!

1 w(t)dt +

dP̂ (t)
P̂ (t)

!

[1

h(t)

w(t)] dt.

(3)

Combining equations (2) and (3), we can decompose the expected one-period return as:
E [rett ] = rdt
PC

+

P̂ (t)

PC
P̂ (t)

1

h(t)

1 [w(t)

P̂ (t)
!

h

!

P0 (t)

+
Note that

1

!

0 and

P0 (t)
P̂ (t)

i
ĥ(t) dt

(4)

ŵ(t)] dt.

1

!

 0.

The model generates simple testable predictions concerning the relationship between hazard rates and mean returns at each event time t. First, if markets have correct beliefs about
hazard rates (h(t) = ĥ(t), w(t) = ŵ(t)), the mean target return will always equal the risk
free rate r (since all risk is assumed to be idiosyncratic). Second, if he market underestimates
completion hazard rates (ĥ(t) < h(t)), mean returns will be higher than the risk free rate r.
This occurs because the market, underestimating the probability of completion, will receive
positive surprises on average, generating abnormally high returns. Finally, if the market overestimates the completion probability (ĥ(t) > h(t)), the target’s stock will be overvalued at
time t and experience a return that is lower than the risk free rate. Incorrect beliefs about the
withdrawal hazard rate would similarly lead to deviations from the risk free rate, following
equation (4). Note that returns in each period will deviate from the risk free rate only if beliefs

15

diﬀer from the true hazard rate in the current period (future diﬀerences between beliefs and
true hazard rates do not matter except in aﬀecting the second and third terms through P̂ (t)).
These predictions directly map to the behavioral hypothesis of market underreaction to
no news. Suppose that markets fail to use the passage of time to update on changes to the
hazard rate, but have correct beliefs on average over the event life of a merger. In other words,
the market believes that ĥ(t) = h and ŵ(t) = w, where h and w represent the average of the
true hazard rates. This implies that the market will have approximately correct beliefs about
the hazard rate of withdrawal because w(t) is approximately constant over time. However,
the market will underestimate the completion hazard rate during event weeks in which the
true hazard rate is high. During these times, the model predicts that we should observe
particularly high returns for the target’s stock. In contrast, in event periods in which the
true completion hazard rate is low, markets will overestimate the hazard rate, and the model
tells us that we should expect to see particularly low average returns for the target. In other
words, underreaction to the passage of time implies that mean returns should be positively
correlated with true hazard rates, exactly as we observe in the data.
Figure 4 shows an example of how the relationship between hazard rates and returns
varies depending on whether beliefs are correct. The top panel shows the completion and
withdrawals hazard rates, estimated for cash deals. It also plots a sample set of beliefs (for
illustrative purposes only) in which the market holds correct beliefs about hazard rates for
the first several weeks after deal announcement (the dotted line and the solid lines coincide).
After a certain number of weeks, and up to a year after announcement, agents fail to use the
passage of time to update on changes in the hazard rate. The beliefs about the completion
hazard rate are constant but correct on average. As a consequence, in this example, markets
underestimate the true completion hazard rate between weeks 10 and 37 and overestimate the
hazard rate from week 37 onwards.
The lower panel of Figure 4 shows the model predictions for average excess returns over
the risk free rate in each event week among the set of of deals that have not yet completed
or withdrawn. During event periods in which beliefs are correct, mean excess returns are
zero (the return is equal to the risk free rate). When markets underreact to no news but
have correct beliefs on average about hazard rates, the returns curve follows the shape of the
16

hazard rate of completion: returns are positively correlated with hazard rates.
These predictions extend to a model in which merger returns contain risk that is systematic
and in which risk and risk premia are allowed to be non-constant in calendar time. As long
as risk and risk premia do not vary systematically over event time, rational updating on the
passage of time implies that merger returns should be constant over the event life of the merger
(although mean returns may exceed the risk free rate). Underreaction to no news still implies
a positive relationship between hazard rates and returns. These predictions also extend to a
model of equity mergers; returns for these deals are those from a portfolio in which investors
long the target and short the acquirer. Finally, these predictions hold even if agents also
have incorrect beliefs about the average completion rate over the merger’s event life. As long
as hazard rate beliefs exhibit flatter event time variation than true hazard rates, the model
predicts a positive relationship between hazard rates and mean returns.

5.2

Estimating Market Beliefs about Hazard Rates

We can also use the model to estimate the market’s beliefs with regard to completion hazard
rates that are implied by the observed returns. We parameterize the model using the main
sample moments of the data: Pc = 1.3P0 (0), corresponding to an approximately 30 percent
takeover premium as shown in Table 1, and r = 2% per year.9 Using Equation (4), we
numerically estimate the values for beliefs ĥ(t) such that the model-implied returns match
the observed average return in each event week. To focus on implied beliefs concerning the
completion hazard rate, we also impose that beliefs about the withdrawal hazard rate are
correct, ŵ(t) = w(t). Given that w(t) is approximately constant, the results are robust to to
assuming that beliefs about withdrawal hazard rates are flat and equal to the mean of w(t).10
Since the model assumes that all risk is idiosyncratic, we also adjust the average return across
9
Of course, P0 (0) need not equal the price of the target prior to merger announcement, as noted in
Malmendier, Opp and Saidi (2011). Our model calibration yields similar results if we instead assume that
Pc = 1.2P0 (0) or that Pc = 1.4P0 (0).
10
In theory, the positive correlation between hazard rates of completion and returns may also be driven by
incorrect beliefs about the hazard rate of withdrawal. However, the true hazard rate of withdrawal is flat over
event time, so agents will have approximately correct beliefs about the hazard rate of withdrawal even if they
ignore the passage of time. To generate the observed returns pattern only through incorrect beliefs about
withdrawal, the market must believe that withdrawal rates are hump shaped even though they are flat over
event time.

17

all event weeks to be equal to the risk free rate. In practice, as shown by Mitchell and
Pulvino (2001), the average return across all events weeks exceeds the risk free rate mainly
due to transaction costs in operating the arbitrage strategy – we show later that these are
approximately constant in the event windows that are relevant for our findings.
Figure 5 compares the estimates of true hazard rates with the beliefs implied by fitting
the model to the observed returns. Consistent with an underreaction hypothesis, we find that
implied beliefs of completion hazard rates are flatter than the estimates of true hazard rates
for both cash and equity deals. Hazard rates are overestimated at the beginning and the end
of the event period, and underestimated in the intermediate period. We can also estimate the
extent of the underreaction: the implied beliefs display 26 and 27 percent less variation over
event time than the estimates of true hazard rates for cash and equity mergers, respectively.11
In other words, markets only partially incorporate the information content of the passage of
time.
A striking implication of Figure 5 is that agents overestimate the hazard rate of completion
during the first two months following merger announcement. This may seem surprising if we
consider that most deals cannot legally complete so soon after announcement due to regulatory
barriers, a fact that should be obvious to many market participants. However, the market
may anticipate that positive explicit news about merger completion probability will be released
in the period immediately following the announcement, which would lead the target’s price
to converge upwards toward the oﬀer price. From the point of view of an agent holding
the target, the release of definitive news about future completion will have the same eﬀect
on target prices as if the actual completion event occurs. Therefore, the overestimation of
hazard rates observed in the first two months could be explained by the agents being overly
optimistic about the probability of obtaining good explicit news about future completion. If
agents overestimate the probability of receiving good news in the next period, they will set
prices too high in the current period, and receive negative surprises (lack of good news) in the
next period, leading to low returns in the first weeks after announcement.
PT
2
We measure the total variation in true hazard rates as T V = t=1 h(t) h̄ . The sum of squared errors
⇣
⌘
2
PT
between the true hazard rate and implied beliefs is SE = t=1 h(t) ĥ(t) . Therefore, SE/T V oﬀers an
estimate of the event time variation in true hazard rates that is not captured by implied beliefs. If beliefs are
correct, SE/T V = 0, and if beliefs are completely flat, then SE/T V = 1.
11

18

Figure 5 also shows an interesting convergence between beliefs and true hazard rates as the
time after merger announcement approaches one year. While returns one year after announcement are noisy, this is consistent with a story in which agents are slow to react to changes
in the hazard rate. However, after suﬃcient time has passed, agents eventually hold correct
beliefs and realize that the merger is unlikely to ever complete. Once agents hold correct
beliefs, returns revert to zero (in the model) or to their mean (once we account for systematic
risk that is constant in event time). This explains why returns display a small upward swing
toward the mean near the end of the event year as shown in Figure 3.

5.3

No News vs. Explicit News

During the interim period between merger announcement and resolution, investors may observe explicit news. For example, investors may see news coverage of shareholder voting results
or insider information leaks about merger completion probability.12 By “no news”, we do not
refer to the situation in which no explicit news is released. Rather, we define “no news” to
be the information content tied to the passage of time, i.e. what the market should know by
observing the passage of time even if agents are unable to observe explicit news.
In this section we show that the release of explicit news is not a problem for our methodology; rather it is a bias against our findings. While we cannot rule out the possibility that
markets underreact to explicit news, we can show that, at a minimum, markets underreact to
the passage of time.
The key insight is that it is possible to underreact to multiple sources of information at the
same time. If multiple signals observed by the market convey the same information and this
information is not reflected in prices, then the market must be underreacting to all signals.
“No news,” defined as the passage of time, is one public signal that the market should observe.
If the passage of time predicts returns, then the market must be underreacting to that signal
and possibly to other signals that contain the same information.
For example, suppose that, historically, the probability of merger completion drops dras12

For example, Ahern and Sosyura (2013) study explicit news released during merger negotiations. While
they focus on news released prior to merger announcement, their analysis suggests that news released after
announcement may also strongly aﬀect market expectations.

19

tically just after event month six. The market observes a new merger approaching month
six. The information content of the passage of time tells us that this merger is now unlikely
to complete. Consider first the case in which there is no explicit news released after merger
announcement. If the price doesn’t drop as the merger approaches month six, then we know
that markets underreacted to the information content of the passage of time.13
Now suppose that, right before month six, the market also observes a news report warning
that this deal is unlikely to complete. At this point, the market observes two signals conveying
the same information: the passage of time beyond month six and the negative news report.
If we again find that the price does not drop, then we know that markets have underreacted
to both the information content of the news report and the passage of time.
Given that prices do not drop as the merger approaches month six, could it be that agents
underreacted to explicit news but correctly incorporated the information content of the passage
of time? No – if markets had incorporated the information content of the passage of time,
they would have realized that the merger was unlikely to complete because it was past month
six, and the price would have dropped.
In our paper, we show prices do not incorporate information that is available by looking
at the passage of time. Therefore, markets underreact to the passage of time. We cannot
exclude that prices are also failing to incorporate information contained in explicit news. In
fact, if agents receive informative explicit news throughout the life of the merger, they should
estimate merger completion probabilities at each point in a merger’s event life with less error,
and therefore aggregate historical hazard rates should be less predictive of returns.14
13

To see why the price should decline as we reach month six, recall that, up to month six, the probability of
completion is positive, so the value of the target incorporates the probability that the deal will complete and
the target shareholders will gain from the completion. As the completion probability drops, the value of the
target drops since now the merger is unlikely to complete.
14
Because the release of explicit news should be a bias against our findings, we do not attempt to measure
the exact quantity of explicit news released after merger announcement (doing so is diﬃcult in the context of
mergers because much of the news after announcement consists of unobservable insider rumors). Nevertheless,
our later results support the idea that explicit news represents a bias against our results. In particular, high
market capitalization and trading volume are likely to be associated with more explicit news, including insider
rumors. In Section 7, we show that the returns of targets with high market capitalization and trading volume
tend to display less underreaction to the passage of time, consistent with the view that the release of explicit
news is a bias against us.

20

5.4

Other Information Content in the Passage of Time

In this paper, we focus on the hazard rates of merger completion because they are easily
measured and clearly non-constant over event time. However, variation in hazard rates need
not be the only reason why the passage of time after merger announcement contains information. The value of the target, acquirer, or combined entity may change systematically with
the passage of time for other reasons. For example, the arrival rate of receiving competing
bids from other potential acquirers may be non-constant over event time. In Appendix Figure
12, we show that the hazard rate of receiving competing bids is slightly higher in the weeks
immediately following merger announcement than in later weeks (although it is relatively flat
compared to hazard rates of completion). In addition, the expected value of the target if the
deal does not go through may vary over the event lives of mergers.
It is possible that these other real changes to merger value tend to vary systematically
with hazard rates. Therefore, we cannot distinguish between the following:
1. Markets underreact to the event time variation in hazard rates of completion
2. Markets have correct beliefs about the event time variation in the hazard rates of completion but underreact to other changes to merger or target value that move in event
time with hazard rates.
Importantly, both interpretations are consistent with the behavioral hypothesis in implying
that hazard rates (and the real events correlated with hazard rates) predict returns because
markets underreact to the information content of the passage of time.

6

Risk and Other Rational Explanations

In this section we study the possibility that risk varies in event time with hazard rates.
If so, the pattern in returns documented in Section 4 could reflect compensation for risk
within a rational framework. We focus on event time variation in risk because the positive
correlation between hazard rates and returns is a phenomenon measured in event time rather
than calendar time. Moreover, we observe over 5,000 mergers staggered across calendar time
and control for all calendar time variation in risk or risk premia through the use of calendar
21

year-month fixed eﬀects in all regressions. Since we do not observe event time variation in
risk premia, we will focus on event time variation in risk.15
We explore three types of risk which may vary in event time and generate the observed
returns pattern. First, we study systematic risk as captured by the Fama French factors.
Second, we consider downside risk, i.e. the possibility of severely negative returns concentrated
in bad times. Third, we investigate idiosyncratic risk, which may be important for arbitrageurs
because of under-diversification or holding costs.
We measure risk exposures by constructing trading strategies that invest in deals only
in specific event time windows. This allows us to capture potential event time variation in
risk and to estimate the economic magnitude of the variation in returns not explained by
risk. Overall, we find that the event time variation in systematic risk, downside risk, and
idiosyncratic risk cannot explain the strong correlation between hazard rates and returns.
Finally, we explore whether event time variation in market frictions or asymmetric information can produce the observed returns pattern within a rational framework. We show that
while there is time variation in the volume, turnover, and bid-ask spread of the stock of the
target, this variation is concentrated in the short period immediately following merger announcement and cannot explain the year-long event time variation in mean returns. Further,
we show that any potential frictions associated with the last day of trading before merger
completion cannot generate our returns patterns.

6.1

Constructing Portfolio Strategies

To understand how the risk exposures of deals vary over event time, we construct calendar time
returns for a set of portfolio strategies, each of which is exposed only to deals active during
specific event windows. Our strategies modify the traditional Buy and Hold merger arbitrage
strategy, described in Mitchell and Pulvino (2001), which buys deals after announcement and
holds until either completion or withdrawal.
The first step in the construction of these portfolio strategies is to identify three event
windows based only on the behavior of the completion hazard rate as estimated from an
15

While we can never observe changes in risk premia over event time, it is not easy to justify why risk premia
should change over event time if risk does not also change.

22

aggregate sample: a first period in which the hazard rate is below its mean (Low Hazard 1
period), a second period in which the hazard rate is above its mean (High Hazard period),
and a third period later in a merger’s event life when the hazard is again below its mean (Low
Hazard 2 period). We estimate these event windows separately for cash and equity deals. The
cutoﬀ points are event weeks 11 and 36 for cash deals and 15 and 41 for equity deals. We also
adopt a split-sample approach in which we choose event windows using hazard rates from the
first half of our sample (pre-1991) and execute the trading strategy in the second half of our
sample. Because the shape of the hazard curves remains stable over time, this split-sample
method yields very similar cutoﬀ weeks.
Given these cutoﬀ weeks, we construct a series of monthly returns for each of the three
strategies. In each calendar month, we invest in all deals that, at the beginning of the month,
are active in the relevant event windows for each of the three strategies. To distinguish the
three strategies more sharply, we leave 2 weeks around each cutoﬀ point, and we do not invest
in deals that are active in those event weeks. All the results that follow are very robust to the
exact choice of the cutoﬀs, as discussed in Section 8.
For example, consider cash mergers. Since the cutoﬀs are 11 and 36, the Low Hazard 1
strategy only invests in deals that, at the beginning of each calendar month, are active in
event weeks 1 through 10. The High Hazard strategy only invests in deals that are active in
event weeks 12 to 35. Finally, deals active in event weeks 37 to 45 are selected by our Low
Hazard 2 strategy. In the middle of a calendar month, if a deal falls out of the relevant event
window (e.g. the deal approaches event week 11 and the relevant event window is weeks 1
through 10), we exit out of the deal and invest the proceeds in the risk free rate for the rest
of the month. Similarly, if the deal completes in the middle of a calendar month, we capture
the gains from completion and invest the proceeds in the risk free rate.
For each calendar month, we construct an equal-weighted return using all selected deals.
If no deals are active in the relevant event window in a given calendar month, the strategy
invests in the risk free rate for that month. Following standard merger arbitrage strategy,
we go long the target for cash deals. For equity deals, we buy the target and short

shares

of the acquirer for each share of the target bought. This ensures that the return following
deal completion does not depend on the price of the acquirer at the time of completion. Note
23

that equity deals involve a short position that exposes the trade to potentially large losses.
Therefore, when we construct our portfolios at the beginning of each calendar month we
exclude deals that involve extreme unbalanced positions for the long and short sides relative
to the position implied by the initial terms of the deal. In particular, we exit from deals if the
premium falls below 1 (i.e. deals in which the arbitrageur loses money for sure if the deals
complete). We also exit from deals if the premium moves above 200% of the initial premium.
In these cases the market expects either a competing oﬀer or a major revision of deal terms
and deal completion is less likely to be the primary form of uncertainty. Importantly, we filter
deals using information available prior to the trade, and we always take into account the gains
and losses of exiting a deal.16
To ensure that our strategy returns do not mistakenly capture price movements due to the
initial announcement of the intention to merge, all our strategies start investing on the second
trading day after announcement or later depending on the event windows. Finally, while all
the deals are equally weighted, we will separately explore the returns of strategies that only
invest in large or small deals, as measured by the market capitalization of the target.

6.2

Event Time Variation in Systematic Risk

We begin by testing whether event windows covered by the High Hazard strategy still experience higher returns than the periods covered by the Low Hazard 1 and 2 strategies, after
controlling for systematic risk. The top panel of Table 3 shows the Fama French alphas of
the three strategies for both cash and equity deals, using the full sample. For cash deals,
the alphas of the two Low Hazard strategies are -5bp and -7bp per month and statistically
insignificant, while that of the High Hazard strategy is 64bp per month (8% per year). Similarly, for equity deals the alpha of the High Hazard strategy is 146bp per month (19% per
year), much higher than both Low Hazard strategies, respectively 68bp and -35bp a month.
On average, the diﬀerence in alphas between the High and Low Hazard strategies across cash
and equity mergers is approximately 100bp.17
16

All results are robust to applying these filters to cash deals as well.
A large literature interprets the stock returns of the target and acquirer in a short window after merger
announcement as representative of the synergies or value creation from mergers. In this paper, we show that
there is significant variation in returns in the event year after merger announcement, and that this returns
17

24

Using these estimates, we test the underreaction hypothesis: after controlling for risk,
returns and hazard rates are correlated in event time. The corresponding test in terms of the
three strategies’ alphas can be expressed as:
(↵high
relative to the alternative (↵high

↵low1 ) + (↵high
↵low1 ) + (↵high

↵low2 )  0,
↵low2 ) > 0.

As shown in the third column of Table 3, the alphas of the High Hazard strategies are
significantly higher than the alphas of the Low Hazard strategies, and the p-values of the
corresponding tests are less than 0.01 for both equity and cash deals.
The first column of Table 3 also reports the alpha of the traditional Buy and Hold strategy,
which invests in deals from announcement until completion or withdrawal. Since the Buy
and Hold strategy invests in deals in both the High and Low Hazard event windows, it is
unsurprising that the Buy and Hold alpha exceeds the alphas of our Low Hazard strategies
but falls short of the alphas of our High Hazard strategies. Because the aim of this paper is
to test for behavioral underreaction rather than to maximize portfolio returns, we focus on
comparing the High and Low Hazard strategy alphas. Nevertheless, we can also test whether
our High Hazard strategy significantly outperforms the traditional Buy and Hold strategy.
We find that the High Hazard alpha exceeds the Buy and Hold alpha by an average of 32bp
per month across cash and equity deals, with a p-value of 0.006.
Note that our underreaction hypothesis centers on event time variation in average returns,
but does not have direct predictions regarding the average level of returns over the life of the
merger. Consistent with the merger arbitrage literature, we find that the average return of
a Buy and Hold strategy exceeds the risk free rate even after controlling for standard risk
factors. Within our underreaction model, this is equivalent to saying that the average return
around which we expect event time variation is not the risk free rate r, but some higher value
µ > r. In this paper, we do not take a strong stand on why the Buy and Hold strategy yields
a positive alpha. The literature studying the Buy and Hold return argues that the positive
alpha reflects compensation for transaction costs and, to a lesser extent, downside risk (see
variation is consistent with the presence of behavioral biases. This suggests that one should be careful in
interpreting returns after merger announcements as evidence of synergies.

25

Mitchell and Pulvino, 2001 and Baker and Savasoglu, 2002). We will show in later sections
that, while downside risk and transaction costs may contribute to the average level of returns,
they cannot explain the event time variation in returns.
In Table 3, we use the same sample to estimate the hazard rates (which generate the
event window cutoﬀs for the trading strategies) and to simulate the trading strategies. In the
top panel of Table 4, we report the alphas of portfolio strategies that only use information
about hazard rates already available at the time of the investment. We choose the event
window cutoﬀs for the High and Low Hazard strategies based upon hazard rates estimated
using pre-1991 data, but only invest in deals active during the later 1991-2010 sample. Given
that Figures 1 and 2 show that the shape of the hazard rate curves remained stable for the
past four decades, it is not surprising that all results remain similar when performing the test
using the early hazard rates and later returns.
Finally, note that we adopted a conservative approach to compute the alphas of the various
strategies presented in Table 3. Since fewer deals survive into the event window covered by
the Low Hazard 2 strategy (many deals have withdrawn or completed before then), it is more
likely to find months with no active deals for the Low Hazard 2 strategy than it is for the High
Hazard strategy. Since the return of a month with no active deals is set equal to the risk free
rate, this may artificially bias the alpha and betas of the Low Hazard 2 strategy towards zero,
thus hiding the true risk and return properties of deals during the last event weeks. To avoid
this problem, in Table 3 we only include returns from calendar months in which active deals
were available for investment. This, while more conservative for tests of event time variation
in strategy alphas, does not represent the returns of a more realistic trading strategy that
must invest in the risk free rate during calendar months in which no deals are active. For
completeness, in the bottom panel of Table 4, we repeat the exercise including all months for
all strategies, thus forming a tradeable portfolio strategy. All the previous results hold.
6.2.1

Betas over Event Time

We now directly explore event time variation in risk by looking at the betas of the various
strategies. Table 5 reports the strategy betas with respect to the three Fama French factors.
Panel A shows that the betas are all quite small, between -0.15 and 0.3. Panel B shows that
26

the betas for the High Hazard strategy are not significantly larger than the betas for the two
Low Hazard strategies.
To capture event time variation in risk exposures in greater detail, we also look at the
variation in the betas across each event week (as opposed to dividing the one-year event
window into three regions). For each of the 45 event weeks following merger announcement,
we construct a calendar time series of returns of a portfolio that only invests in deals that are
active in that event week (separately for cash and equity deals). We then construct a panel
of calendar time returns for each of the 45 event-week-specific portfolios.
We plot the estimates of the betas in Figure 6. The figure points to two important features.
First, the betas with respect to all the Fama French factors are again generally very small
(for example, the market beta is usually less than 0.2). The relative magnitudes of the betas
cannot account for the diﬀerence in the returns that we observe in our High Hazard period
(between the two vertical bars) and the Low Hazard periods (the far left and right regions).
Second, there does not seem to be significant time variation in any of the betas over event
time, although estimation of the betas becomes more noisy as we move toward the right, since
fewer deals survive as event time passes.
In Table 6 we formally test whether betas vary positively with hazard rates over event
time. We find that the relationship between betas and hazard rates is a well-estimated zero
for all three Fama French factors. The point estimates are actually negative and the economic
magnitude of the relation is also extremely small: a one standard deviation increase in the
hazard rate corresponds to a reduction in each of the betas of around of 0.01. Overall, the
results indicate that that there is no significant event time variation in systematic risk as
captured by the Fama French factors.

6.3

Event Time Variation in Downside Risk

An alternative explanation of the relation between hazard rates and returns is event-time
variation in downside risk, i.e. the risk of experiencing particularly bad returns during times
when the market return is also very low (see Kraus and Litzenberger, 1976; Shleifer and
Vishny, 1997). Exposure to downside risk, similar to exposure to a short position in a put
on the market portfolio, has been studied in previous research focusing on the Buy and Hold
27

strategy. For example, Mitchell and Pulvino (2001) find that their Buy and Hold strategy
is indeed exposed to downside risk, although the magnitude of the exposure is small and
insuﬃcient to explain the Buy and Hold alpha.
In this section we test whether the higher alpha of the High Hazard strategy relative
to the alphas of the Low Hazard strategies can be explained by diﬀerential exposures to
downside risk in event time. We start by calculating the raw performance of each strategy in
periods in which the market return is low, defined as all months in which the market portfolio
experiences a return below

3 percent (alternative cutoﬀs of -2, -4, and -5 percent yield similar

results). Panel A of Table 7 shows that, during market downturns, betas increase slightly for
all strategies that invest in cash deals and remain flat or fall for strategies that invest in equity
deals (because the strategy maintains a short position in the acquirer). However, the downside
betas of the High Hazard strategy do not significantly diﬀer from the downside betas of the
two Low Hazard strategies. In addition, the average returns of the three strategies are not
particularly low. In months when the market loses more than 3 percent, no strategy loses
on average more than 2.6 percent. In the Appendix, we further explore downside risk by
plotting the relation between strategy returns and market returns allowing for a piecewise
linear functional form (so that the beta in down markets can be diﬀerent from the beta in
normal markets). The figure confirms that the exposure to downside risk is essentially the
same across the three event-period strategies.
In Panel B of Table 7, we measure exposure to downside risk by adding the out-of-themoney Put and Call factors constructed by Agarwal and Naik (2004) to the standard set of
Fama French factors. We find that the exposure of all strategies to these factors are extremely
small and do not vary significantly across high and low hazard periods. In unreported results,
we also find that exposures to the in-the-money Put and Call factors are similarly low and
do not vary in event time. For completeness, we also estimate exposures to the momentum
factor and again find that they are low and do not vary over event time.
We conclude our analysis of downside risk by presenting additional graphical evidence that
the High Hazard strategy does not owe its high return to high exposure to downside risk. In
Figure 7 we plot the yearly return for the market, the High Hazard strategy and the Buy and
Hold strategy. The Figure shows that the returns of both merger strategies are less volatile
28

than the market return, and that they are not particularly exposed to aggregate downturns.
Note also that the High Hazard strategy and the Buy and Hold strategy have similar volatility
and are correlated, but the High Hazard strategy almost always has higher returns: this is
the graphical counterpart to the higher alpha reported in Table 3.

6.4

Event Time Variation in Idiosyncratic Risk

A final potential risk-based explanation for the correlation between hazard rates and returns
is event time variation in idiosyncratic risk. In cases when merger completion comes as a
surprise, prices should jump. Therefore, we may expect higher return volatility during event
windows when hazard rates of completion are high. Why should idiosyncratic risk be priced
at all? It’s possible that the arbitrageurs that operate in merger markets are constrained to
hold portfolios consisting only of mergers, and require compensation for holding a particularly
volatile portfolio. As shown by Pontiﬀ (2006), idiosyncratic risk may matter even for diversified
arbitrageurs due to holding costs of arbitrage positions in individual securities.
We find that variation in idiosyncratic risk cannot explain the correlation between hazard
rates and returns. Instead of being hump shaped, the volatility of returns from a strategy that
invests in all available cash and equity deals increases in event time (the standard deviation
of returns is 0.023, 0.040, and 0.077 for the Low Hazard 1, High Hazard, and Low Hazard 2
strategies, respectively).18
Finally, it is worth noting that we present conservative estimates of the return volatility
that merger arbitrageurs are likely to experience. Our High Hazard strategy invests in approximately 20 deals on average in each calendar month, which is suﬃcient to obtain large
diversification benefits that greatly reduce returns volatility. However, our sample of deals
is artificially limited because we restrict our analysis to pure cash and equity financed deals
which do not have contingency terms. A merger arbitrageur would likely be able to invest in
a much larger set of deals, such as mergers that are financed using a mix of cash and equity.
18

We also find that the High Hazard strategy displays large positive skewness of 4.37 relative to the two
Low Hazard strategies (which display skewness of -0.56 and 0.15). Thus, the volatility of the High Hazard
strategy partly reflects its disproportionate upside potential. To the extent that positive skewness is valued
by investors, a rational model would actually predict lower expected returns for the High Hazard strategy,
contrary to our findings (e.g. Kraus and Litzenberger, 1976).

29

6.5

Event Time Variation in Frictions

In this section, we consider three other potential explanations for the returns patterns that are
consistent with rational markets. First, it’s possible that event time variation in buying and
selling pressures leads to predictable returns patterns. In particular, conversations with merger
arbitrageurs suggest that large institutional investors, such as mutual funds, tend to sell the
target immediately after merger announcement to lock in gains and because the target’s risk
profile no longer fits with the fund’s core strategy (e.g. a small-value investment fund). In fully
eﬃcient markets, these sell orders should not aﬀect prices. However, if arbitrage capital moves
slowly to take the other side of the trade, the selling pressure can take a while to disappear
(Shleifer, 1986). This may generate low returns immediately after announcement, followed
by slowly increasing returns in the following days. If selling pressures are responsible for the
observed pattern in returns, we expect that measures of liquidity should covary negatively
with returns in event time.
Second, it’s possible that variation in the degree of asymmetric information generates the
returns patterns. Insiders may have greater access to rumors about merger completion than
others and this information advantage may be greatest during event periods when hazard
rates are high. If asymmetric information is responsible for the observed patterns in returns,
we expect that the bid-ask spread should covary positively with returns in event time.
Turning to the data, we find that the event time variation in buying and selling pressure and asymmetric information, as proxied by volume and bid-ask spread, occur on a very
diﬀerent time scale than that of the return predictability we document. Figure 8 compares
the evolution over event time of average returns with the evolution of the median volume of
target equity (relative to volume in the first week following the announcement) and median
bid-ask spread of the target (again relative to the bid-ask spread in the first week following the
announcement). The figure shows that volume is very high in the one or two weeks following
merger announcement, and then drops to a steady level starting in event week four. A very
similar pattern occurs for the bid ask spread, except that the drop towards the steady low
level occurs even more immediately following merger announcement. In unreported results,
we also look at event time variation in turnover, and find a similar pattern. All the variation

30

in volume and bid-ask spread is concentrated around announcement, and there seems to be
no significant event time variation in the months that follow, where the relevant variation in
returns is concentrated. This includes the high average returns starting around event month
three as well as the low average returns starting around event month nine.
Finally, we consider whether the hump-shaped returns pattern can be explained by a “last
day” eﬀect.19 In the last day of trading before the merger formally completes and the target
delists, deal completion is usually considered certain by all market participants because all
parties have publicly agreed to the merger. However, the last recorded target stock price may
still trade at a small discount to the “deal consideration,” the final price paid by the acquirer
for each share of the target. For example, the target may trade at $9.99 on the last day
given an deal consideration of $10.00 at deal completion, a diﬀerence that corresponds to an
additional 10bp return in a single day. Conversations with merger arbitrageurs suggest that
this return may not always be realizable by investors due to illiquidity or fees. We show that
our returns pattern cannot be explained by the last day eﬀect by simulating a trading strategy
that only earns returns based upon traded prices and does not earn any returns based upon
the diﬀerence between the last traded price and the deal consideration. This simulation purges
the strategy returns of any last day eﬀects and is conservative in that it removes some of the
positive returns that investors may have actually earned. We find our results qualitatively
unchanged, although the alphas of all strategies are reduced. For brevity, we report our results
below rather than in table form. For cash deals, the High Hazard alpha is 37bp per month
compared to -5bp and -13bp for the Low Hazard 1 and Low Hazard 2, respectively. For equity
deals, the High Hazard alpha is 105bp compared to 58bp and -52bp for the Low Hazard 1 and
Low Hazard 2 strategies, respectively. We test whether the High Hazard strategies deliver
significantly higher alphas than the Low Hazard strategies and find a p-value of 0.004. In
other words, the last day eﬀect cannot explain the event time variation in returns.
Overall, we show in this section that the returns pattern cannot be explained by event time
variation in systematic risk, downside risk, idiosyncratic risk, buying and selling pressure,
asymmetric information, or last day frictions. All of these elements can contribute to the
positive Buy and Hold returns. In addition, the presence of frictions can limit arbitrage as
19

We thank Mark Mitchell and Todd Pulvino for bringing this phenomenon to our attention.

31

shown in the next section. However, they cannot by themselves generate the event time
variation in returns.

7

Limits to Arbitrage

To further support the behavioral model of underreaction, we explore why sophisticated arbitrageurs (who are likely to recognize the information content of the passage of time) allow
the mispricing to persist. We find evidence suggestive of the existence of both behavioral
and sophisticated investors. However, limits to arbitrage prevent sophisticated investors from
arbitraging away mispricing in the subset of deals that are likely to have higher transaction
costs.

7.1

Sorting on Transaction Costs

We first look at the Fama French alphas for the Low Hazard 1, High Hazard, Low Hazard 2 and
Buy and Hold strategies when the strategies are executed on subsamples of mergers according
to target characteristics that correlate with the transaction costs faced by arbitrageurs: total
dollar volume, average daily turnover, bid-ask spread, and size (market cap) of the target. For
each characteristic, we split the set of mergers occurring in each calendar year by the median
value of the characteristic, as measured during the second week after announcement. We look
at the characteristics after announcement to capture the features of the market during the time
period when arbitrageurs are likely to operate (for example, turnover following announcement
may diﬀer from turnover prior to announcement).
We also report results separately for early (pre-1991) and late (post-1991) calendar periods. This tests the idea that sophisticated arbitrage capital has increased over time, so later
calendar periods may display less returns predictability.
Table 8 reports the Fama French alphas of each strategy for the four stock characteristics
plus the early and late calendar period division. For each characteristic, the left column
corresponds to more diﬃcult arbitrage conditions: small target market cap, low volume and
turnover, high bid-ask spread, and the early sample period. For all characteristics, we find
significantly higher alphas for the High Hazard strategy corresponding to the sample with
32

more diﬃcult arbitrage conditions. The only exception is the early and late calendar period
split. While alphas are higher in the earlier time period, the diﬀerence between the early
and late periods is not significant, and the High Hazard strategy still yields a positive and
significant alpha in the more recent period.

7.2

Accounting Directly for Transaction Costs

Next, we study the returns to trading strategies that take into account the transaction costs
associated with the activity of a realistic merger arbitrage fund. Because it is diﬃcult to
precisely estimate trading costs, we present results using two diﬀerent methods.
The first method closely follows the “RAIM” strategy presented in Mitchell and Pulvino
(2001). We simulate four funds that trade in the four main strategies considered in this paper
(Low Hazard 1, High Hazard, Low Hazard 2, and Buy and Hold), starting with $1M of capital
each in 1970. Every month, each fund invests equally in all available deals in their respective
event windows subject to the following limits to their positions. At most 10 percent of the
capital can be invested in any particular deal, and the total trade in any deal cannot produce
price pressure of more than 5 percent of the price. We estimate price pressure following the
procedure described in Breen et al. (2002).
In addition to limiting the size of the position and the amount of trading that each fund
can perform, we compute direct transaction costs the fund incurs (e.g. broker commissions).20
We also compute indirect transaction costs, which capture lower returns due to price impact
and illiquidity, using the estimates of Breen et al. (2002).
We also present results using a second method to account for trading costs which modifies
the procedure described above by proxying for indirect transaction costs using the bid-ask
spread. We obtain the bid-ask spread for each trade from CRSP, and when that is not
available, we use the bid-ask spread estimated following Corwin and Schultz (2012). For firms
for which neither are available, we set the bid-ask spread to the average among firms in our
sample by year and size category.
20

Following Mitchell and Pulvino (2001), we approximate direct trading costs by assuming a fixed dollar
cost per share traded: $0.1 before 1980, $0.05 between 1980 and 1990, and $0.04 between 1990 and 1998.
Given the advances in technology after 1998, trading costs have fallen further. For all deals after 1998, we use
the conservative estimate of $0.03 per share.

33

Table 9 shows that the alphas of all strategies are noticeably reduced once we take into
account transaction costs, with Method 2 reducing the alphas by more than Method 1. While
transaction costs reduce the alphas of all strategies, our main finding that the alpha of the
High Hazard strategy is significantly higher than the alphas of the two Low Hazard strategies
still holds under both methods.
Taken together, the results in this section oﬀer an explanation of why the behavioral
underreaction is allowed to persist. Not all market participants underreact to the passage
of time. A subset of investors, possibly small retail investors, are boundedly rational and
generate the mispricing. More sophisticated investors are unable to fully arbitrage away the
mispricing in the subset of deals for which transaction costs are particularly high.

8

Robustness

The results in Table 3 correspond to trading strategies that use precise event window cutoﬀs
based upon the estimated hazard rates presented in Figures 1 and 2. In this section we show
that these results are very robust to perturbations to the timing of the event window cutoﬀs.
Figures 9 and 10 report the diﬀerence between the alpha of a strategy that only invests
in deals active between event weeks t1 to t2 , and the alpha of the Buy and Hold strategy. t1
can be read on the vertical axis, and t2 on the horizontal axis.
For example, consider cash deals in Figure 9. The Low Hazard 1 strategy invests in deals
active between event weeks 1 and 10, so its alpha can be read as (t1 = 1, t2 = 10) which
corresponds to the circle at the bottom left. The circle in the middle corresponds to the High
Hazard strategy and the circle on the top right corresponds to the Low Hazard 2 trading
strategy. The bottom-right corner (t1 = 1, t2 = 45) corresponds to the Buy and Hold strategy.
Since the graph reports the alphas of the strategies relative to the Buy and Hold strategy, it
is not surprising to find exactly 0 at (1,45), negative numbers for the Low Hazard strategies,
and a positive number for the High Hazard strategy.
Starting from the circles representing the cutoﬀs for our three trading strategies, it is
straightforward to see that perturbations to the cutoﬀ points in all directions do not dramatically aﬀect the alphas. The Low Hazard strategies lie in an area with low alphas (relative
34

to the Buy and Hold strategy). Meanwhile, the High Hazard strategy lies in an area with
high alphas (relative to the Buy and Hold strategy). This shows that the strategy alphas do
not strictly depend on the cutoﬀ points, but more generally align well with the high and low
return event windows predicted by the underreaction hypothesis.

9

Conclusion

The absence of news and the passage of time often contain important information. However,
no news is likely to be less salient and vivid than traditional news stories. This may lead
boundedly rational investors to underreact to the passage of time.
We test how markets react to the passage of time using the empirical context of mergers.
Following the initial merger announcement, uncertainty relating to merger completion can
take several months to a year to be resolved. We find that hazard rates of merger completion
vary strongly over time after the merger announcement, implying that the passage of time can
predict merger completion. If markets are rational, prices should correctly incorporate this
information and average returns should be constant over event time absent any compensation
for risk or frictions. When we examine target return patterns, we find that the aggregate
merger completion hazard rates are positively correlated with target returns in event time.
We then investigate two possible explanations for this returns predictability. We first show
that the positive correlation between returns and hazard rates can be explained by a behavioral
model in which the agents underreact to the passage of time. If agents do not fully appreciate
the variation in hazard rates associated with the passage of time, they will behave as if hazard
rates are less time-varying (flatter) than in reality. This leads to periods in which agents overor under-estimate the true hazard rates of completion. When true hazard rates are high, they
will be underestimated by the agents and returns will be high due to positive surprises from
actual merger completions. When true hazard rates are low, they will be overestimated by
the agents, and returns will be low due to negative surprises. This underreaction can explain
the observed correlation between hazard rates and returns.
While the positive relationship between returns and hazard rates is consistent with underreaction to no news, it could also be explained by changes in risk or other frictions over
35

the event lives of mergers. We find that, after controlling for systematic risk as captured by
the Fama French factors, the alpha for a strategy that invests in deals during High Hazard
event weeks is significantly larger than the alphas for strategies that invest in deals during
Low Hazard event weeks. Merger returns have low betas in general, and systematic risk does
not vary with hazard rates over the event lives of mergers. We also show that downside risk
and idiosyncratic risk do not very in event time and cannot explain the observed pattern
in returns. Finally, we show that event time variation in selling pressures and asymmetric
information is unlikely to explain the observed returns patterns. We conclude that aggregate
hazard rates of merger completion predict merger returns because markets underreact to the
information content of the passage of time.
Using the empirical context of mergers, we demonstrate that underreaction to the passage
of time can be costly, resulting in returns variation of up to 100bp per month as time passes
after merger announcement. Of course, some investors are likely to be highly sophisticated and
rational. We find evidence consistent with the existence of limits to arbitrage. We show that
underreaction is concentrated in the subset of deals with lower liquidity and higher transaction
costs, suggesting that trading frictions prevent sophisticated investors from arbitraging away
the mispricing.
Evidence of underreaction in mergers markets is also suggestive of a more general phenomenon, in which agents underreact to the passage of time because it is often less salient
than explicit news stories. Underreaction to no news can be persistent, and can potentially
exacerbate asymmetric information problems in many other contexts. We leave to future research to explore the extent to which underreaction to no news pervades other contexts such
as the interactions between voters and politicians, managers and employees, or investors and
insiders.

36

References
Agarwal, Vikas and Narayan Y. Naik, “Risks and Portfolio Decisions Involving Hedge
Funds,” Review of Financial Studies, 2004, 17 (1), 63–98.
Ahern, Kenneth and Denis Sosyura, “Who Writes the News? Corporate Press Releases
During Merger Negotiations,” Journal of Finance, 2013, Forthcoming.
Bagnoli, Mark, William Kross, and Susan G. Watts, “The Information in Management’s Expected Earnings Report Date: A Day Late, a Penny Short,” Journal of Accounting
Research, 2002, 40 (5), 1275–1296.
Baker, Malcolm and Serkan Savasoglu, “Limited Arbitrage in Mergers and Acquisitions,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 2002, 64 (1), 91–115.
Barber, Brad M. and Terrance Odean, “All That Glitters: The Eﬀect of Attention and
News on the Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors,” Review of Financial
Studies, 2008, 21 (2), 785–818.
Breen, William J., Laurie S. Hodrik, and Robert A. Korajczyk, “Predicting Equity
Liquidity,” Management Science, 2002, 19 (4), 119–157.
Campbell, John Y. and Ludger Hentschel, “No News is Good News: An Asymmetric
Model of Changing Volatility in Stock Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 1992, 31,
281–318.
Chan, Wesley, “Stock Price Reaction to News and No-news: Drift and Reversal After Headlines,” Journal of Financial Economics, 2003, 70, 223–260.
Cohen, Lauren and Andrea Frazzini, “Economic Links and Predictable Returns,” Journal
of Finance, 2008, 63 (4), 1977–2011.
Corwin, Shane A. and Jay F. Coughenour, “Limited Attention and the Allocation of
Eﬀort in Securities Trading,” Journal of Finance, 2008, 63 (6), 3031–3067.
Corwin, Shane and Paul Schultz, “A Simple Way to Estimate Bid-Ask Spreads from Daily
High and Low Prices,” Journal of Finance, 2012, 67, 719–759.
Da, Zhi, Umit G. Gurun, and Mitch Warachka, “Frog in the Pan: Continuous Information and Momentum,” Manuscript, 2012.
DellaVigna, Stefano and Joshua M. Pollet, “Investor Inattention and Friday Earnings
Announcements,” Journal of Finance, 2009, 64, 709–749.
Gabaix, Xavier, David Laibson, Guillermo Moloche, and Stephen Weinberg,
“Costly Information Acquisition: Experimental Analysis of a Boundedly Rational Model,”
American Economic Review, 2006, 96, 1043–1068.
Galai, Dan, Alon Raviv, and Zvi Wiener, “Liquidation Triggers and the Valuation of
Equity and Debt,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 2007, 31, 3604–3620.
37

Gao, George and Qingzhong Ma, “The Sound of Silence: What do We Know When
Insiders Do Not Trade?,” Manuscript, 2012.
Giﬀord, Sharon, “Limited Attention as the Bound on Rationality,” B.E. Journal of Theoretical Economics, 2005, 5.
Gilbert, Thomas, Shimon Kogan, Lars Lochstoer, and Ataman Ozyildirim, “Investor Inattention and the Market Impact of Summary Statistics,” Management Science,
2012, 58, 336–350.
Hirshleifer, David and Siew Hong Teoh, “Limited Attention, Information Disclosure,
and Financial Reporting,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 2003, 36, 337–386.
, Kewei Hou, Siew Hong Teoh, and Yinglei Zhang, “Do investors overvalue firms
with bloated balance sheets?,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 2004.
, Sonya Seongyeon Lim, and Siew Hong Teoh, “Driven to Distraction: Extraneous
Events and Underreaction to Earnings News,” Journal of Finance, 2009, 64 (5), 2289–2325.
Huberman, Gur and Tomer Regev, “Contagious Speculation and a Cure for Cancer: A
Nonevent that Made Stock Prices Soar,” Journal of Finance, 2001, 56, 387–396.
Jung, Woon-Oh and Young K. Kwon, “Disclosure When the Market Is Unsure of Information Endowment of Managers,” Journal of Accounting Research, 1988, 26, 146–153.
Kahneman, Daniel, Attention and Eﬀort, Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1973.
Kraus, Alan and Robert H. Litzenberger, “Skewness Preference and the Valuation of
Risk Assets,” Journal of Finance, 1976, 31 (4), 1085–1100.
Malmendier, Ulrike, Marcus Opp, and Farzad Saidi, “Cash is King - Acquirer and
Target Revaluation after Merger Bids,” Manuscript, 2011.
Marin, Jose M. and Jacques P. Olivier, “The Dog That Did Not Bark: Insider Trading
and Crashes,” Journal of Finance, 2008, 63 (5), 2429–2476.
Menzly, Lior and Oguzhan Ozbas, “Market Segmentation and Cross-predictability of
Returns,” Journal of Finance, 2010, 65.
Merton, Robert, “A Simple Model of Capital Market Equilibrium with Incomplete Information,” Journal of Finance, 1987, 42, 483–510.
Mitchell, Mark and Todd Pulvino, “Characteristics of Risk and Return in Risk Arbitrage,”
Journal of Finance, 2001, 56 (6), 2135–2175.
Pashler, Harold, ed., Attention, Psychology Press, 1998.
Peng, Lin, “Learning with Information Capacity Constraints,” Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, 2005, 40, 307–330.
38

and Wei Xiong, “Investor Attention, Overconfidence and Category Learning,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 2006, 80 (3), 563–602.
Pontiﬀ, Jeﬀrey, “Costly Arbitrage and the Myth of Idiosyncratic Risk,” Journal of Accounting and Economics, 2006, 42, 35–52.
Radner, Roy and Michael Rothschild, “On the Allocation of Eﬀort,” Journal of Economic
Theory, 1975, 10, 358–376.
Sargent, Thomas, Bounded Rationality in Macroeconomics, Oxford Unviersity Press, 1993.
Shleifer, Andrei, “Do Demand Curves for Stocks Slope Down?,” Journal of Finance, 1986,
41 (3), 579–590.
and Robert Vishny, “The Limits of Arbitrage,” Journal of Finance, 1997, 52 (1), 35–55.
Simon, Herbert, “A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
1955, 69, 99–118.
Tetlock, Paul, “All the News That’s Fit to Print: Do Investors React to Stale Information?,”
Review of Financial Studies, 2011, 24, 1481–1512.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman, “Availability: A Heuristic for Judging Frequency
and Probability,” Cognitive Psychology, 1973, 5, 207–232.

39

0

0

hazard
.02 .04 .06 .08

Early Sample

hazard
.02 .04 .06 .08

Full Sample

0

10
20
30
40
trading weeks after announcement

50

0

10
20
30
40
trading weeks after announcement

50

0

hazard
.02 .04 .06 .08

Late Sample

0

10
20
30
40
trading weeks after announcement

Completions

50

95% CI

Withdrawals

95% CI

Figure 1: Cash Mergers: Hazard Rates
The Figure reports hazard rates of completion and withdrawal for cash financed mergers over event
time estimated using the Kaplan-Meyer estimator of competing hazard rates. The top left panel uses
the full sample, 1970-2010, to estimate the hazard rates. The top right panel uses data for the period
1970-1990. The bottom panel uses data for the period 1991-2010.

40

hazard
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1

Early Sample

hazard
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1

Full Sample

0

10
20
30
40
trading weeks after announcement

50

0

10
20
30
40
trading weeks after announcement

50

hazard
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1

Late Sample

0

10
20
30
40
trading weeks after announcement

Completions

50

95% CI

Withdrawals

95% CI

Figure 2: Equity Mergers: Hazard Rates
The Figure reports hazard rates of completion and withdrawal for equity financed mergers over event
time estimated using the Kaplan-Meyer estimator of competing hazard rates. The top left panel uses
the full sample, 1970-2010, to estimate the hazard rates. The top right panel uses data for the period
1970-1990. The bottom panel uses data for the period 1991-2010.

41

Equity Mergers: Hazard Rates

0

0

.02

.02

hazard
.04

hazard
.04

.06

.06

.08

.08

Cash Mergers: Hazard Rates

0

10

20
30
trading weeks after announcement

Completions

95% CI

40

Withdrawals

50

0

10

95% CI

Completions

Cash Mergers: Returns in Event Time

95% CI

40

Withdrawals

50
95% CI

Equity Mergers: Returns in Event Time

0

0

.002

.002

weekly return
.004

weekly return
.004

.006

.006

.008

.008

20
30
trading weeks after announcement

0

10

20
30
trading weeks after announcement

Mean Weekly Return

40

50

0

90% Pointwise CI

10

20
30
trading weeks after announcement

Mean Weekly Return

40

50

90% Pointwise CI

Figure 3: Hazard Rates and Mean Weekly Returns
The top panels report estimated hazard rates for cash (left) and equity (right) mergers over event
time, as in Figures 1 and 2. The bottom panel reports the average weekly return across deals over
event time, as estimated using a local mean smoother. If a deal completes or withdraws before the
end of an event week, the weekly return is calculated as the return from the beginning of the event
week to the completion or withdrawal event (in these cases, we do not scale returns to represent full
weekly returns).

42

Completion hazard: true
Completion hazard: belief
Withdrawal hazard: true
Withdrawal hazard: belief

0.07
0.06

hazards

0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0

0

5

10

15
20
25
30
trading weeks after announcement

35

40

45

−3

4

x 10

Returns
weekly returns

2
0
−2
−4
−6

0

5

10

15
20
25
30
trading weeks after announcement

35

40

45

Figure 4: Model Predictions of Returns Given Beliefs
The Figure reports an illustrative example of the returns implied by the model, obtained under a
certain set of beliefs. The top panel reports the true hazard rates (solid lines) and an example of
beliefs (dotted lines). The bottom panel plots the model-implied weekly excess returns over event
time.

43

Cash Mergers

Completion Hazard

0.06

0.04

0.02
Beliefs
True Hazard

0
0

5

10

15
20
25
30
Trading Weeks after Announcement

35

40

Equity Mergers

Completion Hazard

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02

Beliefs
True Hazard

0
0

5

10

15
20
25
30
Trading Weeks after Announcement

35

40

Figure 5: Implied Hazard Rates Beliefs
The Figure plots beliefs about hazard rates of completion over event time estimated from the model
described in Section 5. Inputs into the model include estimates of the true hazard rates constructed
in Section 3 and observed returns. The top and bottom panels report estimates of beliefs for cash
and equity mergers, respectively.

44

portfolio strategy betas
−.5
0
.5

Cash Mergers: Betas in Event Time

0

10

20
30
trading weeks after announcement

40

50

40

50

portfolio strategy betas
−.5
0
.5

Equity Mergers: Betas in Event Time

0

10

20
30
trading weeks after announcement

Rm−Rf

SMB

HML

Figure 6: Event Time Variation in Risk
The Figure reports betas with the three Fama French factor separately for each event-week-specific
trading strategy. The nth -week trading strategy only invests in deals that are active in the nth week
after announcement. Betas are constructed using portfolio returns corresponding to calendar months
for which at least one deal is present (this prevents betas corresponding to later event windows, in
which fewer deals exist, from being biased toward zero). The vertical bars mark the three event
windows for the Low Hazard 1, High Hazard, and Low Hazard 2 trading strategies described in
Section 6.

45

1
Annual Return
0
.5
−.5
1980

1990

2000

2010

Calendar Year
Market

Buy and Hold Strategy

−.5

Annual Return
0
.5

1

High Haz Strategy

1980

1990

2000

2010

Calendar Year
High Haz Strategy

Market

Buy and Hold Strategy

Figure 7: Portfolio Returns Comparisons
The Figure plots the realized yearly returns of the High Hazard and Buy and Hold strategies as well
as the market return. The top panel reports the strategies that invest in cash financed mergers, while
the bottom panel reports the returns of strategies that invest in equity financed mergers.

46

Equity Mergers: Returns in Event Time

0

0

.002

.002

weekly return
.004
.006

weekly return
.004
.006

.008

.008

Cash Mergers: Returns in Event Time

−10

0

10
20
30
trading weeks after announcement
Mean Weekly Return

40

−10

0

90% Pointwise CI

Mean Weekly Return

90% Pointwise CI

low$haz$1

high$haz

low$haz$2

0

low$haz$2

0

high$haz

40

Equity Mergers: Volume
median (volume / volume in event week 1)
.5
1
1.5

median (volume / volume in event week 1)
.5
1
1.5
2

Cash Mergers: Volume

low$haz$1

10
20
30
trading weeks after announcement

−10

0

10
20
30
trading weeks after announcement

40

−10

0

high$haz

low$haz$2

low$haz$1

high$haz

low$haz$2

.9

low$haz$1

40

Equity Mergers: Bid−Ask Spread
median (bid−ask / bid−ask in event week 1)
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4

median (bid−ask / bid−ask in event week 1)
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2

Cash Mergers: Bid−Ask Spread

10
20
30
trading weeks after announcement

−10

0

10
20
30
trading weeks after announcement

40

−10

0

10
20
30
trading weeks after announcement

40

Figure 8: Event Time Variation in Volume and Bid-Ask Spread
The Figure plots average returns for cash and equity financed mergers (top row) together with median
volume (middle row) and median bid-ask spread (bottom row), over event time. Median volume is the
median of the target’s average daily volume in each event week relative to the average daily volume
in the week following the merger announcement. Median bid-ask spread is the median of the target’s
average daily bid-ask spread in each event week relative to the average daily bid-ask spread in the
week following the merger announcement.

47

−3

x 10
45
3
40

2

Strategy starting event week

35

1

30

0

25

−1

20

−2

15

−3

10

−4

−5

5

5

10

15

20
25
30
Strategy ending event week

35

40

45

−6

Figure 9: Cash Mergers: Strategy Alphas
The Figure reports the Fama French alphas of all possible event window trading strategies in excess
of the alpha of the Buy and Hold strategy for cash financed mergers. On the y axis, we report the
first week of the strategy’s event window. On the x axis, we report the last week of the strategy’s
event window. The color at point (x, y) indicates the relative alpha for a strategy that invests in all
deals active between event weeks y to x. The three circles correspond to the Low Hazard 1, High
Hazard, Low Hazard 2 strategies.

48

−3

x 10
45
3
40

2

Strategy starting event week

35

1

30

0

25

−1

20

−2

15

−3

10

−4

−5

5

5

10

15

20
25
30
Strategy ending event week

35

40

45

−6

Figure 10: Equity Mergers: Strategy Alphas
The Figure reports the Fama French alphas for of all possible event window trading strategies in
excess of the alpha of the Buy and Hold strategy for equity financed mergers. On the y axis, we
report the first week of the strategy’s event window. On the x axis, we report the last week of the
strategy’s event window. The color at point (x, y) indicates the relative alpha for a strategy that
invests in all deals active between event weeks y to x. The three circles correspond to the Low Hazard
1, High Hazard, Low Hazard 2 strategies.

49

Mean
Number of deals
Time to completion (trading days)
Time to withdrawal (trading days)
% Completed within one year
% Withdrawn within one year
% Pending within one year
Premium
Size 1960-1979 ($mil)
Size 1980s ($mil)
Size 1990s ($mil)
Size 2000s ($mil)

Cash Mergers
Median Stdev

3414
99.2
65.9
70.5
22.2
7.3
1.32
54.6
228.1
269.5
1014.4

Equity Mergers
Mean Median Stdev

83.0
40.0

60.8
85.7

1.24
19.3
50.6
69.7
191.8

0.90
96.0
762.3
673.3
3150.5

1963
110.2
66.2
76.8
18.9
4.3
1.33
67.8
241.2
686.4
1147.1

97.0
44.0

57.8
94.0

1.23
27.5
51.4
142.9
166.0

1.22
146.3
742.3
2884.0
4344.5

Table 1: Summary Statistics
The Table reports summary statistics separately for cash financed and equity financed mergers.

Dep Var:
Weekly Return
Weekly hazard

(1)
(2)
(3)
Cash
Equity
Cash
Equity
Cash
Equity
0.0327 *** 0.0357 *** 0.0368 *** 0.0390 *** 0.0283 ** 0.0346 **
(0.011)
(0.009)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.013)
(0.017)

Calendar year x month FE

N

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

Stderr clustered by deal &
(calendar year x month)
Split sample
(early hazards, late returns)
Obs
R2

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

N

N

N

Y

Y

62587
0.0001

27457
0.0003

62587
0.0178

27457
0.0161

38813
0.0158

12824
0.0141

Table 2: Hazard Rates vs. Returns
The Table reports the results of regressions of weekly returns on hazard rates. The following specification is estimated: riwt = b0 +b1 hw + t +✏iwt where i indexes mergers, t is calendar time (year-month),
and w is event week following merger announcement. t represents a set of calendar time year-month
fixed eﬀects. ht is the hazard rate, as estimated using the full aggregate sample in Figures 1 and 2.
Column (1) reports the estimates without calendar time fixed eﬀects while Column (2) includes them.
Column (3) employs a split sample approach in which returns following the year 1991 are regressed
on hazard rates measured using the pre-1991 sample. All standard errors are allowed to be double
clustered by calendar year-month and by merger.

50

Cash
Equity

Low hazard 1
High hazard
Low hazard 2
Buy and hold
Low hazard 1
High hazard
Low hazard 2
Buy and hold
Obs
R2

Individual Strategies
Alpha
Stderr
-0.0005
0.0015
0.0064 ***
0.0016
-0.0007
0.0046
0.0038 ***
0.0013
0.0068 ***
0.0015
0.0146 ***
0.0023
-0.0035
0.0055
0.0109 ***
0.0012
3190
0.0779

Tests: P-values
High > Low
0.0084

0.0002

Joint test
0.0000

Table 3: Strategy Alphas
The Table High>BH
reports Fama-French alphas for0.00615
the three portfolio strategies Low Hazard 1, High Hazard,
High>BH>Low
0.0005
Low Hazard 2, as well as for the Buy and Hold
strategy. The “High > Low” column reports p-values
for the null hypothesis that (↵high ↵low1 ) + (↵high ↵low2 )  0. The joint test combines the previous
tests for cash and equity financed mergers. We compute alphas using only calendar months in which
a strategy invests in at least one active merger. We exclude months without active deals (rather
than assuming the strategy obtains the risk free rate) to avoid biasing the alpha of the Low Hazard
2 strategy toward zero (Low Hazard 2 invests in deals toward the end of event life and therefore has
fewer deals to invest in relative to the other two strategies).

51

Cash

Tests: P-values
High > Low

0.2077

Equity

Individual Strategies
Alpha
Stderr
Panel A: Late Sample, Early Hazards
Low hazard 1
-0.0003
0.0022
High hazard
0.0043 *
0.0024
Low hazard 2
0.0019
0.0066
Buy and hold
0.0034 *
0.0019
Low hazard 1
0.0083 ***
0.0024
High hazard
0.0139 ***
0.0029
Low hazard 2
0.0033
0.0036
Buy and hold
0.0107 ***
0.0019
Obs
1521
R2
0.0847

0.0129

Equity

Cash

Panel B: Tradable Strategy
Low hazard 1
High hazard
Low hazard 2
Buy and hold
Low hazard 1
High hazard
Low hazard 2
Buy and hold
Obs
R2

-0.0005
0.0063 ***
-0.0008
0.0038 ***
0.0067 ***
0.0130 ***
-0.0003
0.0109 ***
3888
0.0759

0.0015
0.0016
0.0033
0.0013
0.0014
0.0020
0.0006
0.0012

Joint test
0.0271

0.0018

0.0000

Joint test
0.0000

Table 4: Strategy Alphas - Robustness
High>BH
The Table reports Fama French alphas for0.12055
the Low Hazard 1, High Hazard, Low Hazard 2 and Buy
High>BH>Low
0.0213
and Hold strategies
using more feasible investment
strategies. In Panel A, we use hazard rates of
completion estimated in the early period (prior to 1991) to determine the event window cutoﬀs for
each of ourHigh>BH
three strategies (separately for0.02435
cash and equity mergers). Then, we compute alphas using
High>BH>Low
returns only during the later period (starting in 01991). In Panel B, we compute the alphas and betas
by using all calendar month returns and assume that each strategy earns the risk free rate in months
in which there are no active deals to invest in. The tests reported are as defined in Table 3.

52

Alpha

Rm-Rf

SMB

HML

-0.0005
(0.0015)
0.0064 ***
(0.0016)
-0.0007
(0.0046)
0.0068 ***
(0.0015)
0.0146 ***
(0.0023)
-0.0035
(0.0055)

0.2088 ***
(0.0507)
0.2975 ***
(0.0668)
0.2762 **
(0.1126)
-0.1043 ***
(0.0340)
-0.1124 *
(0.0597)
-0.1235
(0.1310)

0.1495 ***
(0.0409)
0.1920 ***
(0.0571)
0.2393
(0.1721)
0.0947 **
(0.0427)
0.0628
(0.0623)
0.2363
(0.1701)

0.0847
(0.0824)
0.1695 *
(0.0888)
0.0116
(0.1758)
0.0142
(0.0513)
-0.0207
(0.0810)
0.0719
(0.1591)

Rm-Rf

SMB

HML

Obs

R2

Panel A: Betas

Cash

Low hazard 1
High hazard
Low hazard 2

Equity

Low hazard 1
High hazard
Low hazard 2

Cash

High hazard > Low hazard 1

0.1186

0.2438

0.1846

High hazard > Low hazard 2

0.4383

0.6128

0.2141

Equity

Panel B: Tests on Betas (P-values)

High hazard > Low hazard 1

0.5471

0.6687

0.6466

High hazard > Low hazard 2

0.4690

0.8227

0.6960

2220 0.065

Table 5: Strategy Betas
The top panel of the Table reports the betas with respect to the Fama French factors for the diﬀerent
trading strategies. The bottom panel of the table tests the null hypothesis that ( high
low1 )  0
and ( high
low2 )  0, separately for cash and equity deals and for each of the three factors.

53

Dep Var: Betas
Weekly hazard x Cash

Rm - Rf
-0.063
(0.691)

SMB
-0.833
(1.003)

HML
-0.556
(1.101)

Weekly hazard x Equity

0.139
(0.472)

0.152
(0.685)

-0.267
(0.753)

Y

Y

Y

96
0.33

96
0.01

96
0.01

Merger type dummies
Obs
R2

Table 6: Time-Varying Betas
The Table reports the results of a regression of the Fama French betas of each event-week-specific
strategy described in Section 6 on the estimated hazard rate of the corresponding event week. Betas
and hazard rates are measured at the merger type (cash or equity) by event week level.

54

Panel A:
Rm < -3%

Cash

Low 1
High
Low 2

Equity

Low 1
High
Low 2

Average
return
-0.0173
(0.0051)
-0.0128
(0.0050)
-0.0259
(0.0116)
0.0161
(0.0034)
0.0208
(0.0052)
-0.0139
(0.0173)

Cash

Panel B:
Other Risk
Factors
Low 1
High
Low 2

Equity

Low 1
High
Low 2

Alpha

Rm-Rf

SMB

HML

0.0230 **
(0.0099)
0.0213 **
(0.0107)
0.0217
(0.0278)
0.0150 *
(0.0077)
0.0135
(0.0098)
-0.1984 **
(0.0974)

0.4518 ***
(0.0941)
0.4635 ***
(0.1459)
0.6503 *
(0.3340)
-0.0126
(0.1230)
-0.1662
(0.1643)
-2.8060 **
(1.3083)

0.1528
(0.0977)
0.1626
(0.1200)
-0.2086
(0.3564)
0.2815 ***
(0.0994)
0.1990
(0.1579)
0.7859
(0.4937)

-0.1181
(0.2195)
0.0373
(0.1953)
-0.1990
(0.3327)
0.2060 **
(0.1009)
-0.0643
(0.1695)
0.5982
(0.5760)

Alpha

UMD

OTM call

OTM put

-0.0014
(0.0018)
0.0067 ***
(0.0021)
0.0002
(0.0062)
0.0086 ***
(0.0020)
0.0158 ***
(0.0028)
-0.0046
(0.0064)

-0.0325
(0.0334)
-0.1338 **
(0.0618)
-0.2951
(0.2190)
-0.0067
(0.0492)
0.0443
(0.0498)
0.0508
(0.1107)

-0.0073 ***
(0.0022)
-0.0051
(0.0034)
-0.0043
(0.0114)
-0.0007
(0.0025)
0.0029
(0.0061)
0.0016
(0.0087)

-0.0034
(0.0030)
0.0022
(0.0042)
-0.0044
(0.0086)
-0.0001
(0.0037)
-0.0010
(0.0048)
-0.0066
(0.0056)

Market

Obs

R2

338 0.2396

Min Max
return return
-0.125 0.15
-0.111

0.40

-0.311

0.60

-0.13

0.35

-0.211

0.41

-0.164

0.10

-0.225 0.166

hi>lo1 0.186426 0.09321 Table 7: Other Risks
hi>lo2
8E-08 reports1the average return, alphas, and betas of the portfolio strategies
The top panel of the Table
conditional on restricting the sample to calendar months in which the market return is less than
0.000196
or equal tohi>lo1
-3%. The
bottom0.0001
panel reports alphas and betas of a six-factor model that includes
hi>lo2 0.434533 0.2173
the three Fama French factors (betas not reported in the table), the momentum factor UMD, and
two option-based factors from Agarwal and Naik (2004). Note that the alphas and sample sizes are
Joint
SD
Skewness
slightly diﬀerent
our baseline case because
are only available
Lo1 from
0.022816
hi>lo1 these option
0.000668factors0.000334
-0.569 from 1983 to
2011.
Hi
0.039529
4.374
Lo2
BH

0.076688
0.023201

hi>lo2
hi>bh

0
0.000775

55

1
0.000388

0.1515
0.4292

56

Cash

-0.0082
(0.0107)

0.0107
(0.0082)

0.0000
(0.0040)

-0.0099
(0.0086)

0.0036
(0.0054)

0.0001
0.0302
5836
0.0599

0.0000

0.0043
0.0445
5806
0.0534

0.0142

0.0052
0.2521
3784
0.0636

0.0000

0.1884
0.0359
3190
0.0841

Table 8: Limits to Arbitrage
The Table reports alphas for trading strategies after dividing the sample in half by target characteristics (columns 1-8) or by calendar
time (columns 9-10). The sample splits by target characteristics are executed separately within each calendar year using the median
target characteristic in that year as measured two days following merger announcement. At the bottom of the table we report p-values
for the test “High > Low”, corresponding to the similar test in Table 3. We also report a test “High: Illiquid > Liquid” which tests the
null hypothesis that the alphas in the environment in which arbitrage is more diﬃcult (left column of each subdivision) is less than or
equal to the corresponding alpha in the environment in which arbitrage is more favorable (right column of each subdivision).

0.0000

0.0124 *** 0.0084 *** 0.0111 *** 0.0073 *** 0.0111 *** 0.0086 *** 0.0124 *** 0.0082 *** 0.0111 *** 0.0108 ***
(0.0021)
(0.0014)
(0.0021)
(0.0019)
(0.0021)
(0.0020)
(0.0029)
(0.0021)
(0.0016)
(0.0019)

-0.0134 *
(0.0075)

Buy & hold

-0.0041
(0.0064)

0.0002
(0.0144)

-0.0172
(0.0109)

0.0055 *** 0.0087 ***
(0.0018)
(0.0024)

Low haz 2

-0.0075
(0.0062)

0.0009
(0.0073)

0.0043 *** 0.0034 *
(0.0014)
(0.0019)

-0.0026
(0.0041)

0.0181 *** 0.0103 *** 0.0174 *** 0.0083 *** 0.0155 *** 0.0084 *** 0.0162 *** 0.0077 *** 0.0151 *** 0.0137 ***
(0.0037)
(0.0021)
(0.0035)
(0.0026)
(0.0033)
(0.0029)
(0.0054)
(0.0021)
(0.0032)
(0.0030)

0.0076 **
(0.0031)

0.0016
(0.0013)

0.0018
(0.0041)

High haz

0.0067 *
(0.0036)

0.0031
(0.0022)

-0.0064
(0.0077)

0.0062 *** 0.0060 *** 0.0055 ** 0.0050 ** 0.0058 ** 0.0075 **
(0.0023)
(0.0020)
(0.0023)
(0.0023)
(0.0023)
(0.0030)

-0.0012
(0.0049)

0.0041 ** 0.0030 **
(0.0019)
(0.0014)

-0.0004
(0.0077)

Low haz 1

0.0056 *** 0.0009
(0.0018)
(0.0014)

-0.0005
(0.0042)

0.0069 *** 0.0000
(0.0018)
(0.0014)

-0.0020
(0.0085)

0.0083 *** 0.0048 **
(0.0021)
(0.0024)

Time period
Early
Late
-0.0010
-0.0003
(0.0018)
(0.0022)

Buy & hold

0.0024
(0.0047)

0.0080 *** 0.0005
(0.0028)
(0.0017)

Bid-ask spread
High
Low
-0.0027
0.0013
(0.0027)
(0.0013)

-0.0039
(0.0072)

0.0084 *** 0.0037
(0.0022)
(0.0024)

Turnover
Low
High
-0.0020
0.0008
(0.0023)
(0.0017)

Low haz 2

High
-0.0010
(0.0016)

Volume

0.0103 *** 0.0019
(0.0022)
(0.0021)

Low
-0.0002
(0.0022)

0.0113 *** 0.0020
(0.0024)
(0.0021)

Large
-0.0020
(0.0016)

Size

High haz

Low haz 1

Small
0.0001
(0.0021)

High:
Illiquid > Liquid
0.0005
High > Low
0.0019
0.0073
Obs
5929
R2
0.0601

Equity

Pooled Strategy
(Cash and Equity
Mergers)
Low hazard 1

No Trading Costs
Alpha

Trading Costs Alpha
(Method 1)

Trading Costs Alpha
(Method 2)

0.0025 ** (0.0012)

-0.0034 *** (0.0010)

-0.0076 *** (0.0009)

High hazard

0.0091 *** (0.0018)

0.0035 *** (0.0012)

Low hazard 2

0.0018

Buy and hold

0.0071 *** (0.0011)

0.0025 ** (0.0010)

P-value: High > Low
Obs
R2

0.0015
1916
0.0542

0.0000
1916
0.1175

(0.0029)

-0.0008

(0.0009)

-0.0011

(0.0012)

-0.0015 **

(0.0008)

-0.0011

(0.0009)

0.0025
1916
0.1322

Table 9: Accounting for Transaction Costs
The left column of the Table reports the returns of strategies that invest equally in all available deals
from 1970 to the present, ignoring transaction costs and limits to portfolio weights. If no deals are
active during the relevant event window for each strategy, the return is equal to the risk free rate. In
the right columns, we follow Mitchell and Pulvino (2001) and Breen et al. (2002) in estimating the
alphas for feasible trading strategies after accounting for transaction costs. Each strategy starts with
$1M of funds in 1970. Every month, each fund invests equally in all available deals in their respective
event windows subject to the limitation that at most 10 percent of the capital can be invested in
any particular deal. For each trade, we account for direct transaction costs of $0.10 per share prior
to 1980, $0.05 per share from 1980 to 1989, $0.04 per share from 1990 to 1998, and $0.03 from
1999 onwards. In addition, we account for indirect transaction costs using two methods. Method 1
computes indirect transaction costs using the estimates of price pressure from Breen et al. (2002).
In addition, we impose the additional restriction that the total trading in any deal cannot produce
price pressure of more than 5 percent of the price. Method 2 computes indirect transaction costs
using the bid-ask spread. If data on bid-ask spread is unavailable from CRSP, we supplement with
the estimated bid-ask spread from Corwin and Schultz (2012).

57

Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1
Suppose that the true hazard rate of completion for firm i is hi (t) = ↵i h(t), where h(t)
is the common component and ↵i is a firm-specific unobservable parameter distributed in the
cross-section according to the distribution function G(↵) with mean 1. Suppose also that
h(0) = h(T ) = 0. Then, we have
E↵ [↵h(t)] = h(t)

h✓ (t),

where h✓ (t) is the measured hazard rates ignoring the unobserved heterogeneity. Since h(0) =
h(T ) = 0, h(t) has to be more time-varying than h✓ (t).
Proof: Hazard rates are defined such that
´1
↵S(t)↵ 1 S 0 (t)g(↵)d↵
h✓ (t) = 0 ´ 1
,
↵ g(↵)d↵
S(t)
0
and

h(t) = E↵ (↵h(t)) =

ˆ1

↵S(t) 1 S 0 (t)g(↵)d↵.

0

Rearranging terms yields
E↵ (↵h(t)) =

ˆ1

1

0

↵S(t) S (t)g(↵)d↵ =

ˆ1

0

↵S(t)↵ 1 S 0 (t)
g(↵)d↵.
S(t)↵

0

For ease of notation call
X=

↵S(t)↵ 1 S 0 (t),
Y = S(t)↵ ,

with E[Y ]

0 since S(t)

0 and ↵

0. We have:
E↵ (↵h(t)) = E[
h✓ (t) =

Now define Cov( X
, Y ) = E[X]
Y
Cov(
since S(t)

1

X
],
Y

E[X]
.
E[Y ]

E[ X
]E[Y ]. It follows that
Y

X
, Y ) = Cov( ↵S(t) 1 S 0 (t), S(t)↵ )  0,
Y

0, S 0 (t)  0 and Cov(↵, S(t)↵ )  0 (S(t)↵ is decreasing in ↵ since S(t) < 1).

58

This implies
E[

X
]E[Y ]
Y

E[X],

and since E[Y ] > 0 we can write:
E[

E[X]
,
E[Y ]

X
]
Y

or:
E↵ (↵h(t))

h✓ (t).

Downside Beta
In this section we replicate the estimation of downside beta proposed in Mitchell and
Pulvino (2001). In particular, we estimate the coeﬃcients of the regression:
Rstrat

Rf = (1

)[↵mktlow +

mktlow (RM

Rf )] + [↵mkthigh +

mkthigh (RM

Rf )] + ✏,

where is an indicator that the monthly market return is below a threshold (which we take
to be 4% as in Mitchell and Pulvino, 2001), Rstrat is the return of the strategy (we perform
the exercise for our Low Hazard 1, Low Hazard 2 and High Hazard strategies separately),
and RM is the market return. To ensure continuity of the relation between expected strategy
returns and expected market returns, we constrain the coeﬃcients to satisfy:
↵mktlow +

mktlow (

4%) = ↵mkthigh +

mkthigh (

4%).

Figure 13 plots the estimated piecewise linear functions for the three strategies for cash
mergers. The figure shows that the three strategies have extremely similar exposures to
downside risk. We also estimate piecewise linear functions for the three strategies for equity
mergers (omitted for brevity). Due to the short position that acts as a hedge, the downside
betas are negative and cannot explain the returns variation.

59

Appendix Figures

Equity Mergers

0

0

.02

.05

.04

hazard

hazard

.06

.1

.08

.1

.15

Cash Mergers

0

10
20
30
40
trading weeks after announcement

Low Premia

50

0

95% CI

10
20
30
40
trading weeks after announcement

High Premia

50

95% CI

Figure 11: Hazard Rates by Premia (2 Days After Announcement)
The Figure reports the estimated hazard rates of completion for cash and equity mergers after splitting
the sample in half in terms of the premium as measured two days after announcement. The premium
is a proxy for the market’s assessment of the probability that the merger will eventually complete.
The premium for cash mergers is the ratio of the initial oﬀer price at deal announcement to the
price of the target two days after deal announcement. For equity mergers, the premium is defined as
A /P T , where
⇤ Pt=2
is the exchange ratio, defined as the number of acquirer shares oﬀered for
t=2
each share of the target, and P A and P T are the acquirer’s and target’s share prices, respectively.

60

0

.02

hazard
.04
.06

.08

Cash Mergers

0

10

20
30
trading weeks after announcement

40

50

40

50

0

.02

hazard
.04 .06

.08

Equity Mergers

0

10

Completions
95% CI

20
30
trading weeks after announcement

Withdrawals
95% CI

Competing Bids
95% CI

Figure 12: Hazard Rates of Completion, Withdrawal, and Competing Bids
The Figure reports the estimated hazard rates of completion, withdrawal, and of receiving a competing
bid from another acquirer. The hazard rate of receiving a competing bid represents the probability
of receiving at least one competing bid in event week t conditional on no completion or withdrawal
prior to week t. The hazard rates of completion and withdrawal are as defined in Section 3.

61

Strategy Return Minus Risk−Free Rate
−.1
−.05
0
.05

−.2

−.1
0
.1
Market Return Minus Risk−Free Rate
Low Haz 1
Low Haz 2

.2

High Haz
Buy and Hold

Figure 13: Downside Beta
The Figure explores event time variation in downside beta. We estimate piecewise linear functions of
the expected returns of the four trading strategies (Low Hazard 1, Low Hazard 2 and High Hazard,
and Buy and Hold) against the market return. The specification is described in the Appendix.

62

