                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    A THEORY OF THE COMPETITIVE SAVING MOTIVE

                                            Qingyuan Du
                                            Shang-Jin Wei

                                         Working Paper 18911
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18911


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2013




This research is supported by U.S. National Science Foundation grant SES-1024574, which we
gratefullyacknowledge. The paper is a substantial revision and expansion of a previous paper,
circulated underthe title, "a sexually unbalanced model of current account imbalances." We thank
Stefania Albanesi,V. Bhaskar, Pierre-Andre Chiappori, Ed Hopkins, Aloysius Siow, and especially
Xiaobo Zhang, andseminar participants at the University of California-Berkeley, Columbia University,
Ohio State University,IMF, World Bank, University of Washington, Hong Kong University and
Chinese University of HongKong for very helpful discussions, and Nikhil Patel and Joy Glazener
for proofreading. All errors areour responsibilities. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflectthe views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Qingyuan Du and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
A Theory of the Competitive Saving Motive
Qingyuan Du and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 18911
March 2013, Revised September 2013
JEL No. E2,F3,O16

                                             ABSTRACT

Motivated by recent empirical work, this paper formalizes a theory of competitive savings - an arms
race in household savings for mating competition that is made more fierce by an increase in the male-
to-female ratio in the pre-marital cohort. Relative to the empirical work, the theory can clarify a number
of important questions: What determines the strength of the savings response by males (or households
with a son)? Can women (or households with a daughter) dis-save? What are the conditions under
which aggregate savings would go up in response to a higher sex ratio? This theory can potentially
help to understand the savings patterns in China, India, Vietnam, Singapore, Hong Kong, and other
economies that have experienced a dramatic increase in the pre-marital sex ratio.


Qingyuan Du
Economics Department
Monash University
Melburne, Australia
qingyuandu@gmail.com

Shang-Jin Wei
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
Uris Hall 619
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
1    Introduction

     Recent empirical work suggests that one explanation for the rapid rise in the household savings
rate in China, India, Singapore, Vietnam and several other economies is an arms race in savings for
competition for marriage partners triggered by a rise in the pre-marital sex ratio, a phenomenon that
has erupted vigorously since the beginning of the 21st century (Wei and Zhang, 2011). This source
of incremental savings - dubbed as the competitive saving motive - is distinct from the precautionary
saving motive or savings for life-cycle reasons, the relatively more standard explanations for household
savings. The competitive saving motive can be quantitatively important. It is estimated by Wei
and Zhang (2011) to account for half of the observed increase in the Chinese household savings rate
in recent years. Without taking this into account, one would not have a complete picture of the
underlying causes for the global current account imbalances, and might be prone to write incorrect
prescriptions for the problem.

     Because the existing empirical work is not accompanied by a formal theory, it leaves many im-
portant questions unanswered. For example, what determines the strength of the competitive savings
motive by males (when there is a relative surplus of males)? What is the e¤ect of a higher sex ratio
on the aggregate savings given the potential that females may under-save? The goal of this paper is
to develop a formal theory of the competitive saving motive that can clarify these questions. With the
theory, we can also assess welfare implications of the competitive saving motive.

     We construct a simple overlapping generations (OLG) model with two sexes and a desire to
marry. To focus on the macroeconomic implications of sex ratio imbalances, we intentionally shut
down channels such as the usual precautionary savings motive, habit formation, culture, and …nancial
development. Because it is an OLG model, there are still life-cycle considerations, which, however, do
not lead to current account imbalances on their own.

      Under reasonable conditions, we show that men respond to a rise in the sex ratio by raising their
savings rates. Moreover, the increment in their savings is always enough to o¤set any decrease in
women’s savings. As a result, the aggregate savings rises with the sex ratio. We also discuss a number
of extensions that aim to allow for additional realism: (a) incorporate parental savings for children,
(c) introduce intra-household bargaining, (c) consider an OLG structure in which each generation lives
for 50 periods and makes savings decisions in multiple periods, and (d) allow for income inequality.
In each case, under reasonably general conditions, both the aggregate savings rate and the current
account rise in response to a rise in the sex ratio. (Some of the extensions are reported in online
appendices.)

     To check if the model can deliver an e¤ect that is economically signi…cant, we employ quantitative
calibrations. In the benchmark case, for a small open economy, as the sex ratio rises from 1 to 1.15, the
economy-wide savings rate and the current account will both rise by more than 6% of GDP. We also
consider a case of two large economies, whose relative sizes and income levels are calibrated to mimic
China and the United States. The synthetic United States is assumed to always have a balanced sex


                                                   1
ratio, while the synthetic China experiences a signi…cant rise in the sex ratio. The rise in China’s sex
ratio produces a rise in its current account surplus, and a corresponding rise in the current account
de…cit for the United States. The magnitudes of the current account imbalances in the simulations
(about 4.4% of GDP for China and -1.5% of GDP for the United States when China’s sex ratio rises
from 1 to 1.15) are around one-half of the actual current account imbalances observed in the data.
While the sex ratio imbalance is not the only factor a¤ecting the global current account imbalances in
recent years, it could be one of the signi…cant, and yet thus far unrecognized, factors. (This extension
is also reported in an online appendix.)

     A desire to enhance one’s prospects in the marriage market through a higher level of wealth could
be a motive for savings even in countries with a balanced sex ratio. But such a motive is not as
easy to detect when the competition is modest. When the sex ratio gets out of balance, obtaining a
marriage partner becomes much less assured. A host of behaviors that are motivated by a desire to
succeed in the marriage market may become magni…ed. But sex ratio imbalances so far have not been
investigated by macroeconomists. This may be a serious omission. A sex ratio imbalance at birth and
in the marriage age cohort is a common demographic feature in many economies, especially in Asia,
such as Korea, India, Vietnam, Singapore, Taiwan and Hong Kong, in addition to China. In many
economies, parents have a preference for a son over a daughter. This used to lead to large families, not
necessarily an unbalanced sex ratio. However, in the last three decades, as the technology to detect
the gender of a fetus (Ultrasound B) has become less expensive and more widely available, many more
parents engage in selective abortions in favor of a son, resulting in an increasing relative surplus of
men. The spread of technology started in the early 1980s and accelerated quickly afterwards. 1985
was the …rst year in which half of the hospitals in China had acquired at least one Ultrasound B
machine. By the early 1990s, all county-level hospitals had at least one such machine (Ebenstein,
Li, and Meng, 2010). The strict family planning policy in China, introduced in the early 1980s, has
induced Chinese parents to engage in sex-selective abortions more aggressively than their counterparts
in other countries. The sex ratio at birth in China rose from 106 boys per hundred girls in 1980 to 122
boys per hundred girls in 1997 (see Wei and Zhang, 2011, for more detail). It may not be a coincidence
that the Chinese current account surplus started to garner international attention around 2002 just
when the …rst cohort born after the implementation of the strict family planning policy was entering
the marriage market.

     In the benchmark model and numerical examples, we assume an exogenous sex ratio. While the
sex ratio is endogenous in the long-run as parental preference evolves, the assumption of an exogeous
sex ratio can be defended on two grounds. First, the technology that enables the rapid rise in the sex
ratio has only become inexpensive and widely accessible in developing countries within the last 25 years
or so. As a result, it is reasonable to think that the rising sex ratio a¤ects only the relatively young
cohorts’savings decisions, but not those who have passed half of their working careers. Second, data
suggests that if the preference for a son has a mean-reverting property, it must be a very slow-moving
process. Almost all countries that have a skewed sex ratio today have exhibited a gradual climb over
the last decade or two. This suggests that a systematic reversal of the sex ratio is unlikely to happen

                                                   2
in most economies in the short run. In any case, we also consider endogenous sex ratios in an extension
and …nd that all qualitative results still hold.

      To see if the theoretical predicion has any support in the data, we check if a country’s savings rate
is systematically linked to its sex ratio. After controlling for the e¤ects on the savings rate from income,
the share of working age people in the population (i.e., a proxy for the life cycle theory), the ratio of
private bank credit to GDP (a proxy for …nancial development), and social security expenditure as a
share of GDP (a proxy for the precautionary savings motive), we …nd that the sex ratio, the savings
rate, and the current account as a share of GDP are strongly positively correlated.

     There are three bodies of work that are related to the current paper. First, the literature on
status goods, positional goods, and social norms (e.g., Cole, Mailath and Postlewaite, 1992, Corneo
and Jeanne, 1999, Hopkins and Kornienko, 2004 and 2009) has o¤ered many useful insights. One key
point is that when wealth can improve one’s social status (including improving one’s standing in the
marriage market), in addition to a¤ording a greater amount of consumption goods, there is an extra
incentive to save. This element is in our model as well. However, all existing theories on status goods
feature a balanced sex ratio. Yet, an unbalanced sex ratio presents some non-trivial challenges. In
particular, while a rise in the sex ratio is an unfavorable shock to men (or parents with sons), it is
a favorable shock to women (or parents with daughters). Could the latter group strategically reduce
their savings so as to completely o¤set whatever increments in savings men or parents with sons may
have? In other words, the impact on aggregate savings appears ambiguous. Our model will address
this question. In any case, the literature on status goods has no discernible impact in policy circles.
For example, while there are voluminous documents produced by the International Monetary Fund
or speeches by U.S. o¢ cials on China’s high savings rate and large current account surplus, no single
paper or speech thus far has pointed to a possible connection with its high sex ratio imbalance.

     A second related literature is the economics of family, which is too vast to be summarized here
comprehensively. One interesting insight of this literature is that a married couple’s consumption has
a partial public goods feature (Browning, Bourguignon and Chiappori, 1994; Donni, 2006). We make
use of this feature in our model as well. None of the papers in this literature explores the general
equilibrium implications for aggregate savings from a change in the sex ratio.

     The third literature examines empirically the causes of a rise in the sex ratio. The key insight
is that the proximate cause responsible for a majority of the recent rise in the sex ratio imbalance
is sex-selective abortions, which have been made increasingly possible by the spread of Ultrasound
B machines. There are two deeper causes for parental willingness to disproportionately abort female
fetuses. The …rst is the parental preference for sons, which in part has to do with the relatively inferior
economic status of women. When the economic status of women improves, sex-selective abortions
appear to decline (Qian, 2008). The second is either something that leads parents to voluntarily
choose to have fewer children than earlier generations, or a government policy that limits the number
of children a couple can have. In regions of China where the family planning policy is less strictly
enforced, there is also less sex ratio imbalance (Wei and Zhang, 2009). Bhaskar (2011) examines


                                                     3
parental sex selections and their welfare consequences.

     The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we provide some suggestive data
patterns that motivate the theory. In Section 3, we present a benchmark model that delivers the main
mechanism. In Section 4, we consider an extension that allows for parental savings and endogenous sex
ratios. In section 5, we also calibrate the model to see if the sex ratio imbalance can produce changes in
the aggregate savings rate and current account whose magnitudes are economically signi…cant. Finally,
in section 6, we o¤er concluding remarks and discuss possible future research.



2     Some Data Patterns

     To motivate the theory, we discuss two types of empirical approaches that allow us to check for
plausibility and empirical importance of the theory. First, we provide some cross-country evidence on
the relationships between a country’s sex ratio and its savings rate, and between the sex ratio and its
current account. Second, we review household-level evidence from China on the association between
sex ratios and savings rates.


2.1    Cross country data patterns

    We run a panel regression of the savings rate on the sex ratio and other control variables including
country and year …xed e¤ects. To be precise, the speci…cation equation is the following:

      savings:rateit =    0   +   1   jsex ratioit   1j +   2   jsex ratioit   1j LowSRit +   3 Zit   + "it

where savings:rateit is the ratio of country i’s national savings to its GDP in year t. The sex ratio
is de…ned as the male to female ratio for the age group of 10-24 (from the United Nations Population
Division). In our theory, men and women are symmetric. The savings rate is predicted to be higher
with either a surplus of men or a surplus of women. For this reason, our key regressor is jsex ratioit 1j.
Our key coe¢ cient is 1 . If our story is right, this coe¢ cient should be positive.

     In reality, the ability to tolerate singlehood could be di¤erent between men and women, and the
desire to compete in the marriage market by raising savings could also be di¤erent. That is, for a
given rise in the gender imbalance, the savings response could be di¤erent, depending on whether
an economy has too many men or too many women. For this reason, we create a dummy LowSR
to indicate cases in which there is a surplus of young women in the marriage market, or when sex
ratioit < 1: We add as a second regressor an interaction term between this dummy and the extent of
gender ratio imbalance, jsex ratioit 1j LowSRit . The coe¢ cient before this regressor, 2 , tells us if
the aggregate savings response to a higher sex ratio depends on whether the gender ratio imbalance is
in the direction of excess men or excess women.



                                                        4
     Since our theory is about savings in the private sector, we control for the government de…cit in the
regression. Our choice of other control variables is guided by the life-cycle theory, precautionary saving
theory, and …nancial development theory. We therefore include in Zi log per capita GDP, dependency
ratio (a proxy for life-cycle theory), private credit to GDP ratio (a proxy for …nancial development),
and both country and year …xed e¤ects. Unfortunately, we are not able to obtain a panel data on
social security enrollment or social security coverage; we therefore assume that the country …xed e¤ects
capture the absence or presence of a social security system and the generosity of the system across
countries.

     Government de…cit data are obtained from the IMF’s World Economic Outlook (WEO) database.
Current account, GDP, the share of working age in the population and private credit to GDP ratio are
obtained from the World Bank’s WDI database. The intertemporal theory predicts that a country’s
current account should be sensitive to temporary shocks. The sex ratio data is from the United Nations’
Population Division.

     The …rst four columns of Table 1 report a set of savings regressions with a progressively expanding
set of control variables. In each regression, we have a positive and statistically signi…cant coe¢ cient
on the sex ratio: as the sex ratio becomes more unbalanced, the savings rate tends to go up. Using
column (4) of Table 1, we can illustrate the magnitude of the estimates: a rise in the sex ratio from
1.00 to 1.10 is associated with a rise in the savings rate by 5.8 percent of GDP (=58.5% x 0.10).

     Because 2 is not statistically signi…cant, we cannot reject the null that the aggregate savings
response to a higher sex ratio is the same regardless of whether the surplus gender is male or female.
However, because there are relatively few observations with the sex ratio less than one. This coe¢ cient
is not precisely estimated, and we need to exercise caution in interpreting it. Interestingly, the coe¢ -
cient on the dummy for excess females itself is positive and signi…cant. This suggests that the savings
rate for such countries tend to be higher than sample average. We do not have a good explanation
for this phenomenon, but it could re‡ect other di¤erences between surplus female and surplus male
countries that are not related to the sex ratio per se.

     We comment brie‡y on other control variables. We …nd that a higher income is associated with
a higher savings rate, which is a quite typical …nding in the literature. A higher government de…cit is
associated with a lower savings rate. The …nancial development index (private credit as % of GDP)
sometimes has a negative and signi…cant sign; the negative sign is consistent with Caballero, Farhi, and
Gourinchas (2008) and Ju and Wei (2010 and 2011). The dependence ratio is statistically insigni…cant,
which suggests that life cycle considerations may not play a strong role in explaining cross country
variations in the savings rate.

     Some countries report savings rates in excess of 80% of GDP and are likely outliers. To ensure such
observations do not drive the data pattern, we exclude these observations and re-do the regressions
and report them in Columns 5-8 of Table 1. This turns out to make little di¤erence for the basic
results.



                                                    5
      We also examine the relationship between a country’s current account (as % of GDP) and its
sex ratio, and report the results in Table 2. The coe¢ cients on the sex ratio in all the regressions
are positive and statistically signi…cant. This means that the current account tends to be higher in
countries with a higher sex ratio. To illustrate the economic magnitude of the estimates, we use the
last column in Table 2: A rise in the sex ratio from 1.00 to 1.10 is projected to be associated with a
rise in the current account by 2.2% of GDP (=22.27% x 0.10).

     There are important caveats with the empirical patterns. First, in spite of our best e¤orts, there
may still be potential control variables that are missing from our list. Second, the sex ratio can
be endogenous and/or measured with errors. This would normally call for an instrumental variable
approach. At this point, we are not able to come up with convincing instrumental variables in a
cross-country context. For these reasons, it is important to review some micro-evidence from within
China.


2.2    Cross-household and cross-region evidence from China

     The sex ratio for the Chinese pre-marital cohort increased from being basically balanced in 1990
to about 115 young men per 100 young women in 2007. Its household savings rate (out of disposable
income) almost doubled from 16% to 30% during the same period. While China is not the only
economy with a high sex ratio (and a high savings rate), it is the one with the most extreme sex ratio
imbalance at the moment, and, because of its size, its savings rate and current account attract the most
international attention. For this reason, it is useful to highlight a few empirical patterns documented
in Wei and Zhang (2011) that are most relevant for the current paper.

      First, let us start with Chinese households’ self-reported reasons for savings. A survey of rural
households (Chinese household income project in 2002) asked households why they save. There were
seven possible categories for saving rationale in the questionnaire: (1) children’s wedding, (2) children’s
education, (3) bequest to children, (4) building a house, (5) (own) retirement, (6) medical expenses,
and (7) others. The …rst three reasons could be grouped under the heading of "savings directly for
children." If we just focus on families with an unmarried child, one sees a stunning di¤erence between
families with a son versus those with a daughter. 29.8% of families with a son list savings for their
child’s wedding as either the most or the second most important reason for savings, versus 18.3% of
families with a daughter who do the same. Overall, 92.2% of son-families list one of the top three
reasons as their primary reasons for savings, which is 5.8 percentage points higher than the percent of
the daughter families who say the same. In comparison, 45.5% of daugher-families and 37.3% of son-
families say their most or the second most important reason for savings is their own retirement. (Note
that the sum of the percentage of households that list various reasons as the most or the second most
important reason for savings can be more than 100% since a given household could list one category
as the most important reason for savings, and another category as the second most important reason
for savings.)


                                                    6
     Second, we now summarize the relationship between household savings rates (out of disposable
income) and local sex ratios (at the county or city level), holding constant other determinants of savings
rate (household income, household head’s age, gender, ethnicity, and educational level, and children’s
age, and whether there is a family member that has a major illness). What is most revealing for our
theory is not just a direct comparison in the savings rates between son-families and daughter-families,
but the e¤ect of an interaction term between having an unmarried son and living in a region with a
high local sex ratio. This exercise is interesting in China because the migration rate for the purpose
of marriage is low (about 92% of marriages take place between a man and a woman from the same
county). When focusing on families with a son in rural areas, Wei and Zhang report that these families’
savings rate tends to be higher in regions with a more skewed sex ratio. In comparison, the savings rate
by families with a daughter appears to be uncorrelated with the local sex ratio. Across Chinese cities,
the savings rates by both son-families and daughter families tend to rise with the local sex ratio. These
patterns are consistent with our model that allows for intra-family bargaining. When women (or their
parents) are concerned with erosion of bargaining power within a family, they may not reduce their
savings rate in response to a higher sex ratio. When the e¤ect of intra-family bargaining dominates,
the savings rate by daughter-families could rise in response to a rise in the sex ratio.

     Third, across Chinese provinces, Wei and Zhang report a strong positive correlation between
local savings rates and local sex ratios, controlling for the age structure of local population, per
capita income, the share of employment in state-owned …rms in the local labor force, and the share
of local labor force enrolled in social security. To go from correlation to causality, Wei and Zhang
employ variations in the local enforcement of family planning policy (including monetary penalties
for violating birth quotas) as instruments for the sex ratio. The 2SLS estimation con…rms the basic
…nding: regions with a higher sex ratio are also likely to have a higher household savings rate. Based
on the 2SLS estimates, 40-60% of the rise in the household savings rate from 1990 to 2007 can be
attributed to the observed rise in the sex ratio for the pre-marital age cohort during the period.

     Overall, the evidence from within China is consistent with the theoretical predictions.



3    The Benchmark Model

     We construct an overlapping generations model with two sexes. Both men and women live two
periods: young and old. An individual (of either sex) receives an exogenous endowment in the …rst
period and nothing in the second period. She or he consumes a part of the endowment in the …rst
period and saves the rest for the second period.

     A marriage can only take place between a man and a women in the same generation and at the
beginning of their second period. Once married, the husband and the wife pool their …rst-period savings
together and consume an identical amount in the second period. The second period consumption
within a marriage has a partial public good feature. In other words, the husband and the wife can


                                                    7
each consume more than half of their combined second period income - the exact proportion is an
exogenous parameter to be explained below. Everyone is endowed with an ability to give his/her
spouse some emotional utility (or "love" or "happiness"). This emotional utility is a random variable
in the …rst period with a common and known distribution across all members of the same sex, and its
value is realized and becomes public information when the individual enters the marriage market.

     Each generation is characterized by an exogenous ratio of men to women ( 1). All men are
identical ex ante, and all women are identical ex ante. Men and women are symmetric in all aspects
except that the sex ratio may be unbalanced.

     We describe the equilibrium in this economy in six steps. First, we start with a representative
woman’s optimization, followed by a representative man’s optimization problem. Second, we describe
how the marriage market works. Third, we perform comparative statics, in particular, on how the
savings rates change in response to a rise in the sex ratio. Fourth, we consider a small open economy
with production and discuss the current account response to a change in the sex ratio. Fifth, we
solve for a two-country model in which the global interest rate is endogenous. Sixth, we use numerical
calibrations to see if the model can deliver current account responses that are economically signi…cant.


3.1     A Representative Woman’s Optimization Problem

     A representative woman makes her consumption/saving decisions in her …rst period, taking as
given the choices made by men and all other women. If she is not married, her second-period con-
sumption is
                                        c2w;n = Rsw y w

where R, y w and sw are the gross interest rate, her endowment, and savings rate, respectively.

      If she is married (at the beginning of the second period), her second-period consumption is

                                            c2w =     (Rsw y w + Rsm y m )

where y m and sm are her husband’s endowment and savings rate, respectively. ( 12     1) represents
the notion that consumption within a marriage is a public good with congestion. As an example, if
a couple buys a car, both spouses can use it. When = 21 ; the husband and the wife only consume
private goods. In contrast, when = 1, all the consumption is a public good with no congestion1 .

      She chooses her savings rate to maximize the following objective function:

                                      V w = max
                                             w
                                               u(c1w ) + E [u(c2w ) +           m
                                                                                    ]
                                               s
   1 By assuming the same    for the wife and the husband, we abstract from a discussion of bargaining within a household.
In an extension later in the paper, we allow to be gender specifc, and to be a function of the sex ratio and the relative
wealth levels of the two spouses, along the lines of Chiappori (1988 and 1992) and Browning and Chiappori (1998). This
tends to make the response of the aggregate savings stronger to a given rise in the sex ratio.



                                                            8
subject to the budget constraints that

                            c1w   =   (1       sw )y w                                         (3.1)
                                      (
                                                   w w       m m
                                               (Rs y + Rs y ) if married
                            c2w   =                                                            (3.2)
                                                   Rsw y w    otherwise

where V w is her value function, and E is the expectation operator. m is the emotional utility (or
"love") she obtains from her husband, which is a random variable with a distribution function F m .
Utility function u( ) satis…es the standard properties that u0 > 0, and u00 < 0. The exact value of
emotional utility is revealed at the beginning of the second period and becomes common knowledge at
that time. Bhaskar (2011) also introduces a similar "love" variable.


3.2     A Representative Man’s Optimization Problem

     A representative man has a similar optimization problem as the representative woman. In par-
ticular, if he is not married, his second-period consumption is

                                                c2m;n = Rsm y m


      If he is married, his second-period consumption is

                                      c2m =        (Rsw y w + Rsm y m )


      He chooses his savings rate to maximize the following value function:

                                  V m = max
                                         m
                                           u(c1m ) + E [u(c2m ) +         w
                                                                              ]
                                           s


subject to the budget constraints that

                            c1m   =   (1       sm )y m                                         (3.3)
                                      (
                                               (Rsw y w + Rsm y m ) if married
                            c2m   =                                                            (3.4)
                                                   Rsm y m          otherwise

where V m is his value function. w is the emotional utility he obtains from his wife, which is drawn
from a distribution function F w . We assume w and m are independent.




                                                         9
3.3     The Marriage Market2

      In the marriage market, every woman (or man) ranks all members of the opposite sex by a
combination of two criteria: (1) the level of wealth (which is determined solely by the …rst-period
savings), and (2) the size of "love" he/she can obtain from his/her spouse. The weights on the two
criteria are implied by the utility functions speci…ed earlier. More precisely, woman i prefers a higher
ranked man to a lower ranked one, where the rank on man j is given by u(c2w;i;j ) + mj . Symmetrically,
man j assigns a rank to woman i based on the utility he can obtain from her u(c2m;j;i )+ wi . (To ensure
that the preference is strict for men and women, when there is a tie in terms of the above criteria,
we break the tie by assuming that a woman prefers j if j < j 0 and a man does the same.) Note that
"love" is not in the eyes of the beholder in the sense that every woman (man) has the same ranking
over men (women).

     The marriage market is assumed to follow the Gale-Shapley algorithm, which produces a unique
and stable equilibrium of matching (Gale and Shapley, 1962; and Roth and Sotomayor, 1990). The
algorithm speci…es the following: (1) Each man proposes in the …rst round to his most preferred choice
of woman. Each woman holds the proposal from her most preferred suitor and rejects the rest. (2)
Any man who is rejected in round k-1 makes a new proposal in round k to his most preferred woman
among those who have not yet rejected him. Each available women in round k "holds" the proposal
from her most preferred man and rejects the rest. (3) The procedure repeats itself until no further
proposals are made.3

      With many women and men in the marriage market, all women (and all men) approximately form
a continuum and each individual has a measure close to zero. Let I w and I m denote the continuum
formed by women and men, respectively. We normalize I w and let I w = (0; 1). Since the sex ratio is
  , the set of men I m = (0; ). Men and women are ordered in such a way that a higher value means
a higher ranking by members of the opposite sex.
                                                              w
      In equilibrium, there exists a unique mapping (             ) for women in the marriage market.

                                                   w
                                                       : Iw ! Im

That is, woman i (i 2 I w ) is mapped to man j (j 2 I m ), given all the initial wealth and emotional
utility draws. This implies a mapping from a combination (sw           w                              m  m
                                                                  i , i ) to another combination (sj , j ).
In other words, for woman i, given all her rivals’(sw i , w i ) and all men’s (sm , m ), the type of husband
j she can marry depends on her (sw      w
                                   i , i ). Before she enters the marriage market, she knows only the
distribution of her own type but not the exact value. As a result, the type of her future husband (sm     j ,

    2 We use the word "market" informally here. The pairing of husbands and wives in this model is in fact not done

through prices.
    3 If only women can propose and men respond with deferred acceptance, the same matching outcomes will emerge.

What we have to rule out is that both men and women can propose, in which case, one cannot prove that the matching
is unique.




                                                         10
 m
 j )   is also a random variable. Woman i’s second period expected utility is
                     Z               h                                                                                                         i
                                                               m
                         max             u (c2w;i;j ) +                                                      ;       u (Rsw  w
                                                                                                                          i yi )                   dF w (   w
                                                                                                                                                            i )
                                                                w
                                                                    (   ijsw   w w
                                                                           i ; i ;s i ;
                                                                                        w ;sm ; m
                                                                                         i               )
                     Z       h                                                                   i                                 Z       w
                                                                                                                                           i
                                                      m                                           w                      w
             =                   u (c2w;i;j ) +        w
                                                           ( ijsw        w ;sw ; w ;sm ;    m
                                                                                              ) dF (                     i )   +               u (Rsw  w     w
                                                                                                                                                    i yi ) dF (
                                                                                                                                                                       w
                                                                                                                                                                       i )
                         w                                      i ;      i    i   i
                         i



where w i is her threshold ranking on men such that she is indi¤erent between marriage or not. Any
lower-ranked man, or any man with w        w
                                      i < i , won’t be chosen by her.

     Since we assume there are (weakly) fewer women than men, we expand the set I w to Iew so that
Iew = (0; ). In the expanded set, women in the marriage market start from value         1 to . The
measure for women in the marriage market remains one. In equilibrium, there exists a unique mapping
for men in the marriage market:
                                           m
                                              : I m ! Iew

where m maps man j (j 2 I m ) to woman i (i 2 I w ). Those men who are matched with a low value
i<      1 in set Iew will not be married. In that case, wm (j) = 0 and c2m;j;i = Rsm  m
                                                                                   j yj . In general,
man j’s second period expected utility is
                 Z               h                                                                                                             i
                                                           w
                     max             u (c2m;j;i ) +                                                      ;       u Rsm  m
                                                                                                                     j yj                          dF m     m
                                                            m
                                                                ( jjsm
                                                                     j ;
                                                                              m ;sm ; m ;sw ; w
                                                                              j    j   j             )                                                      j
                 Z       h                                                                      i                                  Z       m
                                                                                                                                           j
                                                  w                                                      m           m
         =                   u (c2m;j;i ) +        m
                                                       ( jjsm           m ;sm ; m ;sw ; w
                                                                                                ) dF                 j         +               u Rsm  m
                                                                                                                                                   j yj dF m                m
                                                                                                                                                                            j
                     m                                      j ;         j    j   j
                     j



where m j is his threshold ranking on all women. Any woman with a poorer rank,
                                                                                                                                                             m
                                                                                                                                                             j    <   m
                                                                                                                                                                      j ,   will not
be chosen by him.

     We assume that the density functions of m and w are continuously di¤erentiable. Since all men
(women) in the marriage market have identical problems, they make the same savings decisions. In
equilibrium, a positive assortative matching emerges for those men and women who are matched. In
other words, there exists a mapping M from w to m such that

                                              1    F w(        w
                                                                   )      =       (1        F m (M (             w
                                                                                                                     )))
                                                                         ,
                                                               w                            1       F w(         w
                                                                                                                     )                 1
                                                      M(           )      =     (F m )                                   +

For simplicity, we assume that w and m are drawn from the same distribution, F w = F m = F . The
lowest possible value of emotional utility min is assumed to be su¢ ciently small (and can be negative)
such that any person with a low realized value of emotional utility may not succeed in getting married.
De…ne w and m as the threshold values of emotional utility for women and men, respectively, such
that only those with emotional utilities higher than the threshold value will get married. In other



                                                                                       11
words,
                 w                                         1       m                 m                                                            w
                      = max u2m;n              u2m ; M         (        )    and          = max fu2w;n                        u2w ; M (               )g       (3.5)

                                                                                                                         w
    For woman i, given all her rivals’and men’s savings decisions and                                                        , her second period utility is
                                                                                                        Z
                     w                                                      w
                     i u(       (Rsw  w    m m
                                   i y + Rs y )) + (1
                                                                                    w w
                                                                            i ) u(Rs y )        +                         M (~w
                                                                                                                              i )dF (
                                                                                                                                                  w
                                                                                                                                                  i )
                                                                                                            ~w
                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                     w



                                                                                                                         w
where ~w           w w     m m
         i = u( (Rsi y + Rs y ))                        u( (Rsw y w + Rsm y m )) +                           w
                                                                                                             i .         i    is the probability that she
will get married,

     w
     i   =       Pr ( u( (Rsw  w    m m
                            i y + Rs y ))                      u( (Rsw y w + Rsm y m )) +                                w
                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                                                   w
                                                                                                                                       j Rsw y w ; Rsm y m )
                                w
         =       1        F(           u( (Rsw  w    m m           w w    m m
                                             i y + Rs y )) + u( (Rs y + Rs y )))                                                                               (3.6)


     Due to symmetry (i.e., all women are identical ex ante), we drop sub-index i for women in
subsequent discussions. Given men’s savings decisions, the …rst order condition for her optimization
problem is
                                    "                                                           @
                                                                                                    R
                                                                                                                     M (~w )dF (        w
                                                                                                                                            )
                                                                                                                                                #
                                           w 0 @c2w                 w                                   w        w
                                            u2w @sw    + (1            ) u02w;n Ry w + ~
                 u01w y w +                                             w
                                                                                                                     @sw                            =0         (3.7)
                                                                   + @@sw (u2w u2w;n )

where
                 R                                                               Z
             @       ~w     w   M (~w )dF (    w
                                                   )
                                                       =       u02w Ry w                 M 0(   w
                                                                                                    )dF (          w
                                                                                                                         ) + M(        w
                                                                                                                                           )f (     w
                                                                                                                                                        )
                                 @sw                                                 w

                                             @ w                    w
                                                       = f(             ) u02w Ry w
                                             @sw

     Similarly, a representative man’s second-period utility, given his rivals’and all women’s savings
decisions, is
                                                                                                    Z
             m                                                          m
             j u            Rsw y w + Rsm
                                        j y
                                            m
                                                        + (1                   m m
                                                                        j )u(Rsj y )            +                        M     1
                                                                                                                                   ~m
                                                                                                                                    j dF (              m
                                                                                                                                                        j )
                                                                                                        ~m
                                                                                                         j
                                                                                                                     m



                                                                                                                                   m
where ~m
       j = u                Rsw y w + Rsm
                                        j y
                                            m
                                                           u( (Rsw y w + Rsm y m )) +                              m
                                                                                                                   j     and       j       is his probability of
marriage.

    m
    j    =   Pr u                Rsw y w + Rsm
                                             j y
                                                 m
                                                                   u( (Rsw y w + Rsm y m ) +                             m
                                                                                                                         j
                                                                                                                                   m
                                                                                                                                        Rsw y w ; Rsm y m
                                m
         =   1        F                u     Rsw y w + Rsm
                                                         j y
                                                             m
                                                               ) + u( (Rsw y w + Rsm y m )                                                                     (3.8)




                                                                            12
      The …rst order condition for his optimization problem is
                                  "                      @
                                                             R
                                                                           M 1 (~m )dF (   m
                                                                                               )
                                                                                                                                       #
                                      m 0 @c2m                   ~m    m                                          m
                                       u2m @sm       +                                       + (1                     ) u02m;n Ry m
                 u01m y m +                                                m
                                                                            @sm                                                              =0           (3.9)
                                                                      + @@sm (u2m        u2m;n )

where
            R                1                                                 Z
        @       ~m   w   M       (~m )dF (   m
                                                 )                                     @M 1 (      m
                                                                                                       )
                                                     =       u02m Ry m                                     dF (   m
                                                                                                                      )+M      1
                                                                                                                                   (   m
                                                                                                                                           )f (   m
                                                                                                                                                      )
                         @sm                                                       m     @ m
                                         @ m                      m
                                                     = f(             ) u02m Ry m
                                         @sm

     In the rest of the paper, we assume that the average value of emotional utility E is su¢ ciently
high such that a representative man, ex ante, always prefers marriage to being single. For simplicity,
we also assume R = 1 througout the paper (except for the large country case).


3.4     Equilibrium Savings Rates

     In the benchmark, we assume that all women and men automatically enter the marriage market
(We will later consider an extension in which agents decide whether or not to enter the marriage
market). An equilibrium is de…ned as a collecton of savings rates by men and women that solve their
respective optimalization problems, taking all other men and women’s decisions as given.


De…nition 1 An equilibrium is f sw ; sm j y w ; y m ; F w ; F m g that satis…es the following conditions:

                                         sw             w w       m w m       w
                                          i = arg max Vi j s i ; s ; y ; y ; F ; F
                                                                                   m



and
                                        sm
                                         j = arg max Vj
                                                       m w m
                                                         s ; s j ; yw ; ym ; F w ; F m

where i and j stand for a representative woman and man, respectively, and i and j represent all
women other than i and all men other than j, respectively. sw = sw    w       m   m m
                                                                 i ; s i and s = sj ; s j are the
sets of women’s and men’s savings rates respectively.


     To simplify the discussion, we assume that the population growth rate is zero, and women and
men receive the same …rst period income (y w = y m = y). Before period t, the economy has a balanced
sex ratio. In this case, sw = sm = s, and s can be obtained from solving the set of …rst order conditions
(3.7) or (3.9):
                                 u01w + 2 (1 F ( )) u02 + F ( ) u02n = 0                           (3.10)

and
                                                                       = u2n       u2

                                                                            13
where we use the fact that at        = 1, M ( ) = .

     The …rst key proposition concerns the e¤ect of a rise in the sex ratio on the aggregate savings
rate. The thought experiment assumes that people in the old cohort have made their savings decision
when the sex ratio is balanced. When the sex ratio rises, any change in the aggregate savings is
driven by a change in the savings by the young cohort. This simplifying assumption is motivated by
the reality: A rise in the sex ratio in almost all economies is a recent phenomenon, since large-scale
sex-selective abortions are a recent phenomenon. More precisely, the diagnostic sonography used for
prenatal checkups became gradually more a¤ordable to people in countries that now have a high sex
ratio only since the early 1980s. (The strict version of the Chinese family planning policy, another
contributor to the spread of sex-selective abortions, was also put in place in the early 1980s.) For this
reason, the savings pattern for the currently old was largely decided when there was no severe sex ratio
imbalance.

     In what follows, whenever we say a man (or woman), we mean a young man (or woman), unless
otherwise speci…ed. We …rst state the proposition formally, and then explain the intuition behind the
key parts of the proposition. A detailed proof is provided in Appendix A.


Proposition 1 Assume emotional utility w and m are drawn from an independent and identical
uniform distribution [ min ; max ] with a su¢ ciently low min 4 and the mean E        0. If u(c) = ln(c),
then, as the sex ratio rises, (1) the savings rate of the representative man goes up, but the change in
women’s savings is ambiguous; (2) however, the economy-wide savings rate increases unambiguously.


Proof. See Appendix A.1.

      A few remarks are in order. First, it is perhaps not surprising that the representative man raises
his savings rate in response to a rise in the sex ratio since the need to compete in the marriage market
becomes greater. Why is the impact of a higher sex ratio on a representative woman’s savings rate
ambiguous? The answer is that a higher sex ratio produces two o¤setting e¤ects for her. On the one
hand, as she anticipates more savings from her future husband, she can free-ride and does not need
to sacri…ce her …rst-period consumption as much as she otherwise would have to. On the other hand,
precisely because men have increased their savings rate in the …rst period in response to a higher sex
ratio, they will be more reluctant to share their wealth with a woman with both a low savings rate
and a low emotional utility. The last point raises the probability that low-savings women may not get
married. Since the representative women also prefers marriage than spinsterhood, she may raise her
savings rate to improve her chance in the marriage market. Because the two e¤ects go in the opposite
directions, the net e¤ect of a higher sex ratio on a representative woman’s savings is ambiguous.

     Second, why does the aggregate savings rate rise unambiguously in response to a rise in the sex
ratio even when women reduce their savings? The answer comes from both an intensive margin and
   4 This assumption greatly simpli…es the proof. Relaxing the assumption will not change our qualitative result when

the sex ratio is su¢ ciently unbalanced.


                                                         14
an extensive margin. On the intensive margin, the increment in the representative man’s savings can
be shown to be greater than the reduction in the representative woman’s savings. Heuristically, the
representative man raises his savings rate for two separate reasons: in addition to improving his relative
standing in the marriage market, he wants to smooth his consumption over the two periods and would
raise his savings rate to make up for the lower savings rate by his future wife. The more his future wife
is expected to cut down her savings, the more he would have to raise his own savings to compensate.
This ensures that his incremental savings is more than enough to o¤set any reduction in his future
wife’s savings. On the extensive margin, a rise in the sex ratio implies a change in the mix of the
population with relatively more higher-saving men and relatively fewer lower-saving women. While
both margins contribute to a rise in the aggregate savings rate, we can verify in calibrations that the
intensive margin is quantitatively more important.

      Third, we use log utility function because its simplicity allows us to prove Proposition 1 relatively
easily. While log utility is one of many possible choices for a utility function, it also turns out to have
interesting empirical support. Using datasets across individuals with di¤erent income levels in di¤erent
countries, Stevenson and Wolfers (2008) show that self-reported happiness rises approximately linearly
in log income. They conclude that the "true" utility function should be close to a log utility function.
We interpretate the evidence as suggesting that log utility is a reasonable choice for our baseline case.


3.5     Mixed-strategy equilibrium

     In this section, we extend our benchmark model by allowing men and women to choose to enter
and exit the marriage market. Formally, this is a mixed-strategy game in which the representative
woman chooses the probability of entering the marriage market w , a savings rate if she decides to
enter, and a separate savings rate if she decides to abstain from the marriage market.

      Conditional on deciding to enter the marriage market, she has the same optimization problem as
in the previous section. However, she can also choose to be single, and conditional on such a choice,
her life-time utility is
                                    Vnw = max
                                            w
                                              u(c1w;n ) + u(c2w;n )
                                               sn

where Vnw denotes the value function of a representative woman who is single throughout her life.

      Her overall optimization problem when she is young is

                                                    w
                                         max
                                        w ;sw ;sw
                                                        V w + (1   w
                                                                       )Vnw
                                                n


                               w
Obviously, she would choose        = 1 if and only if V w > Vnw .
                                                                                                      m
      Similarly, a representative man chooses the probability of entering the marriage market             as




                                                          15
well as two potentially separate savings rates. His overall optimization problem is

                                                    m
                                            max
                                        m ;sm ;sm
                                                        V m + (1            m
                                                                                )Vnm
                                                n



where Vnm denotes the value function of a representative man who is single throughout his life. Obvi-
ously, the representative man decides to enter the marriage market with probability one if and only if
the expected utility of doing so is greater than otherwise, or V m > Vnm :

      Now we can re-de…ne the equilibrium as following:

De…nition 2 An equilibrium is f sw ; sm ; sw    m
                                           n ; sn ;
                                                           w
                                                               ;    m
                                                                        j y w ; y m ; F w ; F m g that satis…es the following
conditions:

       sw    w
        i ; sn;i ;
                     w
                     i   = arg max   w w
                                     i Vi   + (1    w   w
                                                    i )Vn;i        sw i ; sm ; sw       m
                                                                                n; i ; sn ;
                                                                                               w
                                                                                                   i;
                                                                                                        m
                                                                                                            ; yw ; ym ; F w ; F m

and

      sm    m
       j ; sn;j ;
                     m
                     j   = arg max   m m
                                     j Vj   + (1    m   m
                                                    j )Vn;j         sw ; smj ; sw    m
                                                                                n ; sn;   j;
                                                                                               w
                                                                                                    ;   m    w m     w
                                                                                                         j; y ; y ; F ; F
                                                                                                                          m



where i and j stand for a representative woman and man, respectively, and i and j represent all
women other than i and all men other than j, respectively. sw = sw             w     w      w
                                                                          i ; s i ; sn;i ; sn; i and s
                                                                                                      m
                                                                                                        =
  m m        m      m                                                                         w     w w
 sj ; s j ; sn;j ; sn; j are the sets of women’s and men’s savings rates respectively.          = i; i
       m        m m
and      = j ; j are the sets of women’s and men’s probabilities of entering the marriage market
respectively.

      We can show a more general proposition:

Proposition 2 Under the same assumptions as those in Proposition 1, there exists a threshold value
                       m
 1 > 1 that satis…es V   = Vnm .

     (i) For < 1 , both women and men choose to enter the marriage market with probability one.
In addition, as the sex ratio rises, a representative man increases his savings rate while the change
in the savings rate of a representative woman is ambiguous. However, the economy-wide savings rate
increases unambiguously.

     (ii) For      1 , as the sex ratio rises, a representative man chooses a positive probability of being
single while a representative woman still chooses to enter the marriage market with probability one.
The e¤ ect on the aggregate savings rate is ambiguous.

Proof. See Appendix A.2.

     Three remarks are in order. First, for < 1 , as the sex ratio rises, men endure a welfare loss
while the e¤ect on women’s welfare is ambiguous. Men lose because (i) they face a lower probability

                                                          16
of marriage, and (ii) the reductions in their …rst-period consumption do not in the end alter their
probability of marriage. In comparison, women face two opposing e¤ects. On the one hand, they
may gain both from an ability to free ride on their future husbands’higher savings rates and from an
improved chance to marry a man with a higher level of emotional utility. On the other hand, precisely
because men have raised their savings, they become more choosy in their selection of a mate as sharing
their higher savings rate with a low-type woman may be worse than being single. As a result, women
ex ante may face a rising risk of not getting married. The net e¤ect of a higher sex ratio on women’s
welfare is ambiguous.

      Second, after the sex ratio reaching and then going beyond the threshold 1 , with a savings
rate already very high, some men would …nd it better to skip the marriage market (or equivalently,
the representative man would assign a positive probability for not entering the marriage market).
Otherwise, they would have to share their high savings rate with a low-type woman, resulting in a
lower level of welfare than being single. From women’s point of view, however, as long as the mean
level of emotional utility is high enough, they always achieve a higher level of welfare by choosing to
enter the marriage market. In this case, the sex ratio in the marriage market is always equal to 1 .
Both men and women who choose to enter the marriage market will keep their savings rates constant.
The rest of men choose another (constant) savings rate to maximize their utilities, but it is ambiguous
whether the life-time bachelors’savings rate is lower than women’s savings rate. Therefore, the e¤ect
of a rise in the sex ratio on the aggregate savings rate is ambiguous.

      Third, the log utility assumption greatly simpli…es the proof. More general functional forms for
utility can also yield the same results if the mean of the emotional utility is su¢ ciently large such that
(i) the condition in Proposition 1 holds
                                      s
                              R u02       max 0; u02 u02w;n + u02m;n    u02w;n u02m;n
                      E( )
                               2                          u001m u001w

and (ii), at the balanced sex ratio, all women and men enter the marriage market.


3.6    A Production Economy

     To analyze how the sex ratio a¤ects a country’s current account imbalance, we need to compare
economy-wide savings with investments. We make the same assumptions as those in Proposition 1,
and introduce a production sector. We assume perfect competition for both the …nal good market and
the factor markets. The production function is Cobb-Douglas:

                                               Qt = Kt L1t                                          (3.11)

where Kt is the capital stock and Lt is the labor input. is the share of capital input to total output
and is the total factor productivity (TFP). Everyone in the economy inelastically supplies one unit


                                                      17
of labor and earns the same income5 .
      A representative …rm maximizes the pro…t

                                               max Qt        Rt Kt      Wt Lt
                                               Kt ;Lt


The capital return and the wage rate are determined by
                                                                              1
                                                        @Qt             1
                                          Rt     =          =                                                (3.12)
                                                        @Kt             Kt
                                                        @Qt
                                         Wt      =          = (1            ) Kt                             (3.13)
                                                        @Lt

where we normalize the aggregate labor supply in the economy to be 1, i.e., Lt = 1.
     For simplicity, we assume no tax or government expenditure; then yt = Wt where yt is the
corresponding …rst period disposable income in the endowment economy. We also assume complete
depreciation in each period. The aggregate capital supply in period t + 1 is predetermined by the
aggregate savings in period t
                                  s                     1 w
                                 Kt+1  =      sm Wt +       s Wt                            (3.14)
                                         1+ t         1+ t

3.7     Current Account in a Small Open Economy

      In a small open economy, we assume that capital can ‡ow freely among countries and the gross
interest rate R is exogenously determined by the rest of the world. By (3.12) and (3.13), the wage rate
is also a constant, and the aggregate investment in the economy is

                                                                   Wt
                                                     Ktd =                                                   (3.15)
                                                             (1     )Rt

Substituting (3.12) and (3.15) into the production function, we have

                                                                   Wt
                                                        Qt =
                                                               1

      The current account in period t equals the increase in net foreign assets,

                                                                                             d
                              N F At = Qt + (R          1) N F At       1    C1t   C2t      Kt+1

where (R 1) N F At 1 is the factor income from abroad. C1t and C2t represent the aggregate
consumptions by young and old people respectively. Then

                                                              1 w
                             N F At =           sm
                                                 t Wt +         s Wt           N F At   1
                                                                                             d
                                                                                            Kt+1
                                        1+                   1+ t
  5 Allowing   men and women to earn di¤erent wages (with a …xed proportional gap) would not change our results.


                                                             18
We de…ne the economy-wide savings rate as the aggregate private savings to GDP ratio; then

                                           Qt + (R       1) N F At   1   C1t        C2t
                                  sP
                                   t =                                                                       (3.16)
                                                             Qt

    We assume that the country has a balanced sex ratio in period t 1, and the sex ratio in the
young cohort in period t, rises from one to (> 1). Then the ratio of the current account to GDP is

                                                                                           d
                                      Qt + (R      1) N F At 1 C1t             C2t        Kt+1
                           cat   =                                                                           (3.17)
                                                           Qt
                                                              1 w
                                 =    (1      )       sm
                                                       t +      s              st   1
                                                  1+        1+ t

where the second equality holds because6

                                            N F At   1   = st   1 Wt 1   Ktd

where st 1 is the savings rate by the cohort born in period t 1: Since the sex ratio is balanced at
that time, both the women and the men will have the same savings rate.

     Since the wage rate is constant in the small open economy, we can show that a country’s current
account rises as its sex ratio rises (up to a point).


Proposition 3 In a small open economy with production, both the economy-wide savings rate and the
current account would rise in response to a rise in the sex ratio.


Proof. See Appendix A.3.

     In this two-period model, the rise in the current account lasts for only one period in response to a
one-time permanent rise in the sex ratio. From the second period onwards, the increase in old people’s
dis-savings completely o¤set the increment in young people’s savings, and the economy achieves a new
equilibrium in which the current account goes back to zero. In the calibration section, we consider
a (more realistic) multi-period OLG model and generate longer lasting savings and current account
responses to the same one-time rise in the sex ratio.

     The assumption of an exogenous interest rate holds only for a small open economy. But some
of the countries that motivate this study are large. An increase in the savings rate in such economies
could lower the world interest rate, which could alter investment and savings decisions in all countries.
We examine the large country case in the next subsection.
   6 In overlapping generations models, net foreign asset is equal to the di¤erence between the savings by the young

cohort and the domestic investment demand.




                                                           19
4          Parental savings and endogenous sex ratios

     In this section, we make the sex ratio for any cohort to be an endogenous choice of their parents.
We introduce parental savings for children, which is a part of the economy-wide household savings. To
incorporate these features, we consider an OLG model in which every cohort lives two periods (young
and old). Everyone works and earns labor income in the …rst period. If one gets married, the marriage
takes place at the beginning of the second period, and the couple produces a single child right away.

     As noted in Wei and Zhang (2011), widespread sex selective abortions are a relatively recent
phenomenon because the inexpensive technology (especially Ultrasound B machines) employed to
detect the gender of a fetus became available only since the 1980s. For example, 1985 was the …rst
year in which half of the county-level hospitables in China acquired at least one ultrasound B machine
(Li and Zheng, 2009). Therefore, the …rst cohort born with a severe sex ratio imbalance was entering
the marriage market only after the start of the 21st century. To capture this feature of the data, we
assume in the model that sex-selective abortions are not technologically feasible in periods before t0
so that the sex ratio is always balanced. Starting from period t0 , parents can directly choose a sex
ratio t for the next cohort. As a result, parents in period t have a son with probability of 1+t , and
                                                                                                t
a daughter with probability of 1+1 .
                                                t


      Parents can save and invest in a risk-free bond for their child, and that savings potentially depends
on the gender of their child. For simplicity, we assume that parents do not invest for girls7 . Let t be
the rate of the parental savings for their son. In period t + 1, parents transfer the bond revenue to
their son. If their son gets married in period t + 1, the son and his wife will share the transfer which
yields a utility of ln R t ym;tP
                                    to both of them,8 where ym;t  P
                                                                      represents the wealth of the parents
with a son in period t. If the son fails to get married in period t + 1, parental transfers will yield a
                     P
utility of ln R t ym;t    to the young man.

    For simplicity, we assume that the parents’ cohort dies when their grandchild’s cohort is born.
Parents derive emotional utility from both their child and their grand-child9 . For a representative
young woman who enters the marriage market
                                                                                                       s              d
                                                                             w                  t+1                                   w
 Vtw = max u(cw           w
              1t ) + E u(c2;t+1 ) +                       ln (Tt+1 ) +       t E
                                                                                      m
                                                                                          +                 +                    +    t   t+2
        w    st                                                                               1+      t+1        1+       t+1


where
                                    m                s             d                  w                      s              d
                            s   t+1 t+1     t+2                                  d    t+1             t+2
                  t+2   =                                 +                  +                                    +
                                1+   t+1   1+       t+2       1+       t+2           1+   t+1      1+       t+2       1+        t+2
    7 This assumption is consistent with the historical evidence described by Botticini and Siow (2003).
    8 Inthis case, the parental transfers are assumed to be spent on a partial public consumption good within the marriage.
Similar to our benchmark model, is a congestion index.
   9 If we allow parents to obtain emotional utility from their daughter-in-law or son-in-law, the results remain the same

qualitatively. If we make a more general assumption by allowing parents to derive their altruistic utility from their child’s
utility, the model would be harder to sovle but the results are likely to be the same qualitatively.



                                                                        20
represents the expected emotional utility obtained by the woman if she has a grandchild at the end
of her life. w                                                    w    m
             t is the probability that the woman gets married. t+1 ( t+1 ) is the probability that her
daughter (son) gets married. s and d are the emotional utilities each parent obtains from having a
son and a daughter, respectively. s and d ( d < s < 1) are the parameters representing the degree
of the emotional utilities from her son’s and daughter’s child, respectively. Tt+1 is the transfer from
the parents to their child.

     For a representative young man,
                                                                                  s             d
                                                            m              t+1                                m
Vtm = max u(cm           m
             1t ) + E u(c2;t+1 ) +         ln (Tt+1 ) +     t E
                                                                  w
                                                                      +                +                  +   t   t+2
       mst                                                                1+     t+1       1+       t+1


     Let cw        w
           1t and st denote the representative woman’s …rst-period consumption and savings rate,
respectively. Naturally,
                                         cw
                                          1t = (1 sw    w
                                                   t ) yt

If she fails to get married, her second-period consumption is

                                             cw;n       w w
                                              2;t+1 = Rst yt



     If she gets married, her second-period consumption is

                                cw;i
                                 2;t+1 =      1    i
                                                   t   (Rsw  w     m m
                                                          t yt + Rst yt )


where sm         m
        t and yt are the …rst period savings rate and income by a man, respectively. i (=w or m)
stands for the child’s gender.

      Assume that d (< s ) is su¢ ciently large such that a woman (man) would not choose to be single
if she/he can be matched with someone. One su¢ cient condition is

                                       d                    1     min
                                              (1 + ) ln

For simplicity, we also assume that men do not observe women’s wealth in the marriage market
(but women do observe men’s wealth). An important consequence of this assumption is that men rank
women only by women’s emotional utility. Young women and young men are assumed to earn the same
…rst period income, ytw = ytm = y. Furthermore, w and m are assumed to be drawn from the same
uniform distribution. With log utility, u(c) = ln c, the optimization condition for the representative
woman is
                                   1         1 F( w    t )   F( wt )
                                        +                  +         =0                          (4.1)
                                1 sw t        sw + sm
                                               t      t       sw
                                                               t

where w , similarly de…ned as in the benchmark model, is the lowest type of women who can get
married. In this extension, w
                            t =
                                 min
                                     and m
                                         t =M
                                                 min
                                                     .



                                                       21
     For a representative man, similar to the benchmark model, the optimal condition is
                              "                                                                                                                               #
                                                                           m      min                                      1                     m 1
                1                      (1 +            t ) (1        F(    t )) +     f( m
                                                                                         t )                         sw   m          +F (        t ) sm
                    +                                                                                                 t +st                           t           =0                (4.2)
                                                                    f( m  )
              1 smt
                                                                                P
                                                                 + sw +sm Ut+1 + ln
                                                                       t
                                                                                                                     um
                                                                                                                      2;n;t+1
                                                                    t    t



where uw;m        w;w
       2;t+1 and u2;t+1 stand for the utilities obtained from consumption when the representative
                                                 P
woman has a son and a daughter, respectively. Ut+1   denotes the expected utility of parents
                                                                         s                d                                                                        s            d
            t+1    uw;m
                    2;t+1 +
                                  s
                                      +        s m
                                                 t+1         1+
                                                                 t+2
                                                                                 +   1+                      uw;w
                                                                                                              2;t+1 +
                                                                                                                                 d
                                                                                                                                     +       d w
                                                                                                                                               t+1
                                                                                                                                                          t+2
                                                                                                                                                         1+            +   1+
  P                                                                  t+2                  t+2                                                                 t+2               t+2
 Ut+1 =                                                                                                  +
                                           1+          t+1                                                                                   1+      t+1


    Parents optimally choose how much to save for (and transfer to) their sons. For a representative
                                                                                     w       m
couple i, given all other households’ choices i;t , and all young people’s choices st and st , the
probability that their son can get married is

                                      m                      m                            it                 m               w m
                                      it   = Pr              it      +       ln                              t        i;t ; st ;st
                                                                                          i;t


The optimization problem for parents at time t is
                                                                                                         s                 d
                                                                                 s m            t+1
                                       maxu(c2;m;t ) +                             t                         +
                                               t                                          1+          t+1        1+            t+1


where we drop the sub-index i due to the symmetry. The …rst order condition is

                                                                             m                       s                 d
                                               1                 sf      (   t )              t+1
                                                       +                                                     +                       =0                                             (4.3)
                                      1            t                         t         1+           t+1          1+        t+1


    Parents also choose the sex ratio (although they don’t directly choose the gender of the child) to
maximize their utility UtP . The …rst order condition on the sex ratio t chosen by parents in period t
is
                              s                        d                                                                                 s               d
   uw;w
    2;t +
             d w
               t
                       t+1
                                      +                              +       d
                                                                                              uw;m
                                                                                               2;t +
                                                                                                             s m
                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                               t+1
                                                                                                                                             +                         +   s
                                                                                                                                                                                    =0
                     1+      t+1           1+              t+1                                                             1+        t+1         1+          t+1
                                                                                                                                                                        (4.4)
                                                             s               d                                                               s       d
We assume that parents favor sons,  >                                            ; furthermore, the di¤erence                                            is su¢ ciently large
such that, when = 1 in period t0 1,
                                                                                 !
                                           d                                                                     s
                     uw;w
                      2;t0 1      +                s
                                                       +         d
                                                                     +       d
                                                                                              uw;m
                                                                                               2;t0      1   +             s
                                                                                                                               +     d
                                                                                                                                             +   s
                                                                                                                                                     <0                             (4.5)
                                           2                                                                     2

 We also make the Darwinian assumption that E m and E w are su¢ ciently large so that marriage is
strongly attractive. Totally di¤erentiating (4.1), (4.2), and (4.3), we have the following proposition:



                                                                                       22
Proposition 4 Assume that the sex ratio becomes a choice variable from period t0 onwards. Under
the same assumptions as those in Proposition 1 and Proposition 3, if (4.5) holds, we can show that

      (i)   t   > 1 (t   t0 );

     (ii) In period t0 , both young men and parents with a son have higher savings rates, but the savings
rates by young women and parents with a daughter decline. In a small open economy, the aggregate
savings rate rises and the country runs a current account surplus in period t0 .


Proof. See Appendix A.4.

     Note that the assumption that parents do not save for their daughter can be relaxed. Since
daughters are assumed to bring a lower utility than boys to their parents if the sex ratio is balanced,
parents will choose a higher sex ratio (more boys than girls) in period t0 . Then all women will get
married even if parents with a daughter do not save for their child. As a result, parents with a daughter
optimally choose zero savings for their daughter.



5     Numerical Examples

     Are the actual sex ratios observed in the data capable of generating a current account response
whose magnitude is economically signi…cant? We answer this question in this section by quantitative
calibrations of the model. We start with a small open economy and allow endogenous entry/exit to the
marriage market. Then we move on to two cases of a large economy. We also consider two extensions
that would add some more realism to the model. First, we discuss potential intra-family bargaining
between husband and wife, with their relative bargaining power depending in part on their relative
savings rate. Second, we extend the benchmark two-period model to a multi-period model.


5.1     The Small Open Economy

      Assume that the utility function is of the log form

                                              u(c) = ln(c)

                                                              1
In the calibrations for a small open economy, we …x R =           . (In the large country case, the interest
rate is to be endogenously determined.)

     The emotional utility needs to follow a continuously di¤erential distribution. We assume a
normal distribution which might be more realistic than the uniform distribution used in the analytical
model (for which the uniform distribution assumption is analytically more convenient). We choose the
mean and the standard deviation of emotional utility by matching them with the empirical moments
implied by the estimates in Blanch‡ower and Oswald (2004). To be precise, here is what we do to


                                                   23
calibrate the mean. Note …rst that, within the model, we can compute the incremental income needed
for a man to be indi¤erent between being married and being forever single when the sex ratio is
balanced:
                            u (Rsm y + my) = u ( R (sm + sw ) y) + E ( )

where m y is the additional compensation paid to a life-time bachelor. Regressing a measure of
subjective well-being on income and marital status (and other determinants of happiness) in the United
States during 1972-1998, Blanch‡ower and Oswald (2004) estimate that, on average, a lasting marriage
is equivalent to augmenting one’s income by $100,000 (in 1990 dollars) per year every year. Since the
average annual income per working person was about $48,000 in that period, a sustained marriage is
worth twice the average income. We therefore choose m = 2:08(' 100;000
                                                                     48;000 ) as the benchmark. This
implies that the mean value of emotional utility is:

                                                            Rsm + m
                                           E ( ) = ln
                                                            R (sm + sw )

where sw and sm are solved for the case when               = 1. We will vary the value of m in the robustness
checks.

     We calibrate the standard deviation of emotional utility to match the standard errors for the
coe¢ cient on the marriage status dummy in the happiness regressions. Since the t-statistic for the
                                                                                               E
marriage status dummy is around 20, the implied standard deviation of emotional utility, = t:stat ,
is about 0:05: As a robustness check, we will also consider = 0:1.

     For other parameters, whenever relevant data are available, we assign values that are consistent
with the data, and they are summarized in the following table.


                                         Choice of Parameter Values
 Parameters                       Benchmark                           Source and robustness checks
                                                            1
 Discount factor                       = 0:7         = R . Song et al (2011) suggests that the annual gross
                                                   deposit rate in China takes value around 1:0175. As we take
                                                   20 years as one period, we set = (1=1:0175)20 ' 0:7
 Share of capital input              = 0:4         From China’s input-output table in year 2007
 Congestion index                    = 0:8           = 0:7; 0:9 in the robustness checks.
 Love, standard deviation            = 0:05          = 0:1 in the robustness checks
 Love, mean                        m = 2:08        m = 1 in the robustness checks

     Figure 1 plots the aggregate savings rate as a function of the sex ratio.When the sex ratio goes
up from 1 to 1.15, the savings rate would go up by 6.2 percentage points (=0.342-0.280).10 As the sex
ratio continues to rise, the savings rate continues to rise but, after a certain point (i.e., after the sex
  1 0 In Online Appendix Tables 1a, 1b and 1c, we also report the calibration results for individual savings when the sex

ratio changes from 1 to 1.5.



                                                           24
ratio approaches 1.4), it starts to decline. This is because the sex ratio has exceeded the threshold 1 in
Proposition 2; some men quit the marriage market and choose a lower savings rate, which drives down
the economy-wide savings rate. Note, since no economy in the real world has a sex ratio exceeding 1.4,
we may not have an opportunity to observe the declining portion of the savings curve in the data.

      For sensitivity analyses, we consider di¤erent combinations of parameter values involving =
0:7; 0:8 and 0:9, m = 2:08 and 0:5, and = 0:05, and 0:1. There are a few noteworthy patterns. First,
the economy-wide savings rate always rises in response to a rise in the sex ratio (up to a relatively
high threshold value of the sex ratio). Second, the response in the economy-wide savings rate is not
sensitive to changes in parameter . Third, when the mean value of emotional utility becomes higher
(e.g., comparing m = 2:08 to m = 1), both the economy-wide savings rate and the current account
respond more strongly to a given rise in the sex ratio. This is intuitive since men have a stronger desire
to compete for a marriage partner. Fourth, as the dispersion for emotional utility becomes smaller, the
economy-wide savings rate and the current account respond more strongly to a rise in the sex ratio.
The reason is similar to before: when men are more similar in terms of the amount of "love" they can
o¤er to women, the need to compete on the basis of wealth also rises.


5.2    Multi-period Model Calibrations

     We now extend our benchmark model to a setting in which every cohort lives for 50 periods.
Everyone works in the …rst 30 periods, and retires in the remaining 20 periods. If one gets married,
the marriage take place in the th period. We have not been able to solve the problem that allows
for parental savings for their child in the 50-period setup. Instead, we study a case in which men and
women save for themselves. However, as we recognize the quantitative importance of parental savings
in the data, we choose = 10 as our benchmark case so the timing of the marriage is somewhere
between the typical number of working years by parents when their child gets married and the typical
number of working years by children themselves when they get married. Besides the base case of =
10, we also examine the case of = 20 as a sensitivity check. Generally speaking, the greater the value
of , the stronger is the aggregate savings response to a given rise in the sex ratio.

     We consider the following experiment: at time 0, the sex ratios in all existing generations are
one. Starting from period 1, the sex ratio in all newly-born generations becomes (> 1), which is not
anticipated in previous periods. A representative woman’s optimization problem is
                                                             " 50                           #
                                X1                            X
                                       t 1                          t 1
                          max                u(cw
                                                t )   + E1                (u(cw
                                                                              t )   +   m
                                                                                            )
                                 t=1                          t=


For t < , when the woman is still single, the intertemporal budget constraint is

                                        At+1 = R (At + ytw            cw
                                                                       t )




                                                        25
where At is her wealth level at the beginning of period t. After marriage (t       ), her family budget

constraint becomes                    (
                                          R AH    H
                                             t + yt    cH
                                                        t =      if t 30
                             AH
                              t+1 =            H     H
                                            R At    ct =         if t > 30

where AHt is the level of family wealth (held jointly by the wife and the husband) at the beginning of
period t. cH
           t is the public good consumption by both spouses, which takes the same form as in the
two period OLG model. The optimization problem for a represenative man is similar.

     On the production side, we assume the same production function as in the benchmark except
that we now assume an annual capital depreciation rate equal to 0.1.

     Given the increase in the number of periods in a lifetime, we need to adjust some parameters in
the calibrations. Following Song, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2011), we take 1:0175 as the annual gross
interest rate in China. The subjective discount factor is set at = 1=R. All other parameters are the
same as in the previous 2-period OLG model.

     In this multi-period OLG setup, earning pro…les may also have implications on the aggregate
savings rate. The Chinese data suggest an interesting (and maybe peculiar) feature about a typical
worker’s life-time earnings pro…le. Using data from urban household surveys, Song and Yang (2011)
document that a typical worker in China faces a fairly ‡at lifetime (real) earnings pro…le (although
the starting salary of each successive cohort tends to rise fast). Within a given cohort, we also assume
a ‡at earnings pro…le over time. Since we do not consider an exogenous growth in productivity, we do
not feature a steady rise in income from one cohort to the next.

     In Figure 2, we trace out the evolution of the aggregate savings and the current account when
the sex ratio rises from 1 to 1.10 (and when the marriage is assumed to always take place in the 10th
period). Over a period of nine years, both the economy-wide savings rate and current account rise by
about 3.4% of GDP. Starting from the 10th period, the increased dis-savings by the old generation
start to partially o¤set the increase in young generation’s savings. Both aggregate savings rate and the
current account begin falling. In the 50th period, the aggregate savings rate and the current account
converge to the new equilibrium.

     As a robustness check, consider the case in which marriages always take place in the 20th period.
In this case, after the same rise in the sex ratio, the economy-wide savings rate and the current account
would rise by about 5.7% of GDP in nineteen years. On the other hand, if marriages take place in the
5th period, the aggregate savings rate and current account would rise by about 1.7% of GDP (we do
not report the corresponding …gures to save space). Because in the real world, savings response come
from both the young cohort and their parents, we think setting the timing of marriages in the 10th
period is reasonable, as it represents a weighted average of the number of working years by the young
cohort and their parents.

     In all these experiments, we see clearly that, a higher sex ratio can generate responses in both the


                                                   26
aggregate savings rate and the current account that are both sizable and long-lasting. For instance, in
Figure 2, as the sex ratio rises from 1 to 1.10, the current account surplus will stay above 2% of GDP
for more than 20 years (from the 6th to 29th period) after the shock.


5.3    Additional Extensions

     We also study several additional extensions to the benchmark model. First, we consider a world
with two large countries. If the two countries are identical in every respect except that Country 2 has
a more unbalanced sex ratio than Country 1, we show analytically that Country 2 then runs a current
account surplus while Country 1 runs a current account de…cit. In a calibration, we consider a version
in which the two countries mimic the United States and China in some important ways. In particular,
while Country 1 (United States) always has a balanced sex ratio, we vary the sex ratio in Country 2
(China) from 1 to 1.5. When the Chinese sex ratio reaches 1.15, it runs a current account surplus on
the order of 4.4% of its GDP. At the same time, the United States runs a current account de…cit of
1.5% of its GDP. This calibration suggests that a rise in the sex ratio in a large economy may induce
other countries to run a current account de…cit (even though they have a balanced sex ratio). This
analysis is presented in Online Appendix B.

     Second, we analyze welfare implications from a rise in the sex ratio. With log utility function,
we show that men’s welfare under a decentralized equilibrium (our benchmark case) relative to the
central planner’s economy declines as the sex ratio increases. In comparison, women’s relative welfare
increases as the sex ratio goes up. With transferable utility, the social welfare (the sum of all men ’s
and women’s welfare) goes down as the sex ratio rises. The details are reported in Online Appendix
C.

     Third, we incorporate intra-household bargaining between wives and husbands into the model. If
the bargaining powers of the two parties depend on their initial relative wealth, women’s savings rate
in our simulations decline much more slowly as the sex ratio rises. If the sensitivity of the bargaining
power to the relative wealth is high enough, and/or private consumption is important in women’s
second period consumption bundle, women may even raise their savings as the sex ratio goes up. For
the aggregate savings rate, it responds more strongly to a rise in the sex ratio than in the benchmark
case. This is reported in Online Appendix D.

     Fourth, recognizing that, even out of a precautionary (or hedging) saving motive, the savings
rate can go up in response to a higher sex ratio, we compare the relative quantitative importance
of the competitive and precautionary saving motives. Changes in the savings rate due to a pure
hedging or precautionary motive can be ascertained by making one’s savings decision to be private
information. If savings cannot be observed, it cannot used as a competitive weapon in the marriage
market. As a result, the competitive saving motive is shut down. Numerical simulations show that
the incremental savings due to a pure hedging motive is very small relative to the competitive saving
motive. This means that when the sex ratio rises, much of the action in the savings response comes


                                                  27
from the competitive motive. A detailed comparison is presented in Online Appendix E.

     Fifth, as the sex ratio rises, raising savings rate may not be the only response in the real world. In
particular, young man may increase human capital accumulation (or parents may invest more in their
son’s human capital). We incorporate this aspect into the model, and show both theoretically and
numerically that a higher sex ratio still generates a signi…cant increase in the savings rate. Intuitively,
if both physical wealth and human capital can enhance a man’s status in the marriage market, the
optimal allocation in the …rst period must be such that marginal gains from additional savings and from
additional education expenditure are equal. As both yield a diminishing returns, an interior solution
emerges in which the man chooses to raise both the savings rate and human capital accumulation. The
derivations and simulations can be found in Online Appendix F.

     Sixth, since a man’s savings/consumption choice depends on the elasticity of intertemporal sub-
stitution, we check for the robustness our results with a more general utility function (CRRA) in
our numerical exercises. We …nd that, as the sex ratio rises, the aggregate savings rate and current
account always go up. As the elasticity of intertemporal substitution becomes lower, the responses of
the savings rate and current account become weaker but still economically signi…cant. This is reported
in Online Appendix G.

     Finally, we investigate how income inequality may a¤ect the savings and current account responses
to sex ratio imbalances. Through simulaitons of a multi-period model, we …nd that greater inequality
generally raises the savings and current account responses to a given rise in the sex ratio. There are
two reasons for this result. For high income men, a rise in the income gap among women motivates
men to try harder to be matched with a high-income woman. While the behavior of a low-income
woman exhibits some non-monoticity, she also eventually raises her savings rate in response to a higher
sex ratio. The details can be found in Online Appendix H.



6    Concluding Remarks and Future Research

     This paper builds a theoretical model to analyze whether and how a rise in the sex ratio may
trigger a competitive race in the savings rate by men (or households with sons). Generally speaking,
men raise their savings rate in order to improve their relative standing in the marriage market. If we
don’t consider intra-household bargaining, women may respond by reducing their savings rate because
they may free ride on the increased savings from their future husbands. If we consider intra-household
bargaining, then the women’s response becomes ambiguous because they also have an incentive to
raise their savings rate in order to protect their bargaining power within a family. In any case, the
aggregate savings always rises unambiguously in response to a rise in the sex ratio, as long as the sex
ratio is below some threshold. We argue conceptually and through calibrations that the threshold is
higher than the sex ratios in all real economies.

     When the country with an unbalanced sex ratio is large, this could have global rami…cations.


                                                    28
In particular, as the sex ratio rises, the world interest rate becomes lower. Other countries with a
balanced sex ratio could be induced to run a current account de…cit. Calibration results suggest that
the sex ratio e¤ect could potentially explain about half of China’s current account surplus and the
U.S. current account de…cit. In other words, the e¤ect is economically signi…cant.

     The theory can be extended in a number of directions. Initial results in several extensions are
presented in seven online appendices. In addition, while the model focuses on the responses of savings
and current account to a rise in the sex ratio, one may extend it to study e¤ects on entrepreneurship
and economic growth.




References
 [1] Becker, G. S. (1973). “A Theory of Marriage: Part I,”Journal of Political Economy 81(4): 813-46.

 [2] Becker, G. S. (1974). “A Theory of Marriage: Part II,” Journal of Political Economy 82(2, Part
     II): S11-S26.

 [3] Becker Gary S., 1991, A Treatise on the Family. Enlarged Edition. Cambridge, Mass. Harvard
     University Press.

 [4] Belton, Willie, and Uwaifo Oyelere, Ruth, 2008, "The Racial Saving Gap Enigma: Unraveling the
     Role of Institutions," working paper, Georgia Institute of Technology.

 [5] Benveniste, L M, and Scheinkman, J A, 1979. "On the Di¤erentiability of the Value Function in
     Dynamic Models of Economics," Econometrica, 47(3): 727-32.

 [6] Bhaskar, V, 2011, "Parental Sex Selection and Gender Balance," American Economic Journal:
     Microeconomics, 3(1): 214–44.

 [7] Bhaskar, V, and Ed Hopkins, 2011, "Marriage as a Rat Race: Noisy Pre-Marital Investments with
     Assortative Matching," Unpublished working paper, University College London and University of
     Edingburgh.

 [8] Browning, M., F. Bourguignon, P.-A. Chiappori, and V. Lechene (1994): “Income and Outcomes:
     A Structural Model of Intrahousehold Allocation,”Journal of Political Economy, 102, 1067–1096.

 [9] Blanchard, Olivier J. and Francesco Giavazzi, 2005. “Rebalancing Growth in China: A Three-
     Handed Approach.” MIT Department of Economics Working Paper No. 05-32.

[10] Blanch‡ower, D.G., Oswald, A.J., 2004. "Well-being over time in Britain and the USA." Journal
     of Public Economics 88 (7–8): 1359–1386.

[11] Botticini, Maristella, and Aloysius Siow, 2003. "Why Dowries?," American Economic Review,
     93(4): 1385-1398, September.

                                                 29
[12] Browning, M. and P.-A. Chiappori (1998): “E¢ cient Intra-household Allocations: A General
     Characterization and Empirical Tests,” Econometrica, 66, 1241–1278.

[13] Browning, M., P.-A. Chiappori, and V. Lechene, 2006, “Collective and Unitary Models: A Clari-
     …cation,” Review of Economics of the Household, 4, 5–14.

[14] Caballero, Ricardo, Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, 2008, "An Equilibrium
     Model of ’Global Imbalances’and Low Interest Rates," American Economic Review, 98(1): 358-
     393.

[15] Carroll, Christopher D., Overland, Jody R. and Weil, David N., 2008, “Saving and Growth with
     Habit Formation,” Working Paper No 95-42.

[16] Chiappori, P.-A., B. Fortin, and G. Lacroix, 2002, “Marriage Market, Divorce Legislation, and
     Household Labor Supply,” Journal of Political Economy, 110, 37–72.

[17] Chiappori, P.-A., Iyigun, M. and Weiss, Y., 2009, "Investment in Schooling and the Marriage
     Market", American Economic Review, 99(5): 1689–1713.

[18] Chamon, Marcos, and Eswar Prasad, 2010, “Why Are Saving Rates of Urban Households in China
     Rising?” American Economic Journal – Macroeconomics, 2 (1): 93-130.

[19] G. Corneo and Olivier Jeanne, 1999, “Social Organization in an Endogenous Growth Model”,
     International Economic Review 40: 711-25

[20] Cole, Harold L., George J. Mailath, and Andrew Postlewaite, 1992, “Social Norms, Savings Be-
     havior, and Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 100(6): 1092-1125, December.

[21] Donni, Olivier, 2006, "The Intrahousehold Allocation of Private and Public Consumption: Theory
     and Evidence from U.S. Data," IZA DP no. 2137

[22] Donni, Olivier, 2007, "Collective Models of the Household," The New Palgrave Dictionary of
     Economics, Second Edition (forthcoming).

[23] Das Gupta, Monica, 2005, “Explaining Asia’s ‘missing women’: A new look at the data,” Popu-
     lation and Development Review 31(3): 529-535.

[24] Ebenstein, Avraham, Hongbin Li, and Lingsheng Meng, 2010, "The Impact of Ultrasound Tech-
     nology on the Status of Women in China," working paper, Hebrew University and Tsinghua
     University.

[25] Eeckhout, Jan, 2000, “On the Uniqueness of Stable Marriage Matchings,”Economic Letters, Vol.
     69, No. 1, 1-8.

[26] Edlund, Lena, 2001, “Dear Son – Expensive Daughter: Do Scarce Women Pay to Marry?” Un-
     published.


                                                30
[27] Edlund, Lena, Hongbin Li, Junjian Yi, and Junsen Zhang, 2008, “More Men, More Crime: Evi-
     dence from China’s One-Child Policy,” IZA DP no. 3214.

[28] Gale, D., and L. S. Shapley, 1962, "College Admissions and the Stability of Marriage", American
     Mathematical Monthly, 69: 9-14.

[29] Hopkins, Ed, 2009, “Job Market Signaling of Relative Position, or Becker Married to Spence,”
     working paper, University of Edinburgh.

[30] Hopkins, Ed, and Tatiana Kornienko, 2004, “Running to Keep in the Same Place: Consumer
     Choice as a Game of Status,” American Economic Review 94(4): 1085-1107.

[31] Ju, Jiandong, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2010, "Domestic Institutions and the Bypass E¤ect of Financial
     Globalization," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(4): 173–204.

[32] Ju, Jiandong, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2011, "When is the Quality of Financial Institutions a Source
     of Comparative Advantage," Journal of International Economics, 84 (2): 178-187.

[33] Kimball, Miles S, 1990. "Precautionary Saving in the Small and in the Large," Econometrica,
     58(1): 53-73.

[34] Li, Hongbin, and Hui Zheng, 2009. "Ultrasonography and Sex Ratios in China," Asian Economic
     Policy Review, 4(1): 121-137.

[35] Lundberg, S., R. Pollak, and T. Wales, 1997, “Do Husbands and Wives Pool Their Resources?”
     The Journal of Human Resources, 32, 463–480.

[36] Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, Jose-Victor Rios-Rull, 2007, "Financial Integration,
     Financial Deepness and Global Imbalances," NBER Working Papers 12909.

[37] Modigliani, Franco, 1970, “The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving and Intercountry Di¤erences in
     the Saving Ratio,”in W.A. Elits, M.F. Scott, and J.N. Wolfe, eds., Growth and Trade, Essays in
     Honor of Sir Roy Harrod, Oxford University Press.

[38] Modigliani, Franco, and Shi Larry Cao, 2004, “The Chinese Saving Puzzle and the Life Cycle
     Hypothesis,” Journal of Economic Literature, 42: 145-170.

[39] Peters, M., and A. Siow, 2002, "Competing Pre-marital Investments," Journal of Political Econ-
     omy 113:1163-1216.

[40] Qian, Nancy, 2008, “Missing Women and the Price of Tea in China: The E¤ect of Sex-speci…c
     Earnings on Sex Imbalance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3): 1251-1285.

[41] Roth, A. E.,1984, "The Evolution of the Labor Market for Medical Interns and Residents: A Case
     Study in Game Theory," Journal of Political Economy, 92: 991–1016.



                                                31
[42] Roth, A. E., and Sotomayor, M. A. O., 1990, Two-sided Matching: A Study in Game-theoretic
     Modeling and Analysis, Cambridge University Press.

[43] Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti, 2011, "Growing Like China," American
     Economic Review, 101(1): 196-233.

[44] Song, Zheng, and Dennis Yang, 2011, "Life Cycle Earnings and the Household Saving Puzzle in
     a Fast-Growing Economy," working paper.

[45] Stevenson, B., and Wolfers, J, 2008, "Economic Growth and Subjective Well-Being: Reassessing
     the Easterlin Paradox," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Economic Studies Program, The
     Brookings Institution, vol. 39(1): 1-102.

[46] Wei, Shang-Jin, and Xiaobo Zhang, 2011, “The Competitive Saving Motive: Evidence from Rising
     Sex Ratios and Savings Rates in China,” Journal of Political Economy, 119(3): 511-564.

[47] Wei, Shang-Jin, and Xiaobo Zhang, 2011, "Sex Ratios, Entrepreneurship, and Economic Growth
     in the People’s Republic of China", NBER working paper #16800.




                                                32
                                                           Table 1: Savings rate vs sex ratio, 1990-2010
                                                          (1)               (2)                 (3)        (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)             (8)
                                                                                  Full sample                                           Excluding outliers
|sex ratio(i,t) – 1|                                   55.24***          57.02***        58.47***       58.51***        54.87***     56.66***        58.07***       58.11***
                                                        (12.13)           (12.00)          (11.94)       (11.93)         (12.01)      (11.87)         (11.81)        (11.79)
| sex ratio(i,t)– 1|*dmy(if sex ratio(i,t)<1)             9.71             20.49             25.65        38.31           10.94        21.99            27.27         42.08
                                                        (30.44)           (30.40)          (30.30)       (30.80)         (30.13)      (30.07)         (29.96)        (30.45)
dmy(if sex ratio(i,t)<1)                               2.78***           3.27***          3.00***        3.06***        2.78***      3.27***         2.99***         3.06***
                                                        (0.859)           (0.858)          (0.881)       (0.880)         (0.851)      (0.849)         (0.871)        (0.870)
ln(real GDP per capita)                                5.30***           6.68***          6.60***       16.67***        5.55***      6.97***         6.92***        18.70***
                                                         (1.24)            (1.25)           (1.26)        (4.70)          (1.23)       (1.23)          (1.25)         (4.65)
Fiscal deficit, % of GDP                              -0.477***         -0.415***        -0.422***     -0.425***       -0.467***    -0.404***       -0.411***      -0.414***
                                                        (0.032)           (0.032)          (0.032)       (0.032)         (0.031)      (0.032)         (0.032)        (0.032)
Credit to private sector, % of GDP                                      -0.035***        -0.037***     -0.032***                    -0.036***       -0.038***      -0.032***
                                                                          (0.008)          (0.008)       (0.008)                      (0.008)         (0.008)        (0.008)
Dependency ratio                                                                            -0.014        0.002                                        -0.008         0.010
                                                                                           (0.034)       (0.035)                                      (0.034)        (0.034)
ln(real GDP per capita) square                                                                          -0.704**                                                    -0.822**
                                                                                                         (0.316)                                                     (0.313)
Time fixed effect                                         Y                 Y                   Y           Y              Y             Y              Y               Y
Country fixed effect                                      Y                 Y                   Y           Y              Y             Y              Y               Y
Observations                                            2,376             2,344             2,323        2,323           2,374        2,342           2,321           2,321
R-squared                                                0.16              0.15             0.16          0.16            0.16         0.15            0.16           0.16
Number of countries                                      159               159              158           158             159          159             158            158
                                                                Standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

         We use the sex ratio in age group 10-24. The data can be obtained from United Nations’ Population Division (http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Excel-Data/population.htm).
         |sex ratio(i,t) – 1| is the absolute difference between country i’s sex ratio at time t and one.
         In Columns (5) to (8), we exclude the observations with extreme savings rate (with absolute value greater than 80% of GDP).
                                                                Table 2: CA/GDP vs sex ratio, 1990-2010
                                                          (1)               (2)                 (3)        (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)           (8)
                                                                                  Full sample                                             Excluding outliers
|sex ratio(i,t) – 1|                                   26.93**           29.18**          30.33**       29.87**          19.13*      21.32**          22.60**       22.27**
                                                        (12.86)           (12.69)          (12.71)       (12.70)         (10.65)      (10.48)          (10.48)       (10.47)
| sex ratio(i,t)– 1|*dmy(if sex ratio(i,t)<1)            19.13             32.09            36.46         24.54           35.24       46.01*           49.73*         37.80
                                                        (32.92)           (32.75)          (32.85)       (33.36)         (26.91)      (26.69)          (26.73)       (27.14)
dmy(if sex ratio(i,t)<1)                                 0.744              1.07            0.655         0.578         2.28***      2.58***          2.21***       2.14***
                                                        (0.949)           (0.943)          (0.973)       (0.973)         (0.781)      (0.774)          (0.797)       (0.797)
ln(real GDP per capita)                                   1.16            3.50**          4.14***          -6.26           1.78      3.84***          4.43***         -5.88
                                                         (1.39)            (1.40)           (1.42)        (5.35)         (1.144)       (1.15)           (1.16)        (4.39)
Fiscal deficit, % of GDP                              -0.189***         -0.136***        -0.139***     -0.137***       -0.136***    -0.098***        -0.103***     -0.100***
                                                        (0.034)           (0.034)          (0.034)       (0.034)         (0.029)      (0.029)          (0.029)       (0.029)
Credit to private sector, % of GDP                                      -0.056***        -0.060***     -0.066***                    -0.051***        -0.056***     -0.061***
                                                                          (0.009)          (0.009)       (0.009)                      (0.007)          (0.007)       (0.008)
Dependency ratio                                                                         0.099***       0.084**                                       0.096***      0.080**
                                                                                           (0.038)       (0.039)                                       (0.031)       (0.032)
ln(real GDP per capita) square                                                                          0.723**                                                     0.717**
                                                                                                         (0.358)                                                     (0.294)
Time fixed effect                                         Y                 Y                   Y           Y              Y               Y              Y             Y
Country fixed effect                                      Y                 Y                   Y           Y              Y               Y              Y             Y
Observations                                            2,318             2,293             2,273        2,273           2,268        2,243            2,223          2,223
R-squared                                                0.04              0.05             0.06          0.06            0.05            0.07          0.08          0.08
Number of countries                                      162               162              161           161             160             160           159           159
                                                                Standard errors in parentheses, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

         We use the sex ratio in age group 10-24. The data can be obtained from United Nations’ Population Division (http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Excel-Data/population.htm).
         |sex ratio(i,t) – 1| is the absolute difference between country i’s sex ratio at time t and one.
         In Columns (5) to (8), we exclude the observations with extreme current account (with absolute value greater than 30% of GDP)
                                            Figures and Tables

            Aggregate savings rate, kappa=0.7                        Aggregate savings rate, kappa=0.8
0.38                                                      0.38

0.36                                                      0.36

0.34                                                      0.34

0.32                                                      0.32

 0.3                                                       0.3


       1        1.1       1.2     1.3       1.4     1.5          1       1.1    1.2     1.3      1.4       1.5
                           sex ratio                                             sex ratio
            Aggregate savings rate, kappa=0.9
0.38

0.36
                                                                               m=2.08, sigma=0.05
0.34                                                                           m=1, sigma=0.05
                                                                               m=2.08, sigma=0.1
0.32

 0.3


       1        1.1       1.2     1.3       1.4     1.5
                           sex ratio



                      Figure 1: Economy-wide savings rate vs sex ratio

                      Aggregate savings rate                                     CA/GDP
 0.39                                                     0.05
                                                                                                 phi=1.1
 0.38                                                                                            phi=1.3
                                                          0.04
                                                                                                 phi=1.5

 0.37                                                     0.03


 0.36                                                     0.02


 0.35                                                     0.01


 0.34                                                       0
           0     10        20          30      40   50           0       10     20          30   40        50
                                time                                                 time
                       Figure 2: 50-period calibrations, τ=10, σ=0.05


                      Aggregate savings rate                                     CA/GDP
 0.44                                                     0.09
                                                                                                 phi=1.1
                                                          0.08
                                                                                                 phi=1.3
 0.42                                                     0.07                                   phi=1.5

                                                          0.06
  0.4
                                                          0.05

                                                          0.04
 0.38
                                                          0.03

 0.36                                                     0.02

                                                          0.01

 0.34                                                       0
        0        10        20          30      40   50           0       10     20          30   40        50
                                time                                                 time

                       Figure 3: 50-period calibrations, τ=20, σ=0.05
  Online Appendices to "A Theory of the Competitive Saving
                                                                          Motive"

 Qingyuan Du (Monash University) and Shang-Jin Wei (Columbia University and NBER)

                                                       This version: August 30, 2013



A       Proofs

A.1         Proof of Proposition 1

Proof. The …rst order conditions for a woman and a man, respectively, are:
                              "                            h                                                       i                              #
                                                   w           1                                                                   w
                                      u02w             +           (1     F(        w
                                                                                        )) +         m
                                                                                                         f(   w
                                                                                                                  ) + (1               ) u02w;n
                   u01w   +                                                                                                                            =0           (A.1)
                                                                            w
                                                                   +f (         ) u02w (u2w                   u2w;n )
                                  "                                                                                                               #
                                                   m                                                                               m
                                          u02m (        + [ (1 F ( m )) + w f ( m )]) + (1                                             ) u02m;n
                     u01m     +                                                                                                                        =0           (A.2)
                                                            +f ( m ) u02m (u2m u2m;n )

                                                               w                                              m              w
       We show by contradiction that                               = u2m;n               u2m and                  = M(           ) hold for            1. Suppose not,
then
                                                                        m                    w            w
                                                                            > M(                 )

where the second inequality holds because                                           1. Then we have

               m
                   = u (Rsw y)                 u ( (Rsw y + Rsm y)) >                            w
                                                                                                         u (Rsm y)           u ( (Rsw y + Rsm y))

and hence, sw > sm .

       Under the log utility assumption, u(c) = ln c, we have u02m < u02m;n and u02w < u02w;n . Then

                          w           1                                                                             w
u01w    =     u02w            +           (1     F(     w
                                                            )) + M (            w
                                                                                    )f (     w
                                                                                                 )       + (1           ) u02w;n + f (       w
                                                                                                                                                 ) u02w (u2w        u2w;n )

                          m           1                                                                             m
        <     u02w            +           (1       F(      w
                                                               )) + M (         w
                                                                                    )f (     w
                                                                                                 )       + (1           ) u02w;n + f (        w
                                                                                                                                                  ) u02w (u2w       u2w;n )
                       m                                                                                                m
        <     u02m            +       (1        F(      m
                                                            )) + M          1
                                                                                (   m
                                                                                        )f (     m
                                                                                                     )    + (1              ) u02m;n + f (        m
                                                                                                                                                      ) u02m (u2m      u2m;n ) = u01m


                                                                                         1
where the …rst inequality holds because

                                             m                      m                                   w            w
                                                  =1           F(        )<1                 F(             )=

and u02m < u02m;n . The second inequality holds because (i)

                               1                   w                     w               w
                                   (1        F(        )) + M (              )f (            )
                                                                                                                max
                                                   w                     w               w
                          =   1         F (M (         )) + M (              )f (            )=         max              min
                                              w            w        w                                            w              w        m
                          =   1         F(        )+           f(       )=           (1           F (M (             ))) +          f(       )
                                                           w                     1       m              m
                                   (1     F (M (               ))) + M               (           ) f(       )

by using the uniform distribution assumption; (ii) sw > sm under our conjecture, and (iii),

                                                  u2m           u2m;n > u2w                        u2w;n

The inequality u01w < u01m derived above implies

                                                                    sm > sw

                                                  m                 w
Contradiction! Therefore, we have                     = M(              ) and sm                   sw1 for                 1.

     Substituting the expressions of w and                          m
                                                                         into (A.1) and (A.2), and totally di¤erentiating the
system and re-arrange the matrix, we obtain

                                                                         ds = dz                                                                 (A.3)

where                                                      !                                      !                                  !
                                         11           12                             dsw                                        0
                              =                                 , ds =                                  and dz =
                                         21           22                             dsm                                        A
     1We can sm      sw for     1 by contradiction. Suppose not, then sw > sm , following the same steps as showing
 m   = M ( w ), we …nd a contradiction.




                                                                             2
                                "                                                                                                                                                 #
                                                               2 00                    1                                 w                       w
                                                                u2w           1+               (1              F(            )) + (1                 ) u002w;n
   11     =    u001w y   + Ry
                                            w          2 00                                 w                                           w
                                    +f (         )      u2w      (u2w + M (                        )           u2w;n ) + 2f (               ) u02w            u02w     u02w;n
                     "                                                                                                                                                 #
                          2 00               1                           w                             w        2 00                             w
                           u2w        1+             (1         F(           )) + f (                      )     u2w         (u2w + M (              )    u2w;n )
   12     = Ry
                                            w          2 02                  w
                                    +f (        )       u2w      + f(             )    u02m;n                    u02m         u02w;n             u02w
                         2 00                              f ( w)                                                 u02m                                                                 2
   21     = Ry            u2m   ((1 + ) (1 F (M ( w )))) +                u02m u02m;n + f (                                                                           w
                                                                                                                                                                          ) ( u02m )
                                "                                                         #
                                       2 00                                   m
                                        u2m ((1 + ) (1 F (M ( w )))) + (1       ) u002m;n
   22     = u001m y + Ry               1           w                                       2
                                           f(          )       u02m          u02m;n            +f(              w
                                                                                                                     )       u02m       u02m;n           u02m

and
                                                           1                      w
                                            A=              2   [1       F(           )]       u02m              u02m;n < 0


       It is easy to show that

                                                                                           w                                        2
                                                                         Ryf (                 )           u02m          u02m;n             11
                    det ( )     = positve:terms                                                                                                  + u001m u001w y 2
                                                       2
                                           ( u02 ) R2 y 2 u02w;n u02m;n                                        u02 u02w;n + u02m;n
                                      +
                                                                              (       max              min )2


With log utility, we can obtain
                                           2
                                    ( u02 ) R2 y 2 u02w;n u02m;n                               u02 u02w;n + u02m;n
                                                                                                                                            =0
                                                                     (   max               min )2


and hence det ( ) > 0.

       The derivatives of the savings rates with respect to the sex ratio are as following:

                                                                     dsm    A 11
                                                                         =        >0
                                                                      d    det( )

and

                                               1                         w                         w                     w                               sm
              dsw               A     1+               (1        F(          )) + f (                  ) M(                  ) + log             1+       t
                                                                                                                                                         sw           2
                t                                                                                                                                         t
                      =                                                                                          2
              d                                                               Ry (sm    w
                                                                                   t + st ) det ( )
                                        max                                                    sm               sw
                                A 2              + 2 log + log 2 +                              t
                                                                                               sw      +         t
                                                                                                                sm            2
                                                                                                t                t
                      =                                                                            2
                                      Ry (         max           min ) (sm            + sw
                                                                         t               t ) det ( )

                                                                                                                                                              dsw
where the …rst equality holds because we use the log utility function. The sign of                                                                             d
                                                                                                                                                                 t
                                                                                                                                                                     is ambiguous.2

       However, the aggregate savings rate by the young cohort, syoung
                                                                 t     =                                                                    1+       sm
                                                                                                                                                      t +
                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                               1+    sw
                                                                                                                                                                      t , rises as the

  2A                                dswt                   max
        su¢ cient condition for      d
                                           < 0 is                > 1.


                                                                                       3
sex ratio becoms more unbalanced.

dsyoung
  t                    sm
                        t   sw
                             t      1 dsm
                                        t    1                dsmt  dsw
               =              2
                                +         +                        + t
  d                    (1 + )     1+ d      1+                 d     d
                                                                    "                                                                                          #!
                                                                                                                           w
                                                                                                                   (1          ) u002w;n
                                                 A    u001w y     + Ry                            w
                       sm
                        t   sw
                             t     1 dsm
                                       t
                                                                                      f(              )     u02   u02w;n       u02m;n + u02w;n u02m;n
               =               +         +
                       (1 + )2   1+ d                                                                     (1 + ) det( )

                                                                                                          dsyoung
where all the terms on the right hand side are positive and hence, td      > 0. Therefore, the aggregate
savings rate of the young cohort increases as the sex ratio rises. Since the (dis-)savings rate of the old
cohort is …xed, an increase in the savings rate by the young cohort translates into an increase in the
economy-wide savings rate.

    Remarks: In this proof, we have assumed a uniform distribution for emotional utility i (i = w; m).
We note that many other distributions can give us the same results as long as they satisfy three su¢ cient
conditions:3                               h R                                       i
                 R         w    w        @  1      f( w)
                                                            dF ( w
                                                                   ) + M ( w
                                                                             )f ( w
                                                                                    )
                @ f (M ( ))d                    f (M ( w ))
                                      0,                                               0
                       @                                       @
           w
and f (        ) is small enough.

      The …rst su¢ cient condition is equivalent to
                                           Z
                                               f 0 (M (   w
                                                            )) 1          F(      w
                                                                                      )       w
                                                          w ))                2           d                0
                                               f (M (

and the second one is equivalent to
                   Z                                                          Z
               1           f ( w)        f ( w)               w           1       f(         )f 0 (M ( w )) 1
                                                                                              w
                                                                                                                           F(      w
                                                                                                                                       )       w
               2                                  dF (            )+                                                           2           d       0
                        f (M ( w ))   f (M ( w ))                                         f 3 (M ( w ))




A.2        Proof of Proposition 2

Proof. Under the log utility assumption, at the balanced sex ratio, (3.10) becomes

                                                              1
                                                                      +           =0                                                                   (A.4)
                                                          1       s       s

where we use the logic that since men and women are symmetric at = 1, they would choose the same
savings rate. Notice that (A.4) is the same …rst order condition for a lifetime bachelor. Even if some
men or women choose to be single, they would choose the same savings rate s.

      For a representative woman, at the balanced sex ratio, if she chooses to enter the marriage market,
  3 We    use normal distributions in the calibration section, which gives the same qualitative result.


                                                                      4
with probability F ( ) she will be married and receive welfare

     Vw        =       ln ((1         s)y) + (1            F ( )) ln ( R (2s) y) + F ( ) ln (Rsy) + (1                                    F ( ))E [ j      w
                                                                                                                                                                   ]
                       ln ((1         s)y) +           ln (Rsy) = Vnw


     where the inequality holds because     > 1=2 and E [ j w      ]    0. Therefore, entering the
marriage market is a dominant strategy for all women. Since men and women are symmetric at = 1,
all men and all women will enter the marriage market with probability one.

      As in Proposition 1,
                                                              dsm         dsm   dsw
                                                                  > 0 and     +     >0
                                                               d           d    d
we can show that
                                                                                                                                      Z
     @V m                                          m 0                    m              dsm             dsw
                   = y            u01m   +          u2m    + (1               )u02m;n         + m y u02m                                            [1   F ( )] d
                                                                                                                                                                (A.5)
      @                                                                                   d              d                                M(   w)
                                  Z                                                               m
                                                                                               ds
                   <                          [1       F ( )] d       (            1) m y u02w      <0
                                  M(     w)                                                     d

where the …rst equality in (A.5) holds because

                   @ m                                            1       F(          w
                                                                                          )
                       (u2m              u2m;n )          =                   2               (u2m       u2m;n )
                    @
                                                                                  w
                                                                  Ryf (               )                dsm                  dsm   dsw
                                                                                              u02m;n               u02m         +                   (u2m       u2m;n )
                                                                                                        d                    d    d
      R                   1       m            m                  Z
 d        M(   w)   M         (       )dF (        )                                                               w
                                                                                                                       (1   F(   w
                                                                                                                                     ))
                                                          =                        [1             F ( )] d                  2
                         d                                            M(      w)

                                                                           w              w
                                                                  Ry           f(             )              dsm                dsm   dsw
                                                                                                   u02m;n               u02m        +
                                                                                                              d                  d    d

and the …rst inequality in (A.5) holds because

                                                                               dsw                dsm
                                                                               d                   d

In summary, men lose as the sex ratio rises.

     Now consider women’s welfare. Given the equilibrium sm and sw under a sex ratio of , if a
woman deviates from the equilibrium choice sw , for instance, by choosing a savings rate sw0 = sm ,
then she would receive a lower lifetime utility V w0 ( V w ). But with sw0 = sm sw , this woman is




                                                                                              5
more likely to get married and is also more likely to marry a better man. Then
                                                               Z
     w0                  0                     0                            w                                       w
 V        = u1w0 +           u2w0 + 1              u2w0 ;n +           M(        + u2w0        u2w ) dF (               )
                                                                   w
                                                                             Z
                                    w                     w                               w             w
             u1w0 +     (1     F(       )) u2w0 + F (         ) u2w0 ;n +            M(        ) dF (           )
                                                                                 w
                                                                            Z
                                    w                    w                                w             w
          = u1m +       (1     F(       )) u2m + F (         ) u2m;n +              M(        ) dF (        )
                                                                                w
                       "                                                                  Z                                              #
                                          w                            w                                        1       m            m
             u1m +      (1     F (M (         ))) u2m + F (M (             )) u2m;n +                   M           (       ) dF (       ) =Vm
                                                                                              M(   w)




where u1w0 , u2w0 and u2w0 ;n denote the …rst period consumption-led utility, the second period consumption-
led utilty when she is married, and the second period utility when she fails to be matched with any
man, respectively. u2w is the second period consumption-led utility for all other women who get mar-
ried. The …rst inequality holds because the woman faces a greater possibility of getting married and
because she will receive a higher expected emotional utility from her husband. The second inequality
holds because, women are more likely than men to both get married and to receive higher emotional
utilities from their spouses.

      Therefore, for         1, women always achieve higher welfare than men, V w                                           V m.

      If the sex ratio approaches in…nity in the marriage market, given his rivals’ choices, if a rep-
resentative man chooses to stay in the marriage market, he will follow the …rst order condition (A.2)
and achieve an approximate lifetime utility of u1m + u2m;n . If he chooses to be single, his lifetime
utility is u1 + u2 . The …rst order condition in this case is

                                                          u01 + u02 = 0                                                                      (A.6)

 The two savings decisions, in the marriage market and being single, will be di¤erent since he would
follow two di¤erent …rst order conditions. Then

                                 Vnm = max u1 + u2 > u1m + u2m;n ! V m

when ! 1. The representative man will then choose to be single which violates the assumption
that, for all s, entering the marriage market is the dominant strategy for all men. Therefore, there
                                               m      m
must be a threshold 1 such that for       1 , Vn = V .

     For       1 , with probability
                                      1
                                        , a representative man chooses to enter the marriage market, and
with probability 1      1
                          , he remains single. For a representative woman, since she earns the same …rst
period income as a representative man, we can show that

                                                   Vnw = Vnm = V m < V w



                                                                   6
Therefore, the representative woman would choose to enter the marriage market with probability one.

      We now turn to the aggregate savings rate in the young cohort. Similar to what we have shown
in Proposition 1 that for < 1 , as the sex ratio rises, the aggregate savings rate in the young cohort
will rise. For     1 , as the sex ratio rises, some men begin to quit the marriage market and choose a
di¤erent savings rate according to (A.6). Comparing (A.2) with (A.6), it is not possible to determine
whether sm > sm n or not. This means that the e¤ect on the aggregate savings rate for a higher sex
ratio beyond the threshold is ambiguous.


A.3     Proof of Proposition 3

Proof. We rewrite the the economy-wide savings rate as following

                                                                         1 w
                                sP
                                 t = (1          )               sm
                                                                  t +      s        syoung       +
                                                         1+             1+ t                         R

                                                 1
As we have shown in Proposition 1, 1+ sm            w
                                          t + 1+ st strictly increases in    since men will save at a
                            P
higher rate than women. s then is an increasing function of . By the expression of the current
account to GDP ratio, this is also the condition that the current account is an increasing function of
the sex ratio. Therefore, the economy-wide savings rate and the current account rise as the sex ratio
becomes more unbalanced.


A.4     Proof of Proposition 4

Proof. We can rewrite the …rst order conditions (4.1), (4.2), (4.3), and (4.4) as equations on variables
sw    m
 t , st , t , t and young people’s labor income in each period. By (4.1) and (4.2), the optimal choices
of st and sm
     w
             t by young women and young men do not depend on their parents’wealth. Similarly, by
(4.3), the parents’optimal choice of t does not depend on their own wealth either. Under the same
assumption as in Proposition 3, in a small open economy, the wage rate is constant. This implies that
sw    m
 t , st , t and t will be constants from period t0 onwards.

      By the assumption that the sex ratio only becomes a choice variable from t = t0 onwards, parents
in all previous periods take as given that the sex ratio is balanced. That is, t = 1 for t t0 . They
make optimal decisions on savings for themselves and savings for children by solving the …rst order
conditions, (4.1), (4.2), (4.3) and (4.4). In the initial equilibrium when parents are not able to choose
the probability of having a son, equation (4.4) becomes
                                                             !
                                 d                                              s
                  uw;w
                   2;t0 1   +        s
                                         +   d
                                                     +   d
                                                                   uw;m
                                                                    2;t0   1+
                                                                                     s
                                                                                         +   d
                                                                                                 +   s
                                                                                                         =   t0 1
                                2                                               2

where    t0 1   is negative by assumption. The savings responses to a shock in period t0 that allows


                                                                    7
parents to choose the sex ratio is equivalent to the savings responses to a permanent increase in
(from t0 1 to zero).

     Since parents and young people will choose an optimal (but constant) savings rate from t = t0 ,
we drop the time index for the rest of the proof. We pursue the rest of the proof in two steps: (i) we
…rst show that > 1 from period t0 onwards and then (ii) we show that both sm and m would rise
while sw would decrease. The aggregate savings rate and the current account will rise.

     (i) We wish to show by contradiction that parents choose a higher sex ratio in period t0 than in
period t0 1.

     Suppose not, then parents choose          t0 1 . In this case, all young men will get married since
period t0 , i.e., m = 1 and w 1. Parents with a son do not have any incentive to save for their son
since they can do nothing to raise their son’s probability of marriage, hence = 0. By (4.4),

                                           s             d                                                     s             d
                            s m                                                           d w
          uw
           2   um
                2 =                                +            +       s
                                                                                                                       +         +       d
                                                                                                                                             >0
                                    1+                 1+                                              1+                  1+

where uw        m
        2 and u2 denote the consumption-led utility obtained by parents when they have a daughter
and a son, respectively. However, since all parents make zero savings for their child,

                                                             uw
                                                              2         um
                                                                         2 =0


Contradiction! Therefore, the sex ratio must rise in period t0 .
                                                                                                                                             w       min
     (ii) Given that       > 1 from period t0 onwards, all women will get married, i.e.,                                                         =         . By
(4.1), we can obtain
                                                                                     sm
                                                        sw =                                                                                           (A.7)
                                                                1+                  1+
Then (4.2) becomes
                       "                                                                1+               1 1=
                                                                                                                                     #
                                                               min          m
            1                              1 + 1= +                  f(         )      (1+sm )         +   sm
               +                            1+                                                          1+
                                                                                                            t                            =0            (A.8)
          1 sm             +f (    m
                                       )   (1+sm )       UP +         ln               f(  m
                                                                                                  )         m
                                                                                                       (1+s )          ln (Rsm y)

where m = M min . Notice that parents select to maximize U P and at time t0 , the balanced sex
ratio ( t0 1 = 1) is not optimal since the …rst order condition (4.4) does not hold. This means that
the optimal sex ratio yields a larger value of U P than that in period t0 1. Then,
                             "                                                                     1+                1 1=
                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                        min          m
            1                                          1 + 1= +               f(          )       (1+sm )          +   sm
                     =                              1+                                                              1+
          1 sm                    +f (     m
                                               )   (1+sm )     UP +             ln                f(  m
                                                                                                           )       (1+sm )   ln (Rsm y)
                             "                                                                                          1 1= t0 1                #
                                                                            min        m            1+
                                               1 + 1=        t0 1   +             f(          )    (1+sm )             +   sm
                     >                              1+                                                                  1+
                                                                                                                            t
                                           m
                                  +f (         )   (1+sm )     UtP0     1   +        ln                m
                                                                                                      f(           )                 m
                                                                                                                       (1+sm ) ln (Rs y)




                                                                        8
which implies
                      "                                                                                                          1 1= t0 1
                                                                                                                                                       #
                                                                             min              m            1+
           1                             1 + 1=       t0         1+                   f(          )       (1+sm )           +       sm
              +                                                                                                                                            <0    (A.9)
         1 sm              +f (     m
                                         )        1+
                                                                 UtP0            +        ln              f(  m
                                                                                                                        )        1+           m
                                                     m
                                                 (1+s )                      1                                                  (1+sm ) ln (Rs y)


It is easy to show that, given , term
                                "                                                                                    1+                 1 1=
                                                                                                                                                             #
                                                                                          min             m
                   1                                          1 + 1= +                          f(            )     (1+sm )          +    sm
                      +                                        1+                                                                      1+
                 1 sm                +f (            m
                                                         )    (1+sm )            UP +             ln               f(   m
                                                                                                                                 )    (1+sm )   ln (Rsm y)

is decreasing in sm . Then by (A.8) at                           t0 1     and (A.9), we can obtain

                                                                             sm > sm
                                                                                   t0                 1


From period t0 onwards, young men will raise their savings rate. Young women will reduce their
savings by (A.7), however,
                                                 (1 + sm )
                                   sw + sm =
                                                  1+
rises.

     By (4.3),
                                                                                 m                    s                 d
                                                 1                   sf      (        )
                                                             +                                            +                          =0
                                             1                                                1+                  1+
it is easy to show that
                                     s
                               d       f ( m)                                                     s           d
                                 =         2                                      2                                                          >0
                               d   (1 + )                                1                     sf ( m)                  s            d
                                                                     1                +               2           1+        +    1+


Parents will increase their savings for their sons.

     As shown in the previous analysis, if we normalize the measure of young people in period t0                                                                    1
to be one, then the economy-wide savings rate

                                                     Qt0 + (R                1) N F At0                   1        C1;t0             C2;t0
                                    sP
                                     t0 =
                                                                                   Qt0

where
                 N F At0   1   = sw
                                  t0             1   + sm
                                                        t0       1   Wt0          1   +        m
                                                                                               t0 1 R             sw
                                                                                                                   t0       1   + sm
                                                                                                                                   t0    1   Wt0   1   Ktd

Then

                                    Qt0 + (R                    1) N F At0 1 C1;t0                                      C2;t0
                    sP
                     t0    =
                                                                      Qt0
                                                               w
                                                              s        sm
                           =        (1               )             +       + R sw
                                                                                t0                                 1    + sm
                                                                                                                           t0        1
                                                             1+      1+                                                                      1+


                                                                                          9
By (4.1) and (4.2),

             1                                       1        1     1 1=
                      =                    <                      +
        1        sw          sw   +   sm                 sw   +sm    sm
                                                                      t
                              "                                                                           1 1=
                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                   min        m             1
                                                    1 + 1= +             f(       )   sw +sm            +   sm                                1
                      <                                                                                  1+
                                                                                                             t                        =
                                  +f (     m
                                               )      1
                                                   sw +sm
                                                               P
                                                              U +       ln            f(        m
                                                                                                    )        m
                                                                                                        (1+s )     ln (Rs y)  m           1    sm

Therefore
                                                                   sm > sw



      If the sex ratio rises in period t0 , sm , m and sw + sm all rise. Then the aggregate savings rate
rises since
                           2                                                                                                                                 3
                                sw +sm (sw        m
                                           t0 1 +st0 1 )  (      1)(sm smt0 1 )                     t0 (   t0 1 )
                           6           1+                + t0 1 1+              + R sw        m
                                                                                      t0 1 + st0 1    1+ t0 1                                                7
 P      P                                   t0 1                    t0 1
st0 st0 1 = (1            )4                                                                                                                                 5
                                     + (sm sw ) 1+          1+
                                                              t0 1
                                                                       + R sw         m
                                                                              t0 1 + st0 1     1+  1+
                                                                                                      t0 1
                                                                                       t0       1                                                   t0   1

                  > 0

 Similarly, the current account

                                      Qt0 + (R           1) N F At0      1    C1;t0             C2;t0           Ktd0 +1
                      cat0   =
                                                                        Qt0
                                                         w          m                                                     m
                                                     s             s
                             =        (1       )              +          + R sw
                                                                              t0            1   + sm
                                                                                                   t0       1
                                                    1+            1+                                               1+             R

will rise.



B      Two large countries

      Consider a world consisting of only two countries. The two countries are identical in every respect
except for their sex ratios in period t (they both have balanced sex ratios in period t 1). Country
1’s sex ratio 1 is smaller than Country 2’s sex ratio 2 . There are no barriers to either goods trade
or capital ‡ows (although labor is not mobile internationally). We can show the following result:


Proposition 1 Country 1 (with a more balanced sex ratio) runs a current account de…cit while Coun-
try 2 runs a current account surplus.


Proof. Since capital can ‡ow freely internationally, the interest rates are equal in both countries. By
(3.12) and (3.13), the wage rates are also equal in the two countries.



                                                                        10
     Given the same wage rates, the households in the two countries have the same …rst period income.
By Proposition 1, Country 2 will have a higher savings rate than Country 1. On the other hand, in
equilibrium, given a constant R, the investments in both countries are the same, and the world capital
market always clears. Therefore, Country 2 runs a current account surplus and Country 1 runs a
current account de…cit.

     To see the intuition, let us …x 1 = 1 (i.e., Country 1 has a balanced sex ratio). If Country 2
were to have a balanced sex ratio, the current account must be zero for both countries since they are
identical in every respect. In other words, within each country, the investment must be equal to the
aggregate savings. However, the sex ratio imbalance in Country 2 causes it to have a higher aggregate
savings for a given world interest rate. This depresses the world interest rate. The lower interest rate
raises the investment level in both economies (and reduces the savings rate a little bit). This must
imply that the desired investment level in Country 1 is now greater than its desired savings rate. As a
result, capital ‡ows from Country 2 to Country 1. That is, Country 1 runs a current account de…cit,
and Country 2 a surplus.

     Numerically, we study two cases to see how a rise in the sex ratio of Country 2 will a¤ect the
current account positions. In the …rst case, we assume that the two countries are identical in every
respect except for their sex ratios. While Country 1 always has a balanced sex ratio ( 1 = 1), we vary
the sex ratio in Country 2 from 1 to 1.5. Appendix Table 2 reports the calibration results. Appendix
Figure 1 traces out the current account responses in both countries as Country 2’s sex ratio increases.
The most important result is that a rise in Country 2’s sex ratio …rst triggers a rise in its current
account surplus and a rise in Country 1’s current account de…cit. After Country 2’s sex ratio exceeds
threshold 1 , a further rise in Country 2’s sex ratio induces a decline in both its current account surplus
and Country 1’s de…cit.

      We have also done robustness checks by varying the values of ; m, and . Based on the same
reasoning as in the small open economy case, for larger , m, or smaller , a given increase in Country
2’s sex ratio results in a greater current account imbalance in the two countries.

     In the second case, we attempt to let Countries 1 and 2 mimic the United States and China,
respectively. In particular, we assume that L1 = 1=5 L2 to match the fact that the U.S. population
is around 1=5 that of China. In addition, we choose the TFP parameter in Country 1, 1 ; to match
the fact that the U.S. per capita GDP was about 15 times the Chinese level around 2000 when the
sex ratio in China for the marriage age cohort was not yet seriously out of balance. The remaining
parameters are set to be the same as before. We let the sex ratio in the United States be always
balanced, and vary the Chinese sex ratio from 1 to 1.5.

      Appendix Tables 3a, 3b and 3c report the benchmark result and robustness checks. Appendix
Figure 2 plots the calibration results. Qualitatively, they look similar to the …rst large-country exper-
iment. Quantitatively, Country 2’s (China) current account response (as a share of GDP) becomes
stronger. With China’s sex ratio at 1.15 (and = 0:8), it runs a current account surplus on the order
of 4.4% of its GDP, and at the same time, the United States runs a current account de…cit of 1.5% of

                                                    11
GDP. This resembles one third to a half of the real world pattern in which the U.S. de…cit is about
4-6% of GDP, whereas the Chinese surplus is on the order of 7-10% of GDP just before the global
…nancial crisis. In other words, a rise in the Chinese sex ratio, while it does not provide a complete
explanation, could be a signi…cant contributor to the global current account imbalances. If the sex
ratio rises beyond threshold 1 , the Chinese surplus can begin to decline.

     To summarize, the calibrations suggest that a rise in the sex ratio (when the sex ratio takes some
reasonable values) could produce an economically signi…cant increase in the aggregate savings rate that
results in a current account surplus. If the country is large enough, this could induce other countries
to run a current account de…cit even if they have a balanced sex ratio.



C     Welfare

      There are two sources of market failure in the model economy. On one hand, a part of the savings
in the competitive equilibrium is motivated by a desire to out-save one’s competitors in the marriage
market. The increment in savings, while individually rational, is not useful in the aggregate, since
when everyone raises the savings rate by the same amount, the ultimate marriage market outcome
is not a¤ected by the increase in savings. In this sense, the competitive equilibrium produces too
much savings. On the other hand, because the savings contribute to a pubic good in a marriage (an
individual’s savings raises the utility of his/her partner), but an individual in the …rst period does not
take this into account, he/she may under-save relative to the social optimum. Note that these sources
of market failure exist even with a balanced sex ratio. They also have opposite e¤ects on the aggregate
savings rate. (In calibrations, we …nd that these two e¤ects cancel each other out when the sex ratio
is balanced.) As the sex ratio rises, the importance of the over-saving e¤ect also increases, which gives
rise to our …rst proposition.

     We now consider what a welfare-maximizing central planner would do. The central planner
gives equal weight to each man and women. He assigns the marriage matching outcomes and chooses
women’s and men’s savings rates to maximize the following social welfare function,

                                                          1
                                     max U =                Uw +    Um
                                                         1+      1+

The …rst order conditions are

                      u01w + [1   F(     w
                                             ) + (1       F (M (        w
                                                                            )))] u02w + F (   w
                                                                                                   )u02w;n   =   0   (C.1)
                                                1
               u01m + 1     F (M (   w
                                         )) +       (1    F(    w
                                                                    )       u02m + F (M (     w
                                                                                                  ))u02m;n   =   0   (C.2)


Comparing (C.1), (C.2) to (A.1) and (A.2), in general, it is not obvious whether women or men will
save at a higher rate in a decentralized equilibrium than that under central planning due to the two


                                                           12
opposing sources of market failure. However, when = 1, since women and men have the same optimal
conditions, by (3.10), women and men will save the same amount in a competitive equilibrium as in
the central planned economy.

    As a thought experiment, one may also consider what the central planner would do if she can
choose the sex ratio (in addition to the savings rates) to maximize the social welfare. The …rst order
condition with respect to is
                                             Um Uw
                                                     2 =0                                        (C.3)
                                             (1 + )
The only sex ratio that satis…es (C.3) is = 1. In other words, the central planner would have chosen
a balanced sex ratio. Deviations from a balanced sex ratio represent welfare losses.

      In calibrations with a log utility function, we show in Appendix Table 4 that men’s welfare under
a decentralized equilibrium relative to the central planner’s economy declines as the sex ratio increases.
In comparision, women’s relative welfare increases as the sex ratio goes up. The social welfare (the sum
of all men’s and women’s welfare) goes down as the sex ratio rises.4 Appendix Figures 3, 3a and 3b
trace out the savings rates for men (the upper left panel), women (the upper right panel), the economy
as a whole (the lower left panel) and the welfare (the lower right panel). With a log-utility function,
the optimal savings rates chosen for men and women by the planner do not depend on the sex ratio
and intra-household bargaining powers.5 When the sex ratio is balanced, the savings rates by women,
men and the economy as a whole are the same as those under the planner’s economy. With unbalanced
sex ratios, men’s (decentralized) savings rates overshoot the socially optimally level, and the extent
of excessive savings rises with the sex ratio. Women’s savings rates follow an opposite pattern. The
economy-wide savings rate follows a pattern that is qualitatively similar to the men’s savings rate. In
particular, the economy in a decentralized equilibrium tends to save too much relative to the social
optimum, and the excess savings rises with the sex ratio. In the lower right panel, we can see that the
welfare levels for both men and the economy as a whole decline as the sex ratio increases, while the
welfare for women rises with the sex ratio.



D      Endogenous Intra-household Bargaining

     One problem in the benchmark calibration is that, as the sex ratio rises, women’s savings rates
decline very quickly. In this extension, we incorporate intra-household bargaining between wives and
husbands into the model. The goal is to show that, when allowing intra-household bargaining, the
women’s savings rate declines much more slowly.

     We assume that everyone consumes two goods in the second period, a public good (e.g., a house)
  4 The    results are similar if we change the utility function to a CRRA form.
  5 This    feature does not hold when we use the CRRA utility function.




                                                            13
and a private good. The aggregate second period consumption index is

                                                   zi h1
                                      c2i =                       i = w; m                       (D.1)
                                                   (1    )1

where zw and zm are private goods consumption by women and men, respectively, and h is the public
good consumption. is the share of private expenditure in the second period consumption index.

     A representative household maximizes the weighted sum of the utilities of the husband and the
wife. Let denote the weight on the wife’s utility, which represents her bargaining power in the family.
Then the household’s optimization problem is

                                      max      u(c2w ) + (1           )u(c2m )
                                   h;zw ;zm


with the resource constraint
                                   zw + zm + h = Rsw y w + Rsm y m                               (D.2)

     If we assume u(c) = ln c, solving the household’s maximization problem, we have

                                c2w    =           (Rsw y w + Rsm y m )
                                c2m    =      (1      ) (Rsw y w + Rsm y m )

If   = 21 , this is the case in our benchmark model and       1
                                                              2   <     =2       < 1.

     More generally, similar to Browning et al. (1994), is a function of the sex ratio , the relative
wealth and other characteristics of the household members. For simplicity, we assume that the intra-
household bargaining power depends only on the relative wealth of household members. In particular,
we assume that the wife’s bargaining power within a family is
                                                              "
                                                         (sw )
                                               =         "        "
                                                    (sw ) + (sm )

and the husband’s bargaining power is 1        . " is the parameter that governs the sensitivity of
bargaining power to relative wealth. A larger " means that household bargaining power will respond
to the relative wealth more strongly.

      We take the same values for other parameters as in the benchmark. Appendix Table 5 reports
the calibration results, and Appendix Figures 4a and 4b plot the saving rates. Relative to the case
of no intra-household bargaining, women now reduce their savings rates more slowly as the sex ratio
rises and may even raise their savings when (i) the sensitivity of bargaining power to relative wealth
is high (large ") and (ii) private consumption is important in her second period consumption bundle
(large ). Since there is no big change in men’s response to the rise in the sex ratio, the economy-wide
savings rate responds more strongly to a rise in the sex ratio than the benchmark case. For = 0:05,
" = 0 and = 0:5, as the sex ratio rises from 1 to 1.15, the current account to GDP ratio rises by

                                                        14
6.2%. For = 0:05, " = 0:5 and = 0:5, as the sex ratio rises from 1 to 1.15, the current account
to GDP ratio rises by 11.2%. As the sex ratio keeps rising (and exceeds the threshold 1 , which is
around 1.35 in this case), some men quit the marriage market and the aggregate savings rate declines.

     In Appendix Table 6, we re-calibrate the case of two asymmetric countries (the United States
versus China) by allowing for intra-household bargaining. The corresponding current account responses
and the welfare changes are plotted in Appendix Figure 5. Relative to the benchmark case of no intra-
household bargaining, the responses of the aggregate savings and the current account to higher sex
ratios are similar. However, the savings response by women is more realistic. For example, for = 0:05,
" = 0 and = 0:5, we can …nd in Appendix Table 6 that a rise in the sex ratio in country 2 (China)
from 1 to 1.15 generates a current account surplus of 4.4% of GDP in China and a de…cit of 1.5%
of GDP in the U.S. For = 0:05, " = 0:5 and = 0:5, the same rise in the sex ratio in China can
generate a very large current account surplus of 8.2% of GDP in China and a de…cit of 2.7% of GDP
in the U.S.

     In the right panel of Appendix Figure 5, we trace out the economy-wide welfare in a decentralized
equilibrium for a given sex ratio relative to the welfare under a balanced sex ratio. The country that
experiences a rise in the sex ratio (e.g., China) clearly su¤ers from an ever-deteriorating welfare. The
country with a balanced sex ratio (e.g., the United States) also experiences a welfare loss (but with
a much smaller magnitude compared to the country with an unbalanced sex ratio). Intuitively, a rise
in the Chinese sex ratio depresses the global interest rate, but this produces two e¤ects with opposite
signs in the United States. On one hand, the lower cost of capital boosts the real wage in the United
States, which is positive for Americans. On the other hand, the lower interest rate also implies a lower
interest income for a given amount of savings, which is negative for Americans. In this numerical
example, the second e¤ect dominates the …rst e¤ect, which yields a welfare loss to Americans.

     We note, however, that the quantitative e¤ect of a rise in the Chinese sex ratio on U.S. welfare is
very small. The Chinese lose the most from a rise in the sex ratio. From the right panel of Appendix
Figure 5, if the Chinese sex ratio reaches 1.15, Americans have a utility loss that is equivalent to a
reduction in consumption by 0.4%. In contrast, the Chinese su¤er a welfare loss that is equivalent to
a decline in consumption by 32.7%. The large Chinese welfare loss comes principally from a rise in the
incidence of involuntary bachelorhood.

     We also calibrate a multi-period model with endogenous intra-household bargaining. Appendix
Figures 6 and 7 report the results. The responses to a higher sex ratio are stronger. When " = = 0:5,
and = 0:05, if the marriage takes place in the 10th period, a rise in the sex ratio from 1 to 1.1 would
produce a rise in both the economy-wide savings rate and current account by about 4% of GDP. If
the marriage takes place in the 20th period instead, then the same sex ratio increase would generate
a bigger increase in the savings rate and current account surplus (by about 7% of GDP).




                                                  15
E       Competitive versus Precautionary Savings Motives

      As in the previous analysis, women and men can bene…t from marriage through two channels.
First, by pooling their resources and consuming a partial public good in a marriage, wives and husbands
can free ride on their spouses. Second, married people can augment happiness by deriving emotional
utility from having a partner. In other words, if a young man fails in getting married, he loses some
future consumption as well as the emotional utility. This means the rise in the savings rate by young
men come from a combination of a competitive savings motive (to compete more e¤ectively in the
mating market) and a hedging motive (to hedge against the event that he may be single in the second
period). Which of the two e¤ects is the more important one when the sex ratio rises? In this appendix,
we provide an answer.

     Based on the same assumptions in Proposition 1, we can write down the …rst order condition for
a young man
                           u01m + m u02m + (1       m
                                                      ) u02m;n + CS = 0

where the term CS represents the marginal gain from the likely marriage when the young man saves
more in the …rst period,

                       CS = u02m ( (1       F(   m
                                                     )) +     w
                                                                  f(   m
                                                                            )f (   m
                                                                                       ) (u2m         u2m;n ))


      We can examine the pure hedging motive for saving by shutting down the competitive saving
motive. For example, if one’s savings rate is private information, and no one else, especially members
of the opposite sex, cannot see, then there is no way to enhance (or hurt) one’s competitive position
in the marriage market by adjusting one’s savings rate. Then, the only reason one may raise savings
rate is to prepare for the increased likelihood that he will be unmarried in the second period. This
is equivalent to setting CS = 0: We call a rise in the savings after a higher sex ratio when CS=0 as
a hedging-induced precautionary savings response. A rise in the savings rate in the case without the
restriction of CS=0 re‡ects the sum of the precautionary savings and the competitive savings.

     When CS = 0 (i.e., no competitive savings), the …rst order conditions for women and men are,
respectively,

                                            w                          w
                                   u01w +        u02w + (1                 ) u02w;n      =        0
                                            m                      m
                                 u01m   +       u02m   + (1            ) u02m;n          =        0

where
                                  w               w                m                      m
                                      =1    F(        ) and                =1      F(         )
  w         m
      and       are similary de…ned as in the benchmark.

      We calibrate the model by using the benchmark parameters:                           = 0:7,          = 0:4,   = 0:8,   = 0:05


                                                         16
and m = 2:08. Appendix Figure 8 shows the comparison between precautionary savings response and
the total savings response in our benchmark. We can clearly see that, if we shut down the competitive
savings motive, the changes in men’s, women’s and the aggregate savings are much smaller than the
benchmark case. For instance, as the sex ratio rises from 1 to 1.10, the aggregate savings rate goes
up by less than 1 percent if there is only precautionary savings. In compariosn, when the competitive
savings motive is also present, the economy-wide savings rate rises by 5.4%. This means that the
competitive savings motive plays a quantitatively large role in understanding the savings response to
a higher sex ratio.



F     A Model with Educational Expenditure

     When the sex ratio rises, raising savings rate may not be the only response in the real world. In
particular, households could alter e¤orts in accumulating human capital. If we allow this channel in
the model, how would this a¤ect the savings response? It is tempted to think that if accumulation
of human capital requires increases in educational expenditure, and this may dampen the savings
response to a given rise in sex ratio. In this appendix, we extend the benchmark model by allowing
human capital accumulation. We show that our basic results continue to hold at least qualitatively.

     We modify our two-period benchmark model by allowing for education input in the …rst period
(which enhances one’s productivity). A young person i’s labor productivity depends on two inputs:
educational expenditure Tei , and e¤ort ei . The labor productivity   Tei ; ei increases in each of its
argument. For simplicity, we assume that the …rst period income for individual i is

                                          Tei ; ei y = min [aTe ; bey]

where y is the e¤ective wage. By this assumption, e¤ort and educational expenditure are complements.

     Assume that everyone enters the marriage market, then the optimization problem for a represen-
tative woman becomes
                            max
                            w  w
                                 u(c1w ) + v(1 ew ) + E [u(c2w ) + m ]
                             s ;Te

subject to the budget constraints that

                                                 w            w
                          c1w   =    (1   sw )       y            y
                                     (
                                                     w                m
                                          (Rsw    y + Rsm                 y) if married
                          c2w   =
                                                 Rsw w y                     otherwise

where w y represents the educational expenditure (in terms of e¤ective wage) in the young woman’s
…rst period consumption basket. v ( ) represents the utility obtained from leisure, which is denoted by
1 ew .



                                                         17
      Similarly, for a representative young man

                                    max u(c1m ) + v(1                  em ) + E [u(c2m ) +               m
                                                                                                             ]
                                    sm ;Tem


subject to the budget constraints that

                                                               m             m
                                c1m     =     (1        sm )       y             y
                                              (
                                                             w w                      m
                                                        (Rs        y + Rsm                y) if married
                                c2m     =
                                                                 Rsm m y                     otherwise


      Now we can show the following proposition.

Proposition 2 Under the assumptions in Proposition 1, if max        1, given the same aggregate pro-
duction function as in (3.11), we can show that as the sex ratio rises, (1) the savings rate of a
representative man goes up, while the savings rate of a representative woman declines; (2) however,
the economy-wide savings rate increases unambiguously.

Proof. In equilibrium, we have

                                                                                 b i
                                          a i y = bei y =)               i
                                                                             =     e , i = w; m                                                (F.1)
                                                                                 a

Under the same assumptions in Proposition 1 and following the same steps as in Appendix A, we can
show that the …rst order condition with respect to sw and ew are
                                    2                                                                                                 3
                                              1                    w                 w               m
                 1                      1+         (1       F(         )) + f (          ) (u2w +            u2w;n )       F(     w
                                                                                                                                      )5
                           +    w   4                                    w                m                            +          w        = (F.2)
                                                                                                                                              0
        1      sw    1=a                                           sw        + sm                                          sw
                                    2                                                                                                  3
                                              1                    w                 w               m
    1                                   1+         (1       F(         )) + f (          ) (u2w +            u2w;n )    F(        w
                                                                                                                                      )5
            v 0 (1   ew ) + bsw 4                                        w                m                            + w        w        =   0
   ew                                                              sw        + sm                                        s

respectively. By (F.2), we can re-write the second condition as

                                                                                 1        1=a
                                              v 0 (1      ew ) ew =                                                                            (F.3)
                                                                             1       sw     1=a

      Similarly, for a representative young man, the …rst order conditions are
                                                        m
              1            m   (1 + ) (1          F(        )) + f ( m ) (u2m +               w
                                                                                                    u2m;n )          F(   m
                                                                                                                              )
                 +                                                                                               +                =0           (F.4)
            1 sm                                            sw w + sm                                                sm    m


and
                                                                                 1        1=a
                                              v 0 (1      ew ) ew =                                                                            (F.5)
                                                                             1       sw     1=a

                                                                       18
       By (F.3) and (F.5), we can show that

                                                                     2
                                        dei       v i0 ei     1
                                            =                     > 0, i = w; m                                                                            (F.6)
                                        dsi   v i0 v i00 ei 1 1=a

                                                                                                                                              m            w
     Similar to the proof of Proposition 1, we can show that m = M ( w ) and sm                                                                       sw       for
    1. Since at = 1, women and men are symmetric, and hence sm = sw and m =                                                                    w
                                                                                                                                                   . For        1,
by (F.6), sm m sw m means sm sw and m             m
                                                    .

       Similar to the proof of Proposition 2, total di¤erentiate equations (F.2) and (F.4), we can obtain
                                                    h                      iT            h                 iT
                                            E
                                                        dsw         dsm         =            z1       z2        d

where
               8           2                                                                                                      3                    9
               >
               >                        2 00
                                         u2w            1+      1
                                                                     (1        F(        w
                                                                                             )) + (1            w
                                                                                                                    ) u002w;n                          >
                                                                                                                                                       >
               <           6                                                                                                       7      w   w        =
  E
        =    w
                u001w + R2 6                +f ( w ) 2 u002w (u2w + M ( w ) u2w;n )                                                7 1 + sw d
  11
               >           4                                                                                                       5        dsw >
               >
               :                                                                                                                                >
                                                                                                                                                ;
                                                +2f ( w ) u02w u02w u02w;n
                    2                                                                                                             3
                                                2 00                  1                          w
                                                 u2w            1+         (1        F(              ))
                          6                                                      7      m    m
  E
        =     R   2 m     6         +f ( )      w       2 00
                                                         u2w
                                            (u2w + M ( ) u2w;n )                 7 1 + sm d
                                                                                         w
  12                      4                                                      5        dsm
                              +f ( ) 2 u02
                                  w
                                           ) u02m;n
                                        2w + f (        u02m u02w;n
                                                           w
                                                                        u02w
                  "      2 00                       w
                                                                #
                           u2m ((1 +  ) (1  F (M  (   ))))             sw d w
  E
  21    =    R2 w                                                 1  +  w
                    +f ( w ) u02m 1 + 1       u02m 1 u02m;n                dsw
               (           " 2 00                                        m
                                                                                     #             )
  E          m   00      2
                                 u2m ((1 + ) (1 F (M ( w )))) + (1         ) u002m;n        sm d m
  22    =       u1m + R                                                                 1+ m m
                              +f ( w ) u02m u02m;n         1+ 1   u02m 1 u02m;n                ds

and
                                                                                w
                                                                [1        F(        )]       u02m          u02m;n
                                       z1 = 0, z2 =                                          2


       Similar to the proof of Proposition 1, we can show that

                                                                           E
                                                                    det             >0

Then
                                     dsmt    z2             E
                                                            11                           dsw
                                                                                           t                z2      E
                                                                                                                    12
                                          =                  E)
                                                                     > 0 and                 =                       E)
                                      d     det (                                        d                 det (
                              w             w
By the de…nition of               and M (       ), it is easy to show that

                  w                                     w                                                                 w           w
   u2w + M (          )   u2w;n = u2w + M (                 )       u2m;n + u2m;n                    u2w;n = M (              )           + u2m;n     u2w;n




                                                                           19
                                w
By the de…nition of                 ,
                                                   w                         m                                m             w
                                                       = log (sm                 )    log ( (sm                    + sw         ))

Similar to the proof of Proposition 2, under the log utilty assumption, we can show that

                                                                                                               sm       sw                 m
                           dsw   z2 R2 2                     max
                                                                     + 2 log + log 2 +                          t
                                                                                                               sw   +    t
                                                                                                                        sm           2
                             t
                               <                                                                                                          !        <0
                           d                                                                      2                     11           12
                                   ( max                        min ) (sm m           +    sw w )            det
                                                                                                                        21           22


where the last inequality holds because

           max                                         sm
                                                        t  sw
                                                            t                                                                sm
                                                                                                                              t  sw
                                                                                                                                  t
       2         + 2 log + log 2 +                      w + m                    2        2 log + log 2 +                     w + m                        2 log (2 ) > 0
                                                       st  st                                                                st  st

By (F.6), we have
                                                                    d m         d w
                                                                        > 0 and     <0
                                                                     d           d

       The aggregate savings rate in the young cohort is

                                                   m        1            w                               m                                 1       w
                                    1+   sm            +   1+       sw                         1+                                         1+
                  syoung =                        m         1       w
                                                                              =                m          1        w
                                                                                                                     sm +                 m         1       w
                                                                                                                                                                sw
                                         1+            +   1+                        1+              +   1+                     1+         +       1+


then
                                                                                                                                               m
                                                                                                                                     1+
                                              m                                       1        w                        d
           dsyoung                  1+                     dsm                       1+                      dsw                1+
                                                                                                                                      m+    1
                                                                                                                                           1+
                                                                                                                                                       w

                   =                m          1       w
                                                               +                     m          1        w
                                                                                                                 +                                           (sm       sw )
             d             1+            +    1+
                                                            d            1+           +        1+
                                                                                                             d                        d

The sum of the …rst two terms on the right hand side yields

                                m                                     1       w                                       1
                      1+                      dsm                    1+                        dsw                   1+                            m ds
                                                                                                                                                       m
                                                                                                                                                                     w ds
                                                                                                                                                                         w

                      m          1       w
                                                  +                  m         1          w
                                                                                                   >                m         1       w
                                                                                                                                                              +
                 1+        +    1+
                                               d            1+           +    1+
                                                                                               d              1+        +    1+
                                                                                                                                                       d               d
                        1
                       1+                        z2                 m                 w
           =          m          1       w                 E)
                                                                (        11                   12 )
                 1+        +    1+
                                              det (
                                                                0                                       w    w
                                                                                                               1
                       1
                      1+
                            m w
                                                 z2             u001w;t + R2 2 u002w 1 + 1 (1 F ( w )) sw ddsw
           >                                                  @          h                          i m m A
                       m         1       w                 E)
                 1+        +    1+
                                              det (                    R2 2 u002w 1 + 1 (1 F ( w )) sm ddsm




                                                                                          20
                                                  0                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                          1
                  1     m w
                                        z2                           u01w                             R u02w                     1+           (1           F(    w
                                                                                                                                                                     )) sm d m
                 1+                               @                                                                                                                            A
     >            m              w           E)                     w                    w      +                                     m                w                 m
           1+          +    1
                           1+
                                     det (               (1        s     1=a)                                                sm        + sw                                dsm
                                                  0                                                                                   1
              1   1   m w                                         (1 sm 1=a) m sm m +sw w 0
            1 sm 1+                     z2                        (1 sw 1=a) w    sm m   u1w
     >                                            @                                                                                   A
                m
           1+     + 1+1 w            det (   E)
                                                         +           0
                                                                 R u2w 1 +     1
                                                                                  (1 F ( w ))

where the last inequality holds because

                                     sm d m                       sm                         1                                   sm
                                      m     =                                               v m00 m
                                                                                                          <
                                        dsm   1                  sm       1=a 1               v m0
                                                                                                                 1           sm           1=a

We can show that by (F.2) and (F.4)
                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                         1                                                        w
                                                                      u02w 1 +                   (1       F(         w
                                                                                                                         )) + (1                      ) u02w;n
                                                                                    w
(1       sm      1=a)   m
                            sm   m
                                     + sw     w                           +f (          ) u02w (u2w + M (                         w
                                                                                                                                      )       u2w;n )                 sm      m
                                                                                                                                                                                  + sw    w
                        w                           =
(1       sw      1=a)            sm m                                 u02m (1 + ) (1                      F(     m ))         + (1                m
                                                                                                                                                      ) u02m;n                sm m
                                                                                                                                  m m
                                                                                                                                            +sw        w
                                                                 1+       1
                                                                               (1       F(        w
                                                                                                      )) + F (               w
                                                                                                                                 )s       sm m             +f(       w
                                                                                                                                                                         ) (M (   w
                                                                                                                                                                                      )       w
                                                                                                                                                                                                  )
                                                    >                                       sm m                                                                          m
                                                                                                              (1 + ) (1                   F(          m ))   + (1             )
                                                                                    sm      m +sw w

                                                                      1                      w                   m                        w
                                                              1+          (1        F(           )) + F (                )        F(          )
                                                    >                                                                                             =1
                                                                               1                          w ))                    m)
                                                                      1+            (1           F(              +F (

and
                                                                                        1
                                             u01w + R u02w                     1+                (1       F(         w
                                                                                                                         ))       <0

then
                                                        m                                         1       w
                                              1+                      dsm                        1+                          dsw
                                              m           1       w
                                                                          +                      m         1         w
                                                                                                                                 >0
                                       1+          +     1+
                                                                       d            1+                +   1+
                                                                                                                             d

                 d m                 d w
         Since    d     > 0 and       d    < 0, we can show that

                                                    m
                                                                                                                                      w
                                 d            1+
                                                                              m w                   wd m                 m dLt
                                       1+
                                               m+    1
                                                    1+
                                                             w                      +                 d                     d
                                                                      =                           m           w 2
                                                                                                                                              >0
                                              d                                             (         +          )

Then
                                                                          dsyoung
                                                                            t
                                                                                  >0
                                                                            d




                                                                                   21
     The aggregate savings rate in this economy is

                                  Qt + (R        1) N F At             1        C1t     C2t
                        sP
                         t   =
                                                     Qt
                                                       m           1             w
                                            1+   sm         +     1+       sw
                             =    (1    )              m           1        w
                                                                                      = (1    ) syoung
                                                 1+         +     1+


Therefore, as the sex ratio rises, aggregate savings rate goes up.

     Some remarks are in order. First, as the sex ratio rises, men will raise their educational e¤ort, and
by (F.1), also their educational expenditure. In this case, the increase in educational expenditure does
not reduce their savings. To see the reason, we …rst note that both savings and educational investment
can enhance men’s status in the marriage market. The optimal allocation in the …rst period must be
such that the marginal gains from additional savings and from additional education expenditure are
equal. Since both yield diminishing returns in the marriage market, we expect both instruments to be
deployed by men and therefore both to rise as the sex ratio rises. Qualitatively, both men’s savings
rate and aggregate savings rate always go up as the sex ratio rises even in the presence of educational
expenditure.

      Second, the assumption that the educational expenditure and the costly e¤ort are complements
can be relaxed. If there exists some substitution e¤ect between the two, but the utility function on
leisure is not that concave, men may …nd that increasing the e¤ort can lead to higher returns in the
marriage market. In this case, they are more likely to raise the e¤ort rather than to increase the
educational expenditure. In this case, men may allocate more of their …rst period income into savings.
Quantitatively, a positive substitution between the two may generate a bigger response in the savings.

    We now present a numerical example. We consider a similar multi-period model as in the bench-
mark except that we allow productivity to be augmented by educational expenditure and e¤ort. We
assume in this experiment that individual i’s labor productivity is

                                            i         Xti
                                            t    =            ,    2 (0; 1)                              (F.7)


where Xti is a composite input of educational expenditure and e¤ort,

                                                       1                                1     1
                                 Xti = a Te;t
                                          i
                                                            + (1           a) eit

Parameter is smaller than one; this means that the marginal gain in labor productivity is decreasing
as the individual exerts additional e¤ort or spends additional income on education.




                                                            22
     A representative woman’s optimization problem is
                                                                    "                                             #
                     X1                                                 50
                                                                        X
                           t 1                                                  t 1
              max                [u(cw
                                     t ) + v(1      ew
                                                     t )] + E1                        (u(cw
                                                                                          t ) + v(1   ew
                                                                                                       t )+
                                                                                                              m
                                                                                                                  )
                     t=1                                                t=


For t < , when the woman is still single, the intertemporal budget constraint is

                                                                         w
                                                At+1 = R (At +           t yt     cw
                                                                                   t )


where At is her wealth level at the beginning of period t. After marriage (t                             ), her family budget

constraint becomes                          (
                                                        w H
                                                R AH
                                                   t + t yt     cH
                                                                 t =                     if t 30
                                 AH
                                  t+1   =             H     H
                                                   R At    ct =                          if t > 30

where AH t is the level of family wealth (held jointly by the wife and the husband) at the beginning of
period t. cHt is the public good consumption by both spouses, which takes the same form as in the two
period OLG model. The optimization problem for a represenative man is similar. v(1 ew     t ) represents
the utility from leisure. We assume that
                                                        (
                                                            B ln (1      ew
                                                                          t ) if t   30
                                    v (1        ew
                                                 t )=
                                                                  0           if t > 30


     A representative man’s optimization problem is similar. For simplicity, we assume that, there
exist lower bounds on the education inputs, Te and e.6 In the calibration, we set Te and e to be the
equilibrium choices by women and men when the sex ratio is one. We set e = 0:1 in the benchmark,
which means that learning time represents at least 10 percent of the total time endowment.7

     We vary the values of parameters , a and        in (F.7) to study the responses of the aggregate
savings and current account. We set = 0:5 in the benchmark and examine the case of = 0:1 in
the robustness checks. Parameter a represents the weight of educational expenditure in the aggregate
human capital investment Xt . We set a = 0:7 in the benchmark, and examine the case of a = 0:4
(educational expenditure is less important) in robustness checks. Parameter represents the elasticity
of substitution between educational expenditure and e¤ort. We consider two cases in the calibration:
   = 0:5 (the two inputs are gross complements) and = 2 (they are gross substitutes). For all other
parameters, we take the values in the benchmark model.

     Consider a rise in the sex ratio in the …rst period from one to 1.1. Appendix Figures 9a, 9b, 10a
and 10b report the calibration results. Similar to the benchmark, both the aggregate savings rate and
the current account rise …rst and persist for a number of periods. The adjustments in the aggregate
   6 We verify in unreported calibrations that, relaxing this assumption does not dramatically change the quantitative

results.
   7 Moderate changes in the value of e only generate moderate changes in the quantitative results.




                                                               23
savings and the current account are quantitatively sizable. For instance, if = 10 (marriage happens
in the 10th period), in all experiments, the current account surplus reaches more than 2.8 percent
of GDP by the 9th period. From the 10th period onwards, both the aggregate savings rate and the
current account start to fall progressively until reaching zero. In all experiments, the current account
surplus lasts for a long time. For instance, if = 10, the current account remains in excess of 2 percent
of GDP for more than twenty years under each combination of the parameters.



G      CRRA utility

     In the benchmark model, we show that, as the sex ratio rises, the increase in a representative
man’s savings will dominate any reduction in a representative woman’s savings. The reason is, in
addition to improving his relative standing in the marriage market, the representative man also wants
to smooth his consumption over the two periods and would raise his savings rate to compensate for the
lower savings rate by his future wife. This ensures that his incremental savings is more than enough to
o¤set any reduction in his future wife’s savings. How willing the representative man is to smooth his
consumption depends on the elasticity of intertemporal substitution. If this elasticity is low, men may
be reluctant to sacri…ce his …rst period consumption to make up for the lower savings by women. As a
result, the change in aggregate savings might not be quantitatively large. In this section, we consider
a more general utility function (CRRA utility) and examine whether di¤erent choices of elasticities of
intertemporal substitution will a¤ect the quantitative results.
                                                                1
     We assume that the utility takes the form u (c) = c 1 1 , where 1= is the elasticity of intertem-
poral substitution. We make a small change in the emotional utilities: the emotional utilities from
                                1                 1
marriage in this case are w y 1 1 and m y 1 1 , where y represents the labor income in the
model8 . In a two-period small-open economy example, we choose the same parameter values as in the
benchmark: = 0:7, = 0:4, = 0:8, = 0:05 and m = 2:08. Then, we vary the choices of to see
how the responses in the aggregate savings and the current account would change.

     Appendix Figure 11 reports the results. In all experiments, we can see that, as the sex ratio rises,
both the aggregate savings rate and the current account will rise. As the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution becomes lower (higher ), the responses of the aggregate savings rate and the current
account to the change in the sex ratio are weaker. However, they are still economically sizable. For
instance, as the sex ratio rises from 1 to 1.15 (the current level of sex ratio in China), the current
account will rise by around 2 percent when = 2.
   8 With this assumption, income does not a¤ect the optimal savings choices. This allows us to do the normalization

on income as in the benchmark calibration.




                                                        24
H     Income Heterogeneity

     We consider an extension in which people di¤er in their incomes. For simplicity, we assume that
there are two income levels: a high level of y H and a low level of y < y H . Assume young women and
young men have identical income distributions, and let ! denote the fraction of the young males (or
females) that are in the high-income group. Then, in a 50-period model that is otherwise similar to
the benchmark, we study the savings rate and current account responses when we vary the degree of
income inequality.

      We need to make an assumption to address a technical di¢ culty: in general, the matching between
men and women is not unique as a man (woman) may be indi¤erent between a partner with a high
income but low emotional utility and someone with a low income but high emotional utility. To
simplify our discussion, we assume that the highest possible value of emotional utility is not high
enough such that every high-income man is ranked higher than all low-income men by a representative
woman. We also assume that the lowest possible value of the emotional utility is su¢ ciently high such
that everyone prefers to get married. Formally, we assume that is drawn from a truncated normal
distribution [E    3 ; E + 3 ].

      With these assumptions, there is no hope for a low-income man to be matched with a high-income
woman when there is a relative shortage of brides. There exist four types of feasible match patterns:
a high-income man with a high-income woman, a high-income man (with a relatively low emotional
utility) with a low-income woman, a low-income man with a low-income woman, and a low-income
man (with a relatively low emotional utility) who stays single. Let M ij ( w ) denote the mapping from
women to men, where i and j denote the income types of women and men, respectively.

    As in the benchmark model, it is easy to show that the optimization problem for a person with
income y is equivalent to
                                    maxu (c1 ) + ^ [u (c2 ) + ^]
                                       c1 ;c2

subject to the life-time budget constraint

                                                           31                  51   1
                           1 R 1                 1   R 1            1    R 1
                      c2 =       (y          c1 ) +        1
                                                                y              1
                            1 R                     1 R                 1 R

where 1 is the marriage age as de…ned in the benchmark. c1 and c2 represents the consumption before
and after the marriage age, respectively. ^ is an increasing function of discount factor , and ^ is an
increasing function of and .

    Now we compute the optimal conditions for the four types of agents: a high-income man, a low-
income man, a high-income woman, and a low-income woman, respectively. They are given by the




                                                     25
following equations:
                                  2                                                R                                              3
                                                   @cHH             HH                             10
                                              uHH0  2m
                                               2m @cH               m     +             M HH    (~m;HH )dF ( m )
                       uH0   ^4                                                                                                   5 =
                        1m +                                                             R                                                0
                                                      1m
                                                  @cHL                    HH                      10
                                    +uHL0  2m
                                      2m @cH                   1          m            +   M LH      (~m;LH )dF (         m
                                                                                                                              )
                                           1m
                 "                    Z                                                                                           #
                       @cLL                                    10                                                        @cL
                                                                                                                           2m;n
    uL0
     1m     +^    uLL0
                   2m
                         2m       LL
                                  m +     M LL                      (~   m;L
                                                                               )dF (     m
                                                                                             ) + 1         LL
                                                                                                           m    uL0
                                                                                                                 2m;n                 =   0
                       @cL
                         1m                                                                                               @cH
                                                                                                                            1m
                                                                                            Z
                                                          ^ HH0                  @cHH
                                                                                   2w
                                                     uH0
                                                      1w + u2w                          1 +   M HH0 (~w;H )dF ( w )  = 0
                                                                                 @cH1w
                                               2                                       R LH0 w;L                   3
                                                                    @cLH         LH
                                                          uLH0  2w
                                                           2w @cL                w +    M     (~ )dF ( m )
                                 uL0
                                  1w      +^4                  @cLL
                                                                         1w
                                                                                    LH
                                                                                           R LL0 w;L               5 = 0
                                                   +uLL0  2w
                                                     2w @cL                    1    w   +    M   (~   )dF  ( m
                                                                                                               )
                                                                    1w



where HH     LL     LH
        m , m and w represent the probabilities that a high income man is getting married with a
high income woman, a low income man is getting married with a low income woman, and a low income
woman is getting married with a high income man, respectively. For the matching functions,
                                                                          w
                                                           1        F(         )              1
                          M HH (      w
                                          )   =    (F )                            +
                                                                                                                w
                                                           1                                 (1   !) (1    F(       ))
                           M LH (     w
                                          )   =    (F )             F     m;H
                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                       !
                                                                                       w;L          w
                                                           1              F                       F( )
                           M LL (     w
                                          )   =    (F )             1


where m;H and w;L represent the two thresholds above which a high-income man can get married with
a high-income woman, and a low-income woman can get married with a high-income man, respectively.

     To simulate the model, we set the values of parameters , , , m and to be the same as in the
benchmark. We choose = 10 and …x the share of high-income people to be 20% of the population.9
With this setup, the ratio of incomes for the rich and the poor, y H =y, represents the degree of income
inequality (which can be easily converted into a Gini coe¢ cient). We will vary the degree of income
inequality to investigate its e¤ect on the strength of the competitive saving motive. Mindful that the
Gini index in China is about 0.47 in recent years (changed from a low value of 0.29 in 1981), we report
results in four cases that correspond to four values of the Gini coe¢ cient: 0, 0.20, 0.47, and 0.60.

      In Appendix Figures 12, we report the responses of the aggregate savings rate and the current
account, respectively, to a sudden increase in the sex ratio from 1 to 1.2. As we can see, the existence
of income heterogeneity does not weaken the quantitative responses. Instead, as the Gini coe¢ cient
rises, a given increase in the sex ratio leads to stronger responses by the aggregate savings rate and
current account. For instance, if the Gini coe¢ cient is 0.47, both the aggregate savings rate and
current account would rise by more than 6% of GDP after nine years.
  9 In   unreported numerical calculations, we verify that di¤erent values of ! do not change the qualitative results.



                                                                          26
     To see what is going on, we now look into the response patterns by individual type, which are
reported in Appendix Figure 13.10 For a high-income man, as the income inequality rises, he raises his
savings rate more aggressively as the sex ratio becomes more unbalanced. Here is the intuition. With
a positive probability, a high-income man will marry a low-income woman. If the income gap becomes
larger, marrying a low-income woman yields a greater losss of utility. As a result, the competitive
saving motive becomes stronger among high-income men; they raise their savings rate by a larger
amount for a given rise in the sex ratio. For high income women, since they can always get married
with a high-income man, they respond by reducing their savings rate.

     For a low-income man, since he cannot hope to get married with a high-income woman, he does
not su¤er much additional utility loss from an increase in the income gap and does not need to modify
his behavior much.11 His savings rate does not di¤er much as the income gap rises. Interestingly,
Appendix Figure 13 shows that, under a higher degree of income inequality, a low-income woman …rst
reduces her savings as the sex ratio rises, before raising the savings rate again as the sex ratio become
more unbalanced. Why such a non-monotonic response? To understand this, we note that there exist
two main forces driving the savings decision of a low-income woman. On the one hand, to free ride
on her future husband, she may lower her savings. On the other hand, as she aspires to marry a
high-income man, which has been made more desirable by a rising gap in income, she would want
to save more. When the sex ratio imbalance is moderate, the free-riding incentive dominates as the
chance of marrying a high-income man is low anyway. However, as the sex ratio becomes su¢ ciently
high, the chance for a low-income woman to be married with a high-income man improves su¢ ciently.
In this case, the competitive savings motive dominatew the free-riding motive. The shifting balance
of the two motives generates a non-linear response by a low-income woman.

     In the current set of calibrations, a rise in income inequality leads to a strengthening of the overall
savings response to a higher sex ratio. We note, however, that there can be scenarios in which the
savings response may be weakened. In particular, if the con…gurations of the rich and poor and the sex
ratio are such that almost no poor man can get married, a rise in income inequality could reduce the
probability of marriage for a poor man (since he is less able to catch up with the rich men). In this case,
in response to a higher sex ratio, a representative poor man may choose to give up the competition in
the marriage market and save less. While this is theoretically possible, it may not be realistic in the
data. Even in China, the country currently with the highest sex ratio for the pre-marital age cohort,
most poor men still think they have a chance to get married if they try hard enough. Therefore, in
empirically plausible settings, a rise in income inequality tends to reinforce the savings response to a
higher sex ratio.




  1 0 Notice that there is no income di¤erence when Gini index equals 0. In this case, we draw the savings curve only in

the low-income boxes.
  1 1 As we analyze below, with greater income inequality, low-income women may raise their savings as the sex ratio rises.

This indirectly raises the incentive for a low-income man to get married. However, the e¤ect is small quantitatively.


                                                            27
                               Appendix Table 1a: Savings rates vs sex ratios, small country
Κ=0.8              m=2.08, σ=0.05                            m=1, σ=0.05                            m=2.08, σ=0.1
                   (sm, sw, st, ca)                        (sm, sw, st, ca)                        (sm, sw, st, ca)
1.00    0.412     0.412       0.280   0.000     0.412     0.412       0.280   0.000     0.412     0.412       0.280     0.000
1.05    0.675     0.281       0.322   0.042     0.604     0.311       0.310   0.030     0.586     0.319       0.306     0.026
1.10    0.741     0.240       0.334   0.054     0.660     0.275       0.319   0.039     0.646     0.282       0.316     0.036
1.15    0.774     0.216       0.342   0.062     0.691     0.253       0.325   0.045     0.679     0.258       0.323     0.043
1.20    0.795     0.199       0.347   0.067     0.709     0.237       0.330   0.050     0.701     0.241       0.328     0.048
1.25    0.808     0.187       0.352   0.072     0.722     0.225       0.334   0.054     0.715     0.229       0.332     0.052
1.30    0.818     0.177       0.356   0.076     0.732     0.216       0.337   0.057     0.726     0.219       0.336     0.056
1.35    0.825     0.169       0.360   0.080     0.736     0.210       0.339   0.059     0.734     0.210       0.340     0.060
1.40    0.825     0.169       0.359   0.079     0.736     0.210       0.338   0.058     0.740     0.203       0.343     0.063
1.45    0.825     0.169       0.357   0.077     0.736     0.210       0.337   0.057     0.745     0.197       0.346     0.066
1.50    0.825     0.169       0.356   0.076     0.736     0.210       0.336   0.056     0.749     0.192       0.349     0.069
        sm—men’s savings rate, sw—women’s savings rate, st—economy-wide savings rate, ca—current account to GDP ratio



                               Appendix Table 1b: Savings rates vs sex ratios, small country
Κ=0.7              m=2.08, σ=0.05                            m=1, σ=0.05                            m=2.08, σ=0.1
                   (sm, sw, st, ca)                        (sm, sw, st, ca)                        (sm, sw, st, ca)
1.00    0.412     0.412       0.280   0.000     0.412     0.412       0.280   0.000     0.412     0.412       0.280     0.000
1.05    0.675     0.281       0.322   0.042     0.604     0.311       0.310   0.030     0.586     0.319       0.306     0.026
1.10    0.741     0.240       0.334   0.054     0.660     0.275       0.319   0.039     0.646     0.282       0.316     0.036
1.15    0.774     0.216       0.342   0.062     0.691     0.253       0.325   0.045     0.679     0.258       0.323     0.043
1.20    0.795     0.199       0.347   0.067     0.709     0.237       0.330   0.050     0.701     0.241       0.328     0.048
1.25    0.808     0.187       0.352   0.072     0.722     0.225       0.334   0.054     0.715     0.229       0.332     0.052
1.30    0.818     0.177       0.356   0.076     0.732     0.216       0.337   0.057     0.726     0.219       0.336     0.056
1.35    0.825     0.169       0.360   0.080     0.738     0.208       0.341   0.061     0.734     0.210       0.340     0.060
1.40    0.830     0.162       0.364   0.084     0.743     0.202       0.344   0.064     0.740     0.203       0.343     0.063
1.45    0.830     0.162       0.362   0.082     0.747     0.196       0.346   0.066     0.745     0.197       0.346     0.066
1.50    0.830     0.162       0.360   0.080     0.750     0.191       0.349   0.069     0.749     0.192       0.349     0.069
        sm—men’s savings rate, sw—women’s savings rate, st—economy-wide savings rate, ca—current account to GDP ratio
                                 Appendix Table 1c: Savings rates vs sex ratios, small country
Κ=0.9              m=2.08, σ=0.05                             m=1, σ=0.05                               m=2.08, σ=0.1
                   (sm, sw, st, ca)                         (sm, sw, st, ca)                           (sm, sw, st, ca)
1.00    0.412     0.412       0.280     0.000     0.412    0.412       0.280     0.000     0.412      0.412       0.280     0.000
1.05    0.675     0.281       0.322     0.042     0.604    0.311       0.310     0.030     0.586      0.319       0.306     0.026
1.10    0.741     0.240       0.334     0.054     0.660    0.275       0.319     0.039     0.646      0.282       0.316     0.036
1.15    0.774     0.216       0.342     0.062     0.691    0.253       0.325     0.045     0.679      0.258       0.323     0.043
1.20    0.795     0.199       0.347     0.067     0.709    0.237       0.330     0.050     0.701      0.241       0.328     0.048
1.25    0.808     0.187       0.352     0.072     0.722    0.225       0.334     0.054     0.715      0.229       0.332     0.052
1.30    0.818     0.177       0.356     0.076     0.731    0.217       0.337     0.057     0.726      0.219       0.336     0.056
1.35    0.821     0.173       0.357     0.077     0.731    0.217       0.336     0.056     0.734      0.210       0.340     0.060
1.40    0.821     0.173       0.356     0.076     0.731    0.217       0.335     0.055     0.740      0.203       0.343     0.063
1.45    0.821     0.173       0.354     0.074     0.731    0.217       0.334     0.054     0.745      0.197       0.346     0.066
1.50    0.821     0.173       0.353     0.073     0.731    0.217       0.333     0.053     0.749      0.192       0.349     0.069
        sm—men’s savings rate, sw—women’s savings rate, st—economy-wide savings rate, ca—current account to GDP ratio


          Appendix Table 2: CA/GDP vs country 2’s sex ratio, two large countries, differing in the sex ratios
Κ=0.8              m=2.08, σ=0.05                             m=1, σ=0.05                               m=2.08, σ=0.1
                   (s1, s2, ca1, ca2)                       (s1, s2, ca1, ca2)                         (s1, s2, ca1, ca2)
1.00    0.247     0.247         0.000   0.000     0.247    0.247         0.000   0.000     0.247      0.247         0.000   0.000
1.05    0.247     0.287        -0.020   0.020     0.247    0.274        -0.014   0.014     0.247      0.272        -0.012   0.012
1.10    0.247     0.299        -0.026   0.026     0.247    0.283        -0.018   0.018     0.247      0.281        -0.017   0.017
1.15    0.247     0.306        -0.030   0.030     0.247    0.289        -0.021   0.021     0.247      0.288        -0.020   0.020
1.20    0.247     0.312        -0.032   0.032     0.247    0.293        -0.023   0.023     0.247      0.293        -0.023   0.023
1.25    0.247     0.317        -0.035   0.035     0.247    0.297        -0.025   0.025     0.247      0.297        -0.025   0.025
1.30    0.247     0.321        -0.037   0.037     0.247    0.300        -0.027   0.027     0.247      0.300        -0.027   0.027
1.35    0.247     0.321        -0.037   0.037     0.247    0.302        -0.028   0.028     0.247      0.304        -0.028   0.028
1.40    0.247     0.309        -0.031   0.031     0.247    0.291        -0.022   0.022     0.247      0.307        -0.030   0.030
1.45    0.247     0.298        -0.025   0.025     0.247    0.280        -0.016   0.016     0.247      0.310        -0.031   0.031
1.50    0.247     0.287        -0.020   0.020     0.247    0.269        -0.011   0.011     0.247      0.312        -0.033   0.033
                     s1—country 1’s economy-wide savings rate, s2—country 2’s economy-wide savings rate,
                   ca1—country 1’s current account to GDP ratio, ca2—country 2’s current account to GDP ratio
                Appendix Table 3a: CA/GDP vs country 2’s sex ratio, two large countries: US and China
Κ=0.8              m=2.08, σ=0.05                             m=1, σ=0.05                               m=2.08, σ=0.1
                   (s1, s2, ca1, ca2)                       (s1, s2, ca1, ca2)                         (s1, s2, ca1, ca2)
1.00    0.247     0.247         0.000   0.000    0.247     0.247         0.000   0.000     0.247      0.247         0.000   0.000
1.05    0.247     0.287        -0.010   0.030    0.247     0.274        -0.007   0.021     0.247      0.272        -0.006   0.019
1.10    0.247     0.299        -0.013   0.039    0.247     0.283        -0.009   0.027     0.247      0.281        -0.009   0.026
1.15    0.247     0.306        -0.015   0.044    0.247     0.289        -0.010   0.031     0.247      0.288        -0.010   0.030
1.20    0.247     0.312        -0.016   0.049    0.247     0.293        -0.012   0.035     0.247      0.293        -0.011   0.034
1.25    0.247     0.317        -0.017   0.052    0.247     0.297        -0.013   0.038     0.247      0.297        -0.012   0.037
1.30    0.247     0.321        -0.018   0.055    0.247     0.300        -0.013   0.040     0.247      0.300        -0.013   0.040
1.35    0.247     0.321        -0.019   0.056    0.247     0.302        -0.014   0.041     0.247      0.304        -0.014   0.043
1.40    0.247     0.309        -0.016   0.047    0.247     0.291        -0.011   0.033     0.247      0.307        -0.015   0.045
1.45    0.247     0.298        -0.013   0.038    0.247     0.280        -0.008   0.024     0.247      0.310        -0.016   0.047
1.50    0.247     0.287        -0.010   0.030    0.247     0.269        -0.005   0.016     0.247      0.312        -0.016   0.049



                Appendix Table 3b: CA/GDP vs country 2’s sex ratio, two large countries: US and China
Κ=0.7              m=2.08, σ=0.05                             m=1, σ=0.05                               m=2.08, σ=0.1
                   (s1, s2, ca1, ca2)                       (s1, s2, ca1, ca2)                         (s1, s2, ca1, ca2)
1.00    0.247     0.247         0.000   0.000    0.247     0.247         0.000   0.000     0.247      0.247         0.000   0.000
1.05    0.247     0.287        -0.010   0.030    0.247     0.274        -0.007   0.021     0.247      0.272        -0.006   0.019
1.10    0.247     0.299        -0.013   0.039    0.247     0.283        -0.009   0.027     0.247      0.281        -0.009   0.026
1.15    0.247     0.306        -0.015   0.044    0.247     0.289        -0.010   0.031     0.247      0.288        -0.010   0.030
1.20    0.247     0.312        -0.016   0.049    0.247     0.293        -0.012   0.035     0.247      0.293        -0.011   0.034
1.25    0.247     0.317        -0.017   0.052    0.247     0.297        -0.013   0.038     0.247      0.297        -0.012   0.037
1.30    0.247     0.321        -0.018   0.055    0.247     0.300        -0.013   0.040     0.247      0.300        -0.013   0.040
1.35    0.247     0.325        -0.019   0.058    0.247     0.303        -0.014   0.042     0.247      0.304        -0.014   0.043
1.40    0.247     0.323        -0.019   0.057    0.247     0.306        -0.015   0.044     0.247      0.307        -0.015   0.045
1.45    0.247     0.312        -0.016   0.049    0.247     0.309        -0.015   0.046     0.247      0.310        -0.016   0.047
1.50    0.247     0.300        -0.013   0.040    0.247     0.311        -0.016   0.048     0.247      0.312        -0.016   0.049
                     s1—country 1’s economy-wide savings rate, s2—country 2’s economy-wide savings rate,
                   ca1—country 1’s current account to GDP ratio, ca2—country 2’s current account to GDP ratio
                         Appendix Table 3c: CA/GDP vs country 2’s sex ratio, two large countries: US and China
       Κ=0.9                   m=2.08, σ=0.05                                           m=1, σ=0.05                                               m=2.08, σ=0.1
                               (s1, s2, ca1, ca2)                                     (s1, s2, ca1, ca2)                                         (s1, s2, ca1, ca2)
       1.00     0.247         0.247         0.000        0.000           0.247       0.247         0.000            0.000       0.247           0.247         0.000         0.000
       1.05     0.247         0.287        -0.010        0.030           0.247       0.274        -0.007            0.021       0.247           0.272        -0.006         0.019
       1.10     0.247         0.299        -0.013        0.039           0.247       0.283        -0.009            0.027       0.247           0.281        -0.009         0.026
       1.15     0.247         0.306        -0.015        0.044           0.247       0.289        -0.010            0.031       0.247           0.288        -0.010         0.030
       1.20     0.247         0.312        -0.016        0.049           0.247       0.293        -0.012            0.035       0.247           0.293        -0.011         0.034
       1.25     0.247         0.317        -0.017        0.052           0.247       0.297        -0.013            0.038       0.247           0.297        -0.012         0.037
       1.30     0.247         0.321        -0.018        0.055           0.247       0.300        -0.013            0.040       0.247           0.300        -0.013         0.040
       1.35     0.247         0.312        -0.016        0.049           0.247       0.289        -0.011            0.032       0.247           0.304        -0.014         0.043
       1.40     0.247         0.301        -0.013        0.040           0.247       0.278        -0.008            0.023       0.247           0.307        -0.015         0.045
       1.45     0.247         0.290        -0.011        0.032           0.247       0.267        -0.005            0.015       0.247           0.310        -0.016         0.047
       1.50     0.247         0.279        -0.008        0.024           0.247       0.257        -0.002            0.007       0.247           0.312        -0.016         0.049
s1—country 1’s economy-wide savings rate, s2—country 2’s economy-wide savings rate, ca1—country 1’s current account to GDP ratio, ca2—country 2’s current account to
GDP ratio

                          Appendix Table 4: The planner’s economy vs the decentralized economy, small country
          planner's economy                        Κ =0.7                                              Κ =0.8                                                  Κ =0.9
              (sm, sw, st)              (sm, Δw(m), sw, Δw(w), st, Δw)                      (sm, Δw(m), sw, Δw(w), st, Δw)                         (sm, Δw(m), sw, Δw(w), st, Δw)
1.00    0.412 0.412 0.280      0.412   0.000    0.412   0.000    0.280    0.000    0.412   0.000    0.412   0.000     0.280   0.000     0.412    0.000    0.412    0.000   0.280    0.000
1.05    0.412 0.412 0.280      0.675   -0.484   0.281   0.267    0.322    -0.118   0.675   -0.489   0.281   0.272     0.322   -0.118    0.675    -0.493   0.281    0.275   0.322    -0.118
1.10    0.412 0.412 0.280      0.741   -0.686   0.240   0.306    0.334    -0.213   0.741   -0.694   0.240   0.314     0.334   -0.214    0.741    -0.702   0.240    0.321   0.334    -0.215
1.15    0.412 0.412 0.280      0.774   -0.810   0.216   0.312    0.342    -0.288   0.774   -0.822   0.216   0.324     0.342   -0.289    0.774    -0.833   0.216    0.333   0.342    -0.290
1.20    0.412 0.412 0.280      0.795   -0.894   0.199   0.307    0.347    -0.348   0.795   -0.910   0.199   0.321     0.347   -0.350    0.795    -0.923   0.199    0.334   0.347    -0.352
1.25    0.412 0.412 0.280      0.808   -0.955   0.187   0.296    0.352    -0.399   0.808   -0.974   0.187   0.314     0.352   -0.402    0.808    -0.990   0.187    0.329   0.352    -0.404
1.30    0.412 0.412 0.280      0.818   -1.000   0.177   0.283    0.356    -0.442   0.818   -1.021   0.177   0.303     0.356   -0.445    0.818    -1.041   0.177    0.321   0.356    -0.449
1.35    0.412 0.412 0.280      0.825   -1.034   0.169   0.269    0.360    -0.479   0.825   -1.058   0.169   0.292     0.360   -0.484    0.821    -1.058   0.173    0.317   0.357    -0.473
1.40    0.412 0.412 0.280      0.830   -1.058   0.162   0.255    0.364    -0.511   0.825   -1.058   0.169   0.292     0.359   -0.496    0.821    -1.058   0.173    0.317   0.356    -0.485
1.45    0.412 0.412 0.280      0.830   -1.058   0.162   0.255    0.362    -0.522   0.825   -1.058   0.169   0.292     0.357   -0.507    0.821    -1.058   0.173    0.317   0.354    -0.497
1.50    0.412 0.412 0.280      0.830   -1.058   0.162   0.255    0.360    -0.533   0.825   -1.058   0.169   0.292     0.356   -0.518    0.821    -1.058   0.173    0.317   0.353    -0.508

sm—men’s savings rate, sw—women’s savings rate, st—economy-wide savings rate, Δw(m)—men’s welfare gain under the decentralized economy compared to
that under the planner’s economy, Δw(w)—women’s welfare gain under the decentralized economy compared to that under the planner’s economy, Δw—social
welfare gain under the decentralized economy compared to that under the planner’s economy
               Appendix Table 5: Savings rates vs sex ratios, endogenous intra-household bargaining, small country, σ =0.05
   γ=0.5                            ε=0                                        ε =0.5                                       ε =1
                              (sm, sw, st, ca)                             (sm, sw, st, ca)                           (sm, sw, st, ca)
    1.00        0.412      0.412         0.280    0.000      0.412      0.412         0.280      0.000     0.412   0.412           0.280   0.000
    1.05        0.675      0.281         0.322    0.042      0.702      0.402         0.366      0.086     0.724   0.482           0.397   0.117
    1.10        0.741      0.240         0.334    0.054      0.766      0.382         0.383      0.103     0.784   0.470           0.414   0.134
    1.15        0.774      0.216         0.342    0.062      0.798      0.370         0.392      0.112     0.814   0.463           0.423   0.143
    1.20        0.795      0.199         0.347    0.067      0.818      0.362         0.399      0.119     0.832   0.457           0.430   0.150
    1.25        0.808      0.187         0.352    0.072      0.831      0.356         0.405      0.125     0.844   0.452           0.435   0.155
    1.30        0.818      0.177         0.356    0.076      0.840      0.350         0.409      0.129     0.864   0.449           0.440   0.160
    1.35        0.825      0.169         0.360    0.080      0.853      0.346         0.414      0.134     0.864   0.449           0.437   0.157
    1.40        0.830      0.163         0.363    0.083      0.853      0.346         0.412      0.132     0.864   0.449           0.434   0.154
    1.45        0.830      0.163         0.362    0.082      0.853      0.346         0.409      0.129     0.864   0.449           0.430   0.150
    1.50        0.830      0.163         0.360    0.080      0.853      0.346         0.406      0.126     0.864   0.449           0.427   0.147
   γ=0.3                           ε=0                                          ε =0.5                                     ε =1
    1.00        0.412      0.412         0.280    0.000      0.412      0.412            0.280   0.000     0.412   0.412          0.280    0.000
    1.05        0.675      0.281         0.322    0.042      0.690      0.365            0.352   0.072     0.702   0.429          0.374    0.094
    1.10        0.741      0.240         0.334    0.054      0.755      0.341            0.368   0.088     0.765   0.413          0.391    0.111
    1.15        0.774      0.216         0.342    0.062      0.788      0.327            0.377   0.097     0.797   0.403          0.401    0.121
    1.20        0.795      0.199         0.347    0.067      0.808      0.317            0.384   0.104     0.816   0.396          0.408    0.128
    1.25        0.808      0.187         0.352    0.072      0.822      0.310            0.389   0.109     0.829   0.391          0.414    0.134
    1.30        0.818      0.177         0.356    0.076      0.844      0.303            0.396   0.116     0.853   0.387          0.419    0.139
    1.35        0.824      0.169         0.360    0.080      0.844      0.303            0.394   0.114     0.853   0.387          0.416    0.136
    1.40        0.824      0.169         0.358    0.078      0.844      0.303            0.391   0.111     0.853   0.387          0.414    0.134
    1.45        0.824      0.169         0.357    0.077      0.844      0.303            0.389   0.109     0.853   0.387          0.411    0.131
    1.50        0.824      0.169         0.355    0.075      0.844      0.303            0.387   0.107     0.853   0.387          0.408    0.128
   γ=0.7                           ε=0                                          ε =0.5                                     ε =1
    1.00        0.412      0.412         0.280    0.000      0.412      0.412            0.280   0.000     0.412   0.412          0.280    0.000
    1.05        0.675      0.281         0.322    0.042      0.714      0.433            0.379   0.099     0.745   0.522          0.415    0.135
    1.10        0.741      0.240         0.334    0.054      0.777      0.415            0.396   0.116     0.802   0.513          0.432    0.152
    1.15        0.774      0.216         0.342    0.062      0.808      0.405            0.405   0.125     0.830   0.507          0.441    0.161
    1.20        0.795      0.199         0.347    0.067      0.827      0.398            0.412   0.132     0.847   0.502          0.447    0.167
    1.25        0.808      0.187         0.352    0.072      0.839      0.392            0.417   0.137     0.858   0.498          0.452    0.172
    1.30        0.818      0.177         0.356    0.076      0.848      0.387            0.422   0.142     0.872   0.495          0.456    0.176
    1.35        0.825      0.169         0.360    0.080      0.855      0.383            0.425   0.145     0.872   0.495          0.452    0.172
    1.40        0.830      0.162         0.364    0.084      0.860      0.379            0.429   0.149     0.872   0.495          0.448    0.168
    1.45        0.834      0.156         0.367    0.087      0.862      0.378            0.429   0.149     0.872   0.495          0.445    0.165
    1.50        0.836      0.154         0.368    0.088      0.862      0.378            0.426   0.146     0.872   0.495          0.442    0.162
sm—men’s savings rate, sw—women’s savings rate, st—economy-wide savings rate, ca—current account to GDP ratio
                   Appendix Table 6: Two large countries, endogenous intra-household bargaining, China vs US, σ =0.05
γ=0.5                                    ε=0                                                          ε =0.5                                                          ε =1
                           (s1, s2, ca1, ca2, dw1, dw2)                                   (s1, s2, ca1, ca2, dw1, dw2)                                   (s1, s2, ca1, ca2, dw1, dw2)
 1.00      0.247     0.247       0.000       0.000     0.000    0.000       0.247     0.247     0.000       0.000    0.000      0.000      0.247     0.247     0.000       0.000    0.000       0.000
 1.05      0.247     0.287       -0.010      0.030    -0.001    -0.108      0.247     0.331     -0.021      0.063    -0.003     -0.148     0.247     0.361     -0.029      0.086    -0.004      -0.200
 1.10      0.247     0.299       -0.013      0.039    -0.002    -0.197      0.247     0.347     -0.025      0.075    -0.003     -0.249     0.247     0.378     -0.033      0.098    -0.004      -0.311
 1.15      0.247     0.306       -0.015      0.044    -0.002    -0.266      0.247     0.357     -0.027      0.082    -0.004     -0.327     0.247     0.388     -0.035      0.105    -0.004      -0.394
 1.20      0.247     0.312       -0.016      0.049    -0.002    -0.323      0.247     0.364     -0.029      0.087    -0.004     -0.390     0.247     0.394     -0.037      0.110    -0.005      -0.459
 1.25      0.247     0.317       -0.017      0.052    -0.002    -0.370      0.247     0.369     -0.030      0.091    -0.004     -0.442     0.247     0.399     -0.038      0.114    -0.005      -0.513
 1.30      0.247     0.321       -0.018      0.055    -0.002    -0.410      0.247     0.374     -0.032      0.095    -0.004     -0.486     0.247     0.392     -0.036      0.108    -0.005      -0.573
 1.35      0.247     0.325       -0.019      0.058    -0.003    -0.446      0.247     0.368     -0.030      0.091    -0.004     -0.529     0.247     0.378     -0.033      0.098    -0.005      -0.578
 1.40      0.247     0.322       -0.019      0.056    -0.003    -0.468      0.247     0.355     -0.027      0.081    -0.004     -0.536     0.247     0.365     -0.029      0.088    -0.005      -0.584
 1.45      0.247     0.310       -0.016      0.048    -0.003    -0.475      0.247     0.343     -0.024      0.072    -0.004     -0.542     0.247     0.352     -0.026      0.079    -0.005      -0.589
 1.50      0.247     0.299       -0.013      0.039    -0.002    -0.483      0.247     0.331     -0.021      0.063    -0.004     -0.548     0.247     0.340     -0.023      0.070    -0.004      -0.594
γ=0.3                                   ε=0                                                           ε =0.5                                                            ε =1
 1.00      0.247     0.247     0.000          0.000   0.000     0.000      0.247     0.247      0.000        0.000    0.000      0.000      0.247    0.247     0.000           0.000   0.000    0.000
 1.05      0.247     0.287     -0.010         0.030   -0.001    -0.108     0.247     0.316      -0.017       0.052    -0.002     -0.129     0.247    0.339     -0.023          0.069   -0.003   -0.157
 1.10      0.247     0.299     -0.013         0.039   -0.002    -0.198     0.247     0.332      -0.021       0.064    -0.003     -0.226     0.247    0.356     -0.027          0.081   -0.003   -0.260
 1.15      0.247     0.306     -0.015         0.044   -0.002    -0.267     0.247     0.341      -0.024       0.071    -0.003     -0.301     0.247    0.365     -0.030          0.089   -0.004   -0.338
 1.20      0.247     0.312     -0.016         0.049   -0.002    -0.325     0.247     0.348      -0.025       0.076    -0.003     -0.362     0.247    0.372     -0.031          0.094   -0.004   -0.401
 1.25      0.247     0.317     -0.017         0.052   -0.002    -0.373     0.247     0.354      -0.027       0.080    -0.003     -0.413     0.247    0.383     -0.034          0.102   -0.004   -0.512
 1.30      0.247     0.321     -0.018         0.055   -0.002    -0.414     0.247     0.350      -0.026       0.077    -0.004     -0.475     0.247    0.369     -0.030          0.091   -0.004   -0.519
 1.35      0.247     0.320     -0.018         0.055   -0.002    -0.442     0.247     0.337      -0.023       0.068    -0.003     -0.483     0.247    0.356     -0.027          0.082   -0.004   -0.526
 1.40      0.247     0.308     -0.015         0.046   -0.002    -0.451     0.247     0.325      -0.020       0.059    -0.003     -0.490     0.247    0.343     -0.024          0.072   -0.004   -0.532
 1.45      0.247     0.297     -0.012         0.037   -0.002    -0.459     0.247     0.314      -0.017       0.050    -0.003     -0.497     0.247    0.331     -0.021          0.063   -0.004   -0.539
 1.50      0.247     0.286     -0.010         0.029   -0.002    -0.466     0.247     0.302      -0.014       0.041    -0.003     -0.504     0.247    0.320     -0.018          0.054   -0.004   -0.545
 γ=0.7                              ε=0                                                         ε =0.5                                                        ε =1
  1.00   0.247     0.247    0.000      0.000    0.000       0.000    0.247     0.247     0.000        0.000     0.000    0.000       0.247   0.247      0.000      0.000    0.000   0.000
  1.05   0.247     0.287    -0.010     0.030    -0.001      -0.108   0.247     0.344     -0.024       0.072    -0.003    -0.169      0.247   0.380     -0.033      0.099    -0.004  -0.246
  1.10   0.247     0.299    -0.013     0.039    -0.002      -0.196   0.247     0.360     -0.028       0.085    -0.004    -0.275      0.247   0.396     -0.037      0.112    -0.005  -0.364
  1.15   0.247     0.306    -0.015     0.044    -0.002      -0.265   0.247     0.370     -0.031       0.092    -0.004    -0.355      0.247   0.405     -0.040      0.119    -0.005  -0.450
  1.20   0.247     0.312    -0.016     0.049    -0.002      -0.321   0.247     0.376     -0.032       0.097    -0.004    -0.419      0.247   0.412     -0.041      0.123    -0.005  -0.518
  1.25   0.247     0.317    -0.017     0.052    -0.002      -0.367   0.247     0.382     -0.034       0.101    -0.004    -0.471      0.247   0.416     -0.042      0.127    -0.005  -0.573
  1.30   0.247     0.321    -0.018     0.055    -0.002      -0.407   0.247     0.386     -0.035       0.104    -0.004    -0.516      0.247   0.408     -0.040      0.121    -0.005  -0.618
  1.35   0.247     0.325    -0.019     0.058    -0.003      -0.441   0.247     0.390     -0.036       0.107    -0.004    -0.554      0.247   0.394     -0.037      0.110    -0.005  -0.623
  1.40   0.247     0.328    -0.020     0.061    -0.003      -0.471   0.247     0.389     -0.036       0.107    -0.005    -0.584      0.247   0.381     -0.033      0.100    -0.005  -0.628
  1.45   0.247     0.332    -0.021     0.063    -0.003      -0.497   0.247     0.376     -0.032       0.097    -0.004    -0.590      0.247   0.368     -0.030      0.091    -0.005  -0.632
  1.50   0.247     0.323    -0.019     0.057    -0.003      -0.507   0.247     0.364     -0.029       0.088    -0.004    -0.595      0.247   0.356     -0.027      0.081    -0.005  -0.636
s1—country 1’s economy-wide savings rate, s2—country 2’s economy-wide savings rate, ca1—country 1’s current account to GDP ratio, ca2—country 2’s current account to GDP ratio, dw1—welfare
change in country 1 in units of consumption goods relative to the case Φ=1, dw1—welfare change in country 2 in units of consumption goods relative to the case Φ=1
                                               Figures and Tables


                          CA/GDP, kappa=0.7                                          CA/GDP, kappa=0.8
             0.04                                                      0.04

             0.02                                                      0.02

               0                                                          0

         -0.02                                                         -0.02

         -0.04                                                         -0.04
                    1    1.1   1.2     1.3     1.4      1.5                    1   1.1   1.2     1.3     1.4      1.5
                           county 2's sex ratio                                      county 2's sex ratio
                           CA/GDP, kappa=0.9
             0.04

             0.02
                                                                                             country 1
               0                                                                             country 2

         -0.02

         -0.04
                    1    1.1   1.2     1.3     1.4      1.5
                           county 2's sex ratio

     Appendix Figure 1: Two large countries, differing only in the sex ratios, σ=0.05


                            CA/GDP, kappa=0.7                                        CA/GDP, kappa=0.8
              0.06                                                      0.06

              0.04                                                      0.04
    CA/GDP




                                                              CA/GDP




              0.02                                                      0.02

                0                                                         0

             -0.02                                                     -0.02
                     1   1.1    1.2      1.3      1.4   1.5                    1   1.1    1.2      1.3      1.4   1.5
                            country 2's sex ratio                                     country 2's sex ratio
                            CA/GDP, kappa=0.9
              0.06

              0.04
                                                                                             country 1
    CA/GDP




              0.02                                                                           country 2


                0

             -0.02
                     1   1.1    1.2      1.3      1.4   1.5
                            country 2's sex ratio

Appendix Figure 2: Two large countries, (GDP per capita)1=15*(GDP per capita)2, σ=0.05
                               Men's savings rate                                  Women's savings rate
          0.9                                                     0.5

          0.8
                                                                  0.4
                                                                                        Planner economy
          0.7
                                                                                        Decentralized economy
                                    Planner economy               0.3
          0.6                       Decentralized economy
                                                                  0.2
          0.5

          0.4                                                     0.1
                   1    1.1        1.2      1.3       1.4   1.5          1   1.1       1.2      1.3         1.4      1.5
                                    sex ratio                                           sex ratio

                             Aggregate savings rate                                      Welfare
          0.4                                                     0.5

                                                                                                    Men
                                                                    0
                                                                                                    Women
         0.35
                                                                                                    Social welfare
                                                                  -0.5
                                    Planner economy
          0.3
                                    Decentralized economy
                                                                   -1


         0.25                                                     -1.5
                   1    1.1        1.2      1.3       1.4   1.5          1   1.1       1.2      1.3         1.4      1.5
                                    sex ratio




Appendix Figure 3: The planner’s economy vs the decentralized economy, Κ=0.8, σ=0.05

                               Men's savings rate                                  Women's savings rate
         0.9                                                       0.5

         0.8
                                                                   0.4

         0.7                                                                              Planner economy
                                    Planner economy                                       Decentralized economy
                                                                   0.3
                                    Decentralized economy
         0.6

                                                                   0.2
         0.5

         0.4                                                       0.1
               1       1.1        1.2       1.3       1.4   1.5          1   1.1        1.2       1.3         1.4         1.5
                                    sex ratio                                             sex ratio

                             Aggregate savings rate                                       Welfare
         0.4                                                       0.5

                                                                                                         Men
                                                                     0
        0.35                                                                                             Women
                                                                                                         Social welfare
                                                                  -0.5
                                    Planner economy
         0.3                        Decentralized economy
                                                                    -1


        0.25                                                      -1.5
               1       1.1        1.2       1.3       1.4   1.5          1   1.1        1.2        1.3        1.4         1.5
                                    sex ratio




Appendix Figure 3a: The planner’s economy vs the decentralized economy, Κ=0.7, σ=0.05
                                  Men's savings rate                                     Women's savings rate
            0.9                                                      0.5

            0.8
                                                                     0.4

            0.7                                                                                Planner economy
                                       Planner economy               0.3                       Decentralized economy
            0.6                        Decentralized economy

                                                                     0.2
            0.5

            0.4                                                      0.1
                    1       1.1      1.2      1.3      1.4     1.5          1      1.1       1.2     1.3        1.4     1.5
                                      sex ratio                                               sex ratio

                                Aggregate savings rate                                         Welfare
            0.4                                                      0.5

                                                                                                           Men
                                                                       0                                   Women
           0.35
                                                                                                           Social welfare
                                       Planner economy               -0.5

            0.3                        Decentralized economy
                                                                      -1


           0.25                                                      -1.5
                    1       1.1      1.2      1.3      1.4     1.5          1      1.1       1.2     1.3        1.4     1.5
                                      sex ratio




   Appendix Figure 3b: The planner’s economy vs the decentralized economy, Κ=0.9, σ=0.05

                        Men's savings rate, gamma=0.5                           Women's savings rate, gamma=0.5
          0.9                                                        0.5

          0.8
                                                                     0.4
          0.7
                                                                     0.3
          0.6
                                                                     0.2
          0.5

          0.4                                                        0.1
                1         1.1      1.2     1.3         1.4   1.5            1       1.1       1.2     1.3        1.4        1.5
                                    sex ratio                                                  sex ratio
                Aggregate savings rate, gamma=0.5                                  Social welfare, gamma=0.5
         0.45                                                          0
                                                                                                                  e=0
          0.4                                                        -0.2                                         e=0.5
                                                                                                                  e=1
         0.35                                                        -0.4


          0.3                                                        -0.6


         0.25                                                        -0.8
                1         1.1      1.2     1.3         1.4   1.5            1       1.1       1.2     1.3        1.4        1.5
                                    sex ratio                                                  sex ratio

Appendix Figure 4a: Savings rates vs sex ratios, endogenous intra-household bargaining, σ=0.05
                        Men's savings rate, e=0.5                             Women's savings rate, e=0.5
          0.9                                                     0.45

          0.8
                                                                   0.4
          0.7
                                                                  0.35
          0.6
                                                                   0.3
          0.5

          0.4                                                     0.25
                  1     1.1      1.2     1.3          1.4   1.5          1     1.1      1.2     1.3          1.4         1.5
                                  sex ratio                                              sex ratio
                      Aggregate savings rate, e=0.5                              Social welfare, e=0.5
         0.45                                                        0
                                                                                                      gamma=0.3
          0.4                                                     -0.2                                gamma=0.5
                                                                                                      gamma=0.7
         0.35                                                     -0.4


          0.3                                                     -0.6


         0.25                                                     -0.8
                  1     1.1      1.2     1.3          1.4   1.5          1     1.1      1.2     1.3          1.4         1.5
                                  sex ratio                                              sex ratio

Appendix Figure 4b: Savings rates vs sex ratios, endogenous intra-household bargaining, σ=0.05




                                    CA/GDP                                                 Welfare
           0.1
                                                                     0
          0.08
                                                                   -0.1
          0.06                                                                                               country 1
                                                                   -0.2                                      country 2
          0.04
                                                                   -0.3

          0.02
                                                                   -0.4

             0                                                     -0.5

          -0.02                                                    -0.6

          -0.04                                                    -0.7
                  1     1.1      1.2        1.3       1.4   1.5           1    1.1      1.2        1.3       1.4         1.5
                              country 2's sex ratio                                  country 2's sex ratio


Appendix Figure 5: Two large countries, endogenous bargaining power, welfare loss in units of
  consumption goods relative to the case of Φ=1, (GDP per capita)1=15*(GDP per capita)2
                              Aggregate savings rate                                    CA/GDP
             0.4                                                   0.06
                                                                                                         phi=1.1
            0.39                                                   0.05                                  phi=1.3
                                                                                                         phi=1.5

            0.38                                                   0.04


            0.37                                                   0.03


            0.36                                                   0.02


            0.35                                                   0.01


            0.34                                                      0
                   0    10         20          30      40    50           0   10       20          30   40         50
                                        time                                                time
Appendix Figure 6: 50-period calibrations, τ=10, endogenous intra-household bargaining, σ=0.05



                              Aggregate savings rate                                    CA/GDP
            0.46                                                   0.12
                                                                                                         phi=1.1
            0.44                                                    0.1                                  phi=1.3
                                                                                                         phi=1.5
            0.42                                                   0.08

             0.4                                                   0.06

            0.38                                                   0.04

            0.36                                                   0.02

            0.34                                                     0
                   0    10         20          30      40    50           0   10      20           30   40         50
                                        time                                                time


Appendix Figure 7: 50-period calibrations, τ=20, endogenous intra-household bargaining, σ=0.05


                              Men's savings rate                               Women's savings rate
              1                                                    0.5


             0.8                                                   0.4


             0.6                                                   0.3


             0.4                                                   0.2


             0.2                                                   0.1
                   1    1.1       1.2     1.3          1.4   1.5          1   1.1     1.2     1.3       1.4    1.5
                                   sex ratio                                           sex ratio
                         Aggregate savings rate
             0.4



            0.35
                                                                                    Benchmark
                                                                                    Precautionary savings

             0.3



            0.25
                   1    1.1       1.2     1.3          1.4   1.5
                                   sex ratio

                       Appendix Figure 8: Benchmark vs Precautionary savings
                      Aggregate savings rate                                     CA/GDP
0.44                                                        0.09
                                                                                           a=0.7,   substitutes
0.43                                                        0.08                           a=0.7,   complements
0.42                                                                                       a=0.4,   substitutes
                                                            0.07
                                                                                           a=0.4,   complements
0.41
                                                            0.06
 0.4
                                                            0.05
0.39
                                                            0.04
0.38
                                                            0.03
0.37
                                                            0.02
0.36

0.35                                                        0.01

0.34                                                           0
       0         10       20           30        40   50           0   10   20            30             40           50
                                time                                              time

             Appendix Figure 9a: 50-period calibration with education, τ=10, ρ=0.5



                        Aggregate savings rate                                   CA/GDP
  0.46                                                      0.12
                                                                                               a=0.7,   substitutes
                                                                                               a=0.7,   complements
  0.44                                                       0.1                               a=0.4,   substitutes
                                                                                               a=0.4,   complements

  0.42                                                      0.08



   0.4                                                      0.06



  0.38                                                      0.04



  0.36                                                      0.02



  0.34                                                         0
         0       10        20           30       40   50           0   10   20            30            40            50
                                time                                              time




             Appendix Figure 9b: 50-period calibration with education, τ=20, ρ=0.5



                      Aggregate savings rate                                     CA/GDP
0.385                                                      0.045
                                                                                          a=0.7,   substitutes
 0.38                                                       0.04                          a=0.7,   complements
                                                                                          a=0.4,   substitutes
0.375                                                      0.035
                                                                                          a=0.4,   complements

 0.37                                                       0.03

0.365                                                      0.025

 0.36                                                       0.02

0.355                                                      0.015

 0.35                                                       0.01

0.345                                                      0.005

 0.34                                                         0
        0        10        20          30        40   50           0   10   20            30            40            50
                                time                                              time

            Appendix Figure 10a: 50-period calibration with education, τ=10, ρ=0.1
                            Aggregate savings rate                                         CA/GDP
  0.41                                                           0.07
                                                                                                         a=0.7,   substitutes
   0.4                                                           0.06                                    a=0.7,   complements
                                                                                                         a=0.4,   substitutes
                                                                                                         a=0.4,   complements
  0.39                                                           0.05


  0.38                                                           0.04


  0.37                                                           0.03


  0.36                                                           0.02


  0.35                                                           0.01


  0.34                                                              0
           0         10         20           30      40    50           0   10        20            30             40           50
                                      time                                                  time

               Appendix Figure 10b: 50-period calibration with education, τ=20, ρ=0.1



                           Aggregate savings rate                                       CA/GDP
  0.4                                                            0.12


 0.38                                                             0.1


 0.36                                                            0.08


 0.34                                                            0.06                              theta=1 (benchmark)
                                                                                                   theta=0.5
                                                                                                   theta=2
 0.32                                                            0.04


  0.3                                                            0.02


                                                                   0
           1         1.1       1.2       1.3         1.4   1.5          1   1.1       1.2       1.3                1.4          1.5
                                 sex ratio                                              sex ratio

                   Appendix Figure 11: 2-period calibration, CRRA utility, σ=0.05



                 Aggregate savings rate, sex ratio=1.2                            CA/GDP, sex ratio=1.2
0.48                                                             0.14
                                                                                                                    Gini=0
0.46                                                             0.12                                               Gini=0.2
                                                                                                                    Gini=0.47
0.44                                                              0.1
                                                                                                                    Gini=0.6
0.42                                                             0.08

 0.4                                                             0.06

0.38                                                             0.04

0.36                                                             0.02

0.34                                                               0
       0            10        20             30      40    50           0   10         20           30              40           50
                                     time                                                   time
           Appendix Figure 12: Multi-period calibration, heterogenous income, τ=10
          High income men's savings rate                    Low income men's savings rate


0.8                                              0.8
0.7                                              0.7
0.6                                              0.6                               Gini=0
                                                                                   Gini=0.2
0.5                                              0.5                               Gini=0.47
0.4                                              0.4                               Gini=0.6
0.3                                              0.3
      1     1.1     1.2     1.3    1.4    1.5          1     1.1     1.2     1.3    1.4      1.5
                     sex ratio                                        sex ratio
          High income women' savings rate                  Low income women's savings rate
0.5                                              0.5

0.4                                              0.4

0.3                                              0.3

0.2                                              0.2

0.1                                              0.1

      1     1.1    1.2     1.3     1.4     1.5         1     1.1     1.2     1.3    1.4      1.5
                    sex ratio                                         sex ratio

             Appendix Figure 13: Individual savings rate vs sex ratio, τ=10
