                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  NEW TRADE MODELS, NEW WELFARE IMPLICATIONS

                                            Marc J. Melitz
                                          Stephen J. Redding

                                        Working Paper 18919
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18919


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2013




We are grateful to Harvard and Princeton Universities for research support. This paper is a revised
version of "Firm Heterogeneity and Aggregate Welfare," NBER Working Paper, 18919. We would
like to thank the editor, four referees, conference and seminar participants at AEA, Harvard, Hong
Kong, LSE, Minneapolis, NBER, NYU, Paris, Princeton, UBC, Vancouver and Wharton, and Pol
Antras, Costas Arkolakis, Ariel Burstein, Arnaud Costinot, Rob Feenstra, Gene Grossman, Gordon
Hanson, Keith Head, Elhanan Helpman, Thierry Mayer, Gianmarco Ottaviano, Andres Rodriguez-Clare,
Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, Jon Vogel and David Weinstein for helpful comments. We are also grateful
to David Krisztian Nagy for research assistance. Responsibility for any results, opinions and errors
is the authors' alone. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Marc J. Melitz and Stephen J. Redding. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
New Trade Models, New Welfare Implications
Marc J. Melitz and Stephen J. Redding
NBER Working Paper No. 18919
March 2013, Revised August 2014
JEL No. F12,F15

                                              ABSTRACT

We show that endogenous firm selection provides a new welfare margin for heterogeneous firm models
of trade (relative to homogeneous firm models). Under some parameter restrictions, the trade elasticity
is constant and is a sufficient statistic for welfare, along with the domestic trade share. However, even
small deviations from these restrictions imply that trade elasticities are variable and differ across markets
and levels of trade costs. In this more general setting, the domestic trade share and endogenous trade
elasticity are no longer sufficient statistics for welfare. Additional empirically observable moments
of the micro structure also matter for welfare.


Marc J. Melitz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
215 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
mmelitz@harvard.edu

Stephen J. Redding
Department of Economics
and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
reddings@princeton.edu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18919
1    Introduction

Over the last decade, new theories of trade with heterogeneous firms in differentiated product markets
have been developed. These theories were designed to account for features of disaggregated trade data:
only some firms export, exporters are more productive than non-exporters and trade liberalization
induces intra-industry reallocations of resources between those different types of firms. These reallo-
cations represent a new potential channel for the gains from trade. However, the implications of these
models for aggregate welfare (combining together all welfare channels) were left unanswered.
    In a recent paper, Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2012, henceforth ACR) show that
there exists a class of heterogeneous and homogeneous firm models in which a country’s domestic trade
share and the elasticity of trade with respect to variable trade costs are sufficient statistics for the
aggregate welfare gains from trade. Therefore, if the different models within this class are calibrated
to the same domestic trade share and the same trade elasticity, they imply the same welfare gains
from trade. Based on this result, ACR summarizes the contribution of new theories of heterogeneous
firms to the aggregate welfare implications of trade as “So far, not much.”
    In this paper, we compare a heterogeneous firm model to a homogeneous firm model that is a
special case with a degenerate productivity distribution. We use a theoretical comparative static
to show that the heterogeneous firm model has an extra adjustment margin that is absent in the
homogeneous firm model: the endogenous decisions of heterogeneous firms to enter and exit the
domestic and export markets. Furthermore, adjustment along this margin is efficient, in the sense
that the market equilibrium corresponds to the constrained efficient allocation chosen by a social
planner. As a result, if the degenerate productivity distribution in the homogeneous firm model is
chosen so that the two models have the same welfare for an initial value of trade costs, this extra
adjustment margin implies that the heterogeneous firm model has higher welfare for all other values
of trade costs. It follows that the two models have different aggregate welfare implications: there are
larger welfare gains from reductions in trade costs and smaller welfare losses from increases in trade
costs in the heterogeneous firm model than in the homogeneous firm model. Quantitatively, we find
that this extra adjustment margin is substantial for a calibration of our heterogeneous firm model to
U.S. firm-level and aggregate data.
    Under additional restrictions on the parameter space, our heterogeneous and homogeneous firm
models belong to the class analyzed by ACR.1 In this class of models, the elasticity of trade with
respect to variable trade costs is constant (and then also serves as a sufficient statistic for welfare
along with the domestic trade share). We show that this existence of a single constant trade elasticity
and its sufficiency property for welfare are highly sensitive to small departures from those ACR
parameter restrictions. In the heterogeneous firm model, the restrictions include an untruncated
Pareto distribution for productivity. Even a slight generalization of this distribution to a truncated
   1
     We focus on monopolistic competition models featuring imperfect competition, endogenous product variety, and
increasing returns to scale. ACR also consider perfect competition models without those features, such as Armington
(1969) and Eaton and Kortum (2002).



                                                        2
Pareto (with a finite upper bound for productivity) implies a variable trade elasticity that differs
across markets and levels of trade costs. As a result, a trade elasticity estimated from one context
need not apply for the evaluation of trade policy in another context. In this more general setting,
evaluating a trade policy based on an estimated trade elasticity is subject to the Lucas Critique: This
elasticity is not invariant with respect to trade policy.2
    Furthermore, once we move beyond those ACR restrictions on the parameter space, the trade
share and (endogenous) trade elasticity are no longer sufficient statistics for welfare. Even conditional
on these variables, micro structure matters for the welfare gains from trade. In this more general
setting, the impact on welfare of the extra adjustment margin in the heterogeneous firm model is
not captured by the trade elasticity. We develop several examples of trade liberalization scenarios
in which this additional impact of the micro structure on welfare can be substantial, even for small,
empirically relevant, departures from the ACR parameter restrictions.
    We extend the ACR approach of expressing the welfare gains from trade as a function of ob-
servable empirical moments (including the trade share and elasticity) to the more general cases of
our homogeneous and heterogeneous firm models. We provide a framework for assessing whether the
ACR formula provides a good approximation to the true welfare gains from trade liberalization. We
quantitatively measure the discrepancies between the ACR formula and the true welfare gains using
our more general model calibrated to U.S. aggregate and firm-level data. We find substantial dis-
crepancies ranging up to a factor of four. Using an elasticity estimated ex post for the observed local
changes in trade costs will reduce – but not eliminate – the discrepancy between the predicted and
true welfare gains from trade. In addition to the two aggregate moments of the domestic trade share
and trade elasticity, our more general welfare expression highlights differences in the hazard rate of
the distribution of log firm size between the domestic and export markets and the response of firm
entry to changes in trade costs, both of which can be examined empirically using firm-level data.
    Our paper is related to other recent research on the welfare gains from trade when the ACR pa-
rameter restrictions are not satisfied. ACR and Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014) explore multiple
sectors, tradable intermediate inputs and multiple factors of production; Arkolakis, Costinot, Don-
aldson and Rodriguez-Clare (2012) and Edmond, Midrigan and Xu (2012) examine variable markups;
Head, Mayer and Thoenig (2014) analyze a log normal productivity distribution; Feenstra (2014)
introduces variable markups using Quadratic Mean of Order r preferences and considers a truncated
Pareto productivity distribution; and Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal (2013) investigate non-homothetic
preferences. In contrast to these studies, we show theoretically that endogenous firm selection provides
an extra margin of adjustment in the heterogeneous firm model. We demonstrate the fragility of a
constant trade elasticity to small departures from the ACR restrictions even in the benchmark case of
a single sector with no intermediate inputs, constant elasticity of substitution (CES) preferences and
monopolistic competition, as considered by Krugman (1980) and Melitz (2003).
   2
     When there is a single constant trade elasticity – as in the class of models considered by ACR – this elasticity must
be invariant so the Lucas Critique does not apply.



                                                            3
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the heterogeneous
and homogeneous firm models. In Section 3, we use our theoretical comparative static to show that
the heterogeneous firm model has an extra margin of adjustment that is absent in the homogeneous
firm model. In Section 4, we extend the ACR approach of expressing welfare gains from trade as
a function of observable empirical moments (including the trade share and elasticity) to the more
general cases of the homogeneous and heterogeneous firm models. In Section 5, we provide several
examples of trade liberalization scenarios where the additional impact of the model’s micro structure
on welfare can be substantial. In Section 6, we examine the quantitative relevance of our theoretical
results. Section 7 concludes.


2        Heterogeneous and Homogeneous Firm Models

We compare the canonical heterogeneous firm model of Melitz (2003) to a homogeneous firm model
that is a special case with a degenerate productivity distribution (as in Krugman 1980).3 We hold all
other parameters (including the trading technology) constant across the two models.

2.1       Closed Economy Heterogeneous Firm Model

The specification of preferences, production and entry is the same as in Melitz (2003).4 There is a
continuum of firms that are heterogeneous in terms of their productivity ϕ ∈ (0, ϕmax ), which is drawn
from a common cumulative distribution G (ϕ) after incurring a sunk entry cost of fe units of labor. We
allow the upper bound of the support of the productivity distribution to be either finite (ϕmax < ∞)
or infinite (ϕmax = ∞). Labor is the sole factor of production. Production involves a fixed production
cost and a constant marginal cost that depends on firm productivity, so that l (ϕ) = fd + q (ϕ) /ϕ
units of labor are required to supply q (ϕ) units of output. Consumers have constant elasticity of
substitution (CES) preferences with elasticity σ > 1 defined over the differentiated varieties supplied
by firms. Profit maximization implies that variety prices are a constant mark-up over marginal cost
that is determined by the elasticity σ. The revenue of a firm with productivity ϕ is then given by:
                                          σ − 1 σ−1 σ−1
                                              
                               rd (ϕ) =             ϕ     RP σ−1 w1−σ ,                           (1)
                                            σ
where R is aggregate revenue, P is the CES price index, and w is the wage. We use the subscript d
to reference the domestic market.
        We begin by considering the closed economy equilibrium, which can be summarized by the following
three relationships, where we use the superscript A to denote the autarky equilibrium. First, fixed
production costs imply a productivity cutoff (ϕA
                                               d ) below which firms exit. This cutoff is defined by a
zero-profit condition equating operating profit to the fixed cost:
                                                           σ−1
                                rd (ϕA     R σ − 1 P ϕA
                                             
                                      d)                 d
                                         =                       = wfd .                                              (2)
                                    σ      σ     σ     w
    3
    A web-based technical appendix contains the derivations of all expressions in the paper.
    4
    Following most of the subsequent international trade literature, including ACR, we consider a static version of Melitz
(2003) in which there is zero probability of firm death.


                                                            4
   Second, free entry requires that the probability of successful entry (1 − G(ϕA d )) times average
                                                                                A
                                                                                 
profits conditional on successful entry (π̄) equals the sunk entry cost: 1 − G ϕd π̄ = wfe . Using
the relationship linking relative firm revenue to relative firm productivity and the zero-profit cutoff
condition above, this free entry condition can be expressed as:

                                                     fd J ϕA
                                                             
                                                           d = fe ,                                  (3)

where                                                      "         σ−1     #
                                                Z   ϕmax
                                                                ϕ
                                  ϕA
                                        
                              J    d        =                                − 1 dG(ϕ),              (4)
                                                 ϕA
                                                  d
                                                                ϕA
                                                                 d

where J ϕA
           
          d is a monotonically decreasing function of the productivity cutoff. We can then write
J ϕA
     
    d in terms of the ratio of average productivity to cutoff productivity:

                                                          A σ−1
                                                     "             #
                                                        ϕ̃
                             J ϕA               A         d
                                                 
                                  d = 1 − G(ϕd )                 −1 .                        (5)
                                                        ϕAd

Following Melitz (2003), we define ϕ̃A
                                     d as a weighted average of firm productivity (corresponding to a
harmonic mean weighted by output shares):
                                            "Z                                     #    1
                                                    ϕmax                               σ−1
                                                                       dG (ϕ)
                                  ϕ̃A
                                    d   =                  ϕ   σ−1
                                                                                             .       (6)
                                                                     1 − G ϕA
                                                                               
                                                ϕA
                                                 d                           d

Third, the mass of producing firms (M ) equals the mass of entrants (Me ) times the probability of
successful entry (1 − G(ϕA
                         d )). This mass of producing firms also equals aggregate revenue (R) divided
by average firm revenue (r̄). Using the relationship linking relative firm revenue to relative firm
productivity and the free entry condition, the mass of producing firms can be written in terms of the
economy’s labor supply (L) relative to average fixed costs per firm:
                                                       R     L
                                  M = 1 − G(ϕTd ) Me =
                                                
                                                          =      .                                   (7)
                                                       r̄   σF A
In this derivation, we choose labor as the numeraire so that aggregate revenue R equals labor payments
L, and we define F A to represent the average fixed cost paid per surviving firm:
                                                           fe
                                            FA =                 + fd .                              (8)
                                                       1 − G(ϕA
                                                              d)

   Using the CES price index and the mass of firms (7), closed economy welfare can be then written
in terms of the mass of firms (L/σF A ) and the weighted average productivity of these firms (ϕ̃A
                                                                                                d ):
                                                                                          1
                                          w   σ−1                     L       σ−1         σ−1
                              WA
                               Het      =   =                           A
                                                                          ϕ̃A
                                                                            d                    .   (9)
                                          P    σ                     σF

2.2     Open Economy Heterogeneous Firm Model

We consider the case of trade between two symmetric countries. We use the subscript x to reference
the export market and the superscript T to reference the open economy equilibrium. We assume that

                                                                5
there is a fixed exporting cost of fx units of labor in the source country and an iceberg variable trade
cost, whereby τ > 1 units of a variety must be shipped from one country in order for one unit to
arrive in the other country. The open economy equilibrium is characterized by productivity cutoffs for
serving the domestic market (ϕTd ) and export market (ϕTx ) that are defined by zero-profit conditions
equating the operating profit in each market to the relevant fixed costs:
                                                          σ−1
                                rd (ϕTd )   R σ − 1 P ϕTd
                                              
                                          =                     = wfd ,                            (10)
                                    σ       σ   σ     w
                                                                           σ−1
                                   rx (ϕTx )           σ − 1 P ϕTx
                                                   
                                               R
                                             =                                     = wfx .         (11)
                                       σ       σ         σ τw
The revenue functions rd (ϕ) and rx (ϕ) separate firm sales by destination market (domestic and ex-
port). Together these two zero-profit conditions imply that the export cutoff is a constant multiple of
the domestic cutoff, where this multiple depends on the fixed and variable costs of trade:
                                                                    1
                                                            fx       σ−1
                                            ϕTx   =τ                       ϕTd .                   (12)
                                                            fd
                                                                                    1
For sufficiently high fixed and variable trade costs (τ (fx /fd ) σ−1 > 1), only the most productive
firms export, consistent with an extensive empirical literature (see for example the review in Bernard,
Jensen, Redding and Schott 2007).
       The free entry condition again equates the expected value of entry to the sunk entry cost,
    1 − G ϕTd π̄ = wfe , and can be written as:
             


                                         fd J ϕTd + fx J ϕTx = fe ,
                                                           
                                                                                                   (13)

where J (·) is defined in (4). Using the relationship between the productivity cutoffs (12), and noting
that J (·) is a decreasing function, the free entry condition (13) determines a unique equilibrium
value of the domestic cutoff (ϕTd ), which in turn determines the export cutoff (ϕTx ). Furthermore, the
domestic cutoff in the open economy is strictly greater than the domestic cutoff in the closed economy
(ϕTd > ϕA
        d ) for positive values of fixed exporting costs.
      As in the closed economy, the mass of producing firms (M ) equals the mass of entrants (Me ) times
the probability of successful entry (1 − G(ϕTd )), and is determined by the economy’s labor supply (L)
relative to average fixed costs:
                                                         R     L
                                    M = 1 − G(ϕTd ) Me =
                                                  
                                                            =      ,                               (14)
                                                         r̄   σF T
where F T summarizes average fixed costs per surviving firm in the open economy:
                                                  fe
                                       FT =               + fd + χfx ,                             (15)
                                              1 − G(ϕTd )

and χ = 1 − G(ϕTx ) / 1 − G(ϕTd ) is the proportion of exporting firms. In this derivation, we choose
                              

labor in one country as the numeraire and use country symmetry, which implies that aggregate revenue
R still equals labor payments L in each country.

                                                            6
    Using the CES price index and mass of firms (14), open economy welfare can be written in terms of
the mass of varieties available for consumption (L(1 + χ)/σF T ) and the weighted average productivity
of these varieties (ϕ̃Tt ):
                                                                                   1
                                        w   σ−1             L(1 + χ) T σ−1         σ−1
                              WTHet   =   =                          ϕ̃t                  .          (16)
                                        P    σ                σF T
This weighted average productivity (ϕ̃Tt ) in the open economy is constructed using the same weighting
scheme (6) as we used for the closed economy. However the productivity of exporters is reduced by
τ to account for the units “lost” in transit. Letting ϕ̃Tx denote the average productivity of exporters,
defined as in (6), the overall productivity average for the open economy can be written:
                                     σ−1        1 h T σ−1               σ−1 i
                              ϕ̃Tt          =       ϕ̃d     + χ τ −1 ϕ̃Tx        .                   (17)
                                                1+χ
Aggregate trade between the two countries is inversely related to the domestic trade share (the pro-
portion of domestic sales in total sales):
                                        R ϕmax
                                                ϕT
                                                     rd (ϕ)dG(ϕ)            1
                                                 d
                                 λHet =                            =               ,                 (18)
                                                      R                1 + τ 1−σ Λ
where Λ = δ(ϕTx )/δ(ϕTd ) ≤ 1 is the market share of exporters in the domestic market and δ(ϕj ) =
R ϕmax σ−1
 ϕj   ϕ    dG(ϕ) is a function that depends only on G(·) and σ. The sensitivity of aggregate trade
to changes in variable trade costs is captured by the full trade elasticity:
                                   (
                   d ln 1−λλHet
                               Het
                                        (σ − 1) − dd ln Λ
                                                          >0        for τ (fx /fd )1/(σ−1) > 1
         θHet = −                   =                ln τ                                      ,     (19)
                        d ln τ          (σ − 1)           >0        for τ (fx /fd )1/(σ−1) < 1

where d ln Λ/d ln τ < 0. When trade costs are sufficiently low, all firms export and there is no extensive
margin of trade. Given CES preferences, the elasticity of the intensive margin of trade is constant at
σ − 1. When there is selection into the export market, the elasticity of trade θHet is the sum of the
intensive margin elasticity σ − 1 and the extensive margin elasticity −d ln Λ/d ln τ .

2.3    Closed Economy Homogeneous Firm Model

We construct a homogeneous firm model that is a special case of the heterogeneous firm model with
a degenerate productivity distribution. Firms pay the same sunk entry cost of fe units of labor and
                                                                                     
draw a productivity of either zero or ϕ̄d with exogenous probabilities Ḡd and 1 − Ḡd respectively.
Fixed production costs imply that only firms drawing a productivity of ϕ̄d find it profitable to pro-
duce. Therefore producing firms are homogeneous and there is a degenerate productivity distribution
conditional on production at ϕ̄d .
    The closed economy equilibrium of this homogeneous firm model is isomorphic to that in Krugman
(1980), in which the representative firm’s productivity is set equal to ϕ̄d and the fixed production cost
                                                                                     
is scaled to incorporate the expected value of entry costs (F̄d ≡ fd + fe / 1 − Ḡd ). These values for
the representative firm’s productivity and the fixed production cost are exogenous and held constant.



                                                            7
To simplify the exposition, we adopt this Krugman (1980) interpretation. The representative firm’s
production technology is:
                                                      q
                                                l=       + F̄d .                                         (20)
                                                     ϕ̄d
   Consumers have the same CES preferences that we defined previously. Profit maximization implies
that equilibrium prices are a constant markup over marginal cost. Profit maximization and free entry
imply that equilibrium output and employment for the representative variety are proportional to the
fixed production cost:
                                      q = ϕ̄d F̄d (σ − 1),         l = σ F̄d .

Using equilibrium employment for the representative variety, the mass of firms can be determined
from the labor market clearing condition:
                                                         L
                                                 M=           .                                          (21)
                                                        σ F̄d
Using the CES price index and the mass of firms (21), closed economy welfare can be written in terms
of the mass of firms (L/σ F̄d ) and productivity (ϕ̄d ):
                                                                                  1
                                         w   σ−1              L                    σ−1
                                WA
                                 Hom   =   =                       (ϕ̄d )σ−1             ,               (22)
                                         P    σ              σ F̄d

where we again choose labor as the numeraire.

2.4    Open Economy Homogeneous Firm Model

We again consider trade between two symmetric countries and assume the same trading technology
as in the heterogeneous firm model, so that there is a fixed exporting cost of fx units of labor and an
iceberg variable trade cost of τ > 1 units of each variety.
   In the homogeneous firm model, the probability of successful entry and productivity conditional on
                                                                          
successful entry are exogenous and remain unchanged and equal to 1 − Ḡd and ϕ̄d respectively. For
sufficiently high fixed and variable trade costs (τ σ−1 fx /F̄d > 1), the representative firm does not find
it profitable to export. In contrast, for sufficiently low fixed and variable trade costs (τ σ−1 fx /F̄d < 1),
the representative firm finds it profitable to export, and there is trade in both models. The open
economy equilibrium of this homogeneous firm model is isomorphic to a version of Krugman (1980)
with the same trading technology as in Melitz (2003).
   Profit maximization again implies that equilibrium prices are a constant mark-up over marginal
costs, with export prices a constant multiple of domestic prices due to the variable costs of trade. Profit
maximization and free entry imply that equilibrium output and employment for the representative
variety are proportional to fixed costs:
                                                         
                                         q = ϕ̄d F̄d + fx (σ − 1),
                                                            
                                              l = σ F̄d + fx .


                                                       8
Therefore both output and employment rise for the representative firm following the opening of trade
to cover the additional fixed costs of exporting.
        Using equilibrium employment for the representative variety, the mass of firms can be determined
from the labor market clearing condition:
                                                            L
                                                M=                .                                             (23)
                                                       σ F̄d + fx
Using the CES price index and the mass of firms (23), open economy welfare can be written in terms
of the mass of varieties available for consumption (2L/σ(F̄d + fx )) and average productivity (ϕ̄t ):
                                                 (                        ) 1
                                                                           σ−1
                                      w    σ − 1       2L
                           WTHom =      =                      (ϕ̄t )σ−1      .                    (24)
                                      P      σ     σ F̄d + fx

where average productivity (ϕ̄t ) is constructed in the same way as in (17) for heterogeneous firms:5
                                       σ−1   1h      σ−1    −1
                                                                 σ−1 i
                                (ϕ̄t )     =   (ϕ̄d )    + τ ϕ̄d        .                         (25)
                                             2
We again choose the wage in one of the symmetric countries as the numeraire.
        In the case of homogeneous firms, the domestic trade share simplifies to:
                                                              1
                                                λHom =              .                                            (26)
                                                          1 + τ 1−σ
There is no extensive margin of trade, so the trade elasticity is given by the constant elasticity for the
intensive margin of trade (so long as there is some trade):
                                                    for τ σ−1 fx /F̄d < 1
                                     
                                        σ−1
                             θHom =                                       .                                      (27)
                                        0           otherwise

3        Theoretical Comparative Static

We now show that endogenous firm selection provides a new margin of adjustment through which the
economy can respond to trade liberalization that leads to different aggregate welfare implications in the
heterogeneous and homogeneous firm models. Holding all other structural parameters constant across
the two models (same fd , fe , fx , τ , L, σ), we first pick the parameters Ḡd and ϕ̄d for the degenerate
productivity distribution with homogeneous firms such that welfare in an initial equilibrium is the
same in the two models. We next examine the effects of changes in trade costs from this initial
equilibrium. We undertake this analysis both for the opening of the closed economy to trade and for
changes in trade costs in the open economy equilibrium.

3.1       Opening the Closed Economy to Trade

We begin by picking the parameters Ḡd and ϕ̄d of the degenerate productivity distribution with
homogeneous firms such that the autarky equilibrium is isomorphic to that with heterogeneous firms,
and examine the effect of opening the closed economy to trade.
    5
   With a representative firm, average productivity across domestic firms and exporters is ϕ̄t , and the proportion of
exporting firms is one.


                                                          9
Proposition 1 Consider a homogeneous firm model that is a special case of the heterogeneous firm
model with an exogenous probability of successful entry 1 − Ḡd = 1 − G(ϕA
                                                                          
                                                                          d ) and an exogenous
degenerate distribution of productivity conditional on successful entry ϕ̄d = ϕ̃A
                                                                                d . Given the same value
for all remaining parameters {fd , fe , L, σ}, all aggregate variables (welfare, wage, price index, mass
of firms, and aggregate revenue) are the same in the closed economy equilibria of the two models.

Proof. Comparing (9) and (22), equal welfare follows immediately from ϕ̄d = ϕ̃A
                                                                                               
                                                                                 d and 1 − Ḡd =
  1 − G(ϕA                          A
           
         d ) , which implies F̄d = F . This also implies equal price indices. Equal masses of firms
follow immediately from equal price indices and ϕ̄d = ϕ̃A
                                                        d . Equal aggregate revenue follows from
R = L in both models.

      This first proposition reflects the aggregation properties of the heterogeneous firm model. All
aggregate variables in this model take the same value as if there were a representative firm with
productivity ϕ̄d and fixed costs F̄d . The key difference between the heterogeneous firm model and
such a representative firm model is that aggregate productivity in the heterogeneous firm model is
endogenous and responds to changes in trade costs.

Proposition 2 Choosing the degenerate productivity distribution in the homogeneous firm model so
that the two models have the same closed economy welfare and the same structural parameters (fd , fe ,
fx , τ , L, σ), the proportional welfare gains from opening the closed economy to trade are strictly larger
in the heterogeneous firm model than in the homogeneous firm model (WTHet /WA      T     A
                                                                            Het > WHom /WHom ),
except in the special case with no fixed exporting cost. In this special case, the proportional welfare
gains from opening the closed economy to trade are the same in the two models.

Proof. See the Appendix.

      The intuition for this result involves revealed preference arguments of the kind commonly used
in international trade.6 Our starting point is to note that, with CES preferences and monopolistic
competition, the open economy equilibrium in the heterogeneous firm model is efficient. As shown
in the web appendix, a welfare-maximizing social planner faced with the same production and entry
technology would choose the same allocation as the market equilibrium. When the economy is opened
to trade, the planner could choose not to adjust the set of firms selected for production and exports.
Average productivity would then remain constant, and this outcome would replicate the opening to
trade in the homogeneous firm case. The latter is thus a feasible allocation for the planner with the
heterogeneous firm production and entry technology. However, efficiency implies that this planner
chooses to replicate the market equilibrium of the heterogeneous firm model, which involves adjust-
ments in the set of firms selected for production and exports – and an associated increase in average
productivity. This induced allocation therefore yields higher welfare than any other feasible allocation
  6
   For the sake of parsimony, we focus on symmetric countries; however, this revealed preference argument applies
more generally for asymmetric countries.



                                                       10
– including the homogeneous firm outcome. Additionally, the planner’s objective function is strictly
concave. Thus, welfare in the heterogeneous firm open economy must be strictly higher than in the
homogeneous firm case whenever the cutoffs adjust to the opening to trade.7
       The difference in aggregate welfare implications between the two models arises because of the
additional efficient adjustment margin of firm entry and exit decisions in the heterogeneous firm
model (for both the domestic and export markets). In the special case with no fixed exporting
cost, the domestic productivity cutoff is unaffected by the opening of the closed economy to trade.
As a result, the additional adjustment margin of firm entry and exit decisions is inoperative in the
heterogeneous firm model, and the welfare effects of trade liberalization are the same in the two
models. We consider this special case uninteresting, since firm productivity dispersion then plays no
role in the heterogeneous firm model (the exit threshold and average productivity are the same in the
closed and open economies). Furthermore, this special case stands at odds with an extensive body
of empirical evidence that only some firms export, exporters are larger and more productive than
non-exporters, and there are substantial fixed exporting costs.8

3.2      Changes in Trade Costs in the Open Economy Equilibrium

The role of the extra adjustment margin of firm entry and exit decisions for generating different
aggregate welfare implications is not limited to the opening of the closed economy to trade and also
holds for reductions in trade costs in the open economy equilibrium. To show this, we recast our
heterogeneous and homogeneous firm models so that they have the same welfare in an initial open
economy equilibrium. In order to ensure that the two models have the same initial welfare and
only differ in their productivity distribution (keeping the same structural parameters fd , fe , fx , τ ,
L, σ), we extend the homogeneous firm model to allow for two types of firms: exporters and non-
exporters. In this extension, firms again pay a sunk entry cost of fe units of labor before observing
                                            
their productivity. With probability 1 − Ḡx a firm draws a productivity of ϕ̄x and can export; with
                                                                                                     
probability Ḡdx the firm draws a productivity of ϕ̄dx and cannot export; with probability Ḡx − Ḡdx
the firm draws a productivity of zero and does not find it profitable to produce. We pick the parameters
of this “extended” homogeneous firm model (ϕ̄x , ϕ̄dx , Ḡx , Ḡdx ) such that the open economy equilibrium
features the same aggregate variables as the initial open economy equilibrium with heterogeneous firms
(same welfare, price index, mass of firms, aggregate revenue, and domestic trade share).
       Nevertheless these two models respond differently to changes in trade costs from this common
initial equilibrium along a key dimension. In the heterogeneous firm model, the endogenous selection
responses to trade costs lead to changes in the average productivity of exporting and non-exporting
   7
      In contrast, if the elasticity of substitution between varieties is variable, the market equilibrium is not in general
efficient (see Dixit and Stiglitz 1977 for the case of homogeneous firm models and Dhingra and Morrow 2012 for the
case of heterogeneous firm models). Endogenous firm selection still provides an extra margin of adjustment in the
heterogeneous firm model relative to the homogeneous firm model. This again generates different aggregate welfare
implications in the two models, as considered in the web appendix.
    8
      For reviews of the extensive empirical literatures on firm export market participation, see Bernard, Jensen, Redding
and Schott (2007) and Melitz and Redding (2014). For evidence of substantial fixed exporting costs, see Roberts and
Tybout (1997) and Das, Roberts and Tybout (2007).


                                                            11
firms and in the proportion of exporting firms. In contrast, in the extended homogeneous firm model,
the average productivity levels of exporters and non-exporters and the proportion of exporting firms
remain constant.9 The presence of this extra adjustment margin in the heterogeneous firm model
implies that welfare following the change in trade costs must be strictly higher than in the extended
homogeneous from model. This argument holds irrespective of whether trade costs decrease or in-
crease. Therefore, welfare gains are larger in the heterogeneous firm model whenever trade costs fall,
and welfare losses are smaller in the heterogeneous firm model whenever trade costs increase.

Proposition 3 Starting from an initial open economy equilibrium with the same welfare and the same
structural parameters in the two models (fd , fe , fx , τ , L, σ), a common decrease (increase) in variable
or fixed trade costs generates larger welfare gains (smaller welfare losses) in the heterogeneous firm
model than in the extended homogeneous firm model.

Proof. See the Appendix.

    Note that the extended homogeneous firm model is equivalent to a version of the heterogeneous
firm model in which the domestic and export productivity cutoffs are held constant at their values
in an initial open economy equilibrium. Put another way, consider a planner who is constrained to
keep the same set of firms operating in both the domestic and export markets – i.e. the endogenous
selection margin is inoperative. Under this constraint, the welfare-maximizing allocation coincides
with the market equilibrium of the extended homogeneous firm model. In contrast, in the absence
of this constraint, the welfare-maximizing allocation coincides with the market equilibrium of the
heterogeneous firm model. Therefore, the welfare differential between the two models provides a
direct measure of the impact of selection on aggregate welfare. In other words, it isolates the additional
contribution to aggregate welfare of the new endogenous selection/productivity channel highlighted
by the heterogeneous firm model of trade – this represents the new welfare implications that we refer
to in the title of this paper. Later in Section 6, we show that this additional welfare channel is
quantitatively substantial for a model calibrated to U.S. aggregate and firm statistics.
    Atkeson and Burstein (2010) considers this welfare differential from endogenous firm selection in
a model with product and process innovation. They find that this welfare differential is of second-
order. Proposition 3 is consistent with this result. As discussed above and shown formally in the web
appendix, the initial equilibrium of the heterogeneous firm model is efficient. Therefore the envelope
theorem implies that the changes in the productivity cutoffs in the heterogeneous firm model have
only second-order effects on welfare. But, as we show later, these second-order welfare effects can be
quite substantial for larger changes in trade costs.
   9
     Unless trade costs become sufficiently high that firms with productivity ϕ̄x no longer find it profitable to export or
firms with productivity ϕ̄dx no longer find it profitable to produce. In both cases, the average productivity of the two
types of firms remains constant at ϕ̄x and ϕ̄dx




                                                            12
3.3         Untruncated Pareto Distribution

Since the homogeneous firm model is a special case of the heterogeneous firm model, our comparison
of the two models above is equivalent to a discrete comparative static of moving from a non-degenerate
to a degenerate productivity distribution within the heterogeneous firm model. In the special case of
an untruncated Pareto productivity distribution, the degree of firm heterogeneity is summarized by a
single parameter: the shape parameter k. Lower values of k correspond to greater firm heterogeneity
and the homogeneous firm model corresponds to the limiting case in which k → ∞. Therefore, we can
complement the above discrete comparative static with a continuous comparative static in the degree
of firm heterogeneity (k), holding all other structural parameters constant.

Proposition 4 Assuming that productivity in the heterogeneous firm model has an untruncated Pareto
distribution (g(ϕ) = kϕkmin ϕ−(k+1) , where ϕ ≥ ϕmin > 0 and k > σ − 1) and fixed exporting costs are
positive, greater dispersion of firm productivity (smaller k) implies: (a) larger welfare gains from
opening the closed economy to trade (larger WTHet /WA
                                                    Het ), (b) larger (smaller) welfare gains (losses)
from a decrease (increase) in variable trade costs in the open economy equilibrium.

Proof. See the appendix.

         Intuitively, a larger dispersion of firm productivity (smaller k) implies greater scope for adjustment
along the margin of endogenous firm entry and exit decisions, which implies different aggregate welfare
effects from a change in trade costs.


4         Welfare and Trade Policy Evaluation

To isolate the extra adjustment margin from endogenous firm selection, our theoretical comparative
static changes the distribution of productivity holding all other exogenous variables fixed across mod-
els. This exercise does not restrict the equilibrium values of the endogenous variables (in particular
the domestic trade share λ and the trade elasticity θ) to be the same in the two models. Instead the
equilibrium values for these endogenous variables differ systematically across the two models. In the
appendix, we show that the heterogeneous firm model generates a higher trade elasticity than either
the homogeneous firm model or its extension given the same value of the exogenous variables. On the
one hand, moving from the closed economy to the open economy, there is less trade (higher λ) in the
heterogeneous firm model than in the homogeneous firm model. On the other hand, starting from an
open economy equilibrium, trade liberalization generates more trade (lower λ) in the heterogeneous
firm model than in the extended homogeneous case.10
    10
    For sufficiently high trade costs, the domestic trade share is higher in the homogeneous firm model than in the
heterogeneous firm model, because the representative firm does not find it profitable to export. As trade costs fall below
the threshold at which the representative firm exports, the domestic trade share in the homogeneous firm model falls
from one to a value below that in the heterogeneous firm case, and the trade elasticity jumps from zero to σ − 1 (less
than the trade elasticity in the heterogeneous firm case).




                                                           13
   ACR show that there exists a restricted subset of our heterogeneous and homogeneous firm models
(in terms of parameter space restrictions) in which the trade elasticity is constant. Under these
parameter restrictions, this constant trade elasticity and the domestic trade share become sufficient
statistics for welfare. Even then, the micro structure of the underlying model still matters for the
welfare gains from trade, but only through its effect on the trade share and trade elasticity. Therefore,
if aggregate data can be used to measure the trade elasticity independently of a model (the trade
share, by definition, is directly observed from aggregate data) then these aggregate data can be used
to accurately measure the welfare gains from trade; and this welfare computation will be independent
of the micro structure of the underlying model. Furthermore, since the trade elasticity is constant
under the ACR parameter restrictions, it has a structural interpretation, and hence its use in trade
policy evaluations is not subject to the Lucas Critique.
   The key feature of those parameter restrictions is to induce a single constant trade elasticity that
can be applied across models. However, when using the ACR sufficient statistics for an ex ante trade
policy evaluation, one needs to assume more than a data generation process conforming to one of those
models within the ACR class. One also needs to assume that these models are universal and eternal,
in the sense that their structural parameters are always the same, independent of the time or country
to which they are applied. If this assumption is not satisfied, and one wants to estimate the welfare
gains from trade in a new context where the trade elasticity is unknown and cannot plausibly be taken
from an existing context, one needs to start with a specific structural model and assumptions about
its behavioral parameters. As shown in our theoretical comparative static, this structural model will
generate different ex ante predictions for the aggregate welfare implications of changes in trade costs,
depending on whether or not it features firm heterogeneity.
   In particular, we show how the existence of a single constant elasticity breaks down under very
small departures from the ACR parameter restrictions. In such a setting, a trade elasticity estimated
from one context need not apply for the evaluation of trade policy in another context, even when the
model parameters remain unchanged. Therefore trade policy evaluations using an estimated trade
elasticity become subject to the Lucas Critique, because this elasticity is not invariant to trade policy.
More fundamentally, we show that even the endogenous trade elasticity is no longer a sufficient statistic
for welfare (along with the domestic trade share): even conditioning on those two aggregate moments,
the micro structure influences the welfare gains from trade. The reason is that welfare depends on the
entire distribution of firms producing and selling in a market – which is summarized by the domestic
productivity cutoff. Therefore, changes in welfare depend on the change in the domestic productivity
cutoff (which can be measured using a domestic trade elasticity). Only in the case of an untruncated
Pareto distribution is the domestic trade elasticity equal to the export trade elasticity. Departing
from this parametrization, these two elasticities diverge and depend on the micro structure and the
level of the trade costs.
   In the remainder of this section, we extend the ACR approach of expressing the welfare gains from
trade as a function of observable empirical moments to the more general cases of the homogeneous and


                                                   14
heterogeneous firm models from Section 2 (without imposing the ACR parameter restrictions). These
empirical moments include the trade share and trade elasticity, but also additional ones that capture
micro structure (and differ between the two models). In Section 5, we provide several examples of
trade liberalization scenarios in which the additional impact of the micro structure on welfare can be
substantial, even for small empirically relevant departures from the ACR restrictions. In Section 6,
we quantitatively assess these differences in welfare predictions.

4.1   ACR Welfare Derivation

ACR show how the domestic trade share (λ) and trade elasticity (θ) are sufficient statistics for the
welfare gains from trade in a large class of trade models (including special cases of our homogeneous
and heterogeneous firm models), so long as three macro-level restrictions are satisfied: (R1) balanced
trade; (R2) aggregate profits are a constant share of aggregate revenues; and (R3) a CES import
demand system with a constant elasticity of trade with respect to variable trade costs. Under these
restrictions, the welfare gains from trade regime T0 to T1 can be written:
                                                                θ1
                                            WT1          λT0
                                                     
                                                =                     .                                (28)
                                            WT0          λT1

Thus, (28) will characterize the welfare gains from trade for both our homogeneous and heterogeneous
firm models so long as (R1)-(R3) are satisfied. Trade is balanced in both of these models, so (R1)
is always satisfied. However, the general versions of both models imply departures from a constant
aggregate share of profits embodied in (R2). Given CES preferences, the constant aggregate trade
elasticity restriction (R3) will be satisfied in all versions of our homogeneous firm model, whereas it
will be violated along with (R2) in our general heterogeneous firm model.

4.2   Gains from Trade in the Homogeneous Firm Model

We consider a lowering of trade costs from τ0 and fx0 (trade regime T0 ) to τ1 and fx1 (trade regime
T1 ). To simplify notation, we assume that τ0 and fx0 may be high enough such that no trade is
generated in T0 . Let χT0 denote an indicator variable for positive trade. Then, using the expressions
for welfare in the closed economy (22) and open economy (24) and the domestic trade share (26), we
can write the welfare gains from trade in the heterogeneous firm model as:
                                          "                  # 1
                                    WT1     λT0 F̄d + χT0 fx0 σ−1
                                        =                         ,                                    (29)
                                    WT0
                                                           
                                             λT1 F̄d + fx1

where θ = σ − 1 is the elasticity of trade with respect to variable trade costs.
   In this more general setting, the welfare gains depend on the same two aggregate moments (the
domestic trade share and trade elasticity) as in ACR (28), but also on the change in firm size (captured
in (29) by the total fixed costs paid by the representative firm). This change in firm size is an observable
empirical moment, but one that characterizes a change in micro structure. Even after controlling for
the two aggregate moments, these changes in micro structure will affect the welfare gains from trade.

                                                    15
Such changes in micro structure will occur whenever the fixed exporting cost changes in an open
economy with trade (χT0 = 1) or even in the presence of any positive fixed exporting costs in an
economy that opens up to trade (from χT0 = 0). These changes represent a violation of (R2) as the
share of profits in revenue changes with firm size in the homogeneous firm model.

4.3      Gains from Trade in the Heterogeneous Firm Model

We now seek to express the welfare gains from trade liberalization in terms of observable empirical
moments for the general case of our heterogeneous firm model. Since trade continuously drops to
zero when trade costs increase, we can start from an open economy trade regime T without loss of
generality. To simplify notation, we drop the T superscript. For now, we also assume that there is
export market selection in this trade regime so that ϕx > ϕd .
       From (19), the full trade elasticity with export market selection is θHet = (σ − 1) − d ln Λ/d ln τ ,
where Λ = δ(ϕx )/δ(ϕd ) represents the domestic market share of exporters (and hence changes in Λ
capture changes in the extensive margin of trade). This full trade elasticity θHet incorporates the direct
effect of τ on the extensive margin of trade via its impact on the export cutoff ϕx = τ (fx /fd )1/(σ−1) ϕd
(see (11)), as well as indirect effects through the price index via its impact on the domestic cutoff ϕd .
       As argued by ACR, only the partial trade elasticity capturing the direct effect of τ is observed em-
pirically, since it is estimated from a gravity equation with exporter and importer fixed effects. In the
context of our symmetric country model, this partial elasticity can be derived from (18), which relates
the domestic trade share to variable trade costs and the two productivity cutoffs (λ = λ(τ, ϕd , ϕx )),
and from (12), which relates the two productivity cutoffs to one another (ϕx = ϕx (τ, ϕd )).11 Taking
the partial derivative of the domestic trade share with respect to τ holding ϕd constant, we have:

                                ∂ ln 1−λ
                                          
                                        λ                  ∂ ln Λ ∂ ln ϕx
                          ϑ=−                 = (σ − 1) −                    ,
                                   ∂ ln τ                  ∂ ln ϕx ∂ ln τ ϕd
                                                 ϕd

where the relationship between the productivity cutoffs (12) implies ∂ ln ϕx /∂ ln τ |ϕd = 1. Therefore
the partial elasticity can be further written as:

                                                              ∂ ln Λ
                                            ϑ = (σ − 1) −                    ,
                                                              ∂ ln ϕx   ϕd
                                              = (σ − 1) + γ(ϕx ),                                                (30)

where γ(ϕj ) = −d ln δ(ϕj )/d ln ϕj is the elasticity of δ(ϕj ) for market j ∈ {d, x}.
       Note that δ(ϕj ) is proportional to the cumulative market share (in any given market) of firms
above any cutoff ϕj . Therefore γ(ϕj ) represents the hazard function for the distribution of log firm
size within a market. If the distribution of productivity ϕ is an untruncated Pareto(k), then the
distribution of firm size (in any given market) also will be an untruncated Pareto(k − σ + 1) and the
hazard function γ(·) will be constant at k − (σ − 1). In this case, the partial and full trade elasticity
  11
    In the web appendix, we show how a multi-country version of our model yields an expression for log bilateral trade
that is linear in exporter and importer fixed effects and ϑ ln τ .


                                                         16
are equal to one another and constant at k. Even a slight departure from an untruncated Pareto to
a truncated Pareto implies that the partial and full trade elasticity are distinct from one another and
variable. In this case, the hazard function γ(ϕj ) becomes:
                                                                      k−(σ−1)
                                                                ϕmin
                                                                 ϕj
                        γ(ϕj ) = (k − (σ − 1))           k−(σ−1)                    k−(σ−1) ,    (31)
                                                   ϕmin                        ϕmin
                                                    ϕj                 −       ϕmax

where ϕmax is the upper bound to the support of the productivity distribution. As ϕmax → ∞,
the hazard function γ(ϕj ) converges to its constant value for an untruncated Pareto distribution:
limϕmax →∞ γ(ϕj ) = k − (σ − 1). More generally, for ϕmax < ∞, γ(ϕj ) takes a strictly higher value
than for an untruncated Pareto productivity distribution and differs between the domestic and export
market. The hazard function for each market is increasing in the productivity cutoff, attaining its
minimum value as ϕj → ϕmin , and converging towards infinity as ϕj → ϕmax . Since higher variable
trade costs reduce the domestic productivity cutoff and increase the export productivity cutoff, they
imply a lower γ(ϕd ) and a higher γ(ϕx ).
   Using welfare (16) and the trade share (18), welfare in the heterogeneous firm model can be written:
                                                                            1
                                           σ − 1 σ−1
                                                   1
                                                                δ(ϕd )       σ−1
                                  WHet   =      Me                                 ,                 (32)
                                             σ                    λ

Since welfare (16) also implies that changes in welfare are proportional to changes in the domestic
productivity cutoff (d ln W = d ln ϕd and d ln δ(ϕd ) = −γ(ϕd )d ln ϕd ), we can then write the welfare
change using the (observable) partial trade elasticity from (30):
                                               1
                           d ln W =                         (d ln Me − d ln λ) .                     (33)
                                      ϑ + [γ(ϕd ) − γ(ϕx )]

As highlighted by ACR, restricting the distribution of productivity draws G(ϕ) to be untruncated
Pareto and assuming that there is export market selection (ϕTx > ϕTd ), ensures that the macro re-
strictions (R1)-(R3) are satisfied. In this case, the hazard function is constant so that the difference
γ(ϕd ) − γ(ϕx ) is zero, and entry does not respond to changes in trade costs (d ln Me = 0). In this case,
we recover the welfare gain derivation (28) from ACR. Since the partial trade elasticity ϑ is constant
in this case, the welfare differential can be integrated to capture proportional welfare changes between
any two trade regimes, so long as there is export market selection in both.
   However, the welfare differential (33) highlights how, in the general case, the welfare gains from
trade liberalization will change with the micro structure. Even after controlling for the trade share
and trade elasticity, this micro structure matters for welfare through the hazard differential γ(ϕd ) −
γ(ϕx ). In Section 6, we show quantitatively how small changes in the shape of the distribution of
firm productivity G(ϕ) away from an untruncated Pareto distribution can lead to large changes in
the hazard differential γ(ϕd ) − γ(ϕx ). This issue is distinct from the challenge of measuring the
“appropriate” trade elasticity ϑ in a world where this elasticity is variable (both across countries
and within each country for different values of trade costs). The predicted welfare effects of trade

                                                     17
liberalization based on the ACR formula will also diverge from the true welfare effects because of the
variable nature of the partial trade elasticity ϑ.
   Finally, the welfare differential (33) also shows that, in cases where trade liberalization leads to
responses in firm entry (d ln Me 6= 0), then this change in micro structure will also affect the welfare
gains from trade, even conditional on the domestic trade share and trade elasticity.
   Our analysis also highlights the direction of the bias in the ACR formula. With a truncated Pareto
productivity distribution, the hazard function γ(ϕj ) is monotonically increasing in the productivity
cutoff ϕj . Furthermore, in an equilibrium with export market selection, the domestic productivity
cutoff (ϕd ) is less than the export productivity cutoff (ϕx ), which implies a negative hazard differential
γ(ϕd ) − γ(ϕx ). Therefore, even with a correct estimate of the variable partial trade elasticity ϑ,
an evaluation of welfare changes (33) that does not control for the hazard differential will tend to
understate the absolute magnitude of changes in welfare in response to changes in trade costs, since
ϑ > ϑ + γ(ϕd ) − γ(ϕx ).
   To make our argument as clearly as possible, we have developed these results for two symmetric
countries. But the expression for welfare in the heterogeneous firm model with a general productivity
distribution (32) holds more generally in a setting with many asymmetric countries, as shown in
the web appendix. In such a setting, there is a separate partial trade elasticity for each exporter-
importer pair. Empirical estimates of the coefficient on variable trade costs from a gravity equation
including exporter and importer fixed effects capture the average value of this elasticity across all
exporter-importer pairs in the regression sample. This average elasticity need not provide a good
approximation to the partial trade elasticity for any one individual exporter-importer pair either inside
or outside the regression sample. The appropriate elasticity for welfare in (33) is the partial trade
elasticity for any one individual exporter-importer pair adjusted for the hazard differential between
that exporter-importer pair and the domestic market.
   A somewhat separate implication of an untruncated Pareto distribution is that the increase in
product variety from imports (following trade liberalization) is exactly offset by a decrease in domestic
product variety (associated with tougher selection). Hsieh and Ossa (2011) establish this result for a
multi-sector setting with asymmetric countries and CES preferences (see also Feenstra 2010). Feenstra
(2014) shows that this implication of the untruncated Pareto productivity distribution extends to a
general class of non-CES preferences, but that it is similarly broken by small departures away from
an untruncated Pareto distribution (to a truncated Pareto distribution). In our setting with a general
productivity distribution, the response of firm entry to trade liberalization implies changes in product
variety available for consumption.
   Lastly, we briefly characterize the gains from trade (in terms of observable moments) when trade
costs are sufficiently low that all surviving firms export. In other words, there is no export market
selection and ϕTd = ϕTx . As we previously discussed, the equilibrium in this case will have identical
aggregate properties to an equilibrium with homogeneous firms, in which all firms have a common
productivity level ϕ̃Td and face a fixed cost F T = fe / 1 − G(ϕTd ) + fd + fx . Thus, the welfare gains
                                                                   



                                                     18
associated with a transition from trade regime T0 to T1 can be measured using:
                                                                     1
                                         WT1           λT0 F T0
                                                                  σ−1
                                             =                            ,                           (34)
                                         WT0           λT1 F T1

where in this case the full and partial trade elasticities are equal to one another: θ = ϑ = σ − 1.
   As in the homogeneous firm case, we see that the welfare gains from trade depend on changes in
average firm size (captured by F T ) as well as the domestic trade share and trade elasticity (which is
now constant at σ −1). Average firm size is now endogenous and varies with the domestic productivity
cutoff (ϕTd affects F T ). Any change in the fixed exporting costs between T0 and T1 will induce changes
in average firm size - even when productivity has an untruncated Pareto distribution (as was the case
in the homogeneous firm model, this situation represents a violation of ACR’s macro restriction R2).
   Taking the results of this subsection together, our generalization of the ACR welfare representa-
tion provides a way of quantitatively assessing whether predictions for the welfare gains from trade
liberalization based on the domestic trade share and the assumption of a constant trade elasticity
provide a good approximation to the true welfare gains. The success of this approximation depends
on the extent to which the partial trade elasticity is constant, the size of the hazard rate differential
between the domestic and export markets and the degree to which firm entry responds to changes in
trade costs. If firm-level data are available, these differences in hazard rates and the response of firm
entry can be examined empirically. Admittedly, measuring the response of firm entry to changes in
trade costs raises challenges. But these challenges are similar to those faced in estimating a partial
trade elasticity and recovering the change in trade induced by a change in variable trade costs alone.
Head, Mayer and Thoenig (2014) propose a goodness of fit test of firm size distribution to the Pareto
distribution that is similar to checking for changes in the hazard rate (which is constant under Pareto).
   Even in cases where only aggregate trade data is available, one can in principle estimate differences
in trade elasticities across country-partner pairs. Helpman, Melitz and Rubinstein (2008) and Novy
(2013) both implement gravity estimation procedures that allow for variation in the elasticity of trade
with respect to observable trade frictions (such as distance). Both papers find substantial variation
in these elasticities. Unless this variation is exactly offset by an equal and opposite variation in the
elasticity of trade costs with respect to the observable trade frictions, these results imply a variable
elasticity of trade with respect to trade costs.
   In the setting with many asymmetric countries discussed above, our generalized welfare derivations
highlight that the discrepancy between the predicted and true welfare effects of trade liberalization
will be minimized by choosing a trade elasticity for country-partners that most closely approximates
the elasticity for a country’s trade with itself. If the hazard rate function γ(ϕj ) is monotonic in the
cutoff ϕj , then the hazard differential γ(ϕii ) − γ(ϕik ) will be minimized when ϕik is closest to ϕii ,
which occurs for the trading partner with the highest share of exporting firms.




                                                       19
5     Trade Policy Evaluation

In the previous section, we introduced small deviations from the ACR parameter restrictions and
showed how the micro structure then affects the measurement of the welfare gains from trade –
even when conditioning on a given trade elasticity and a given domestic trade share. This led to
discrepancies between the true welfare effects of trade liberalization and those predicted by the ACR
formula. We now illustrate more concretely how such discrepancies may arise when evaluating the
welfare gains generated from a few specific trade liberalization scenarios. Our starting point is the
heterogeneous firm model with two symmetric countries developed in Section 2. We consider the
welfare gains from liberalizing trade first from trade regime T0 (τ0 , fx0 ) to T1 (τ1 , fx1 ), and then to
T2 (τ2 , fx2 ). We contrast the true welfare gains from (16) with those measured by a policy analyst who
applies the ACR formula (28). We also contrast the cases of ex post and ex ante policy evaluation
using a similar approach to ACR and Costinot and Rodriguez-Clare (2014).
    Specifically, we assume that trade liberalization from T0 → T1 is evaluated ex post so that the
domestic trade shares λT0 and λT1 are observed, and the (arc) trade elasticity therefore can be directly
measured as:12                                                                       
                                                         1−λT1                  1−λT0
                                                ln        λT 1
                                                                     − ln        λT0
                                     θ̂01 = −                                               .                                (35)
                                                           ln τ1 − ln τ0
                                                                                                1/θ̂01
The ACR predicted welfare gains from trade are then Ŵ01 = λT0 /λT1                                       . On the other hand, we
assume that trade liberalization from T1 → T2 is evaluated ex ante, so the domestic trade share λT2
is unobserved and is recovered from the model using the elasticity θ̂01 . That is, λ̂T2 solves:
                                                  T
                                                                 T1
                                                                      
                                           ln 1−Tλ̂2 2 − ln 1−λ  T
                                                                λ 1
                                               λ̂
                                  θ̂01 = −                              .                                                    (36)
                                                  ln τ2 − ln τ1

Ex ante, the ACR welfare derivation yields predicted welfare gains from trade given by Ŵ12 =
          1/θ̂01
   T
  λ /λ̂
    1   T2         . We assume that the trade costs in the trade regimes T0 and T1 are high enough
to generate export market selection. However, we do not impose this restriction on the hypothetical
trade regime T2 : A policy analyst may be interested in evaluating the welfare gains from trade for
scenarios that go most (or all) of the way to free trade.

5.1    Scenario 1: Untruncated Pareto Productivity Distribution

We assume that G(ϕ) is distributed untruncated Pareto(k) and initially assume no change in the fixed
export costs: fx0 = fx1 = fx2 . Then, the measured elasticity θ̂01 will recover the constant elasticity k,
and Ŵ01 will exactly measure the “true” welfare gains from the ex post liberalization T0 → T1 . Also, if
the hypothetical trade regime T2 features export market selection (the trade costs τ2 and fx2 are high
enough), then θ̂01 = k will also capture the trade elasticity between T1 and T2 , and the analyst would
 12
    When the distribution of productivity draws G(ϕ) is an untruncated Pareto – a necessary condition for the ACR
macro restrictions to hold – there is no difference between the full and partial trade elasticities θ and ϑ.




                                                            20
also correctly predict the attained domestic trade share in regime T2 . Thus, the predicted welfare gain
Ŵ12 will again recover the “true” welfare gain from (16).
       However, if the trade costs in regime T2 are low enough – such that all firms export in T2 – then the
ex ante welfare evaluation will be incorrect. The true trade elasticity drops from k to σ − 1 once there
is no export market selection, and this change will not be reflected in the elasticity θ̂01 . Consequently,
the analyst will also incorrectly predict the attained domestic trade share in regime T2 . This transition
between the case of export market selection and no selection represents a violation of ACR’s macro
restriction (R3). Yet, this transition occurs endogenously in our model; the only structural change is
a reduction in trade costs.
       We now consider the case where trade liberalization from T0 − T1 involves a change in both the
variable and fixed trade cost. In this case, the measured trade elasticity θ̂01 will be biased, because
it captures the effects of the change in both the variable and fixed trade costs. In turn, this will
generate discrepancies between the true and predicted welfare gains from trade liberalization for both
the ex post and ex ante policy evaluations. This case does not represent any violation of ACR’s macro
restrictions; it represents a measurement issue for the trade elasticity.13

5.2      Scenario 2: Truncated Pareto Productivity Distribution

We now assume that G(ϕ) is distributed Pareto, but that there is a finite upper bound to the support
of the productivity distribution (ϕmax < ∞). We return to our initial assumption of no change in
the fixed exporting cost (so fx0 = fx1 = fx2 ). As we highlighted in the previous section, this small
departure from an untruncated Pareto distribution changes the derivation of the welfare gains from
trade from the ACR formula (28) to (33). We abstract from measurement issues for the trade elasticity
induced by differences between arc versus point elasticities, and between the full versus the partial
trade elasticity. Thus, we assume that the measured elasticity θ̂01 yields an accurate estimate for any
point partial trade elasticity ϑ between τ0 and τ1 .14
       Nevertheless, the analyst will obtain an incorrect measure of the ex post welfare gains from trade
because both the difference in the hazard rates γ(ϕd )−γ(ϕx ) and the response of entry 4 ln Me will be
non-zero. In our quantitative analysis in the next section, we find the former effect to be substantial
while the latter effect is relatively small for our parametrization.
       Lastly, we consider the evaluation of an ex ante hypothetical trade liberalization from T1 to T2 .
The same discrepancies between the true and predicted welfare gains from trade liberalization as
mentioned above for the ex post evaluation will also apply to the ex ante case. In addition, the
measured elasticity θ̂01 will no longer apply to changes in τ between τ1 and τ2 – even abstracting from
  13
     ACR note that, in a multi-country world, the trade elasticity can be recovered from the estimation of a gravity
equation when variations in bilateral tariffs are observed. This estimation also requires that the variation in any fixed
trade cost that is correlated with the tariffs is also observed. In the absence of controls for this variation in fixed costs,
the gravity equation estimation will be subject to omitted variables bias. While the seriousness of this concern depends
on the source of variation used, to our knowledge such data on fixed trade costs are not available.
  14
     In our calibration based on a truncated Pareto distribution in the next section, we find that differences between the
arc partial elasticity and the arc full elasticity have a relatively small effect on the measured welfare gains from trade.



                                                             21
the differences between arc versus point elasticities and between the full and partial elasticities: All
of these elasticities are different for τ ∈ (τ1 , τ2 ) relative to τ ∈ (τ0 , τ1 ).15 This also means that the
analyst will incorrectly predict the domestic trade share in regime T2 .
    In closing, we highlight that all the different trade liberalization scenarios that we have described
in this section satisfy the assumptions for our open economy comparative static exercise described in
Subsection 3.2. Thus, in all these cases, the extra margin of adjustment in the heterogeneous firm
model is operative. Under the ACR parameter restrictions, the trade elasticity is constant and the
heterogeneous and homogeneous firm models can be calibrated to both generate the same welfare
gains from trade across the two models. Even for small departures from these parameter restrictions,
the trade elasticity is not constant, and is not a sufficient statistic for the welfare gains from trade
(along with the domestic trade share). Instead, micro structure also matters for the welfare gains
from trade and differs between the heterogeneous and homogeneous firm models, because of the extra
adjustment margin in the heterogeneous firm model.


6     Quantitative Relevance

In this section, we examine the quantitative relevance of our results. In subsection 6.1, we show
that the extra margin of adjustment in the heterogeneous firm model is associated with substantial
differences in the aggregate welfare implications of trade between the heterogeneous and homogeneous
firm models. In subsection 6.2, we show that the assumption of a constant trade elasticity when
the true elasticity is variable can lead to quantitatively relevant discrepancies between the true and
predicted welfare effects of trade liberalization.

6.1    Theoretical Comparative Static

In this subsection, we compare the welfare properties of the heterogeneous and homogeneous firm
models holding all structural parameters other than the productivity distribution constant between
the two models. We assume an untruncated Pareto distribution for productivity in the heterogeneous
firm model; this satisfies the ACR macro restrictions so long as trade costs are high enough to generate
export market selection. The homogeneous firm model satisfies the ACR restrictions so long as the
fixed exporting cost remains constant. We choose standard values for the heterogeneous firm model’s
parameters based on central estimates from the existing empirical literature and moments of the U.S.
data. Those same structural parameters then carry over to the homogeneous firm case, except that
we set a degenerate productivity distribution as described below.
    We set the elasticity of substitution between varieties σ = 4, which is consistent with the estimates
using plant-level U.S. manufacturing data in Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and Kortum (2003). The Pareto
shape parameter for the productivity distribution (k) determines the elasticity of trade flows with
  15
     A growing body of empirical research reports results that are consistent with a variable trade elasticity, including
Helpman, Melitz and Rubinstein (2008), Novy (2013), and Head, Mayer and Thoenig (2014). Simonovska and Waugh
(2014b) provides evidence that the estimated trade elasticity is model dependent. Imbs and Méjean (2009) and Ossa
(2012) argue that aggregate trade elasticities are influenced by sectoral composition in multi-sector models.


                                                           22
respect to variable trade costs in the heterogeneous firm model under export market selection. We
set k = 4.25 as a central value for estimates of the trade elasticity.16 A choice for the Pareto scale
parameter is equivalent to a choice of units in which to measure productivity, and hence we normalize
ϕmin = 1.
       We consider trade between two symmetric countries, and choose labor in one country as the
numeraire (w = 1), which implies that the wage in both countries is equal to one. With an untruncated
Pareto productivity distribution, scaling L and {fe , fd , fx } up or down by the same proportion leaves
the productivity cutoffs {ϕTd , ϕTx } and the mass of entrants unchanged (Me ), and merely scales average
firm size (r̄) up or down by the same proportion. Therefore we set L equal to the U.S. labor force
and normalize fd to one. With an untruncated Pareto productivity distribution, the sunk entry cost
fe affects the absolute levels of the productivity cutoffs and welfare but not their relative levels for
different values of trade costs. As a result, the relative comparisons below are invariant to the choice
of fe , and hence we normalize fe to one.
       We calibrate τ to match the average fraction of exports in firm sales in U.S. manufacturing
   τ 1−σ
( 1+τ 1−σ   = 0.14, as reported in Bernard, Jensen, Redding and Schott 2007), which implies τ = 1.83
(which is in line with the estimate of 1.7 in Anderson and van Wincoop 2004). Given our choice
for the parameters {σ, k, ϕmin , fd , fe , τ }, we choose fx to ensure that the model is consistent with
the average fraction of U.S. manufacturing firms that export (0.18, as reported in Bernard, Jensen,
Redding and Schott 2007).
       We choose the degenerate productivity distribution in the homogeneous firm model so that the two
models generate the same aggregate variables in an initial equilibrium. In our baseline specification
here, we do so for an initial open economy equilibrium using our calibrated values of trade costs
of τ = 1.83 and fx = 0.545. Thus we compare the heterogeneous firm model to the extended
homogeneous firm model introduced in subsection 3.2. In the web appendix, we undertake a similar
analysis for an initial closed economy equilibrium, as analyzed in subsection 3.1.
    In our baseline specification here, we solve for the initial open economy equilibrium of the hetero-
                                                                          h          i
geneous firm model, including the probability of successful firm entry 1 − G ϕTd 0 , the proportion
                                  h           i
of exporting firms 1 − G ϕTx0 / 1 − G ϕTd 0 , weighted average productivity in the export mar-
                    

ket (ϕ̃Tx0 ), weighted average productivity in the domestic market (ϕ̃Td 0 ), and the weighted average
productivity of domestic firms (ϕ̃Tdx0 ). In the extended homogeneous firm model, we choose the prob-
abilities of entry and exporting and the weighted average productivities for domestic and exporting
firms to equal to their values in the initial open economy equilibrium of the heterogeneous firm model:
                                     h                 i
  1 − Ḡx = 1 − G ϕTx0 , Ḡdx = G ϕTx0 − G ϕTd 0 , ϕ̄x = ϕ̃Tx0 , and ϕ̄dx = ϕ̃Tdx0 . All parameters
                                          

apart from the productivity distribution are held constant across the two models (same fd , fe , fx , τ ,
                                    h          i
L, σ), which implies F̄d = fd + fe / 1 − G ϕTd 0 . The key difference between the two models is that
the market entry probabilities and weighted average productivities in each market respond to changes
  16
    Simonovska and Waugh (2014a) estimate a trade elasticity of 4.10 or 4.27 depending on the data used. Costinot and
Rodriguez-Clare (2013)’s benchmark value for the trade elasticity is 5. Any of these values would lead to quantitatively
similar results.


                                                          23
in trade costs in the heterogeneous firm model. In contrast, in the extended homogeneous firm model,
these probabilities and weighted average productivities are parameters.
       In Figure 1, we show the effects of adjusting variable trade costs from their calibrated value of
τ T0   = 1.83 to values of τ T1 ∈ [1, 3] (for which there is trade in both models).17 Panel A displays
relative welfare, measured as welfare for each value of variable trade costs relative to welfare in the
initial open economy equilibrium: WT1 /WT0 ; Panel B shows the probability of exporting: χT1 =
         T1               T1
[1 − G(ϕ
       x )]/[1 − G(ϕ    d )]; Panel
                                     C displays
                                                      weighted average productivity in the domestic market:
            T      T                    T
  T1   G(ϕx1 )−G(ϕd 1 )      T1    1−G(ϕx1 )
ϕ̃d =           T1        ϕ̃dx +        T1     ϕ̃xT1 ; Panel D shows the domestic trade share: λT1 . The solid
             1−G(ϕd )               1−G(ϕd )
blue line corresponds to values in the heterogeneous firm model, while the red dashed line corresponds
to values in the extended homogeneous firm model.
       As shown in Panel A, welfare in the two models is the same for the calibrated value of variable
trade costs, but is strictly higher in the heterogeneous firm model than in the extended homogeneous
firm model for all other values of variable trade costs. Therefore the welfare gains (losses) from
reductions (increases) in variable trade costs are greater (smaller) in the heterogeneous firm model
than in the extended homogeneous firm model. The differences in welfare between the two models
are quantitatively relevant for empirically plausible changes in variable trade costs. A reduction in
variable trade costs from τ = 1.83 to τ = 1 generates welfare that is five percentage points of real
GDP higher in the heterogeneous firm model than in the extended homogeneous firm (this represents
around a third of the overall welfare gains of 17 percentage points in the heterogeneous firm model).
       As shown in Panels B and C, the source of these welfare differences is endogenous selection into
the domestic and export markets in the heterogeneous firm model. For the calibrated value of variable
trade costs of τ = 1.83, the probability of exporting and weighted average productivity in the domestic
market are the same in the two models. As variable trade costs fall from their calibrated value to τ = 1,
the probability of exporting rises from 0.18 to 1 in the heterogeneous firm model, but remains constant
in the extended homogeneous firm model (Panel B). Additionally, weighted average productivity in
the domestic market rises by around 8 percent in the heterogeneous firm model, while remaining
constant in the extended homogeneous firm model (Panel C).
       As shown in Panel D, the domestic trade share is the same in the two models for the calibrated
value of variable trade costs. Given the same structural parameters, the elasticity of trade with
respect to variable trade costs is higher in the heterogeneous firm model with an untruncated Pareto
distribution (k) than in the extended homogeneous firm model (σ − 1). Therefore, the domestic trade
share is lower in the heterogeneous firm model for variable trade costs below the calibrated value, and
is higher in the heterogeneous firm model for variable trade costs above the calibrated value.
       Taken together, these results show that the extra margin of adjustment in the heterogeneous firm
model relative to the homogeneous firm model is of quantitative relevance for aggregate welfare. In
the web appendix, we show that we find similar results when we calibrate the heterogeneous and
  17
     For brevity, we concentrate on changes in variable trade costs, but we find a similar pattern of results for changes
in fixed exporting costs, as shown in the calibration in the working paper version of this paper.



                                                           24
                                                              Panel A: Relative Welfare                                                            Panel B: Probability of Exporting
                                      1.1763                                                                                              1

                                                                                                                                         0.8




                                                                                                              Probability of exporting
                                      1.1263
      Relative Welfare




                                                                                                                                         0.6
                                      1.0763
                                                                                                                                         0.4

                                      1.0263
                                                                                                                                         0.2

                                      0.9763                                                                                              0
                                               1           1.5           2             2.5           3                                         1   1.5            2            2.5     3
                                                                 Variable trade cost                                                                     Variable trade cost


                                                   Panel C: Domestic Weighted Average Productivity                                                 Panel D: Domestic Trade Share
                                      1.0809
      Weighted average productivity




                                                                                                                                         0.9


                                                                                                              Domestic trade share
                                      1.0559
                                                                                                                                         0.8
                                      1.0309
                                                                                                                                         0.7

                                      1.0059
                                                                                                                                         0.6


                                      0.9809                                                                                             0.5
                                               1           1.5           2             2.5           3                                         1   1.5            2            2.5     3
                                                                 Variable trade cost                                                                     Variable trade cost

                          Note: Blue solid line heterogeneous firm model. Red dashed line extended homogeneous firm model. Same structural parameters.




Figure 1: Reductions in variable trade costs in the heterogeneous firm model with an untruncated
Pareto distribution and in the extended homogeneous firm model


homogeneous firm models to an initial closed economy equilibrium.

6.2                            Practical Evaluation of Trade Policies

We now examine the quantitative implications of a variable trade elasticity for the practical evaluation
of trade policies. We assume a truncated Pareto productivity distribution in the heterogeneous firm
model (Scenario 2 from Section 5). We keep all of the other parameters in the heterogeneous firm model
the same as for the untruncated Pareto distribution in the previous subsection. To calibrate the upper
bound to the support of the productivity distribution (ϕmax ), we use data on average size differences
between exporters and non-exporters. For the assumed value of fx = 0.545, the heterogeneous firm
model with an untruncated Pareto distribution from the previous subsection matches the average
fraction of U.S. manufacturing firms that export (0.18), but implies larger differences in average
revenue between exporters and non-exporters than observed for U.S. manufacturing firms (2.09 log
points compared to 1.48 log points in Bernard, Jensen, Redding and Schott 2007). Therefore, we



                                                                                                         25
choose fx and ϕmax in the heterogeneous firm model with a truncated Pareto distribution so that it
matches both of these moments (fx = 0.535 and ϕmax = 2.85).
   In Figure 2, we examine each of the components of the proportional change in welfare (33) for this
truncated Pareto productivity distribution. Panel A shows the partial trade elasticity (ϑ); Panel B
displays the hazard differential between the domestic and export markets (γ(ϕd ) − γ(ϕx )); Panel C
shows the domestic trade share (λ); Panel D displays the mass of entrants (Me ). We change variable
trade costs from their calibrated value of τ T0 = 1.83 to values of τ T1 ∈ [1, 3] for which trade occurs.


                                                    Panel A: Partial Trade Elasticity                                                        Panel B: Domestic Minus Export Hazard
                                                                                                                                     0

                                          15                                                                                       −2
               Partial Trade elasticity




                                                                                                            Difference in Hazard
                                          13
                                                                                                                                   −4
                                          11
                                                                                                                                   −6
                                           9
                                                                                                                                   −8
                                           7

                                           5                                                                                       −10

                                           3                                                                                       −12
                                                1   1.5            2            2.5     3                                                1       1.5           2             2.5     3
                                                          Variable trade cost                                                                          Variable trade cost


                                                    Panel C: Domestic Trade Share                                                              Panel D: Relative Mass of Entrants
                                           1                                                                                  1.03

                                          0.9
        Domestic trade share




                                                                                                 Relative to τ=1




                                          0.8
                                                                                                                              1.01
                                          0.7

                                          0.6

                                          0.5                                                                                 1.00
                                                1   1.5            2            2.5     3                                                1       1.5           2             2.5     3
                                                          Variable trade cost                                                                          Variable trade cost




Figure 2: Trade elasticity, domestic trade share and mass of entrants in the heterogeneous firm model
with a truncated Pareto productivity distribution

   In the special case in which the upper bound to the support of the productivity distribution
converges to infinity (ϕmax → ∞), the truncated Pareto distribution converges to an untruncated
Pareto distribution. In this special case, the partial trade elasticity (ϑ) is constant and equal to the
full trade elasticity (θ), which is equal to the Pareto shape parameter (k = 4.25). Furthermore, in this
special case, the mass of entrants depends only on parameters and hence is constant. In contrast, for a
truncated Pareto distribution with a finite upper bound to the support of the productivity distribution


                                                                                            26
(ϕmax < ∞), the partial trade elasticity (ϑ) is variable and differs from both the full trade elasticity
(θ) and the Pareto shape parameter (k = 4.25). As we vary variable trade costs from one to three,
the partial trade elasticity in Panel A ranges from around three to more than fifteen.18
       The relationship between the partial trade elasticity and trade costs can be seen from our closed
form expression for the hazard function with a truncated Pareto distribution (31). As variable trade
costs increase, the export productivity cutoff (ϕTx ) rises, which increases the export hazard (γ(ϕTx )) and
hence in turn increases the partial trade elasticity (ϑ). As variable trade costs become sufficiently large
that the export productivity cutoff approaches the upper bound to the support of the productivity
distribution (ϕx → ϕmax ), the partial trade elasticity converges towards infinity (ϑ → ∞). From
the hazard function (31), this result is robust to the choice of any finite value for the upper bound
to the support of the productivity distribution (ϕmax ), because there exists a sufficiently high trade
cost such that ϕTx converges to any finite value of ϕmax .19 As variable trade costs become sufficiently
small that all firms export, the export and domestic productivity cutoffs become equal to one another
(ϕTx = ϕTd ) and independent of variable trade costs. At the threshold value for variable trade costs
below which all firms export, the partial trade elasticity (ϑ) falls discretely to σ − 1 and remains equal
to this constant value for all lower variable trade costs. Taken together, these results suggest that the
partial trade elasticity can vary quite substantially from one context to another.
       As shown in Panel B, these changes in variable trade costs have implications for the difference
in hazard functions between the domestic and export markets (γ(ϕTd ) − γ(ϕTx )). As variable trade
costs increase, the resulting rise in the export productivity cutoff (ϕTx ) increases the hazard function
in the export market (γ(ϕTx )), but the associated reduction in the domestic productivity cutoff (ϕTd )
reduces the hazard function in the domestic market (γ(ϕTd )). As a result, as we vary variable trade
costs from one to three, the hazard rate differential between the two markets ranges from zero to
minus twelve. When variable trade costs are low enough, all firms export, there is a single domes-
tic/export productivity cutoff (ϕx = ϕd ), and there is no difference between the two hazard functions,
γ(ϕd ) − γ(ϕx ) = 0. However, as variable trade costs increase, generating export market selection, the
hazard differential monotonically decreases from zero (as the proportion of exporting firms decreases).
When variable trade costs become sufficiently large, the proportion of exporting firm goes to zero
(ϕx → ϕmax ) and the hazard differential converges to minus infinity (γ(ϕd ) − γ(ϕx ) → −∞). This
differential is directly related to the bias associated with using the foreign trade elasticity instead of
the (unobserved) domestic trade elasticity when evaluating welfare gains from trade using the ACR
formula (see equation (33)). Thus, when this evaluation is performed for country pairs with a low
proportion of exporting firms, this bias can be arbitrarily large.
       As shown in Panel C, increases in variable trade costs raise the domestic trade share, which
converges towards one as variable trade costs rise towards three, and converges towards a value of one
  18
     Assuming a constant elasticity of trade costs with respect to distance, Novy (2013) estimates elasticities of trade
with respect to trade costs that range from less than five to more than twenty.
  19
     To illustrate this robustness of our results to the choice for the upper bound to the support of the truncated Pareto
productivity distribution, the web appendix reports a robustness check using ϕmax = 4.



                                                           27
half as variable trade costs fall to one (reflecting country symmetry). As shown in Panel D, increases
in variable trade costs raise the mass of entrants, which is shown for each value of variable trade costs
in the figure relative to its value for τ = 1. With a truncated Pareto distribution, higher variable trade
costs reduce average firm size conditional on successful entry. With a fixed labor endowment, this in
turn leads to a larger mass of entrants. For the parameterization considered here, these changes in
the mass of entrants are relatively small, with the mass of entrants increasing by around 3 percent as
variable trade costs increase from one to three. As variable trade costs become sufficiently small that
all firms export, the export and domestic productivity cutoffs become equal to one another (ϕTx = ϕTd )
and independent of variable trade costs. Therefore, for this range of variable trade costs, both average
firm size and the mass of entrants are constant.
   We now examine the quantitative implications of the above changes in micro structure for the
evaluation of trade policies. Table 1 compares the true welfare gains from trade liberalization with
a truncated Pareto distribution to the welfare gains that would be predicted by a policy analyst
who falsely assumed a constant trade elasticity and applied the ACR formula. We examine trade
liberalization from high variable trade costs for which the economy is relatively closed (τ = 3 and
λ = 0.998), through intermediate values of variable trade costs (τ = 1.5 and λ = 0.832), and to low
values of variable trade costs for which the economy is relatively open but still only some firms export
(τ = 1.25 and λ = 0.668).
   In Column (1), we report the true relative change in welfare (WT1 /WT0 ) in the heterogeneous firm
model with a truncated Pareto distribution (as computed using (32)). Reducing variable trade costs
from τ = 3 to τ = 1.25 increases welfare by 8.07 percent, which is broadly in line with estimates of
the welfare gains from trade in recent quantitative trade models. Around half of these welfare gains
are achieved from the reduction in variable trade costs from τ = 3 to τ = 1.5 (3.36 percent), with the
remaining half realized from a further reduction in variable trade costs to τ = 1.25 (4.56 percent).
Since the variable partial trade elasticity is increasing in variable trade costs, larger welfare gains are
generated from a given percentage reduction in variable trade costs when the economy is relatively
open than when it is relatively closed. This property of a variable trade elasticity has important
implications for the evaluation of future efforts at multilateral trade liberalization. Even if variable
trade costs already have been reduced to relatively low levels, this does not necessarily mean that


                                   (1)             (2)               (3)                (4)
       Trade Liberalization      Actual         Predicted         Predicted          Predicted
                               (Truncated     (ACR formula)     (ACR formula)      (ACR formula)
                                 Pareto)          ϑstart           ϑaverage             start
                                                                                       θend
       τ = 3 to τ = 1.25        108.07%          102.41%           105.80%            106.30%
       τ = 3 to τ = 1.5         103.36%          101.09%           102.47%            102.64%
       τ = 1.5 to τ = 1.25      104.56%          104.43%           104.52%            104.55%


               Table 1: Actual and Predicted Welfare Gains from Trade Liberalization



                                                    28
most of the welfare gains from reductions in variable trade costs already have been achieved.
   In Column (2), we report the results of an ex ante policy evaluation under the (false) assumption
of a constant trade elasticity. We consider a policy analyst who has access to estimates of the partial
trade elasticity for an initial value of trade costs (ϑstart ). The policy analyst considers each of the
reductions in variable trade costs (e.g. from τ = 3 to τ = 1.5) and uses the ACR formula to predict
the welfare effects of these trade liberalizations based on the observed change in the domestic trade
share and the assumption of a constant trade elasticity.
   For trade liberalizations starting from high variable trade costs (the first and second rows), we
find substantial discrepancies between the true and predicted welfare gains from trade liberalization.
Reducing variable trade costs from τ = 3 to τ = 1.25 is predicted in Column (2) to increase welfare
by 2.41 percent (a discrepancy of around six percentage points or 70 percent). These discrepancies
arise because the true trade elasticity is variable rather than constant and because the hazard function
differs between the domestic and export markets. For high values of variable trade costs, the partial
trade elasticity changes substantially across different values of trade costs (Panel A of Figure 2) and
the difference in the hazard function between the domestic and export market is large (Panel B of
Figure 2). In contrast, for reductions in variable trade costs from intermediate to low values (the third
row), we find that the predicted and true welfare effects of trade liberalization are relatively close to
one another (a discrepancy of less than one percentage point). At these lower values of variable trade
costs, the partial trade elasticity is relatively stable (Panel A of Figure 2), and the difference in the
hazard function between the domestic and export markets is small (Panel B of Figure 2), because the
export and domestic productivity cutoffs are close together.
   In Columns (3) and (4), we report the results of an ex post policy evaluation under the (false)
assumption of a constant trade elasticity. We consider a policy analyst who has access to an estimate
of the average trade elasticity in between the start and end values of variable trade costs. The policy
analyst considers each of the reductions in variable trade costs (e.g. from τ = 3 to τ = 1.5) and uses
the ACR formula to predict the welfare effects of these trade liberalizations based on the observed
change in the domestic trade share and the estimated average trade elasticity. We consider two
different estimates for the average trade elasticity. In Column (3), we compute an average partial
trade elasticity by considering variable trade costs at intervals of 0.005, evaluating the partial trade
elasticity at each of these points, and taking the arithmetic mean of the partial trade elasticities across
these points (ϑaverage ). In Column (4), we compute an average full trade elasticity by evaluating the
logarithmic percentage growth in trade between the start and end values of trade costs and dividing
                                                                       start ). Although the estimated
this by the logarithmic percentage reduction in variable trade costs (θend
average trade elasticity in Column (4) is a full elasticity rather than a partial elasticity, in practice we
find similar results in both Columns (3) and (4).
   For trade liberalizations starting from high variable trade costs (the first and second rows), we
continue to find quantitatively relevant discrepancies between the true and predicted welfare gains
from trade liberalization. Reducing variable trade costs from τ = 3 to τ = 1.25 is predicted in


                                                    29
Column (3) to increase welfare by 5.80 percent (a discrepancy of around 2.27 percentage points or
around 28 percent of the true welfare gain from trade liberalization). In contrast, for reductions in
variable trade costs from intermediate to low values (the third row), we find that the predicted and
true welfare effects of trade liberalization are relatively close to one another (a discrepancy of less than
one percentage point). Again this reflects the relative stability of the partial trade elasticity (Panel
A of Figure 2) and the small difference between the domestic and export hazards (Panel B of Figure
2) at low values of variable trade costs. Unsurprisingly, the difference between the true and predicted
welfare effects of trade liberalization is smaller using an average estimated trade elasticity in an ex
post evaluation than using an initial estimated trade elasticity in an ex ante evaluation.
    As discussed in section 4.3, with a truncated Pareto productivity distribution, the hazard function
γ(ϕj ) is monotonically increasing in the productivity cutoff ϕj , and hence the hazard differential
γ(ϕd ) − γ(ϕx ) is negative under selection into export markets. Therefore, even with a correct estimate
of the variable partial trade elasticity ϑ, an evaluation of welfare changes (33) without controlling
for the hazard differential will tend to understate the absolute magnitude of changes in welfare in
response to changes in trade costs, since ϑ > ϑ + γ(ϕd ) − γ(ϕx ). Consistent with this direction of bias,
the predicted welfare changes using the ACR formula in Table 1 are all smaller in absolute magnitude
that the true changes in welfare with a truncated Pareto productivity distribution.
    Key takeaways from this section are that both the partial trade elasticity and the hazard differential
between the domestic and export markets can vary substantially across different values for variable
trade costs (and hence in a multi-country world across relatively open and relatively closed economies).
Taking a trade elasticity estimated from a relatively closed economy and applying this elasticity to
a relatively open economy without controlling for the difference in hazard functions between the two
markets can lead to quantitatively relevant discrepancies between the predicted and true welfare effects
of trade liberalization in both ex ante and ex post evaluations. In contrast, taking a trade elasticity
estimated from a relatively open economy and applying it to another relatively open economy provides
a much closer approximation to the true welfare effects of trade liberalization.
    We focus our quantitative analysis in this subsection on the truncated Pareto distribution to high-
light that simply changing the upper bound to the support of the productivity distribution can induce
substantial variation in partial trade elasticities and substantial differences in the hazard function
between the domestic and export markets. But the point that the partial trade elasticity is variable
and the hazard function differs across markets is much more general, and also applies for example
with a log normal distribution, as examined in Head, Mayer and Thoenig (2014).


7    Conclusions

We examine whether firm heterogeneity matters for the aggregate welfare implications of trade. We
use a theoretical comparative static to show that endogenous firm selection provides an extra wel-
fare margin for trade liberalization in the heterogeneous firm model relative to the homogeneous firm
model. Under additional restrictions on the parameter space, ACR show that two aggregate statis-

                                                    30
tics, the domestic trade share and a constant trade elasticity, are sufficient statistics for the welfare
gains from trade. But the existence of a single constant trade elasticity is highly sensitive to small
departures from those parameter restrictions, such as generalizing the productivity distribution in the
heterogeneous firm model from an untruncated to a truncated Pareto. In this more general setting,
the endogenous trade elasticity and domestic trade share are no longer sufficient statistics for welfare.
Even conditioning on these two aggregate statistics, the extra margin of adjustment highlighted by
our theoretical comparative static implies that micro structure matters for the measurement of the
welfare gains from trade.
    We develop several examples of trade liberalization scenarios in which this additional impact of
micro structure on welfare can be substantial, even for small, empirically relevant departures from
the ACR parameter restrictions. We show that assuming a constant trade elasticity when the true
elasticity is variable can lead to substantial quantitative discrepancies between the predicted and true
welfare effects of trade liberalization. We extend the ACR approach of expressing the welfare gains
from trade as a function of observable empirical moments to the more general cases of the homogeneous
and heterogeneous firm models. We show that using a trade elasticity estimated for a local change in
trade costs in a similar context will reduce – but not eliminate – the discrepancy between the predicted
and true welfare gains from trade. In addition to the two aggregate moments of the domestic trade
share and trade elasticity, our more general welfare expression highlights differences in the hazard rate
of the distribution of log firm size between the domestic and export markets and the response of firm
entry to changes in trade costs, both of which can be examined empirically using firm-level data.


A     Appendix
A.1    Proof of Proposition 2

Proof. We establish the proposition for the various possible types of open economy equilibria de-
pending on parameter values. (I) First, we consider parameter values for which the representative
                                                                                    1/(σ−1)
firm does not find it profitable to export in the homogeneous firm model (τ fx /F̄d          > 1). For
these parameter values, the proposition follows immediately from the fact that the two models have
the same closed economy welfare, there are welfare gains from trade, and trade only occurs in the
heterogeneous firm model. (II) Second, we consider parameter values for which the representative
firm exports in the homogeneous firm model and there is selection into export markets in the hetero-
                                  1/(σ−1)
geneous firm model (0 < τ fx /F̄d          < 1 < τ (fx /fd )1/(σ−1) ). From (16) and (24), open economy
welfare is higher in the heterogeneous firm model than in the homogeneous firm model if the following
inequality is satisfied:
                                   σ−1                   σ−1                     σ−1
                            ϕ̃Td          + χτ 1−σ ϕ̃Tx            1 + τ 1−σ ϕ̃A
                                                                            
                                                                                 d
                                  fe
                                                                 >                      .           (37)
                                             + fd + χfx                 F̄d + fx
                               1−G(ϕTd)




                                                           31
To show that this inequality must be satisfied, we use the open economy free entry condition in the
heterogeneous firm model, which implies:
               Z ϕmax " σ−1       #            Z ϕmax " σ−1    #
                         ϕ                                ϕ
            fd            T
                                 − 1 dG (ϕ) + fx            T
                                                                − 1 dG (ϕ) = fe ,
                 ϕT
                  d
                        ϕ d                       ϕT
                                                   x
                                                          ϕ x
                                          "           σ−1            #                                     "          σ−1      #
                                                ϕ̃Td                                                              ϕ̃Tx
              fd 1 − G ϕTd                                                                        ϕTx
                                                                                                    
                                                                 − 1 + fx 1 − G                                                 − 1 = fe ,
                                                ϕTd                                                               ϕTx
                              σ−1                    σ−1
                         ϕ̃Td            1 − G ϕTx      ϕ̃Tx
                       
                                                                   fe
                    fd     T
                                   + f x          T
                                                             =            + fd + χfx .
                                                               1 − G ϕTd
                                                         T
                         ϕd              1 − G ϕd       ϕ x
            σ−1         σ−1 σ−1
Using ϕTx          = ϕTd       τ    fx /fd , we obtain:

                           fd   h
                                    T σ−1
                                              1−σ   T σ−1
                                                          i                                          fe
                                  ϕ̃d     + χτ     ϕ̃x       =                                               + fd + χfx .                   (38)
                          T σ−1                                                                   1 − G ϕTd
                            
                       ϕd

Note that the open economy free entry condition in the heterogeneous firm model also implies:
               Z ϕmax " σ−1       #             Z ϕmax " σ−1        #
                        ϕ                                    ϕ
            fd                  − 1 dG (ϕ) + fx                     − 1 dG (ϕ) < fe ,         (39)
                ϕA
                 d
                        ϕTd                        ϕA
                                                    d
                                                            ϕTx

since ϕA    T    T
       d < ϕd < ϕx and                    "                           #
                                                       σ−1
                                                ϕ
                                                                 − 1 < 0,                   for         ϕ < ϕTd ,
                                                ϕTd
                                           "          σ−1             #
                                                 ϕ
                                                                  −1 <0                     for         ϕ < ϕTx .
                                                 ϕTx
Rewriting (39), we have:
                                          "           σ−1            #                                     "          σ−1      #
                                                ϕ̃A                                                               ϕ̃A
              fd 1 − G ϕA                         d
                                                                                                  ϕA                d
                                                                                                    
                        d                                        − 1 + fx 1 − G                    d                            − 1 < fe ,
                                                ϕTd                                                               ϕTx
                                               σ−1                         σ−1
                                         ϕ̃A                          ϕ̃A
                                                                
                                           d                            d                       fe
                                fd                     + fx                             <             + fd + fx .
                                         ϕTd                          ϕTx                   1 − G ϕA
                                                                                                   d
            σ−1           σ−1
Using ϕTx          = ϕTd             τ σ−1 fx /fd , we obtain:

                                   fd                                        σ−1               fe
                                                 1 + τ 1−σ             ϕ̃A
                                                                  
                                    σ−1                                 d              <             + fd + fx .                           (40)
                                  T
                                 ϕd                                                         1 − G ϕA
                                                                                                   d

From (38) and (40), we have:
                                                           h          σ−1                         σ−1 i
                                                fd
                                                  σ−1          ϕ̃Td          + χτ 1−σ ϕ̃Tx
                                           (ϕTd )
                                                              fe
                                                                                                              = 1,                           (41)
                                                           1−G(ϕT
                                                                            + fd + χfx
                                                                 d)


                         fd                                      σ−1                 fd                                  σ−1
                                      1 + τ 1−σ            ϕ̃A                                    1 + τ 1−σ         ϕ̃A
                                                                                                             
                           σ−1                               d                          σ−1                           d
                      (ϕT
                        d   )                                                   (   ϕT
                                                                                     d  )
                                   fe
                                                                            =                                                    < 1,
                                               + fd + fx                                           F̄d + fx
                                1−G(ϕAd)



                                                                                32
which establishes that inequality (37) is satisfied. In an open economy equilibrium of the heterogeneous
firm model with export market selection, welfare also can be expressed as:
                                                    1
                                  T      w       L σ−1 σ − 1 T
                                WHet =     =                   ϕd .                                   (42)
                                         P      σfd         σ
From (42) and (24), the condition for open economy welfare to be higher in the heterogeneous firm
model with export market selection than in the homogeneous firm model can be also written as:
                                 1                       1
                                                 1 + τ 1−σ σ−1 A
                                               
                                  1 σ−1 T
                                         ϕd >                 ϕ̃d .
                                 fd              F̄d + fx
Using (37) and (41), this (equivalent) inequality is necessarily satisfied. Since closed economy welfare is
the same in the two models, and open economy welfare is higher in the heterogeneous firm model than
in the homogeneous firm model, it follows that the proportional welfare gains from trade are larger
in the heterogeneous firm model (WTHet /WA      T     A
                                         Het > WHom /WHom ). (III) Third, we consider parameter
values for which the representative firm exports in the homogeneous firm model and all firms export
                                                                                             1/(σ−1)
in the heterogeneous firm model, but fixed exporting costs are still positive (0 < τ fx /F̄d          <
τ (fx /fd )1/(σ−1) ≤ 1). This is simply a special case of (II) in which ϕTx = ϕTd , ϕ̃Tx = ϕ̃Td and
1−G(ϕT x)
1−G(ϕT
           = 1. Therefore the same line of reasoning as in (II) can be used to show that the inequality
       d)
(37) is satisfied and hence open economy welfare is higher in the heterogeneous firm model than in
the homogeneous firm model. In this special case in which all firms export, the free entry condition
in the open economy equilibrium of the heterogeneous firm model implies:
                                     Z ϕmax " σ−1      #
                                              ϕ
                          (fd + fx )                  − 1 dG (ϕ) = fe ,
                                      ϕT
                                       d
                                              ϕTd
                                     Z ϕmax " σ−1      #
                                              ϕ
                          (fd + fx )                  − 1 dG (ϕ) < fe ,                               (43)
                                      ϕA
                                       d
                                              ϕTd
since ϕA    T
       d < ϕd and                "                          #
                                             σ−1
                                       ϕ
                                                    − 1 < 0,                 for         ϕ < ϕTd .
                                       ϕTd
Rewriting (43), we obtain:
                                                 σ−1
                                           ϕ̃A
                                       
                                             d                   fe
                          (fd + fx )                    <              + fd + fx = F̄d + fx .        (44)
                                           ϕTd               1 − G ϕA
                                                                    d

In an open economy equilibrium of the heterogeneous firm model in which all firms export, welfare
can be also expressed as:
                                                                             ! 1
                                                   σ−1             1 + τ 1−σ L σ−1
                                   WHet          =                                 ϕd .               (45)
                                                    σ              σ (fd + fx )
Therefore the condition for open economy welfare in the heterogeneous firm model without export
market selection (45) to be higher than open economy welfare in the homogeneous firm model (24)
can be also written as:                               1                               1
                                          1            σ−1                    1          σ−1
                                                             ϕTd   >                           ϕ̃A
                                                                                                 d.
                                       fd + fx                             Fd + fx

                                                                   33
From (44), this inequality is necessarily satisfied. Since closed economy welfare is the same in the two
models, and open economy welfare is higher in the heterogeneous firm model than in the homogeneous
firm model, it follows that the proportional welfare gains from trade are larger in the heterogeneous
firm model (WTHet /WA          T        A
                       Het > WHom /WHom ). (IV) Finally, when fixed exporting costs are zero, we have
              1/(σ−1)
0 = τ fx /F̄d           = τ (fx /fd )1/(σ−1) . This is a special case of (III) in which ϕTx = ϕTd = ϕA
                                                                                                     d,
  T     T      A       1−G(ϕTx)
ϕ̃x = ϕ̃d = ϕ̃d and 1−G ϕT = 1. In this special case of zero fixed exporting costs, the free entry
                           ( d)
condition in the open economy equilibrium of the heterogeneous firm model implies:
                                         Z ϕmax " σ−1         #
                                                    ϕ
                             (fd + fx )                     − 1 dG (ϕ) = fe ,
                                          ϕA
                                           d
                                                   ϕTd
                                                   σ−1
                                             ϕ̃A
                                         
                                               d                  fe
                            (fd + fx )                    =             + fd + fx = F̄d + fx ,
                                             ϕTd              1 − G ϕA
                                                                     d
where we have used ϕA    T
                    d = ϕd . From (45) and (24), it follows immediately that open economy welfare
is the same in the two models when fixed exporting costs are equal to zero.

A.2     Proof of Proposition 3

Proof. In the initial open economy equilibrium before the change in trade costs, (16) implies that
welfare in both the heterogeneous firm model and in the extended homogeneous firm model can be
written as:                                                                   σ−1                                
                                                     σ−1 σ−1
                                                                                                             σ−1
                                                                       ϕ̃Td 1              χ1 τ11−σ    ϕ̃Tx1
                                                        
                                   σ−1         L    σ                                +
                            WTHet
                               1
                                           =                  "                                        #                .
                                                                     fe
                                                          σ              T
                                                                                  + fd + χ1 fx1
                                                                  1−G ϕd 1

In the new open economy equilibrium after the change in trade costs, (16) implies that welfare in the
heterogeneous firm model is:
                                                                              σ−1                                
                                                     σ−1 σ−1
                                                                                                             σ−1
                                                                       ϕ̃Td 2              χ2 τ21−σ    ϕ̃Tx2
                                                        
                                   σ−1         L    σ                                +
                            WTHet
                               2
                                           =                  "                                        #                .
                                                                     fe
                                                          σ              T
                                                                                  + fd + χ2 fx2
                                                                  1−G ϕd 2

In contrast, in the new open economy equilibrium after the change in trade costs, welfare in the
extended homogeneous firm model is:
                                                                               σ−1                               
                                                     σ−1 σ−1
                                                                                                             σ−1
                                                                        ϕ̃Td 1              χ1 τ21−σ   ϕ̃Tx1
                                                        
                                   σ−1         L    σ                                 +
                            WTHom
                               2
                                             =                "                                        #
                                                                     fe
                                                          σ              T
                                                                                  + fd + χ1 fx2
                                                                  1−G ϕd 1

To show that welfare in the new open economy equilibrium is higher in the heterogeneous firm model
than in the homogeneous firm model, we need to show that:
                          σ−1                    σ−1           σ−1                    σ−1
                    ϕ̃Td 2        + χ2 τ21−σ ϕ̃Tx2          ϕ̃Td 1        + χ1 τ21−σ ϕ̃Tx1
                             fe
                                                        >            fe
                                                                                                .                           (46)
                                     + fd + χ2 fx2                          + fd + χ1 fx2
                                 T2                                      T1
                            1−G ϕd                                               1−G ϕd


                                                                    34
To establish this inequality, we use the free entry condition in the new open economy equilibrium of
the heterogeneous firm model, which implies:
                            !σ−1    
             Z ϕmax                                Z ϕmax "      σ−1    #
                        ϕ                                     ϕ
           fd T                  − 1 dG (ϕ) + fx2 T                  − 1 dG (ϕ) = fe ,
               ϕd 2    ϕTd 2                        ϕx2      ϕTx2
                                            
                                   T2 σ−1                               T2 σ−1
                                       !                           "            #
                h          i   ϕ̃                                   ϕ̃
              fd 1 − G ϕTd 2      d
                                          − 1 + fx2 1 − G ϕTx2         x
                                                               
                                                                               − 1 = fe ,
                                 ϕTd 2                                ϕTx2
                            !σ−1                                   σ−1
                ϕ̃Td 2                       1 − G ϕTx2                                        1 − G ϕTx2
                                                                                                         
                                                             ϕ̃Tx2             fe
         fd                            + fx2                            =              + fd +              fx2 .
                ϕTd 2                                        ϕTx2
                                                                                                 
                                             1 − G ϕTd 2                  1 − G ϕTd 2          1 − G ϕTd 2
              σ−1             σ−1
Using ϕTx2              = ϕTd 2      τ2σ−1 fx2 /fd , we obtain:
                                                                
                               fd      T2
                                          σ−1
                                                     1−σ   T2 σ−1
                                                                                                           fe
                               σ−1 ϕ̃d       + χ2 τ2   ϕ̃x        =                                              + fd + χ2 fx2 .                (47)
                           ϕTd 2                                                                       1 − G ϕTd 2

Note that the free entry condition in the new open economy equilibrium of the heterogeneous firm
model also implies:
                                                   !σ−1                                              "                        #
                   Z       ϕmax                                                          Z   ϕmax                  σ−1
                                               ϕ                                                             ϕ
              fd                                              − 1 dG (ϕ) + fx2                                          − 1 dG (ϕ) < fe ,         (48)
                       ϕd 1
                           T
                                          ϕTd 2                                           ϕx1
                                                                                             T
                                                                                                            ϕTx2

since ϕTd 1 < ϕTd 2 and ϕTx1 > ϕTx2 and
                                       !σ−1                                    
                                     ϕ
                                                                           − 1 < 0,            for         ϕ < ϕTd 2 ,
                                                            ϕTd 2
                                               "             σ−1          #
                                                        ϕ
                                                                       −1 >0             for           ϕTx2 < ϕ < ϕTx1 .
                                                    ϕTx2
Rewriting (48), we have:
                                                                    !σ−1                                         "           σ−1      #
                   h                          i           ϕ̃Td 1                                                      ϕ̃Tx1
                                       ϕTd 1                                − 1 + fx2 1 − G ϕTx1
                                                                                                 
              fd 1 − G                                                                                                                − 1 < fe ,
                                                            ϕTd 2                                                       ϕTx2

                            !σ−1                                   σ−1
                ϕ̃Td 1                       1 − G ϕTx1                                        1 − G ϕTx1
                                                                                                         
                                                             ϕ̃Tx1             fe
         fd                            + fx2                            <              + fd +              fx2 .
                ϕTd 2                                        ϕTx2
                                                                                                 
                                             1 − G ϕTd 1                  1 − G ϕTd 1          1 − G ϕTd 1
              σ−1             σ−1
Using ϕTx2              = ϕTd 2      τ2σ−1 fx2 /fd , we obtain:
                                                                
                               fd      T1
                                          σ−1
                                                     1−σ   T1 σ−1
                                                                                                           fe
                               σ−1 ϕ̃d       + χ1 τ2   ϕ̃x        <                                              + fd + χ1 fx2 .                (49)
                           ϕTd 2                                                                       1 − G ϕTd 1



                                                                                    35
From (47) and (49), we have:
                                                               σ−1                                   
                                           fd                                                    σ−1
                                  
                                       T
                                            σ−1        ϕ̃Td 2          +    χ2 τ21−σ      ϕ̃Tx2
                                      ϕd 2
                                                      fe
                                                                                                            = 1,
                                                          T
                                                                    + fd + χ2 fx2
                                                   1−G ϕd 2

                                                               σ−1                                   
                                           fd                                                    σ−1
                                  
                                       T
                                            σ−1        ϕ̃Td 1          +    χ1 τ21−σ      ϕ̃Tx1
                                      ϕd 2
                                                      fe
                                                                                                            < 1,
                                                          T
                                                                    + fd + χ1 fx2
                                                   1−G ϕd 1

which establishes the inequality (46).

A.3    Proof of Proposition 4

Proof. (a) First, consider parameter values for which the representative firm exports in the ho-
mogeneous firm model and there is selection into export markets in the heterogeneous firm model
               1/(σ−1)
(0 < τ fx /F̄d          < 1 < τ (fx /fd )1/(σ−1) ). From (42), we have:

                                                                  WTHet   ϕTd
                                                                        =     .                                                                 (50)
                                                                  WAHet   ϕA
                                                                           d

In the special case of an untruncated Pareto productivity distribution and for these parameter values
for which there is selection into export markets in the heterogeneous firm model, we have:
                                                                                             !k      1/k
                                       ϕTd                                   1                     fx 
                                           = 1 +                                                          ,
                                       ϕA
                                        d                        τ (fx /fd )1/(σ−1)                fd

which can be written as:
                                                                                                       !k        
                                      ϕTd
                                         
                                                                                          1                   fx 
                             ln                  = k −1 ln 1 +                                                    .
                                      ϕA
                                       d                                     τ (fx /fd )      1/(σ−1)         fd

Note that
                                                                                                                                    k
                                                                                                                                        fx
                                                                 k                k−1 ln(τ (fx /fd )1/(σ−1) )            1
   d ln(ϕT   A
         d /ϕd )
                                                                                                                             1/(σ−1)    fd
                                        
                                                                        fx                                        τ (fx /fd )
        dk         = −k −2 ln 1 +                     1
                                                                        fd       −             "                               #            < 0,
                                             τ (fx /fd )1/(σ−1)                                                             k
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                 1              fx
                                                                                                   1+             1/(σ−1)       fd
                                                                                                        τ (fx /fd )

                                                                                                                                                (51)
where we have used       d (ax ) /dx         =   (ln a) ax .       Since a smaller value of k corresponds to greater pro-
ductivity dispersion, it follows that greater productivity dispersion implies larger ϕTd /ϕA
                                                                                           d . Second,
consider parameter values for which the representative firm exports in the homogeneous firm model
and all firms export in the heterogeneous firm model, but fixed exporting costs are still positive
               1/(σ−1)
(0 < τ fx /F̄d          < τ (fx /fd )1/(σ−1) ≤ 1). From (42) and (45), we have:
                                                                             ! 1
                                               WTHet               1 + τ 1−σ fd σ−1 ϕTd
                                                     =                                  .
                                               WAHet                 fd + fx        ϕA
                                                                                     d


                                                                         36
In the special case of an untruncated Pareto productivity distribution and for these parameter values
for which all firms export in the heterogeneous firm model, we have:
                                          ϕTd        fx 1/k
                                                       
                                              = 1+          ,
                                          ϕA
                                           d
                                                     fd
which can be written as:
                                                               ϕTd
                                                                                          
                                                                              −1          fx
                                                      ln                 =k        ln 1 +      .
                                                               ϕA
                                                                d
                                                                                          fd
Note that
                              d ln ϕTd /ϕA
                                                           
                                         d       −2       fx
                                             = −k ln 1 +       < 0.                           (52)
                                   dk                     fd
Since a smaller value of k corresponds to greater productivity dispersion, it follows that greater
productivity dispersion again implies larger ϕTd /ϕA
                                                   d . Taking (51) and (52) together and using (50),
it follows that greater dispersion of firm productivity (smaller k) implies larger proportional welfare
gains from opening the closed economy to trade. (b) Consider parameter values for which there
is selection into export markets in the open economy equilibrium of the heterogeneous firm model
(τ (fx /fd )1/(σ−1) > 1). In the special case of an untruncated Pareto productivity distribution, we
have:
                                                                                                         k        1/k
                                                                                               1
                                   
                                          σ−1
                                                           1/k          fd +                                   fx
                                                                                      τ (fx /fd )1/(σ−1)
                         ϕTd =                                                                                              ϕmin .
                                                                                                                    
                                       k − (σ − 1)                                          fe
                                                                                                                    

Therefore:
                                                                                                 k
                                                                                      1
                                        dϕTd    τ                                                      fx
                                                                             τ (fx /fd )1/(σ−1)
                                                   dτ = −                                                        dτ
                                            dτ ϕTd
                                                                                                      k
                                                                                           1
                                                                     fd +                                   fx
                                                                                  τ (fx /fd )1/(σ−1)
                                                               = −ξdτ.

Hence:                                                                                     k
                         dϕT
                                                                 
                 d          d τ
                          dτ ϕT    dτ         ln τ (fx /fd )1/(σ−1)              1
                                                                                   1/(σ−1)    fx
                               d                                        τ (fx /fd )
                                            =                                   k               (1 − ξ) dτ,
                           dk
                                                            
                                                                     1
                                                      fd +             1/(σ−1)      f x
                                                                          τ (fx /fd )
which implies:
                                                     dϕT
                                                                    
                                                        d τ
                                             d        dτ ϕT     dτ
                                                           d
                                                                         <0             for        dτ < 0,
                                                       dk
                                                     dϕT
                                                                    
                                                        d τ
                                             d        dτ ϕT     dτ
                                                           d
                                                                         >0             for        dτ > 0.
                                                       dk
Therefore greater dispersion of firm productivity (smaller k) implies a larger elasticity of the domestic
productivity cutoff with respect to reductions in variable trade costs, which from (42) implies greater
proportional welfare gains from reductions in variable trade costs. By the same reasoning, greater
dispersion of firm productivity (smaller k) implies a smaller elasticity of the domestic productivity
cutoff with respect to increases in variable trade costs, which from (42) implies smaller proportional
welfare costs from increases in variable trade costs.

                                                                             37
References

 [1] Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop (2004) “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic Literature,
    42(3), 691-751.

 [2] Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot and Andres Rodriguez-Clare (2012) “New Trade Models,
    Same Old Gains,” American Economic Review, 102(1), 94-130.

 [3] Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson and Andres Rodriguez-Clare (2012) “The
    Elusive Pro-Competitive Effects of Trade,”MIT, mimeograph.

 [4] Armington, Paul S. (1969) “A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished by Place of Pro-
    duction,” IMF Staff Papers, 16, 159-178.

 [5] Atkeson Andrew and Ariel Burstein (2010) “Innovation, Firm Dynamics and International
    Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, 118(3), 433-484.

 [6] Axtell, R. L. (2001) “Zipf Distribution of US Firm Sizes,” Science, 293, 1818-20.

 [7] Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel S. Kortum (2003) “Plants
    and Productivity in International Trade,” American Economic Review, 93(4), 1268-1290.

 [8] Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding and Peter K. Schott (2007) “Firms
    in International Trade,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(3), 105-130.

 [9] Costinot, Arnaud and Andres Rodriguez-Clare (2014) “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying
    the Consequences of Globalization,” Handbook of International Economics, Chapter 4, 197-262.

[10] Das, Mita, Mark J. Roberts and James R. Tybout (2007) “Market Entry Costs, Producer Het-
    erogeneity and Export Dynamics,” Econometrica, 75(3), 837-73.

[11] Dhingra, Swati and John Morrow (2012) “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
    Diversity Under Firm Heterogeneity,” London School of Economics, mimeograph.

[12] Dixit, Avinash K. and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1977) “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Prod-
    uct Diversity,” American Economic Review, 67(3), 297-308.

[13] Eaton, Jonathan and Kortum, Samuel (2002) “Technology, Geography, and Trade,”Econometrica,
    70(5), 1741-1779.

[14] Edmond, Chris, Virgiliu Midrigan and Daniel Yi Xu (2012) “Competition, Markups, and the
    Gains from International Trade,”NBER Working Paper, 18041.

[15] Fajgelbaum, Pablo D. and Amit K. Khandelwal (2014) “Measuring the Unequal Gains from
    Trade,” NBER Working Paper, 20331.



                                                 38
[16] Feenstra, Robert C. (2010) “Measuring the Gains from Trade under Monopolistic Competition,”
    Canadian Journal of Economics, February, 1-28.

[17] Feenstra, Robert C. (2014) “Restoring the Product Variety and Pro-competitive Gains from
    Trade with Heterogeneous Firms and Bounded Productivity,” NBER Working Paper, 19833.

[18] Head, Keith, Thierry Mayer and Mathias Thoenig (2014) “Welfare and Trade Without
    Pareto,”American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 104(5), 310-16.

[19] Helpman Elhanan, Melitz Marc J. and Yona Rubinstein (2008) “Estimating Trade Flows: Trading
    Partners and Trading Volumes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2), 441-87.

[20] Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Ralph Ossa (2011) “A Global View of Productivity Growth in China,”
    NBER Working Paper, 16778.

[21] Imbs, Jean and Isabelle Méjean (2009) “Elasticity Optimism,” CEPR Discussion Paper, 7177.

[22] Krugman, Paul. R. (1980) “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,”
    American Economic Review, 70(5), 950-959.

[23] Melitz, Marc J. (2003) “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
    Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695-1725.

[24] Melitz, Marc J. and Stephen J. Redding (2014) “Heterogeneous Firms and Trade,” Handbook of
    International Economics, Volume 4, Chapter 1, 1-54.

[25] Novy, Dennis (2013) “International Trade without CES: Estimating Translog Gravity,” Journal
    of International Economics, 89(2), 271-282.

[26] Ossa, Ralph (2012) “Why Trade Matters After All,” NBER Working Paper, 18113.

[27] Roberts, Mark J. and James R. Tybout (1997) “The Decision to Export in Colombia: An Em-
    pirical Model of Entry with Sunk Costs,” American Economic Review, 87(4), 545-564.

[28] Simonovska, Ina and Michael E. Waugh (2014a) “The Elasticity of Trade: Estimates and Evi-
    dence,” Journal of International Economics, 92(1), 34-50.

[29] Simonovska, Ina and Michael E. Waugh (2014b) “Trade Models, Trade Elasticities, and the Gains
    from Trade,” University of California at Davis, mimeograph.




                                                  39
