NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MARKET FOR OTC DERIVATIVES
Andrew G. Atkeson
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
Pierre-Olivier Weill
Working Paper 18912
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18912

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013

We'd like to thank, for fruitful discussions and suggestions, Gara Afonso, Saki Bigio, Briana Chang,
Darrell Duffie, Ben Lester, Gustavo Manso, Tyler Muir, Martin Oehmke, Ionid Rosu, Tano Santos,
Daniel Sanches, Martin Schneider, Shouyong Shi, Randy Wright, Pierre Yared, and seminar participants
at UC Davis, UT Austin, Carnegie-Mellon University, OSU, Kellogg, UCLA, LSE, LBS, the Society
for Economic Dynamics, Paris School of Economics, NBER Summer Institute, Minnesota Workshop
in Macroeconomic Theory, the Chicago Fed Summer Workshop on Money, Banking, Payments and
Finance, the AMSE Marseille Macroeconomic Meeting, the Saint Louis Fed Policy Conference, the
Wisconsin School of Business in Madison, the American Economic Association, Cal Tech, Banque
de France, and Columbia. Patrick Kiefer, Omair Syed, and Alfredo Reyes provided expert research
assistance. We thank the Bank of France, the Fink Center for Finance and Investments, and the Ziman
Center for Real Estate, for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w18912.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Andrew G. Atkeson, Andrea L. Eisfeldt, and Pierre-Olivier Weill. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Market for OTC Derivatives
Andrew G. Atkeson, Andrea L. Eisfeldt, and Pierre-Olivier Weill
NBER Working Paper No. 18912
March 2013
JEL No. D83,G0
ABSTRACT
We develop a model of equilibrium entry, trade, and price formation in over-the- counter (OTC) markets.
Banks trade derivatives to share an aggregate risk subject to two trading frictions: they must pay a
fixed entry cost, and they must limit the size of the positions taken by their traders because of risk-management
concerns. Although all banks in our model are endowed with access to the same trading technology,
some large banks endogenously arise as “dealers,” trading mainly to provide intermediation services,
while medium sized banks endogenously participate as “customers” mainly to share risks. We use
the model to address positive questions regarding the growth in OTC markets as trading frictions decline,
and normative questions of how regulation of entry impacts welfare.

Andrew G. Atkeson
Bunche Hall 9381
Department of Economics
UCLA
Box 951477
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
andy@atkeson.net
Andrea L. Eisfeldt
Anderson School of Management
Andrea.eisfeldt@Anderson.ucla.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18912

Pierre-Olivier Weill
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
Bunche Hall 8283
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
poweill@econ.ucla.edu

1

Introduction

Several stylized observations regarding trading patterns in over-the-counter (OTC) markets for derivatives have recently received considerable attention from policy makers and
the public alike. First, the large volume of bilateral trades at varied prices creates an
intricate liability structure between participating banks. Second, for the banks participating in these markets, the gross volume of trade greatly exceeds the net volume. This
difference between gross and net volume is particularly striking for a few large banks, who
have very large gross positions but very small net positions. Because these large banks
hold nearly offsetting long and short positions, they can be viewed as intermediaries or
“dealers.” In contrast, medium sized banks act as “customers”: they trade mostly in one
direction, either long or short, so their gross and net volume are close to each other.
Lastly, these OTC markets are segmented: most smaller banks do not participate at all.
Clearly, these trading patterns differ from the Walrasian market benchmark, in which all
agents participate, gross and net positions always coincide, and trade occurs at a common
price.
In this paper, we offer a parsimonious equilibrium model of entry, trade, and price
formation in an OTC market. Trade in our model is subject to two key trading frictions.
First, a fixed entry cost must be paid by participating banks; second, traders within each
bank face limits on the position they can take with any counterparty. The first friction
is motivated by the observation that trade in OTC derivatives markets requires specialized capital and expertise. The second friction is motivated by the observation that,
within banks, a standard risk management practice is to put limits on traders’ positions.
We show that, based on these two trading frictions alone, our model can rationalize the
observed market patterns: namely, the intricate liability structure, the discrepancies between gross and net positions, the dispersion of prices, and banks’ participation patterns.
In particular, although all banks in our model have access to the same trading technology,
some large banks endogenously participate as “dealers,” trading to provide intermediation
services, mainly to profit from price dispersion, while medium-sized banks endogenously
participate as “customers,” mainly to share risks. Lastly, because of the fixed cost, small
banks do not participate. We use the model to address positive questions regarding the
growth in OTC markets as trading frictions decline, and normative questions of how
regulation of entry impacts welfare.
We consider a theoretical financial system composed of a continuum of financial institutions we call banks. A bank is viewed as a coalition of many risk-averse agents, called
traders. Banks’ coalitions have heterogenous sizes and heterogenous endowments of a

2

non-tradable risky loan portfolio, creating heterogenous exposures to an aggregate risk
factor. Since traders in banks are risk averse, they will attempt to equalize these exposures. While, in our model, banks cannot alter their exposure directly by trading their
loan endowment, they can do it synthetically by trading derivatives “swap” contracts.
Specifically, conditional on their size and initial exposure to aggregate risk, banks first
choose whether to pay a fixed cost in order to enter into an OTC market for swaps. Next,
traders from participating banks trade swaps bilaterally, subject to a trade size limit.
Finally, banks consolidate their positions internally, and loans and swap contracts pay
off. We first characterize the equilibrium bilateral and aggregate trade volumes, as well
as pricing, conditional on entry patterns. After this analysis, we study entry.
Consider first the market equilibrium after entry. Conditional on banks’ entry decisions, the traders in each participating bank establish bilateral trading relationships almost surely with traders from every other bank. When the traders from two banks match,
they bargain over the terms of a swap contract: the direction, the size, and the price.
Gains from trade are determined by the expected post-trade risk exposures of the traders’
respective banks. The direction of the contract which each trader executes depends on
whether their counterparty’s bank expects a larger or smaller post-trade exposure to the
aggregate risk factor than their own bank. The size of the contract is constrained by
a trade size limit. Lastly, the price is set to split the gains from trade equally between
the two traders. Thus, within a bank, some traders execute long contracts, and some
enter short contracts, at dispersed prices that depend on the post-trade exposures of their
different counterparties. At the end of the period, the swap portfolio of a participating
bank is made up of the swap contracts of all its traders. In equilibrium, traders thus share
risk within their banks, and banks share aggregate risk amongst each other through the
OTC derivatives market.
All the bilateral relationships between traders of different banks are constrained by
a trade size limit: a trader cannot sign more than a given amount of swap contracts
with her counterparty, either long or short. We assume that these trading limits are
allocated to the traders in a bank before information about the risk exposure of each
trader’s counterparty is revealed. The restriction that banks cannot reallocate trading
limits across traders once trade has begun is what effectively limits risk sharing.
Next, consider entry. Banks’ decisions to enter the market are driven by two motivations, the strength of which are determined by their sizes and initial risk exposures.
One motivation to enter is to share aggregate risk. This motivation is strong when a
bank’s initial risk exposure is significantly higher or lower than the market-wide average. A second motivation for a bank to enter is to capture the trading profits due to
3

the equilibrium price dispersion across different bilateral trades. These motivations result
in entry patterns corroborated by empirical evidence: small-sized banks cannot spread
the fixed entry cost over many traders, and choose not to enter. Medium-sized banks
only find it optimal to enter the market if their gains from trading in the OTC market
are large enough, which we show occurs when their initial risk exposure is significantly
higher or lower than the market-wide average. They use the OTC market to take a large
net position, either short or long, and in this sense act as customers. Finally, large-sized
banks are willing to enter the swap market irrespective of their initial risk exposure. If
their initial risk exposure is significantly higher or lower than the market-wide average,
they enter as customers for the same reason as the medium-sized banks do. If their initial
exposure is near the market-wide average, they do not desire much change in their risk
exposure, and therefore do not have incentives to enter as customers. Nevertheless, they
enter for a different reason: their size allows them to conduct sufficiently many trades to
profit from equilibrium price dispersion while covering the fixed cost of entry. Such banks
do not change their exposure much and have many offsetting long and short positions. In
this sense, large banks with average risk exposures emerge endogenously as dealers who
provide intermediation services in the OTC market, have large gross position but small
net positions.
To offer theoretical insights into the growth of OTC markets for derivatives over the
last decade, we ask how trading patterns change in response to a decrease in trading
frictions. We contrast two possible scenarios: a decline in the entry cost representing
more sophisticated trading technologies, or a relaxation of trading limits representing
improvements in operational risk management practices. Our results indicate that in
both cases, reducing frictions causes the market to grow, in the sense of increasing gross
notional outstanding per capita. But predictions differ markedly in other dimensions.
For example, when trading technologies improve (entry cost falls), the market grows
through an increase in intermediation activity, and the average net-to-gross notional ratio
decreases. When risk-management technologies improve (trading limits are relaxed), the
market can grow through an increase in customer-to-customer trades. As a result, the
net-to-gross notional ratio can increase. Thus, according to the model, the evolution
of the net-to-gross notional ratio can help distinguish a decrease in frictions due to an
improvement in trading versus risk-management technologies.
Finally, we also ask how a planner or policy maker might improve the OTC market
structure. In our model, large banks choose to enter as dealers, provide intermediation by
taking offsetting long and short positions, and make profits thanks to equilibrium price
dispersion. One policy question is whether the private incentives to provide intermediation
4

that arise endogenously in response to the trading frictions in the OTC market lead to
socially efficient entry. We show that large banks enter too much, and in this sense the
market is too concentrated: a social planner could improve welfare by removing some
larger dealer banks from the market and encouraging smaller banks to enter.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 surveys the literature. To offer some empirical context for the market structure arising in our model, Section 3 presents stylized
facts characterizing the OTC market for Credit Default Swaps (CDS). Section 4 presents
the economic environment, Section 5 solves for equilibrium trading conditional on entry patterns, and Section 6 studies equilibrium entry decisions, showing that our model
rationalizes the banks’ participation patterns observed in the data. Finally, Section 7
analyzes efficiency and Section 8 concludes. Proofs not given in the text are gathered in
the appendix.

2

Related Literature

Our main contribution relative to the literature on OTC markets is to develop a model
that is sufficiently tractable to analyze endogenous entry, explain empirical patterns of
participation across banks of different sizes, and address normative issues regarding the
size and composition of the market. In particular, by allowing the system of bilateral
trades and price dispersion to arise endogenously as a result of market entry, and by
studying the costs and benefits of a structure in which certain banks play a more important role in intermediating trade, we are able to study the costs and benefits of a more
concentrated market structure.1
Several recent papers consider ideas related to the role of the market structure in
determining trading outcomes in OTC markets. Duffie and Zhu (2011) use a framework
similar to that in Eisenberg and Noe (2001) to show that a central clearing party for CDS
only may not reduce counterparty risk because such a narrow clearinghouse could reduce
cross contract class netting benefits. Babus (2009) studies how the formation of long-term
lending relationships allows agents to economize on costly collateral, demonstrating how
star-shaped networks arise endogenously in the corresponding network formation game.
Gofman (2011) emphasizes the role of the bargaining friction in determining whether
trading outcomes are efficient in an exogenously specified OTC trading system represented
1

The costs of concentration have been a key concern to regulators of OTC derivatives markets.
See, for example, the quarterly reports from the Office of the Comptroller of the
currency at http://www.occ.treas.gov/topics/capital-markets/financial-markets/trading/
derivatives/derivatives-quarterly-report.html, as well as ECB (2009), and Terzi and Ulucay
(2011).

5

by a graph.
The effects of the trading structure on trading outcomes has been studied in the
literature on systemic risk.2 Allen and Gale (2000) develop a theory of contagion in a
circular system, which they use to consider systemic risk in interbank lending markets.
This framework has been employed by Zawadowski (2013) to consider counterparty risk in
OTC markets. Eisenberg and Noe (2001) also study systemic risk, but use lattice theory
to consider the fragility of a financial system in which liabilities are taken as given (see
also the recent work of Elliott, Golub, and Jackson, 2012). Our work differs from the
papers discussed above by considering entry.
One of the most commonly employed frictions used to study OTC markets, following
Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2005), is the search friction.3 Kiefer (2010) offers an
early analysis of CDS pricing within this framework. Our paper is most closely related
to the earlier work by Afonso and Lagos (2012), who develop a different search model
in order to explain trading dynamics in the Federal Funds Market. While their focus is
on the dynamics of reserve balances, they also consider the importance of intermediation
by banks in the reallocation of reserves over the course of the day. We differ from this
literature in that we develop a different model, in the spirit of Shi (1997), with a trading
friction that is conceptually different from search. We gain tractability by collapsing all
trading dynamics into a single multilateral trading session. This allows us to study entry.
2

See Stulz (2011) for a discussion of the potential for systemic risk in CDS markets.
Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2002) apply the paradigm to markets for borrowing stocks. Vayanos
and Wang (2007), Weill (2008), and Vayanos and Weill (2008) study cross-sectional asset pricing in multiasset extensions of the original model. Lagos and Rocheteau (2009) and Gârleanu (2009) demonstrate
that relaxing the asset holding constraint can have important impact on asset prices and on the entry
decisions of intermediaries. Afonso (2011) study the externalities involved in investors’ entry decisions.
Weill (2007) and Lagos, Rocheteau, and Weill (2011) study the liquidity provision of dealers in response
to liquidity shocks. Biais, Hombert, and Weill (2010) use this paradigm to analyze equilibrium in limit
order markets. Duffie and Strulovici (2012) study limited capital mobility between markets and its impact
on asset prices. Pagnotta and Philippon (2011) analyze exchanges competing to offer trading speed. He
and Milbradt (2012) study the interaction between default risk and OTC market liquidity. Information
diffusion is addressed by Duffie and Manso (2007), Golosov, Lorenzoni, and Tsyvinski (2008), Duffie,
Malamud, and Manso (2009), and recently by Babus and Kondor (2013) using different techniques.
Adverse selection is studied by Guerrieri and Shimer (2012) and Chang (2012). Trejos and Wright (2012)
offer a unified analysis asset pricing in finance and monetary models of bilateral trades. Bolton, Santos,
and Scheinkman (2012) show how OTC markets may inefficiently “cream-skim” assets from organized
exchange.
3

6

3

CDS Stylized Facts

We will focus our analysis on the market for Credit Default Swap (CDS).4 This market
is large: in the third quarter of 2011, the top twenty-five U.S. bank holding companies
participating in over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives markets had $13.58 trillion in assets,
and held almost twice as much, or $22.28 trillion, in credit derivatives notional. Most of
these credit derivatives are CDS contracts. In what follows, we collect data from the Office
of the Comptroller of the Currency for the top 25 bank holding companies in derivatives,
from these Bank Holding Companies’ FR Y-9C filings, and from the Depository Trust
& Clearing Corporation (DTCC) Trade Information Warehouse. We use these data to
document the following stylized facts which characterize the market for CDS.5

3.1

Dealers, customers, and non participants

Based on their patterns of trades in the CDS market, banks can be divided into three
categories: dealers, customers, and non participants.
Dealers. A few large banks, commonly referred to as “dealers,” concentrate most of
the market, measured in terms of gross notional in credit derivatives outstanding. As
shown in Figure 1, in the U.S., over ninety-five percent of the gross notional in credit
derivatives is consistently held by only five bank holding companies.6 Figure 2 reveals
that these gross positions remain large after controlling for bank size: namely, graphing
gross notional to trading assets across banks ranked by trading assets shows that the top
25 bank holding companies in derivatives trade disproportionately more than others.
Dealer banks appear to be motivated by trading or intermediation activity as opposed
to hedging underlying exposure. To document that this activity is not motivated by
hedging, consider first that, for these banks, there is significant netting between long and
short contracts, as measured by their ratio of net to gross notional. Figure 3 plots net
4

As will become clear later, our theoretical analysis applies more generally to OTC trading of any
derivatives contracts, in which counterparties make a fixed-for-floating exchange of cash flow streams,
and in which the floating stream is exposed to aggregate risk. This includes, for examples, interest rate
swaps, CDS of sovereign entities, CDS indices and, to the extent that default risk is correlated across
firms, CDS on single firms.
5
For other recent studies of CDS markets, see Bolton and Oehmke (2011), Bolton and Oehmke (2012),
Oehmke and Zawadowski (2013) for theoretical studies, and Arora, Gandhi, and Longstaff (2012), Chen,
Fleming, Jackson, Li, and Sarkar (2011), Saretto and Tookes (2011), and Shachar (2012) for empirical
analyses. Bolton and Oehmke (2013) reviews the growing literature on the market for CDS.
6
The International Swaps and Derivatives Association (2010) shows that concentration is less dramatic
in an expanded data set including non-U.S. financial institutions: for CDS, about ninety percent of gross
notional is held by fourteen global dealer banks.

7

to gross notionals for the top 25 bank holding companies in derivatives and shows that
this fraction is on average close to zero for the largest dealer banks, which appear on the
right-hand side.7 For example, JP Morgan’s net to gross notional ratio is -0.1%.
Another piece of evidence is derived from regulatory reporting. Namely, starting in
the first quarter of 2009, and implemented to a greater extent in the second quarter of
2009, bank holding companies’ FR Y-9C filings report the notional of purchased credit
derivatives that are recognized as a guarantee for regulatory capital purposes. Figure 4
shows the fraction of purchased credit derivatives from Q2 2009 to Q4 2011 that could be
counted as a guarantee for regulatory purposes for the largest 12 vs. the rest of the top 25
bank holding companies in derivatives. It reveals that, for the top 12 bank holding companies in derivatives, less than 0.5% of purchased credit derivatives could be recognized
as a guarantee. This is consistent with dealer banks simply trading CDS to earn spreads
on intermediation volume.
Customers. In general middle-sized and smaller banks tend to be customer banks
(though not all customers are small). Their trading patterns are opposite of those of
dealer banks. Figure 2 shows that middle-sized banks have smaller gross notional outstanding, and Figure 3 shows that their net-to-gross notional ratio is often close to 100%.
For instance, Bank of New York Mellon has a net-to-gross notional ratio close to 100%,
meaning that nearly all its CDS positions are going in the same direction. Turning to
regulatory reporting, Figure 4 shows that, for the 13 smaller bank holding companies
amongst the top 25, almost 40% of purchased credit derivatives were recognized as a
guarantee. This is consistent with the notion that customer banks are more likely to use
purchased CDS to change their credit exposure and to hedge.
Non-participants. Many banks do not participate at all in the CDS market. The
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago lists about 14,000 U.S. bank holding companies, while
Chen, Fleming, Jackson, Li, and Sarkar (2011) report that only about 900 bank holding
companies worldwide trade in CDS.
7

We report statistics for netting of long and short positions multilaterally and across contracts. While
ISDA master agreements account only for bilateral netting, the aggregate data we can access does not
allow us to disentangle bilateral relationships. Even adhering to ISDA’s strict definition of netting, we
can verify from the 10-Q’s of individual firms that large banks indeed enjoy large netting benefits. See, for
example, the excerpts from the 10-Q’s for Bank of America or Goldman Sachs in the Financial Times Alphaville at ftalphaville.ft.com/blog/2011/12/21/808181/do-you-believe-in-netting-part-1/

8

3.2

Prices and bilateral trade patterns

Two further stylized facts are of interest to us.
Price Dispersion. Prices vary by counterparty. This is apparently true since pricing data from Markit are composite quotes from multiple sources. Arora, Gandhi, and
Longstaff (2012) use heterogeneity in quotes from multiple dealers to a single customer to
assess the extent to which counterparty risk is priced. Interestingly, they find that little
of the price dispersion is explained by counterparty risk. This finding is consistent with
the notion that spreads are driven by other bank’s characteristics, such as their credit
exposures and their outside trading options. Shachar (2012) also uses data on individual
trades, but studies the impact of dealers’ post-trade credit risk exposures on their ability
to provide liquidity. This evidence is consistent with the banks’ preferences and pricing
in our model; banks price each contract based on their pre-trade risk exposure combined
with any additional default risk arising from the rest of their portfolio. Further indirect
evidence of price dispersion is provided by Mayordomo, Pena, and Schwartz (2010).
Network of Trades. Finally, banks are connected by a complex liability structure.
The OTC market for CDS is an opaque market in which the liability linkages are private
information. Following the financial crisis, the Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation
(DTCC) expanded its collection of data on the stock of OTC swaps outstanding and has
began releasing aggregate data on gross and net notional outstanding for CDS on a large
number of underlying entities. Two features of these data are of note.
First, these data confirm that banks (financial institutions aggregated up to the holding company level) take gross positions far in excess of their net positions, even when
narrowing down to CDS on individual reference entities. In February 2013, looking across
CDS on the top 1000 single name reference entities by gross notionals, the ratio of aggregate net to aggregate gross exposure is 7%. Similarly, for the 370 CDS on indices for
which there are 10 contracts or more outstanding, the ratio of aggregate net to aggregate
gross exposure is 13%.8
Second, the DTCC also offers aggregated data on the gross notionals signed between
institutions they define as dealers and institutions they define as customers. In February
2013, dealer-to-dealer trades accounted for roughly 60% of all CDS gross notional outstanding, customer-to-dealer trade for roughly 40%, and customer-to-customer trades for
8

The data from which we computed these statistics are in Table 6 and 7 available on the DTCC
website at: http://www.dtcc.com/products/derivserv/data_table_i.php?tbid=0

9

a very small fraction, less than 1%.9
As these facts clearly indicate, trading patterns in this market differ from what would
be predicted by a traditional Walrasian model. In Walrasian markets, gross exposures
and net exposures coincide, there is no price dispersion, and there is no explicit network
of trade.

4

The economic environment

This section presents the economic environment.

4.1

Preferences and endowments

The economy is populated by a unit continuum of risk-averse agents, called traders.
Traders have utility functions with identical constant absolute risk aversion and are endowed with a technology to make payments by producing storable consumption good at
unit marginal cost.10 To model the financial system, we take a novel approach in the
literature: we assume that traders are organized into large coalitions called banks. As
will become clear, this assumption allows us to model banks’ gross and net exposures even
when we collapse all trade dynamics into a single multilateral trading session.
Banks are heterogenous along two dimensions: their sizes, denoted by S, which we
identify with the number of traders in the coalition, and their per capita endowment of
some non-tradeable risky loan portfolio, denoted by ω. We interpret this endowment as
arising from the bank’s lending activity to households and corporations, which we do
not model explicitly here. Although the distribution of (S, ω) in the economy at large is
exogenous, we will endogenize its distribution amongst banks that choose to participate
in the OTC market by studying entry.
Banks’ sizes are cross-sectionally distributed according to the continuous density ϕ(S)
over the support [S, ∞), S ≥ 0. The density has thin enough tails, in that limS→∞ S 3 ϕ(S)
exists and is finite. Because the economy-wide number of traders is one, we must have
R∞
Sϕ(S) dS = 1.
S
Banks’ per capita endowments of loan portfolio are cross-sectionally distributed according to a uniform distribution over [0, 1]. The per capita payoff for the bank from
9

See Table 1 on the same DTCC website. Figure 5 plots the time series of the composition of trade
by counterparty type in the CDX market, using data from the DTCC for October of 2008 to the present.
10
Precisely, if an agent consumes C and produces H, his utility is U {C − H} = − α1 e−α(C−H) , for some
coefficient of absolute risk aversion α > 0. Given no wealth effect, an equivalent interpretation is that
the agent has a large endowment of storable consumption good that she uses to make payments.

10

its illiquid loan portfolio is the size of the portfolio, ω, times each loan’s payoff 1 − D,
where 1 represents the face value of the loans and D represent default risk. We assume
that D ∈ [0, 1] is a (non-trivial) random variable with a twice continuously differentiable
moment generating function, identical for all loans. Thus, ω represents a bank’s pre-trade,
per-capita exposure to an aggregate default risk factor.
To clarify the economic forces at play, we assume that banks’ sizes and per-capita
endowments are independently distributed in the economy at large. As a result, we will
argue that the correlation between bank’s size and per-capita endowment that arises in
the OTC market equilibrium is purely endogenous. Even with no presumed correlation
between size and per-capita endowment ex-ante, our model with entry costs and trading
limits helps rationalize banks’ participation and trading patterns, as described above in
Section 3.11

4.2

Two key OTC market frictions

If banks could trade their loan endowments directly in a competitive market, they would
find it optimal to share risk fully by equalizing their exposures to the aggregate default
risk factor.12 In our model, we prevent such full risk sharing by assuming that banks
cannot trade their loan endowments directly, but we allow partial risk sharing by letting
banks enter an OTC derivatives market to trade swap contracts, resembling CDS. The
timing of entry and trade is as follows. First, each bank chooses whether to participate
in the OTC market. Next, traders from active banks meet in the OTC market. Finally,
banks consolidate the positions of their traders and all payoffs from loan portfolios and
swap contracts are realized.
Trade in the OTC market is impaired by two frictions: fixed entry costs and trading
limits.
First, when a bank chooses to participate in the OTC market, it has to pay a fixed
entry cost. In practice, mass processing of OTC derivatives order tickets requires a large
infrastructure, and trading in derivatives requires specialized expertise which is costly to
acquire. In our model, the fixed cost implies that smaller banks will not enter and trade.
As we discuss below, a bank that chooses to participate will endogenously take on the
11

Nevertheless, our model is flexible enough to handle more general joint distributions of size and per
capita endowments. For example, in an earlier version of the paper, we provided a characterization of
the post-entry equilibrium when larger banks have more neutral pre-trade exposures than smaller banks,
for example through greater internal diversification.
12
One could add a speculative trading motive by assuming that banks have different beliefs about the
mean loss-upon-default, E [D]. When D is normally distributed, the model of trading in the OTC market
would remain as tractable as the one we discuss here.

11

trading patterns of a dealer, or that of a customer, depending on its risk exposure relative
to that of other participants.
Second, when traders from participating banks meet and sign CDS, their banks subject
them to a trading limit. This limit proxies for risk-management constraints on individual
trading desk positions in practice. We do not model the microfoundations of the trading
limit, however we note that, in practice, traders typically do face line limits. For example,
Saita (2007) states that the traditional way to prevent excessive risk taking in a bank “has
always been (apart from direct supervision...) to set notional limits, i.e., limits to the size
of the positions which each desk may take.”13 Theoretically, one might motivate such
limits as stemming from moral hazard problems, concerns about counterparty risk and
allocation of scarce collateral, or from capital requirement considerations. In this sense,
the trading limit is conceptually different from the traditional search friction considered
in the literature. As we show below, this trading limit is what prevents participant banks
from fully sharing their risk in the OTC market. It is also what leads to price dispersion
in equilibrium and hence creates incentives for banks to enter and provide intermediation
services.

4.3

Payoff of non-participating banks

Traders in non-participating banks consume the per-capita payoff of their loan portfolio
endowment, ω(1 − D), with expected utility:14

1 
E [U {ω(1 − D)}] ≡ − E e−αω(1−D) .
α
The corresponding certainty-equivalent payoff is:
CEn (ω) = ω − Γ [ω] ,

where Γ [ω] ≡



1
log E eαωD .
α

(1)

That is, CEn (ω) is equal to the face value of the loan portfolio endowment, ω, net of the
certainty equivalent cost of bearing its default risk, Γ [ω].
Lemma 1. The certainty equivalent cost bearing default risk, Γ [ω], is twice continuously
differentiable, strictly increasing, Γ0 [ω] > 0, and strictly convex, Γ00 [ω] > 0.
13

In addition, measures such as DV01 or CS1% which measure positions’ sensitivities to yield and
credit spread changes, as well as risk weighted asset charges, are used to gauge and limit the positions of
a particular desk’s traders.
14
Given identical concave utility, this is indeed the ex-ante optimal allocation of risk amongst traders
in the bank.

12

These intuitive properties follow by taking derivatives. Note that, when D is normally
distributed with mean E[D] and variance V[D], Γ [ω] is the familiar quadratic function:
Γ [ω] = ωE [D] + ω 2

αV [D]
.
2

(2)

The first term is the expected loss ωE [D] upon default. The second term is an additional
cost arising because banks are risk averse and the loss is stochastic.15

4.4

Payoff of participating banks

In the OTC market, each trader from every bank is matched with a trader from some
other bank to bargain over a CDS contract. Matching is uniform, in the sense that all
traders in the population of participating banks are equally likely to be matched. Thus,
the probability of being matched with a trader from a bank whose per-capita endowment
is less than ω is equal to N (ω), the fraction of such traders in the OTC market. The
distribution N (ω) is the result of entry decisions that we study later. For now we just
need to guess that N (ω) admits a continuous density n(ω), positive almost everywhere.
Notice that, in our model, the trading technology is the same for all traders. In
particular, traders from large banks do not have any built-in technological advantage in
trading. Thus, in our model, any greater tendency for traders of large banks to become
intermediaries is purely endogenous.
As will become clear shortly, our model has a natural homogeneity property: two
participating banks with identical per capita loan portfolio endowments, ω, have identical
per capita trading behavior. As discussed formally after Proposition 1, this implies that
after entry, size is no longer a state variable for the bank, and that the OTC market
equilibrium will only depend on the distribution n(ω).
CDS contracts in the OTC market. When a trader from a bank of type ω (an
“ω-trader”) meets a trader from a bank of type ω̃ (an “ω̃-trader”), they bargain over the
terms of a derivative contract resembling a CDS. The ω-trader sells γ(ω, ω̃) contracts to
the ω̃-trader, whereby she promises to make the random payment γ(ω, ω̃)D at the end
of the period, in exchange for the fixed payment γ(ω, ω̃)R(ω, ω̃). If γ(ω, ω̃) > 0 then
the ω-trader sells insurance, and if γ(ω, ω̃) < 0 she buys insurance. As explained before,
traders face a position limit: in any bilateral meeting, they cannot sign more than a
15

Clearly, a normal distribution does not satisfy our assumption that D ∈ [0, 1]. For this reason, it
implies that Γ [ω] is decreasing for ω negative enough. However, and as will become clear as we progress,
our results only rely on strict convexity and so they continue to hold with a normally distributed D.

13

fixed amount of contracts, k, either long or short. Taken together, the collection of CDS
contracts signed by all banks (ω, ω̃) ∈ [0, 1]2 must therefore satisfy:
γ(ω, ω̃) + γ(ω̃, ω) = 0

(3)

− k ≤ γ(ω, ω̃) ≤ k.

(4)

Equation (3) is simply a bilateral feasibility constraint, and equation (4) is the trading
limit.
Bank’s per capita consumption. A trader in this economy faces two kinds of risk.
The first is idiosyncratic risk over the type of counterparty they will trade with, namely
the size and risk exposure of their counterparty’s bank. The second is aggregate default
risk. But since there is a large number of traders in each bank, traders can diversify
their idiosyncratic counterparty-type risk so that they are left with only the per capita
exposure to default risk. Specifically, we assume that at the end of the period, traders
of bank ω get together and consolidate all of their long and short CDS positions.16 By
the law of large numbers, the per capita consumption in an active bank with per capita
endowment ω and size S is:


Z 1
c
γ(ω, ω̃) R(ω, ω̃) − D n(ω̃)dω̃.
(5)
− + ω(1 − D) +
S
0
The first term is the per capita entry cost. The second term is the per capita payout
of the loan portfolio endowment, after default. The third term is the per capita consolidated amount of fixed payments, γ(ω, ω̃)R(ω, ω̃), and random payments, γ(ω, ω̃)D, on
the portfolio of contracts signed by all ω-traders. Note in particular that, given uniform
matching, n(ω̃) represents the fraction of ω-traders who met ω̃-traders.
One can see that the position limit k is indeed crucial. Banks in our model almost
surely trade with every other bank and thus would want to allocate all their trading
capacity to their best counterparties, thereby achieving full risk-sharing. Again, we argue
that in reality risk management practices aimed to alleviate standard moral problems
prevent such reallocation of trading capacity.
Our assumption that traders consolidate their CDS positions captures some realistic
features of banks in practice. Within a bank, some traders will go long and some short,
16

As is well known from other models with “large coalition” or “large families,” we could equivalently
assume that traders can buy and sell CDS in two ways: i) with traders from other banks, in a bilateral
OTC market subject to trade size limits and ii) with traders from the same bank, in an internal frictionless
competitive market. The internal competitive market leads to full risk sharing within the bank, just as
with the large coalition.

14

depending on whom they meet and trade with. Because of this, our model is able to
distinguish between gross and net exposure to credit risk resulting from trades in the
CDS market.
Certainty equivalent payoff. To calculate the certainty equivalent payoff, it is useful
to break down the bank’s per capita consumption in equation (5) into a deterministic and
a random component. Namely, in bank ω, the per capita deterministic payment is:
c
− +ω+
S

Z

1

γ(ω, ω̃)R(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃)dω̃.

(6)

0

Similarly, the per capita random payment is −g(ω)D, where
Z
g(ω) ≡ ω +

1

γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃)dω̃,

(7)

0

is the sum of the initial exposure, ω, and of the exposure acquired in bilateral matches.
The function g(ω) thus represents the bank’s post-trade exposure to default risk.
Just as with non-participating banks in equation (1), we find that the per capita
certainty equivalent payoff of a participating bank is
c
CEp (ω, S) = − + ω +
S

Z

1

γ(ω, ω̃)R(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃)dω̃ − Γ [g(ω)] ,

(8)

0

the per-capita deterministic payment, net of the certainty equivalent cost of bearing the
exposure g(ω) to aggregate default risk.
Bargaining in the OTC market. To determine the terms of trade in a bilateral
meeting, we need to specify the objective function of a trader. To that end, we follow the
literature which allows risk sharing within families, such as in Lucas (1990), Andolfatto
(1996), Shi (1997), Shimer (2010), and others, and assume that a trader’s objective is
to maximize the marginal impact of her decision on her bank’s utility. This assumption
means that a trader is small relative to her institution and that she does not coordinate
her strategy with other traders in the same institution. One could think, for instance,
about a trading desk in which all traders work independently knowing that all risks will
be pooled at the end of the day.
Precisely, when a trader signs γ(ω, ω̃) contracts at a price R(ω, ω̃) per contract, her

15

marginal impact on her bank’s utility is defined as:




E Λ(ω, D)γ(ω, ω̃) R(ω, ω̃) − D , where Λ(ω, D) ≡

U 0 {y(S, ω, D)}
,
E [U 0 {y(S, ω, D)}]

and y(S, ω, D) is the bank’s per capita consumption derived in equation (5).
The first term in the expectation, Λ(ω, D), is bank ω’s stochastic discount factor.
Since utility is exponential, there are no wealth effects and so Λ(ω, D) is invariant to
deterministic changes in the level of consumption. In particular, it does not depend on
the entry cost, c/S, and therefore does not depend on size.
The second term is the trader’s contribution to her bank’s consumption: the number
of contracts signed, γ(ω, ω̃), multiplied by the net payment per contract, R(ω, ω̃) − D.
Using the formula for the cost of risk bearing, Γ [g(ω)], the ω-trader’s objective function
can be simplified to:


0
γ(ω, ω̃) R(ω, ω̃) − Γ [g(ω)] .

(9)

Note that this can be viewed as the trader’s marginal contribution to the certainty equivalent payoff (8). The expression is intuitive. If the trader sells γ(ω, ω̃) CDS contracts,
she receives the fixed payment R(ω, ω̃) per contract but, at the same time, she expects
to increase her bank’s cost of risk bearing. Since the trader is small relative to her bank,
she only has a marginal impact on the cost of risk bearing, equal to γ(ω, ω̃)Γ0 [g(ω)].
The objective of the other trader in the match, the ω̃-trader, is similarly given by:


0
γ(ω, ω̃) Γ [g(ω̃)] − R(ω, ω̃) ,

(10)

where we used the bilateral feasibility constraint of equation (3), stating that γ(ω̃, ω) =
−γ(ω, ω̃). The trading surplus is therefore equal to the sum of (9) and (10):


0
0
γ(ω, ω̃) Γ [g(ω̃)] − Γ [g(ω)] .
We assume that the terms of trade in a bilateral match between an ω-trader and an
ω̃-trader are determined via symmetric Nash bargaining. The first implication of Nash
bargaining is that the terms of trade are (bilaterally) Pareto optimal, i.e, they must
maximize the surplus shown above. Since the marginal cost of risk bearing, Γ0 [x], is

16

incresasing, this immediately implies that:



k


γ(ω, ω̃) =
[−k, k]



 −k

if g(ω̃) > g(ω)
if g(ω̃) = g(ω)

(11)

if g(ω̃) < g(ω).

This is intuitive: if the ω̃-trader expects a larger post-trade exposure than the ω-trader,
g(ω̃) > g(ω), then the ω-trader sells insurance to the ω̃-trader, up to the trading limit.
And vice versa if g(ω̃) < g(ω). When the post-trade exposures are the same, then any
trade in [−k, k] is optimal.
The second implication of Nash bargaining is that the unit price of a CDS, R(ω, ω̃),
is set so that each trader receives exactly one half of the surplus. This implies that:


1 0
0
Γ [g(ω)] + Γ [g(ω̃)] .
R(ω, ω̃) =
2

(12)

That is, the price is halfway between the two traders’ marginal cost of risk bearing. As
is standard in OTC market models, prices depend on traders’ “infra-marginal” characteristics in each match, instead of depending on the characteristic of a single “marginal”
trader, as would be the case in a Walrasian market.
It is important to note that a trader’s reservation value in a match is determined by
her post-trade exposure, which results from the simultaneous trades of all traders in her
institution. This means that, although our model is static, outside options play a key role
in determining prices: if a trader chooses not to trade in a bilateral match, she still enjoys
the benefits created by the trades of all other traders in her institution. This is similar to
the familiar outside option of re-trading later arising in dynamic models.17

5

Equilibrium conditional on entry

Conditional on the distribution of traders, n(ω), generated by entry decisions, an equilibrium in the OTC market is made up of measurable functions γ(ω, ω̃), R(ω, ω̃), and g(ω)
describing, respectively, CDS contracts, CDS prices, and post-trade exposures, such that:
(i) CDS contracts are feasible: γ(ω, ω̃) satisfies (3) and (4);
17

As mentioned in footnote 16, allowing traders of the same bank to pool their CDS contracts is
essentially equivalent to assuming that traders can exchange CDS in a competitive “intra-bank” market.
In that market, the price of a CDS contract is Γ0 [g(ω)]. Thus, the outside option of a trader in a bilateral
match can be viewed as the outside option of trading later in the intra-bank market.

17

(ii) CDS contracts are optimal: γ(ω, ω̃) and R(ω, ω̃) satisfies (11) and (12) given g(ω);
(iii) post-trade exposures are consistent: g(ω) satisfies (7) given γ(ω, ω̃) and n(ω).
In what follows, we will say that γ(ω, ω̃) is the basis of an equilibrium if the triple γ(ω, ω̃),
g(ω), and R(ω, ω̃) is an equilibrium conditional on entry, where g(ω) is constructed from
γ(ω, ω̃) according to (7), and R(ω, ω̃) is constructed from g(ω) according to (12).

5.1

Constrained efficiency

In order to establish the existence and uniqueness of an equilibrium, it is useful to first
analyze its efficiency properties. To that end, we consider the planning problem of choosing a collection of CDS contracts, γ(ω, ω̃), in order to minimize the average cost of risk
bearing across banks,
Z

1

Γ [g(ω)] n(ω) dω,

inf

(13)

0

with respect to some bounded measurable γ(ω, ω̃), subject to (3), (4), and (7). Given that
certainty equivalents are quasi-linear, a collection of CDS contracts solves the planning
problem if and only if it is Pareto optimal, in that it cannot be Pareto improved by
choosing another feasible collection of CDS contracts and making consumption transfers.
We then establish:
Proposition 1. The planning problem has at least one solution. All solutions share
the same post-trade risk exposure, g(ω), almost everywhere. Moreover, a collection of
CDS contracts, γ(ω, ω̃), solves the planning problem if and only if it is the basis of an
equilibrium.
It follows from this proposition that an equilibrium exists, conditional on the distribution of traders, n(ω), generated by entry decisions. Moreover, the equilibrium post-trade
exposures, g(ω), and bilateral prices, R(ω, ω̃), are uniquely determined. The Proposition shows that our restriction that CDS contracts only depend on ω is without much
loss of generality. Indeed, if CDS contracts were allowed to depend on any other bank
characteristics, such as size, then the same efficiency result would hold: equilibrium posttrade exposures would solve a generalized planning problem in which CDS contracts are
allowed to depend on these characteristics. It is then easy to show that this generalized
planning problem has the same solution as (13); the planner, in other words, would find

18

it strictly optimal to choose post–trade exposures that only depend on ω.18 Therefore, in
any equilibrium, post-trade exposures coincide with the unique solution of (13).

5.2

Equilibrium post-trade exposures: some general results

We now establish elementary properties of the post-trade exposure function. First, we
show that:
Proposition 2. Post-trade exposures are non-decreasing and closer together than pretrade exposures:
0 ≤ g(ω̃) − g(ω) ≤ ω̃ − ω, for all ω ≤ ω̃.

(14)

The proposition shows that there is partial risk sharing. For example, in the special
case of full risk-sharing, then g(ω̃) − g(ω) = 0 and the inequality is trivially satisfied.
With partial risk sharing, we obtain a weaker result: g(ω̃) − g(ω) is smaller than ω̃ − ω,
but in general remains larger than zero.
Proposition 3. If g(ω) is increasing at ω, then:
g(ω) = ω + k [1 − 2N (ω)] .

(15)



g(ω) = E ω ω ∈ [ω, ω] + k [1 − N (ω)] − kN (ω),

(16)

If g(ω) is flat at ω then:

where the expectation is taken with respect to n(ω), conditional on ω ∈ [ω, ω], and where
ω ≡ inf{ω̃ : g(ω̃) = g(ω)} and ω ≡ sup{ω̃ : g(ω̃) = g(ω)} are the boundary points of the
flat spot surrounding ω.
The intuition for this result is the following. If g(ω) is strictly increasing at ω, then it
must be that a ω-trader sells k contracts to any trader ω̃ > ω, and purchases k contracts
from any traders ω̃ < ω. Aggregating across all traders in bank ω, the total number of
contracts sold by bank ω is k [1 − N (ω)] per capita. Likewise, the total number of contracts purchased by bank ω is kN (ω) per capita. Adding all contracts sold and subtracting
all contracts purchased, we obtain (15).
18

Precisely, suppose that CDS contracts depend on the pre-trade exposure,
ω, and on some other vector
R
of characteristics denoted by x. Then, the CDS contracts
γ̂(ω,
ω̃)
≡
γ(ω,
x,
ω̃, x̃)n(dx | ω)n(dx̃ | ω̃) are
R
feasible and generate post-trade exposures ĝ(ω) = g(ω, x)n(dx | ω). Because the cost of risk-bearing is
convex, the planner prefers γ̂(ω, ω̃) over γ(ω, x, ω̃, x̃), and strictly so if g(ω, x) varies with x.

19

Now consider the possibility that g(ω) is flat at ω and define ω and ω as in the
proposition. By construction, all banks in [ω, ω] have the same post-trade exposure.
Therefore, g(ω) must be equal to the average post-trade exposure across all banks in
[ω, ω] which is given in equation (16): the average pre-trade exposure across all banks
in [ω, ω], plus all the contracts sold to ω̃ > ω-traders, minus all the contracts purchased
from ω̃ < ω-traders. The contracts bought and sold among traders in [ω, ω] do not appear
since, by (3), they must net out to zero.
To derive a sufficient condition for a flat spot, differentiate equation (15): g 0 (ω) =
1 − 2kn(ω). Clearly, if this derivative turns out negative, then (15) cannot hold, i.e., g(ω)
cannot be increasing at ω.
Corollary 4. If 2kn(ω) > 1, then g(ω) is flat at ω.
This corollary means that, when n(ω) is large, then the post-trade exposure function
is flat at ω. Intuitively, when there is a large density of traders in the OTC market with
similar endowments, these traders can match very easily. As a result, they can execute
so many bilateral trades amongst themselves that they manage to pool their risks fully in
spite of their limited trading capacity.
A reasoning by contradiction offers a more precise intuition. Assume that n(ω) is large
in some interval [ω1 , ω2 ], but that g(ω) is strictly increasing. Then, when two traders from
this interval meet, it is always the case that the low-ω trader sells k CDS to the high-ω
trader. In particular, ω1 sells insurance to all traders in (ω1 , ω2 ], and ω2 buys insurance
from all traders in [ω1 , ω2 ). If there are sufficiently many traders to be met in [ω1 , ω2 ], then
this can imply that g(ω1 ) > g(ω2 ), contradicting the property that g(ω) be non-decreasing.
The above results also provide a heuristic method for constructing the post-trade
exposure function, g(ω), induced by some particular distribution of traders, n(ω). One
starts from the guess that g(ω) is equal to ω + k [1 − 2N (ω)], as in equation (15). If this
function turns out to be non-decreasing, then it must be equal to g(ω). Otherwise, one
needs to “iron” its decreasing spots into flat spots. The levels of the flat spots are given
by (16). The boundaries of the flats spots are pinned down by the continuity condition
that, at a each boundary point, post-trade exposures must satisfy both (15) and (16).

5.3

Example: U -shaped and symmetric distributions

To build more intuition, we solve for the equilibrium under the assumption that n(ω) is
U -shaped and symmetric around 21 . That is, we assume that n(ω) is decreasing over [0, 21 ],
increasing over [ 12 , 1] and satisfies n(ω) = n(1 − ω). Aside from the fact these assumptions
lead to a closed form solution, this type of distribution is of special interest because,
20

under natural conditions, it will hold in the entry equilibrium of Section 6. An example
U -shaped and symmetric n(ω) is shown in Figure 6.
5.3.1

Post-trade exposures

We focus attention on ω ∈ [0, 21 ] because the construction over [ 21 , 1] is symmetric. First,
since n(ω) is decreasing over [0, 12 ] it follows that ω + k [1 − 2N (ω)] is increasing over
[0, 21 ] if and only if it is increasing for ω = 0, that is, if and only if 2kn(0) ≤ 1. If that
condition is satisfied, then clearly g(ω) is non-decreasing and is given by equation (15).
Otherwise, we guess that g(ω) is first flat over some interval [0, ω], and then increasing
over the subsequent interval [ω, 12 ]. The boundary ω of the flat spot must satisfy two
conditions. First, the post-trade exposure must be equal to
g(ω) = ω + k [1 − 2N (ω)] .
That is, a trader just to the right of ω must buy k contracts from all ω̃ < ω and sell k
contracts to all ω̃ > ω. The second condition is given by Proposition 3, which states that
post-trade exposures in the flat spot must be equal to


g(ω) = E ω ω ∈ [0, ω] + k [1 − N (ω)]
Taking the difference between the two, we obtain:
Z
H(ω) = 0,

where H(ω) ≡

ω

(ω − ω̃) n(ω̃) dω̃ − kN (ω)2 .

0

If there is some ω ∈ (0, 12 ) such that H(ω) = 0, then we have found the upper boundary
of the flat spot. Otherwise, the post-trade exposures must be flat over the entire interval
[0, 12 ]. The construction is illustrated in Figure 7, and summarized below:
Proposition 5. Suppose that the distribution of traders, n(ω), is U-shaped and symmetric
around ω = 12 . Then, there are ω ∈ [0, 12 ] and ω = 1 − ω such that, for ω ∈ [0, ω] and
ω ∈ [ω, 1], g(ω) is flat, and for ω ∈ [ω, ω], g(ω) is increasing and equal to g(ω) =
ω + k [1 − 2N (ω)]. Moreover:
• if k ≤ 21 [n (0)]−1 , then g(ω) has no flat spot.
• if

1
2



[n (0)]−1 < k < 1 − 2E ω | ω ≤ 12 , then g(ω) has flat and increasing spots.



• if k > 1 − 2E ω | ω ≤ 12 , then g(ω) is flat everywhere and equal to 21 .
21

5.3.2

CDS contracts

The post-trade exposures of Proposition 5 are implemented with the following collection
of CDS contracts. For all ω ∈ [ω, 1 − ω], the implementation is straightforward: since
g(ω) is increasing, it must be the case that a ω trader buys k contracts from all ω̃ < ω,
and sells k contracts to all ω̃ > ω. Matters are more subtle within the flat spots: indeed,
when two traders (ω, ω̃) in [0, ω]2 or [1 − ω, 1]2 meet, all trades in [−k, k] leave them
indifferent. Yet, they must trade in such a way that their respective institutions wind up
with identical post-trade exposures, g(ω). To find bilaterally feasible contracts delivering
identical post-trade exposures, we guess that, when two traders ω < ω̃ meet, the ω-trader
sells to the ω̃ trader a number of contracts, which we denote by z(ω̃), which only depends
on ω̃. When the ω trader meets a trader ω̃ > ω, he must sell k contracts since, in this
case, g(ω̃) > g(ω). This guess is illustrated in Figure 8 and means that:
ω

Z
g(ω) = ω − z(ω)N (ω) +

z(ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ + k [1 − N (ω)]
ω

The first term is the initial exposure. The second term adds up all the contracts purchased
from ω̃ < ω; the third term adds up all the contracts sold to ω̃ ∈ (ω, ω]; and the fourth
term adds up all the contracts sold to ω̃ ∈ (ω, 1]. Taking derivatives delivers an ordinary
differential equation for z(ω), which we can solve explicitly with the terminal condition
z(ω) = k.
Proposition 6. The post-trade exposures of Proposition 5 are implemented by the follow 
ing CDS contracts. For all ω ∈ 0, 12 and ω̃ > ω:
if ω̃ ≤

1
2

if ω̃ >

1
2

: γ(ω, ω̃) = min {k, z(ω̃)} ;
Rω


: γ(ω, ω̃) = min k, z


1
2

, where z(ω) ≡

0

(ω − ω̃) n(ω̃) dω̃
,
N (ω)2

All other γ(ω, ω̃) are then uniquely determined by symmetry, γ(1 − ω, 1 − ω̃) = −γ(ω, ω̃),
and bilateral feasibility, γ(ω, ω̃) + γ(ω̃, ω) = 0.
While bilateral feasibility puts non-trivial restrictions on CDS contracts, there can be
multiple collections of CDS contracts implementing the same equilibrium. The one proposed above has, however, two appealing features: it is consistent with the intuitive notion
that banks with low exposures sell to banks with high exposures, and it is continuous at
the boundary of the flat spot.

22

5.3.3

Notionals

We now study bank trading patterns. We show in particular that, in our OTC market,
traders employed by the same bank execute both long and short contracts, and as a result
a bank’s gross notional can greatly exceed its net notional. In the aggregate, the OTC
market can have a larger trading volume than its Walrasian counterpart. For brevity we
offer only a graphical analysis but a precise analytical characterization can be found in
Appendix A.5.3.
Contracts sold and bought. Following some of the measurements performed by the
US Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), we define the (per-capita) number
of contracts sold and bought by bank ω:
+

Z

G (ω) =

1

γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃,

and

ω

−

Z

G (ω) = −

ω

γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃)dω̃,
0

keeping in mind that, with the particular implementation proposed in Proposition 6,
γ(ω, ω̃) > 0 for ω < ω̃, and γ(ω, ω̃) < 0 for ω > ω̃. The number of contracts sold, G+ (ω),
shown in the left panel, is decreasing over [0, 1] and equal to zero for ω = 1: this reflects
the fact that low-ω banks, with low pre-trade exposure to the aggregate default risk factor,
have more risk bearing capacity, and hence tend to supply more insurance to others than
high-ω banks, with high pre-trade exposures. Note that G+ (ω) is positive even for banks
ω > 21 : that is, even though banks with ω > 21 are net buyers of insurance, g(ω) − ω < 0,
their traders sell insurance when they meet traders of banks ω̃ > ω. Symmetrically, the
number of contracts purchased, G− (ω), shown in the right panel, is zero for ω = 0, and
then is increasing over [0, 1]. Because banks with high pre-trade exposures to aggregate
default risk have less risk bearing capacity, they demand more insurance from others.
Intermediation. As shown in Figure 11, all banks with ω ∈ (0, 1) provide some intermediation: they simultaneously buy and sell CDS contracts since both G+ (ω) and G− (ω)
are positive. A natural measure of intermediation volume is min{G+ (ω), G− (ω)}: this
represents, for each bank ω, the per-capita volume of fully offsetting CDS contracts. One
sees that this volume is smallest for extreme-ω banks, and largest for middle-ω banks.
Extreme-ω banks play the role of “customer banks” and do not provide much intermediation. In order to bring their exposures closer to 21 most of their traders sign contracts in
the same direction. Middle-ω banks, on the other hand, play the role of “dealer banks”,
who provide more intermediation: they do not need to change their exposure much, so
they can use their trading capacity to take large offsetting long and short positions to
23

take advantage of price dispersion.
To compare our model’s implication to the data of the DTCC on the volume of trading
amongst customers, between customer and dealers, and amongst dealers, we must take a
stand on which banks we term dealers or customers. Assume, consistent with the trading
patterns implied by the model, that dealers have “middle” endowment ω ∈ [ω ? , 1 −
ω ? ] for some ω ? ≤ 21 , and that customers are the remaining banks. These middle-ω
banks have relatively higher gross exposure, lower net exposure, and make relatively more
intermediation profits. The fraction of traders in dealer banks is then nD = 1 − 2N (ω ? )
and the fraction of traders in customer banks is nC = 2N (ω ? ). For simplicity, assume
that post-trade exposures, g(ω), have no flat spots so that all trades are up to the trading
limit, k. Then, with uniform matching, the distribution of exposures coincides with the
distribution of customer-to-customer, customer-to-dealer, and dealer-to-dealer matches:
nCC = n2C , nCD = 2nC nD , and nDD = n2D . If we define dealers (by choosing ω ? ) so that
75% of the traders belong to dealer banks, which is approximately the fraction of trading
assets in the top 4 or 5 large dealer banks, then there are 50% more dealer-to-dealer than
customer-to-dealer trades. This is roughly consistent with the average composition of
trades in the DTCC data. As a consequence of uniform matching, the model also implies
that only 1/16 = 6.25% of gross notionals is accounted for by direct customer-to-customer
trades. The finding that there are substantially fewer customer-to-customer trades than
dealer-to-customer trades is qualitatively consistent with data. However, quantitatively,
in the data, there are even fewer direct customer-to-customer trades than is implied by
our model if we choose to label dealers and customers as we have done above.19
Gross notional. The gross notional is G+ (ω) + G− (ω), the total number of CDS signed
by a ω-bank. One sees that the gross notional is largest and the net notional is smallest for
middle-ω dealer banks. Indeed, middle-ω banks lie in an increasing spot of g(ω), so their
traders always use all of their capacity limit, either selling k or purchasing −k. Extreme-ω
customer banks, on the other hand, lie in a flat spot of g(ω), and their traders do not use
all of their capacity when they meet other traders from the same flat spot. This feature of
the equilibrium will be a key driver of some of the cross sectional variation across banks’
trading behavior.
19

The model has an endogenous force reducing the amount of customer-to-customer trades, coming
from the fact that customers lie in a flat spot of g(ω) and do not trade to their limit k with each other.
Quantitatively, however, the most that this endogenous force can do is reduce the volume of customer to
customer trades by a factor of 2.

24

Net notional. The net notional is the difference between contracts sold and purchased
by a ω-bank, G+ (ω) − G− (ω) = g(ω) − ω . Clearly, it is lowest for middle-ω dealer
banks, which enter the OTC market with ω ' 21 and thus do not need to change their
risk exposures much.
Trading volume. Because middle-ω banks engage in intermediation activity, the OTC
market can create excess trading volume. More precisely, trading volume is non-monotonic
in k, and for intermediate k it is always larger than the Walrasian volume. This is
interesting because excess volume can increase as frictions decline. Thus, large notionals
can be evidence of improved OTC market functioning.
To understand why volume is non-monotonic in k, we first observe that, when k
is small, then mechanically trading volume is small because traders have little trading


capacity. When k is greater than 1 − 2E ω | ω ≤ 12 but less than 1, we show in the
Appendix that, for any equilibrium set of CDS contracts, not only that of Proposition
6, the OTC market optimally circumvents frictions by creating excess trading volume,
relative to its Walrasian counterpart. Note that this is in spite of the fact that the posttrade exposures are the same as in the Walrasian equilibrium (see Proposition 5). Finally,
when k is large enough, one can find CDS contracts generating a volume that is arbitrarily
close to the Walrasian volume.
5.3.4

Bilateral prices

As shown in equation (12), in the equilibrium of our CDS market, prices are dispersed.
Thanks to bargaining, a ω-trader is able to sell CDS above her marginal cost of providing
insurance, Γ0 [g(ω)], and she is also able to buy below her marginal value, which is also
equal to Γ0 [g(ω)]. This implies in particular that middle-ω banks, who do not change
their expose in the OTC market, make positive profits from intermediation.
Another implication of (12) is that the average price faced by an ω-bank is increasing in
its post-trade exposure, g(ω). Thus, customers with the most risky post trade positions, as
measured by g(ω), face the highest prices. This is consistent with the evidence in Arora,
Gandhi, and Longstaff (2012), since post-trade risk exposure is likely to be related to
variables that measure default risk. In our model, the adverse pricing offered to banks with
large post trade risk exposures reflects their large gains from trade and not counterparty
credit risk. Thus, what appears to be variation in counterparty risk may actually be
measuring variation in gains from trade.

25

6

Equilibrium entry decisions

In this section we study the entry of banks into the OTC market, thus endogenizing n(ω).
We first characterize entry incentives and offer a general existence result. Next, we provide
conditions under which the equilibrium n(ω) turns out to be U -shaped and symmetric.
Lastly, we show that, with entry, our model explains qualitative empirical relationships
between bank size, net notionals, gross notionals, and intermediation activity.

6.1

Entry incentives

Banks’ decisions to enter the market are driven by two motivations, the strength of which
are determined by their sizes and initial risk exposures. The first motivation is to hedge
underlying risk exposure. The second motivation is to capture the trading profits due to
the equilibrium price dispersion across different bilateral trades. This second motivation
gives banks an incentive to provide intermediation services.
More formally, given any distribution of traders in the OTC market, n(ω), we can
calculate the ex-ante value of entering the market:
Z
∆(ω) ≡ Γ [ω] − Γ [g(ω)] +

1

γ(ω, ω̃)R(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃,

(17)

0

per trader’s capita. The first term is the change in exposure: it is negative if the bank is
a net seller of insurance, and positive if it is a net buyer. The second term is the sum of
all CDS premia collected and paid by the bank. It is positive if the bank is a net seller,
and is negative if it is a net buyer.
To obtain a decomposition of entry incentives into hedging and price dispersion motives
we note that, in a Walrasian market, a bank would conduct all its trades at a common
price. The hedging motive corresponds to the change in exposure and the sum of all
CDS premia collected or paid by the bank, if valued at this common price. The price
dispersion motive corresponds to the residual trading profits associated with deviations of
actual transaction prices, R(ω, ω̃), from this common price. In what follows, we provide a
decomposition of entry incentives into hedging and price dispersion motives by assuming
that the common price is Γ0 [g(ω)], the bank’s marginal cost of risk bearing.20 This leads
20

Clearly, there are many possible decompositions. In her discussion of our paper, Briana Chang
argued that choosing a different hypothetical common price could offer further insights into the nature of
intermediation profits. One advantage of our decomposition is to facilitate our welfare analysis of Section
7.

26

to the decomposition:
1
∆(ω) = K(ω) + F (ω)
2
where the function K(ω) is:
Z

1

Γ0 [g(ω)] γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃
0

= Γ [ω] − Γ [g(ω)] + Γ0 [g(ω)] g(ω) − ω ,

K(ω) ≡ Γ [ω] − Γ [g(ω)] +

because

R1
0

γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ = g(ω) − ω. The function F (ω) is:


Z 1
Z 1
0
γ(ω, ω̃)R(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ −
Γ [g(ω)] γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃
F (ω) ≡ 2
0
0
Z 1

=
γ(ω, ω̃) Γ0 [g(ω̃)] − Γ0 [g(ω)] n(ω̃) dω̃
0
Z 1
=k
Γ0 [g(ω̃)] − Γ0 [g(ω)] n(ω̃) dω̃,
0

where the second line follows from using the formula (12) for R(ω, ω̃), and the third line
from the optimality condition (11).
The function K(ω) ≥ 0 represents the per-capita competitive surplus of bank ω. Specifically, it represents the utility of entry assuming that traders in the bank have no bargaining power, i.e., the price of every contract is equal to Γ0 [g(ω)]. Notice that it is positive if
g(ω) 6= ω and zero if g(ω) = ω. In other words, K(ω) only measures incentives to hedge
exposure.
The function F (ω) is also positive and measures the frictional surplus of bank ω.
When Γ0 [g(ω̃)] is not equalized across banks, a ω-bank uses its bargaining power to sell
insurance at a price higher than its marginal cost, and to buy insurance at price lower
than its marginal value. The trading profits thus generated add up to 21 F (ω), where
the frictional surplus is multiplied by 12 because a trader only has half of the bargaining
power. As long as g(ω) is not everywhere flat, F (ω) is positive even for a bank that does
not change its exposure. It thus measures incentives to enter to take advantage of price
dispersion, and provide intermediation services.
When D is normally distributed and n(ω) is U -shaped and symmetric, we obtain a
sharper characterization of both functions:
Proposition 7 (Entry Incentives). Suppose that the distribution of active traders, n(ω),
is U-shaped and symmetric, and assume that D is normally distributed. Then both the
27

competitive surplus, K(ω), and the frictional surplus, F (ω), are U-shaped and symmetric
around 21 .
The proposition means that extreme-ω “customer” banks, who use the OTC market
to change their exposures, have the greatest incentives to enter. This occurs for two
reasons. First, low-ω banks have the biggest risk-bearing capacity, and high-ω banks have
the largest need to unwind their risk, so they obtain a large surplus when they trade CDS.
This is measured by the competitive surplus, K(ω). Second, extreme-ω banks reap larger
trading profits from bargaining, as measured by the frictional surplus, F (ω), the average
gap between their marginal cost of risk bearing and that of their counterparty.21
Middle-ω “dealer” banks, on the other hand, do not change their exposure much and
have smallest incentive to trade in the OTC market. The only reason they enter is to
earn intermediation profits.

6.2

Entry equilibrium

Keeping in mind that a bank has to pay a fixed cost c to enter the market, it will enter
if and only if:
∆(ω) −

c
≥0
S

⇐⇒

S ≥ Σ(ω) where Σ(ω) ≡

c
.
∆(ω)

(18)

Let Ψ(S) be the measure of traders in banks with sizes greater than S. For S ≥ S, Ψ(S) =
R∞
xϕ(x) dx, and for S ≤ S, Ψ(S) = 1. Given that sizes and per-capita endowments are
S
independent in the banks’ cross section, the measure of active traders with endowment ω
is Ψ [Σ(ω)]. The distribution of active traders is, then:
T [n] (ω) = R 1
0

Ψ [Σ(ω)]
Ψ [Σ(ω̃)] dω̃

,

(19)

where the denominator normalizes the measure of active traders by the total measure of
active traders in the OTC market, keeping in mind that ω is uniformly distributed in the
banks’ cross-section.
An entry equilibrium is a fixed point n(ω) of equation (19), where Σ(ω) is defined from
∆(ω) in equation (18), and ∆(ω) is defined from n(ω) in equation (17).
Proposition 8 (Existence). There exists a continuous function, n, positive almost evR1
erywhere and such that 0 n(ω̃) dω̃ = 1, solving the functional equation T [n] = n.
21

The frictional surplus, F (ω), measures the average absolute distance between bank ω’s marginal cost
of risk bearing and that of other banks, and so it is minimized for the median bank. With a symmetric
n(ω) the median bank is at ω = 21 .

28

Because our proof applies the Schauder fixed point theorem, it establishes existence
but not uniqueness.22 Note also that the solution of the fixed point problem is the basis
of an equilibrium with positive entry: given the distribution of traders n(ω), some banks
have positive gains from trade and, if large enough, will find it optimal to enter.23
Proposition 7 showed that a U -shaped and symmetric n(ω) maps into a U -shaped
and symmetric ∆(ω) and, therefore, into a hump-shaped and symmetric threshold, Σ(ω).
Since the function Ψ(x) is decreasing, it follows that T [n](ω) is U -shaped and symmetric. Therefore, the operator T preserves the U -shaped and symmetric property. This
immediately implies that:
Corollary 9. If D is normally distributed, there exists an equilibrium n(ω) that is Ushaped and symmetric.
In the entry equilibrium of Corollary 9, small-sized banks do not enter the OTC market
because their entry cost per capita is too large. Middle-sized banks enter, but only at the
extremes of the ω spectrum, where ∆(ω) is largest. In other words, middle-sized banks
tend to be customers. Large banks enter at all points of the ω spectrum: at the extreme,
as customers, and in the middle, as dealers. This pattern of participation thus implies
that middle-ω dealer banks are, on average, larger than extreme-ω customer banks.

6.3

Empirical implications

In this section we study some empirical implications of our model.
6.3.1

Conditional moments

In Section 3, we provided stylized facts about gross and net CDS notional in a crosssection of banks sorted by trading assets, a natural empirical measure of bank size. To
derive model counterparts of these facts, we calculate population moments conditional on
bank size, for several variables of interest. Precisely, let n(ω | S) be the distribution of
traders conditional on bank size, and let x(ω) be some cross-sectional variable of interest
22

In Appendix A.10, we establish uniqueness of a symmetric equilibrium in a simplified model with
three endowment types and quadratic cost of risk bearing.
23
A crucial step in applying the Schauder fixed point theorem is to prove that the set of distributions
generated by the operator T [n] is equicontinuous. Two observations deliver this property in our model.
First, from Proposition 2, the post-trade exposure function, g(ω), is Liptchitz with a coefficient that
does not depend on n(ω). This Liptchitz property is then inherited by ∆(ω) and Ψ [Σ(ω)]. The second
property is that, as one varies the perceived distribution of traders in the OTC market, n, the measure of
traders who choose to enter, given by the denominator of T [n](ω), remains bounded away from zero. This
follows because the closure of the set of entry incentives ∆(ω) is compact and because entry incentives
cannot be uniformly zero over the ω spectrum. See the appendix for the detailed proof.

29

(price, notional, etc...).24 The expectation of x(ω) with respect to the distribution of
traders conditional on S is defined as:
Z 1
x(ω)n(ω | S) dω.
ES [x(ω)] ≡
0

Proposition 10 (Cross-sectional facts). In an entry equilibrium with a U-shaped and
symmetric n(ω):


• conditional gross notional, ES G+ (ω) + G− (ω) , is non-decreasing in S;


• conditional net notional, ES |G+ (ω) − G− (ω)| , is non-increasing in S;


• conditional intermediation, ES min{G+ (ω), G− (ω)} , is non-decreasing in S;



2
• conditional price dispersion, ES R(ω, ω̃)2 − ES R(ω, ω̃) , is non-increasing in S.
These results, illustrated in Figure 12, are the model counterparts of the stylized facts
we documented using US data from the OCC and bank holding companies’ financial
reports. Just as we normalize by trading assets in the data to control for the mechanical
effect of size on various measures of notional, the proposition focuses on “per capita”
quantities. To build intuition, recall from Section 5.3.3 that middle-ω banks have the
largest gross notional, the smallest net notional, and the largest intermediation volume.
These middle-ω banks are predominantly large, because only large banks can recoup
their entry cost by conducting a large enough volume of intermediation, in the entry
equilibrium. As a result, gross notional increases with size, net notional decreases with
size, and intermediation volume increases with size.
Because middle-ω banks are large, have very little net relative to gross notionals, and
enter and trade mainly to generate intermediation profits from price dispersion, we consider them to be “dealers.” The entry incentives, and resulting trading patterns, for these
banks are consistent with the empirical trading patterns seen for dealers in the market for
CDS. In practice, banks that are able to set up and maintain successful dealerships are
those with broad customer bases that include both counterparties who would like to use
CDS to insure credit risk (medium-sized banks with sizable loan portfolios), and counterparties who would like to add credit risk to their portfolios (such as insurance companies
and hedge funds). Thus, we do not interpret the model in a strict sense to only include
banks, but also other financial institutions which are active in credit markets. Our data
24

Note that, since we are conditioning on a population of banks who have identical size, this distribution
of traders must coincide with the distribution of banks conditional on size.

30

on CDS holdings at the firm level, however, is constrained to regulated entities that must
publicly report their CDS activity.
The last result of the proposition is that price dispersion decreases with size. Because
middle-sized banks tend to have extreme ω’s, a large number of middle-sized matches
involve either two low-ω banks, who trade at low prices, or two high-ω banks, who trade
at high prices. The prevalence of either low-price or high-price matches results in a large
degree of price dispersion. On the other hand, there are more large-sized banks with
middle ω, and therefore more matches at average prices. This effect implies that price
dispersion decreases with size.
It is intuitive that large middle-ω banks, which act as dealer banks, should trade
with each other at common prices since they all have similar outside options. These
dealer banks then trade with typically smaller banks with more extreme ω’s, that is, end
users or customers, at heterogeneous prices that depend on the customers’ post trade
positions. In the earlier work of Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen (2005) and Lagos and
Rocheteau (2009), it is assumed that market makers or dealers trade in a frictionless
market at common prices. In our model, such an inter-dealer market arises endogenously
among large banks that are central to the market. One advantage of not assuming a
frictionless inter-dealer market is that, empirically, Arora, Gandhi, and Longstaff (2012)
show that there is substantial heterogeneity across dealers in CDS spreads offered to
the same customer. This seems consistent with the fact that, as in our model, dealer
characteristics are also key determinants of CDS spreads.
6.3.2

Concentration

Taking stock of the above results, our model shows that the concentration of gross exposures in large banks is the result of several forces working in the same direction. First,
on the extensive margin, smaller banks participate less in the OTC market than large
banks: small-sized banks do not participate, middle-sized banks participate only if their
per capita endowment, ω, is extreme enough. Second, on the intensive margin, middlesized banks sign fewer CDS contracts than larger banks. Some of this intensive margin
effect is purely mechanical: middle-sized banks have fewer traders, so they sign proportionally fewer CDS contracts. But some of the effect arises because middle-sized banks
tend to have extreme ω’s, to lie in a flat spot of g(ω), and to thus find it optimal to use
less than their full trading capacity, k. Large-sized banks tend to have average ω, to lie
in an increasing spot of g(ω), and to thus use all their trading capacity. This is another
channel driving notional concentration.
Figure 13 shows a heat map of bilateral gross notionals, per capita, across size per31

centiles. Variation along the diagonal of the heat map illustrates that gross notionals are
larger amongst larger banks, as we already knew from Proposition 10. The off-diagonal
vectors of the heat map offer new information: smaller banks trade more with larger
banks than amongst each other. This further illustrates the manner in which, in spite of
our assumption that all matching is uniform, large banks endogenously emerge as central
counterparties in the OTC market.
6.3.3

Market response to declining frictions

Over the last decade, the volume of trade in OTC markets has grown dramatically, and
OTC trading profits have become an ever larger fraction of dealer banks’ earnings. In
this section we investigate patterns of growth in OTC markets by contrasting two possible
scenarios: a decline in the entry cost, c, representing more sophisticated trading technologies, or a relaxation of trading limits, k, representing improvements in operational risk
management practices.
Because such comparative statics are difficult to characterize in full generality, we consider a simplified model based on the following assumptions: there are only three possible
per-capita endowments, ω ∈ {0, 21 , 1}, the size distribution is Pareto with support [S, ∞)
for some S > 0, and the cost of risk bearing is quadratic. Our results, developed formally
in Appendix A.10, indicate that in both cases, reducing frictions causes the market to
grow, in the sense of increasing gross notional outstanding per capita. But predictions
differ markedly in other dimensions. For example, when trading technologies improve,
as proxied by a decline in c, the market grows through an increase in intermediation activity, and the net-to-gross notional ratio decreases. In contrast, when risk-management
technologies improve, as proxied by an increase in k, the market can grow through an
increase in customer-to-customer trades. As a result, the net-to-gross notional ratio can
increase. Thus, according to the model, the evolution of the net-to-gross notional ratio
can help distinguish a decrease in frictions due to an improvement in trading versus riskmanagement technologies. These comparative statics can also help to guide policies aimed
at reducing the importance of central dealers. Our analysis indicates that improvements
to risk management technologies, rather than reductions in entry costs, are more likely
to decrease intermediated trade and excess volume.
Decline in entry cost. The comparative static depends on the position of c relative to
two thresholds, c > c. When c declines while remaining larger than the upper threshold,
c > c̄, because of the Pareto size distribution, the market grows proportionally across the
ω spectrum: the measure of traders of all types is scaled up by the same constant, so
32

market composition stays the same. When the entry cost reaches the threshold c = c̄, all
extreme-ω banks but only part of middle-ω banks have entered the OTC market. That
is, when c = c̄, the entry threshold satisfies Σ(0) = Σ(1) = S, but Σ( 12 ) > S. This
is because extreme-ω banks always have more incentives to enter than middle-ω banks.
Thus, a further decrease in entry cost cannot create more entry of extreme-ω banks,
since all have entered, and only causes more entry of middle-ω banks. Thus, when c
declines in the intermediate range c ∈ [c, c], the OTC market grows through an increase
in intermediation. As a result, the ratio of net-to-gross notional decreases. This process
continues until c reaches the lower threshold c, at which point Σ( 12 ) = c and all banks
have entered in the OTC market.
Relaxation of trading limits. While a decline in entry costs tends to (weakly) decrease the net-to-gross notional ratio, a relaxation of trading limits has ambiguous effects.
When k → 1, the post-trade exposures converge to g(ω) = 12 , and prices are less and
less dispersed. As a result, the fraction of middle-ω converges to zero as they have fewer
incentives to enter. Near this limiting equilibrium, the volume of customer-to-customer
trades increases at the expense of intermediated trades, and the ratio of net-to-gross notional in the OTC market increases. As we discuss in Proposition 19 in the appendix, this
pattern of convergence need not be monotonic. This is because an increase in k allows all
banks, in particular middle-ω ones, to increase their trading volume and profits, giving
them more incentives to enter. In particular, we show that for intermediate values of k,
an increase in k can increase the fraction of middle-ω banks in the market, and hence
reduce the ratio of net-to-gross notional.

7

Welfare

This section shows that, at the margin of the entry equilibrium, a planner can increase
welfare by reducing the entry of middle-ω banks and increasing the entry of extreme-ω
banks.

7.1

The welfare impact of marginal changes in entry

Consider any pattern of entry characterized by some continuous threshold Σ(ω) > S such
that ω-banks enter if and only if S ≥ Σ(ω). Let M denote the corresponding measure
of traders in the OTC market, and let n(ω) > 0 denote the corresponding distribution
of traders. We study the impact of perturbing the measure of traders entering at ω by

33

εδ(ω), for some small ε > 0 and some continuous function δ(ω). If δ(ω) < 0, then the
measure of traders at ω decreases, and if δ(ω) > 0, it increases. The changes εδ(ω) are
engineered by changing the entry size threshold from Σ(ω) to Σε (ω) such that:
Ψ [Σε (ω)] = M n(ω) + εδ(ω).
That is, the total measure of traders in banks of size greater than Σε (ω) is equal to
M n(ω) + εδ(ω). Thus, our perturbation of the distribution n(ω) is equivalent to a perturbation of the size threshold.
Without loss of generality, we assume that CDS contracts are efficient conditional on
entry, i.e., they solve the planning problem of Proposition 1. If the planner can transfer
goods (but not assets) across banks at time zero, then δ(ω) increases welfare if and only
if it increases:
Z 1
Z 1


W (ε, δ) ≡ −
1 − M n(ω) − εδ(ω) Γ [ω] dω −
M n(ω) + εδ(ω) Γ [gε (ω)] dω
0
0
Z 1
Φ [Σε (ω)] dω,
−c
0

where gε (ω) is the post-trade exposure solving the planning problem conditional on the
distribution of traders induced by M n(ω) + εδ(ω). The first term is the cost of risk
bearing for traders who stay out of the OTC market, and the second term is the cost of
risk bearing for traders who enter. The last term, on the second line, is the sum of all
R∞
fixed entry costs incurred by bank establishments, with Φ [S] ≡ S ϕ(x) dx denoting the
measure of banks with sizes greater than S.
To study marginal changes in entry we evaluate the directional derivative W 0 (0, δ).
Because post-trade exposures conditional on entry are efficient, an envelope theorem of
Milgrom and Segal (2002) implies that the marginal impact of entry is found by differentiating W (ε, δ) holding the collection of CDS contracts, γ(ω, ω̃), constant.
Proposition 11 (Directional Derivative). The derivative of W (ε, δ) at ε = 0 is:
0

Z

W (0, δ) =
0

1



1
1
c
+ ∆(ω) + F (ω) −
δ(ω) −
Σ(ω)
2
2

Z

1


F (ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ dω,

(20)

0

where K(ω) and F (ω) are the competitive and frictional surpluses defined in Section 6.1.
The intuition for each term is the following. First δ(ω) creates additional entry costs:
at ω, the marginal bank is of size Σ(ω), so each new ω-trader in this bank must pay a
c
per-capita entry cost Σ(ω)
. The second term, ∆(ω), is simply the private value of entry
34

for this marginal bank at ω. The third and fourth terms capture the gap between the
private and social value of entry.
The first part of the gap is 21 F (ω). Indeed, because of bargaining, the private value
of entry incorporates only half of the frictional surplus created by the entrant. Hence
1
F (ω) represents the portion of the frictional surplus that accrues to incumbents when a
2
marginal ω-bank enters.
The second part of the gap is negative and reflects congestion externalities. Precisely,
since the number of matches has to be equal to half the number of traders, when δ(ω)
traders enter, they create δ(ω) new matches with incumbents, and displace δ(ω)/2 existing
R1
matches amongst incumbents.25 The term − 21 0 F (ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ represents the surplus lost
from these displaced matches. It is intuitive that this lost surplus is proportional to the
average frictional surplus because matches amongst incumbents are, by virtue of uniform
matching, effectively displaced at random. Crucially for our welfare result, this loss of
surplus is constant with respect to the entrant’s type, ω.

7.2

Improving upon the entry equilibrium

Substituting the free entry condition ∆(ω) =
1
W (0, δ) =
2
0

Z

1

c
Σ(ω)

into (20), we obtain


Z
δ(ω) F (ω) −

1


F (ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ dω.

0

0

A necessary condition for social optimality is that this integral is equal to zero for all
R1
δ(ω), and this can only be the case if 21 F (ω) = 21 0 F (ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ for almost all ω. That
is, the equilibrium is optimal only if entry compensates incumbents for the congestion
externality: the portion of the frictional surplus that accrues to incumbents when the
marginal ω-bank enters must be equal to the frictional surplus lost by incumbents from
the matches that the marginal bank displaces.
This optimality condition clearly does not hold. As we have discussed above, the
frictional surplus 21 F (ω) that accrues to incumbents is U -shaped in ω. The frictional
surplus lost because of displaced matches is constant in ω, and equal to the average
frictional surplus accruing to incumbents. Hence, gap between social and private value is
positive for extreme-ω banks and negative for for middle-ω banks, and equal to zero on
25

Precisely, suppose that there are initially M incumbent traders in the OTC market, and that a small
measure δ of new traders enter. Since all traders are matched and since there are two traders per match,
the total number of matches is now equal to (M + δ)/2. Hence, the net amount of match created is δ/2.
At the same time, the number of new matches between entrants and incumbents is, to a first order, equal
to δ > δ/2. This implies that entry displaces δ/2 matches amongst incumbents.

35

average.
The first implication of this reasoning is that, to a first order, there are no welfare
gains from changing the size of the market while keeping its composition, n(ω), the same.
Formally W 0 (0, δ) = 0 when δ(ω) is proportional to n(ω). In Appendix A.12, we show
that this is, in fact, a global result: an entry equilibrium has a socially optimal size given
n(ω). The intuition is that, when the composition of the market does not change, entry is
equivalent to creating two separate markets with identical n(ω), one for the incumbents
and one for the entrants. Therefore, proportional entry has no externality on incumbents.
The second implication of this reasoning is that, at the margin, a social planner would
like to induce extreme-ω banks (customers) to enter, and middle-ω banks (dealers) to
exit. Formally:
Proposition 12. Assume that D is normally distributed, consider an entry equilibrium
in which n(ω) is U-shaped and symmetric, assume that Σ(ω) > S for all ω, and that
R1
F (ω) 6= 0 for some positive measure of ω. Then, if 0 δ(ω̃) dω̃ = 0, then W 0 (0, δ) > 0
when δ(ω) is U-shaped and symmetric.
This result does not mean that middle-ω banks should not enter in the OTC market
at all. In our model, one can show that any bank, and in particular a middle-ω bank,
always has a positive social value before accounting for the entry cost. This means that,
as long as there is partial risk sharing, it is socially optimal to have some large enough
ω = 12 banks entering in the OTC market. In the entry equilibrium, however, the marginal
ω = 12 banks enter too much.

8

Conclusion

The OTC market for CDS’s is very large relative to banks’ trading assets, and gross
notionals are highly concentrated on the balance sheets of just a few large dealer banks.
Moreover, the varied bilateral trades executed by banks’ many traders create an intricate
system of liability linkages. In this paper we have sought to uncover the economic forces
which determine this empirical trading structure in the OTC credit derivatives market.
To this end, we have developed a model in which banks trade credit default swaps in an
OTC market in order to share aggregate credit default risk. The equilibrium distribution
of trades in our model has many realistic features. Gross notionals greatly exceed net
notionals, and the market is highly concentrated in large banks. Small-sized banks do not
participate, middle-sized banks arise as customers that trade at dispersed prices, whereas
a small measure of large banks arise as key dealers and trade at near common prices.
36

Finally, all banks are connected through the bilateral trades of participating banks’ many
traders. We argue that capturing these positive features gives credence to our model as a
laboratory in which to study the normative features OTC derivatives markets, as well as
the policy questions surrounding them.
We study the key normative features of our theoretical market setup, namely the
size and composition of the market. We find that, given its composition, the size of
the market is optimal: a planner could not improve welfare by adding or subtracting
banks while leaving the composition of participating traders’ pre-trade risk endowment
the same. We show that, however, market composition is suboptimal. In particular, the
OTC market is too concentrated, in the sense that a planner would want to remove some
large dealer banks and replace them with smaller customer banks.
Finally, we argue that it is important to understand the origin of observed trading
patterns in order to answer the current regulatory questions surrounding OTC derivatives
markets. For example, the proposed “Volcker rule” aims to restrict derivatives trading
which is not directly tied to underlying exposures. This may reduce risk taking by banks.
However, one potential side effect is a decline in market intermediation and liquidity.
Another proposed provision in the Dodd Frank Act aims to restrict exposure to any one
counterparty. Are such limits welfare improving? If so, how should each bilateral limit
be determined? Current bankruptcy law and capital adequacy regulations seem to favor
banks with large offsetting long and short positions. Moreover, policies such as too-bigto-fail and FDIC insurance may provide forces for concentrating derivatives trading in
explicitly or implicitly insured institutions. How much of the observed concentration of
gross CDS notionals is due to traditional considerations of economies of scale that we
study, and how much is driven by regulation favoring large dealer banks? We do not
know. In future work, we plan to address questions such as these using the framework we
have developed in this paper.

37

Figure 1: CDS Market Concentration
ABN AMRO NORTH AMERICA HOLDING COMPANY
ALLFIRST FINANCIAL INC.
ALLY FINANCIAL INC.
AMERICAN EXPRESS COMPANY
BANC ONE CORPORATION
BANK OF AMERICA CORP
BANK OF NEW YORK
BANK OF NEW YORK MELLON CORPORATION, THE
BANK ONE CORPORATION
BANKAMERICA CORPORATION
BANKBOSTON CORPORATION
BANKERS TRUST CORPORATION
BANKMONT FINANCIAL CORP.
BARCLAYS GROUP US INC.
BB&T CORPORATION
BOK FINANCIAL CORPORATION
CAPITAL ONE FINANCIAL CORPORATION
CHASE MANHATTAN CORP
CIBC DELAWARE HOLDINGS INC.
CITICORP
CITIGROUP INC.
CITIZENS FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
COMERICA INCORPORATED
COUNTRYWIDE CREDIT INDUSTRIES, INC
COUNTRYWIDE FINANCIAL CORPORATION
DORAL FINANCIAL CORPORATION
FIFTH THIRD BANCORP
FIRST CHICAGO NBD CORPORATION
FIRST HORIZON NATIONAL CORPORATION
FIRST NB OF CHICAGO CORPORATION
FIRST SECURITY CORPORATION
FIRST TENNESSEE NATIONAL CORPORATION
FIRST UNION CORPORATION
FLEET FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
FLEETBOSTON FINANCIAL CORPORATION
GMAC LLC
GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC., THE
HARRIS FINANCIAL CORP.
HSBC USA INC
HUNTINGTON BANCSHARES INCORPORATED
IMPERIAL BANCORP
IRWIN FINANCIAL CORPORATION
J.P. MORGAN CHASE & CO.
JOHN HANCOCK FINANCIAL SERVICES
JOHN HANCOCK HOLDINGS (DELAWARE) LLC
JPMORGAN CHASE & CO.
KEYCORP
LASALLE BANK CORPORATION
MELLON BANK CORPORATION
MELLON FINANCIAL CORPORATION
METLIFE, INC.
MORGAN STANLEY
NATIONAL CITY
NATIONAL CITY CORPORATION
NATIONSBANK CORP
NORTHERN TRUST CORPORATION
NORWEST CORPORATION
PNC BANK CORP.
PNC FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP, INC., THE
PROVIDENT FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.
RBC USA HOLDCO CORPORATION
REGIONS FINANCIAL CORPORATION
REPUBLIC NB OF NEW YORK CORPORATION
REPUBLIC NEW YORK CORPORATION
STATE STREET CORPORATION
SUNTRUST BANKS, THE
TAUNUS CORP
TAUNUS CORPORATION
TD BANK US HOLDING COMPANY
TD BANKNORTH INC.
TD WATERHOUSE GROUP, INC.
U.S. BANCORP
UNIONBANCAL CORP
UNIONBANCAL CORPORATION
US BANCORP
UTRECHT
WACHOVIA CORP
WACHOVIA CORPORATION
WELLS FARGO & COMPANY
ZIONS BANCORPORATION

35,000,000

Credit Derivative Notionals
in Millions
30,000,000

25,000,000

20,000,000

15,000,000

10,000,000
JPMORGAN CHASE & CO.

5,000,000
MORGAN STANLEY

WACHOVIA CORPORATION

0

WELLS FARGO & COMPANY

Figure 1 plots gross notionals from 2007-2011 for banks that are among the top 25 bank holding
companies in OTC derivatives during that time period. Data are from the OCC quarterly report on bank
trading and derivatives activities. Derivatives notionals in millions.

Figure 2: Increasing Returns to Scale in CDS Markets
25

Total CDS Notional/Trading Assets
by Trading Asset Size
Top 25 HC in Deriviatives
20

JPMORGAN CHASE & CO.

GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC., THE

CITIGROUP INC.

MORGAN STANLEY

BANK OF AMERICA CORPORATION

TAUNUS CORPORATION

WELLS FARGO & COMPANY

HSBC NORTH AMERICA HOLDINGS INC.

METLIFE, INC.

BANK OF NEW YORK MELLON CORPORATION, THE

STATE STREET CORPORATION

RBC USA HOLDCO CORPORATION

SUNTRUST BANKS, INC.

PNC FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP, INC., THE

NORTHERN TRUST CORPORATION

U.S. BANCORP

FIFTH THIRD BANCORP

REGIONS FINANCIAL CORPORATION

KEYCORP

UNIONBANCAL CORPORATION

BB&T CORPORATION

CITIZENS FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.

0

ALLY FINANCIAL INC.

5

TD BANK US HOLDING COMPANY

10

CAPITAL ONE FINANCIAL CORPORATION

15

Figure 2 plots gross notional to trading assets by trading assets by trading assets for the top 25 bank
holding companies in derivatives according to the OCC quarterly report on bank trading and derivatives
activities third quarter 2011. Data are from bank holding companies’ FR Y-9C filing from Q3 2011.
Trading assets in thousands.

38

Figure 3: CDS Net to Gross Notional
1.2

Net Notional/Gross Notional
(CDS Bought-CDS Sold)/(CDS Sold+CDS Bought)

1

JPMORGAN CHASE & CO.

GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP, INC., THE

CITIGROUP INC.

MORGAN STANLEY

BANK OF AMERICA CORPORATION

TAUNUS CORPORATION

WELLS FARGO & COMPANY

HSBC NORTH AMERICA HOLDINGS INC.

METLIFE, INC.

BANK OF NEW YORK MELLON CORPORATION, THE

RBC USA HOLDCO CORPORATION

STATE STREET CORPORATION

SUNTRUST BANKS, INC.

NORTHERN TRUST CORPORATION

U.S. BANCORP

FIFTH THIRD BANCORP

REGIONS FINANCIAL CORPORATION

KEYCORP

CITIZENS FINANCIAL GROUP, INC.

UNIONBANCAL CORPORATION

BB&T CORPORATION

0

CAPITAL ONE FINANCIAL CORPORATION

0.2

ALLY FINANCIAL INC.

0.4

TD BANK US HOLDING COMPANY

0.6

PNC FINANCIAL SERVICES GROUP, INC., THE

0.8

-0.2

-0.4

Figure 3 plots net to gross notional for the top 25 bank holding companies in derivatives according to
the OCC quarterly report on bank trading and derivatives activities third quarter 2011. Data are from
bank holding companies’ FR Y-9C filing from Q3 2011. Trading assets in thousands. Empty bars denote
zero gross CDS notional.

Figure 4: Fraction of purchased credit derivatives recorded as guarantee
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Top 12

Bottom 13

Purchased CDs NOT eligible as guarantee

Purchased CDs eligible as guarantee

Figure 4 plots the fraction of purchased credit derivatives from Q2 2009 to Q4 2011 that could
be counted as a guarantee for regulatory purposes for the larger vs. the smaller top 25 bank holding
companies in derivatives. Data are from bank holding companies’ FR Y-9C filings. Size is measured by
trading assets.

Figure 5: Trade Composition by Counterparty Type
Percent customer-customer

Percent customer-dealer

Percent interdealer

Oct-08
Nov-08
Dec-08
Jan-09
Feb-09
Mar-09
Apr-09
May-09
Jun-09
Jul-09
Aug-09
Sep-09
Oct-09
Nov-09
Dec-09
Jan-10
Feb-10
Mar-10
Apr-10
May-10
Jun-10
Jul-10
Aug-10
Sep-10
Oct-10
Nov-10
Dec-10
Jan-11
Feb-11
Mar-11
Apr-11
May-11
Jun-11
Jul-11
Aug-11
Sep-11
Oct-11
Nov-11
Dec-11
Jan-12
Feb-12
Mar-12
Apr-12
May-12
May-12
Jun-12
Jul-12
Aug-12
Sep-12
Oct-12
Nov-12
Dec-12
Jan-13
Feb-13

100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Figure 5 plots trade composition by counter party type.
http://www.dtcc.com/products/derivserv/data/index.php.

39

Data is from the DTCC at

2

n(ω)

1.5

1

0.5

0

0

0.5

1

pre-trade exposures, ω

Figure 6: A U -shaped and symmetric distribution.

post-trade exposure, g(ω)

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

ω
ω
pre-trade exposure, ω

1

Figure 7: The post-trade exposure function when the traders’ distribution is U -shaped
and symmetric.

γ(ω, ω̃) = z(ω̃)

0

ω

ω̃

ω

1

γ(ω, ω̃) = −z(ω)

γ(ω, ω̃) = k

Figure 8: Portfolio of CDS contracts of a bank with pre-trade exposure ω ∈ [0, 12 ].

40

CDS sold per capita

CDS bought per capita

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

0.5

0

1

0

0.5

ω

1

ω

Figure 9: The number of contract sold, G+ (ω), and purchased, G− (ω).

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

0

0.5

1

ω

Figure 10: The volume of fully offsetting CDS contracts, min{G+ (ω), G− (ω)}.

gross notional per capita

absolute net notional per capita

0.42
0.3
0.4
0.2

0.38
0.36

0.1

0.34
0

0.5

0

1

0

ω

0.5

ω

Figure 11: Gross and net notional.

41

1

absolute net notional per capita

gross notional per capita
0.42
0.35
0.4
0.3
0.38
0.25
0.36
0.2
0.34
0.15
0

50

100

0

50

intermediation volume per capita

100

price dispersion
1

0.1
0.9

0.05

0.8

0.7
0

0

50

100

0

50

size percentile

100

size percentile

Figure 12: Conditional moments. On all panels, the x-axis is the size percentile of a bank
in the overall cross-section. The dotted vertical line indicates the entry threshold, Σ(0).

0.38
90

size percentile

0.36
80

0.34

70

0.32
0.3

60
0.28
50
0.26
40

0.24
0.22

30
30

40

50

60
70
size percentile

80

90

0.2

Figure 13: Bilateral gross notionals between size percentiles, per-capita.

42

References
Gara Afonso. Liquidity and congestion. Journal of Financial Intermediation, 20:324–360,
2011. 6
Gara Afonso and Ricardo Lagos. Trade dynamics in the federal funds market. Working
paper, Federal Reverve Bank of New York and NYU, February 2012. 6
Franklin Allen and Douglas Gale. Financial contagion. Journal of Political Economy, 1:
1–33, 2000. 6
David Andolfatto. Business cycles and labor-market search. The American Economic
Review, 86(1):112–132, 1996. 15
Navneet Arora, Priyank Gandhi, and Francis A. Longstaff. Counterparty credit risk and
the credit default swap market. Journal of Financial Economics, Forthcoming, 2012.
7, 9, 25, 31
Ana Babus. Endogenous intermediation in over-the-counter markets. Working paper,
Imperial College, 2009. 5
Ana Babus and Péter Kondor. Trading and information diffusion in over-the-counter
markets. Working paper, Imperial College and Central European University, 2013. 6
Bruno Biais, Johan Hombert, and Pierre-Olivier Weill. Trading and liquidity with imperfect cognition. Working paper, TSE, HEC, UCLA, 2010. 6
Patrick Bolton and Martin Oehmke. Should derivatives be privileged in bankruptcy?
Working paper, Columbia, 2011. 7
Patrick Bolton and Martin Oehmke. Credit default swaps and the empty creditor problem.
Review of Financial Studies, Forthcoming, 2012. 7
Patrick Bolton and Martin Oehmke. Strategic conduct in credit derivative markets. Working paper Columbia University, 2013. 7
Patrick Bolton, Tano Santos, and José Scheinkman. Cream skimming in financial markets.
Working paper Columbia University, 2012. 6
Briana Chang. Adverse selection and liquidity distortion in decentralized markets. Working paper, University of Wisconsin, 2012. 6
Kathryn Chen, Michael Fleming, John Jackson, Ada Li, and Asani Sarkar. An analysis
of cds transactions: Implications for public reporting. Working paper, FRBNY, 2011.
7, 8
Darrel Duffie, Semyon Malamud, and Gustavo Manso. Information percolation with equilibrium search dynamics. Econometrica, 2009. Forthcoming. 6

43

Darrell Duffie and Gustavo Manso. Information diffusion in large population. American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 97, 2007. 6
Darrell Duffie and Bruno Strulovici. Capital mobility and asset pricing. Econometrica,
80:2469–2509, 2012. 6
Darrell Duffie and Haoxiang Zhu. Does a central clearing counterparty reduce counterparty risk, working paper. Review of Asset Pricing Studies 2011, Volume 1: 74-95.
Review of Asset Pricing Studies 2011, Volume 1: 74-95. Review of Asset Pricing Studies, 1:74–95, 2011. 5
Darrell Duffie, Nicolae Gârleanu, and Lasse H. Pedersen. Securities lending, shorting, and
pricing. Journal of Financial Economics, 66:307–339, 2002. 6
Darrell Duffie, Nicolae Gârleanu, and Lasse H. Pedersen. Over-the-counter markets.
Econometrica, 73:1815–1847, 2005. 6, 31
ECB. Credt default swaps and counterparty risk. Working paper, European Central
Bank, 2009. 5
Ivan Eckland and Roger Téman. Convex Analysis and Variational Problems. Society for
Industrial Mathematics, 1987. 47
Larry Eisenberg and Thomas H. Noe. Systemic risk in financial systems. Management
Sciece, February:236–249, 2001. 5, 6
Matthew Elliott, Benjamin Golub, and Matthew O. Jackson. Financial network and
contagion. Working paper, CalTech and Stanford University, 2012. 6
Nicolae Gârleanu. Portfolio choice and pricing in illiquid markets. Journal of Economic
Theory, 144:532–564, 2009. 6
Michael Gofman. A network-based analysis of over-the-counter markets. Working paper,
Wisconsin, 2011. 5
Mikhail Golosov, Guido Lorenzoni, and Aleh Tsyvinski. Decentralized trading with private information. Working Paper, MIT and Yale, 2008. 6
Veronica Guerrieri and Robert Shimer. Dynamic adverse selection: A theory of illiquidity,
fire sales, and flight to quality. Working paper, University of Chicago, 2012. 6
Zhiguo He and Konstantin Milbradt. Endogenous liquidity and defaultable debt. Working
paper, Chicago Booth and MIT, 2012. 6
International Swaps and Derivatives Association. Concentration of otc derivatives among
major dealers. , 2010. 7
Patrick Kiefer. A search-based pricing model of credit default swaps. Working paper,
UCLA, 2010. 6
44

Ricardo Lagos and Guillaume Rocheteau. Liquidity in asset markets with search frictions.
Econometrica, 77:403–426, 2009. 6, 31
Ricardo Lagos, Guillaume Rocheteau, and Pierre-Olivier Weill. Crises and liquidity in
otc markets. Journal of Economic Theory, 146:2169–2205, 2011. 6
Robert E. Jr. Lucas. Liquidity and interest rates. Journal of Economic Theory, 50:
237–264, 1990. 15
Sergio Mayordomo, Juan Ignacio Pena, and Eduardo S. Schwartz. Are all credit default
swap databases equal. Working paper NBER, 2010. 9
Paul Milgrom and Ilya Segal. Enveloppe theorems for arbitrary choice set. Econometrica,
70:583–601, 2002. 34, 69
Martin Oehmke and Adam Zawadowski. The anatomy of the cds market”. Working paper
Columbia University, 2013. 7
Emiliano Pagnotta and Thomas Philippon. Competing on speed. Working Paper, NYU
Stern School of Business, 2011. URL http://ssrn.com/abstract=1967156. 6
Walter Rudin. Principles of Mathematical Analysis. McGraw-Hill, 1953. 69
Walter Rudin. Real and Complex Analysis. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1974. 55
Francesco Saita. Value at Risk and Bank Capital Management. Academic Press, 2007. 12
Alessio Saretto and Heather Tookes. Corporate leverage, debt maturity and credit default
swaps: The role of credit supply. Working paper, Yale, 2011. 7
Or Shachar. Exposing the exposed: Intermediation capacity in the credit default swap
market. Working paper, NYU, 2012. 7, 9
Shouyong Shi. A divisible search model of fiat money. Econometrica, 65:75–102, 1997. 6,
15
Robert Shimer. Labor Markets and Business Cylces (CREI Lectures in Macroeconomics).
Princeton University Press, 2010. 15
Nancy L. Stokey and Robert E. Lucas. Recursive Methods in Economic Dynamics. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 1989. 59
Renee Stulz. Credit default swaps and the credit crisis. Journal of Economic Perspectives,
24:73–92, 2011. 6
Nuray Terzi and Korkmaz Ulucay. The role of credit default swaps on financial market
stability. Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences, 24:983–990, 2011. 5
Alberto Trejos and Randall Wright. Shi-trejos-wright meets duffie-garleanu-pedersen.
Working paper, University of Wisconsin, 2012. 6
45

Dimitri Vayanos and Tan Wang. Search and endogenous concentration of liquidity in
asset markets, working paper. Journal of Economic Theory, 136:66–104, 2007. 6
Dimitri Vayanos and Pierre-Olivier Weill. A search-based theory of the on-the-run phenomenon. Journal of Finance, 63:1361–1398, 2008. 6
Pierre-Olivier Weill. Leaning against the wind. Review of Economic Studies, 74:1329–
1354, 2007. 6
Pierre-Olivier Weill. Liquidity premia in dynamic bargaining markets. Journal of Economic Theory, 140:66–96, 2008. 6
Adam Zawadowski. Entangled financial systems. Working paper, Boston University, 2013.
6

46

A
A.1

Proofs
Proof of Lemma 1

The first derivative of Γ(g) is:


E DeαgD
Γ [g] =
,
E [eαgD ]
0

which is positive since D is positive. The second derivative is:
00

Γ [g] = α


 


2
E D2 eαgD E eαgD − E DeαgD
E [eαgD ]2

.

The numerator is positive since, by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we have
h
i2

2

 

E DeαgD = E Deαg/2D eαg/2 < E D2 eαgD E eαgD .
The denominator is positive as well. We thus obtain that Γ00 (g) > 0 as claimed.

A.2

Proof of Proposition 1

The planner’s objective is convex, and its constraint set is convex and bounded. Given that
γ(ω, ω̃) is measurable and bounded by k, γ(ω, ω̃) belongs to the Hilbert space of square integrable
functions. Existence then follows from an application of Proposition 1.2, Chapter II in Eckland
and Téman (1987). That all solutions of the planning problem share the same post-trade
exposure almost everywhere follows from the strict convexity of the function Γ [g].
To show that any solution of the planning problem is the basis of an equilibrium, consider
the following variational experiment. Starting from a solution, γ(ω, ω̃) and g(ω), consider the
alternative feasible allocation γ(ω, ω̃)+ε∆(ω, ω̃) for some small ε > 0 and some bounded ∆(ω, ω̃)
such that
∆(ω, ω̃) + ∆(ω̃, ω) = 0

(21)

γ(ω, ω̃) = k ⇒ ∆(ω, ω̃) ≤ 0

(22)

γ(ω, ω̃) = −k ⇒ ∆(ω, ω̃) ≥ 0.

(23)

R1
The corresponding post-trade exposure is g(ω) + ε 0 ∆(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃. The change in the objective is, up to second-order terms:
Z 1
Z 1
0
δJ =ε
n(ω)Γ [g(ω)]
∆(ω, ω̃) n(ω̃) dω̃ dω
0
0
Z Z
Z Z
ε 1 1 0
ε 1 1 0
=
Γ [g(ω)] ∆(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃)n(ω) dω̃ dω +
Γ [g(ω)] ∆(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃)n(ω)dω̃ dω
2 0 0
2 0 0
Z Z
Z Z
ε 1 1 0
ε 1 1 0
=
Γ [g(ω)] ∆(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃)n(ω) dω̃ dω +
Γ [g(ω̃)] ∆(ω̃, ω)n(ω)n(ω̃)dω dω̃
2 0 0
2 0 0

47

Z Z
Z Z
ε 1 1 0
ε 1 1 0
=
Γ [g(ω)] ∆(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃)n(ω) dω̃ dω −
Γ [g(ω̃)] ∆(ω, ω̃)n(ω)n(ω̃)dω dω̃
2 0 0
2 0 0

Z Z 
ε 1 1
=
Γ0 [g(ω)] − Γ0 [g(ω̃)] ∆(ω, ω̃)n(ω)n(ω̃) dω̃ dω.
2 0 0
where: the first equality follows trivially; the second equality from relabeling ω by ω̃ and vice
versa; the third equality from the fact that ∆(ω, ω̃) + ∆(ω̃, ω) = 0; the fourth equality by
collecting terms. Since we started from a solution to the planning problem, it must be that
δJ ≥ 0. For this inequality to hold for any ∆(ω, ω̃) satisfying (21)-(23), it must be the case that
γ(ω, ω̃) and g(ω) satisfy (11) almost everywhere. Clearly, γ(ω, ω̃) is basis of an equilibrium, after
perhaps modifying it on a measure zero set so that it satisfies (11) everywhere. For brevity we
omit the precise construction of such a modification. The details are available from the authors
upon request.
Conversely, consider any equilibrium γ(ω, ω̃) and g(ω). Given that Γ [g] is convex, the
difference between the planner’s cost for the equilibrium allocation and the planner’s cost for
any other allocation γ̂(ω, ω̃) and ĝ(ω) is smaller than:

Z 1
Z 1
0
ˆ
n(ω)Γ [g(ω)]
γ(ω, ω̃) − γ̂(ω, ω̃) n(ω̃)dω̃dω.
J −J ≤
0

0

Keeping in mind that γ(ω, ω̃) + γ(ω̃, ω) = 0, we obtain, using the same manipulations as before:

Z 1Z 1
Z Z 
1 1 1
0
0
0
Γ [g(ω)] γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃)n(ω)dω̃ dω =
Γ [g(ω)] − Γ [g(ω̃)] γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω)n(ω̃)dω dω̃.
2 0 0
0
0
ˆ we obtain:
Plugging this back into the expression for J − J,


Z 1Z 1
0
0
ˆ
J −J ≤
Γ [g(ω)] − Γ [g(ω̃)]
γ(ω, ω̃) − γ̂(ω, ω̃) n(ω̃)n(ω)dω̃dω.
0

ω

Because of (11) the integrand is negative, implying that J ≤ Jˆ and establishing the claim that
γ(ω, ω̃) solves the planner’s problem.

A.3

Proof of Proposition 2

To prove that g(ω) is non-decreasing, suppose, constructing a contradiction, that there are
ω ≤ ω̃ such that g(ω̃) < g(ω). Then, by (11), it must be the case that for any counterparty x,
γ(ω, x) ≤ γ(ω̃, x), i.e., bank ω̃ sells more insurance than bank ω. But since bank ω̃ starts with
weakly larger exposure, ω ≤ ω̃, the definition of g(ω) in equation (7) implies that g(ω̃) ≥ g(ω),
which would be a contradiction.
To prove that post-trade exposures are closer together than pre-trade exposures, consider
again two banks ω ≤ ω̃ and bear in mind that we have just shown that g(ω) ≤ g(ω̃). If
g(ω) = g(ω̃), then the result is trivially true. Otherwise if g(ω) < g(ω̃), then it must be the case
that, for any
R 1 counterparty x, bank
R 1 ω̃ sells less insurance than bank ω, i.e. γ(ω̃, x) ≤ γ(ω, x).
Therefore 0 γ(ω̃, x)n(x) dx ≤ 0 γ(ω, x)n(x) dx which is, by definition of g(ω), equivalent to
g(ω̃) − ω̃ ≤ g(ω) − ω.

48

A.4

Proof of Proposition 3

All ω-traders in [ω, ω] sell k CDS contracts to any trader ω̃ > ω and buy k CDS contracts from
any trader ω̃ < ω. With traders ω̃ ∈ [ω, ω], the number of CDS contracts bought and sold is
indeterminate. For any ω ∈ [ω, ω] we thus have:
Z

ω

g(ω) = g(ω) = g(ω) = ω − kN (ω) +

γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ + k [1 − N (ω)] .
ω

Now multiply by n(ω) and integrate from ω to ω and note that, by (3) it must be the case that:
Z

ω

Z

ω

γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω)n(ω̃)dωdω̃ = 0.
ω

ω

In other words, the net trade across all matches (ω, ω̃) ∈ [ω, ω]2 must be equal to zero. Collecting
terms we obtain expression (16).

A.5
A.5.1

Proof of Proposition 5 and 6
Two preliminary results

First we establish that, when n(ω) is symmetric around 12 , the equilibrium is symmetric as well:
Lemma 2. Suppose that the distribution of traders satisfies n(ω) = n(1 − ω). Then equilibrium
post-trade exposures are symmetric, i.e. they satisfy g(1−ω) = 1−g(ω), and can be implemented
by a symmetric collection of CDS contracts, i.e. such that γ(ω, ω̃) = −γ(1 − ω, 1 − ω̃).
To see this, consider some equilibrium collection of CDS contracts, γ(ω, ω̃) and its associated
post-trade exposures, g(ω). Now, the alternative collection of CDS γ̂(ω, ω̃) = −γ(1 − ω, 1 − ω̃)
is feasible and generates post-trade exposures:
Z 1
Z 1
γ(1 − ω, 1 − ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ = ω −
γ(1 − ω, 1 − ω̃)n(1 − ω̃) dω̃
ĝ(ω) = ω −
0
0

Z 1
=1− 1−ω+
γ(1 − ω, ω̂)n(ω̂) dω̂ = 1 − g(1 − ω),
0

where the first equality holds by definition of γ̂(ω, ω̃), the second equality because n(ω̃) =
n(1 − ω̃), and the third equality by change of variables ω̂ = 1 − ω̃. Now it is easy to see that
γ̂(ω, ω̃) satisfies (11). Indeed, ĝ(ω) < ĝ(ω̃) is equivalent to g(1 − ω̃) < g(1 − ω), which implies
from (11) that γ(1 − ω̃, 1 − ω) = −γ(1 − ω, 1 − ω̃) = γ̂(ω, ω̃) = k. Since equilibrium post-trade
exposures are uniquely determined, we conclude from this that ĝ(ω) = 1 − g(1 − ω) = g(ω).
To see that g(ω) can be implemented
using a symmetric collection of CDS contracts, consider

γ ∗ (ω, ω̃) = 21 γ(ω, ω̃) + γ̂(ω, ω̃) , for the same γ̂(ω, ω̃) defined above. By construction, we have
that γ ∗ (1 − ω, 1 − ω̃) = −γ ∗ (ω, ω̃), and g ∗ (ω) = 21 g(ω) + ĝ(ω) = g(ω), given that we have just
shown that g(ω) is symmetric.
The second preliminary result concerns the function H(ω):
Rω
Lemma 3. Let, for ω ∈ [0, 21 ], H(ω) ≡ 0 (ω − ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ − kN (ω)2 .
• if k ≤

1
2

[n (0)]−1 , then H(ω) ≥ 0.

49



• if 12 [n (0)]−1 < k < 1−2E ω | ω ≤ 12 , then there is a unique ω ∈ (0, 12 ) such that H(ω) < 0
for ω ∈ (0, ω) and H(ω) > 0 for ω ∈ (ω, 21 ).


• if k ≥ 1 − 2E ω | ω ≤ 12 , then H(ω) ≤ 0.
To prove this result, note that H 0 (ω) = N (ω) [1 − 2kn(ω)] and keep in mind that n(ω) is
non-increasing over [0, 21 ]. If 2kn(0) ≤ 1, then H 0 (ω) ≥ 0 over [0, 21 ]. Given that H(0) = 0, this
establishes the first point of the Lemma. If 2kn(0) > 1, then it follows that H(ω) is initially
decreasing and may subsequently become increasing: therefore, the equation H(ω) = 0 has at
most one solution in (0, 21 ]. Such a solution exists if and only if:
H( 12 )

1
2N

1
2



Z

1
2

ω̃n(ω̃) dω̃ − kN
0


⇐⇒ k ≤ 1 − 2E ω | ω ≤ 12 ,

≥ 0 ⇐⇒

−


1 2
2

≥0

since n(ω) symmetric implies N ( 12 ) = 21 .


Lastly, we verify that 1 − 2E ω | ω ≤ 12 ≥ 12 [n(0)]−1 , with an equality if and only if n(ω) is
uniform. This follows from two implications of the fact that n(ω) is non-increasing over [0, 12 ].
First,
N ( 12 )

=

1
2

Z
=

1
2

n(ω) dω ≤

0

n(0)
2

=⇒ n(0) ≥ 1.

Second, a uniform distribution over [0, 12 ] first-order stochastically dominates n(ω | ω ≤
implying that:




E ω | ω ≤ 12 ≤ 12 ⇐⇒ 1 − E ω | ω ≤ 12 ≥ 21 ,

1
2 ),

with a strict inequality if and only if n(ω | ω ≤ 12 ), and thus n(ω), is uniform. Combining the
two we obtain the desired inequality.
It follows directly from the Lemma that:
Corollary 13. For ω ∈ (0, 21 ), z(ω) ≤ k if and only if H(ω) ≤ 0.

A.5.2

Proof of the two propositions

Given Lemma 2 it is enough to focus on ω ∈ [0, 21 ].
[n(0)]−1 . Then, by
Lemma 3, it follows that z(ω) ≥ k for all ω ∈ (0, 12 ]. Therefore, the candidate CDS contracts
of Proposition 6 are such that γ(ω, ω̃) = k if ω < ω̃. The corresponding post trade exposure is
thus equal to g(ω) = ω + k [1 − 2N (ω)]. Since n(ω) is U shaped and symmetric, the maximum
of n(ω) is n(0) and so 2kn(ω) ≤ 1 for all ω. Therefore the function g(ω) is non-decreasing
over [0, 1]. This establishes that the CDS contracts of Proposition 6 are indeed the basis of an
equilibrium.

When there is no flat spot. Consider first the case when k ≤

1
2

−1
When
there
< k < 1−

 are flat and increasing spots. Now assume that [n(0)]

2E ω | ω ≤

1
2

and consider some ω ∈ [0, ω]. By Lemma 3, we have that γ(ω, ω̃) = −z(ω) for

50

ω̃ < ω, γ(ω, ω̃) = z(ω̃) for ω̃ ∈ (ω, ω), and γ(ω, ω̃) = k for ω̃ ≥ ω. Therefore, the corresponding
post-trade exposure is
Z ω
Z ω
z(ω) n(ω̃) dω̃ +
g(ω) = ω −
z(ω̃) n(ω̃) dω̃ + k [1 − N (ω)] .
0

ω

Differentiating with respect to ω one directly verifies that g 0 (ω) = 0 so that g(ω) is flat over [0, 12 ].
Next consider ω ∈ (ω, 12 ]. By Lemma 3, we have that γ(ω, ω̃) = −k for ω̃ < ω, and γ(ω, ω̃) = k
for ω̃ > ω. Therefore the corresponding post-trade exposure is g(ω) = ω + k [1 − 2N (ω)].
Differentiating we obtain that g 0 (ω) = 1 − 2kn(ω), which is positive since, by Lemma 3, it must
be the case that H 0 (ω) > 0 for ω ∈ (ω, 12 ]. Taken together, this implies that the CDS contracts
of Proposition 6 are indeed the basis of an equilibrium.


When there is full risk sharing. Lastly, assume that k ≥ 1 − 2E ω | ω ≤
z(ω) ≤ k for all ω ∈ [0, 21 ]. For all ω ∈ [0, 12 ], g(ω) becomes
Z
g(ω) = ω −

ω

1
2

Z
z(ω) n(ω̃) dω̃ +

0

ω

1
2


. Then



z(ω̃) n(ω̃) dω̃ + z( 12 ) 1 − N ( 12 ) ,

i.e., the same as above with ω replaced by 21 and k replaced by z( 12 ). Taking derivatives shows
that g 0 (ω) = 0 and so g(ω) = g( 12 ). Now given that N ( 12 ) = 12 , it follows that g( 12 ) = 12 and so
the CDS contracts of Proposition 6 are the basis of an equilibrium.

A.5.3

Proof of the results discussed in Section 5.3.3

We first establish:
Proposition 14. Suppose that n(ω) is U-shaped, symmetric, positive, and consider the equilibrium CDS contracts of Proposition 6. Then:
(i) G+ (ω) = G− (1 − ω);
(ii) G+ (ω) is decreasing and G− (ω) is increasing;
(iii) G+ (ω) = G− (ω) if and only if ω = 12 ;
(iv) G+ (ω) + G− (ω) is weakly hump-shaped and symmetric around
[0, ω), constant over (ω, 1 − ω) and decreasing over (1 − ω, 1];

1
2:

it is increasing over

(v) G+ (ω) − G+ (ω) is U-shaped and symmetric around 12 ;
(vi) min{G+ (ω), G− (ω)} is hump-shaped and symmetric around 21 .

Point (i). The first point of the Proposition follows from the fact that γ(ω, ω̃) = −γ(1 −
ω, 1 − ω̃).

Point (ii). Given the first point, to prove the second point we only need to show that G+ (ω) is
decreasing over [0, 12 ], and that G− (ω) is increasing over [0, 12 ]. For this we consider various subcases. If g(ω) is increasing, then G+ (ω) = k [1 − N (ω)] and so is clearly decreasing. Likewise,
G− (ω) = kN (ω) and is clearly increasing. If g(ω) has flat and possibly increasing spot, i.e. ω ∈

51

(0, 12 ], then for ω ∈ (ω, 12 ], G+ (ω) = k [1 − N (ω)] and G− (ω) = kN (ω), which are respectively
decreasing and increasing. For ω ∈ [0, ω]
Z ω
z(ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ + k [1 − N (ω)] ,
G+ (ω) =
0

which is decreasing. Likewise, when ω ∈ [0, ω],
Rω

−

G (ω) = N (ω)z(ω) =

0

(ω − ω̃) n(ω̃) dω̃
N (ω)

Taking derivatives we obtain

Rω
N (ω)2 − n(ω) 0 ω − ω̃ n(ω̃) dω̃
dG−
(ω) =
dω
N (ω)2

Rω
Rω
n(ω) 0 ω̃n(ω̃) dω̃
ωn(ω)N (ω) − n(ω) 0 ω − ω̃ n(ω̃) dω̃
=
≥0
≥
N (ω)2
N (ω)2
where the second line follows from the fact that n(ω) is decreasing over [0, 12 ], implying that
N (ω) ≥ ωn(ω).

Point (iii). The first point implies that G+ ( 12 ) = G− ( 21 ). This is the unique solution of
G+ (ω) = G− (ω) given that G+ (ω) is decreasing and G− (ω) is increasing.

Point (iv). Given the first point, it is enough to show that G+ (ω) + G− (ω) is non-decreasing
over [0, 21 ]. If g(ω) is increasing then G+ (ω) + G− (ω) = k. Now suppose that g(ω) has a flat and
possibly an increasing spot. For all ω ∈ [ω, 21 ], g(ω) is increasing and so G+ (ω) + G− (ω) = k.
For ω ∈ [0, ω], the gross exposure is:
Z ω
+
−
G (ω) + G (ω) = z(ω)N (ω) +
z(ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ + z(ω) [1 − N (ω)] .
ω

Now recall:
Z

ω

g(ω) = ω − z(ω)N (ω) +

z(ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ + z(ω) [1 − N (ω)] .
ω

This implies:
+

Rω

−

G (ω) + G (ω) = g(ω) − ω + 2z(ω)N (ω) = g(ω) − ω + 2
Rω
(ω − 2ω̃) n(ω̃)
= g(ω) + 0
,
N (ω)

52

0

(ω − ω̃) n(ω̃) dω̃
N (ω)

where the first equality follows from plugging in the expression for z(ω) from Proposition 6.
Taking derivatives with respect to ω we find:
Rω
N (ω) (−ωn(ω) + N (ω)) − n(ω) 0 (ω − 2ω̃) n(ω̃) dω̃
N (ω)2
Rω


Z ω
N (ω) − 2n(ω) 0 (ω − ω̃) n(ω̃) dω̃
n(ω)
=
(ω − ω̃) n(ω̃) dω̃ ,
ω−2
≥
N (ω)
N (ω)
0
where the last inequality follows because n(ω) is non-increasing over [0, 12 ], and so N (ω) ≥ ωn(ω).
The result follows because the term in parenthesis is equal to zero when ω = 0, and its derivative
is 1 − 2N (ω) > 0 over [0, 12 ).

Point (v). Given the first point it is enough to show that G+ (ω) − G− (ω) is decreasing over
[0, 12 ]. For ω ∈ [0, 21 ], Proposition 2 implies that g( 12 ) − g(ω) ≤ 21 − ω. Given symmetry, g( 21 ) = 12 ,
so g(ω) ≥ 0 and |G+ (ω) − G− (ω)| = g(ω) − ω. When g(ω) is flat, then clearly this is a decreasing
function. When g(ω) is increasing, then g 0 (ω) = 1 − 2kn(ω), and so g 0 (ω) − 1 = −2kn(ω) < 0.

Point (vi). From Point (ii) and (iii), it follows that, for ω ∈ [0, 21 ], min{G+ (ω), G− (ω)} =

G+ (ω) is increasing.

Lastly we show our results regarding trading volume:
Proposition 15. Trading volume is non-monotonic in k:
(i) When k goes to zero, trading volume goes to zero.


(ii) When k ∈ [1 − 2E ω | ω ≤ 21 , 1], trading volume is always greater than the Walrasian
volume.
(iii) Assume that n(ω) is bounded away from zero. Then, when k goes to infinity, there exists
an equilibrium collection of CDS contracts generating a trading volume arbitrarily close to
the Walrasian volume.

Point (i). Trivially, when k → 0, volume must also go to zero.


Point (ii). Assume that k is greater than 1 − 2E ω | ω ≤

1
2



but less than one. Then there
is full risk sharing and post trade exposures in the OTC market are the same as in a Walrasian
market. As a result, trading volume in the OTC market is at least equal to trading volume
in the Walrasian market, where net exposures are equal to gross exposures. Suppose towards
a contradiction that volume in the OTC market is exactly equal to its Walrasian counterpart.
That is, for any ω, the gross exposure is equal to the absolute net exposure, | 21 − ω|. Since
R1
g(ω) = 12 = ω + 0 γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃, this implies that for ω < 12 , we must have γ(ω, ω̃) ≥ 0 and
for ω > 21 , γ(ω, ω̃) ≤ 0. In other words, the only way there is no excess trading volume is that
any given bank ω only sign CDS contracts in one direction. But this also means that there
cannot be trades amongst (ω, ω̃) ∈ [0, 21 )2 , and amongst (ω, ω̃) ∈ ( 12 , 1]2 . Therefore, for a ω < 12
bank:
Z 1
k
1
2 − ω = 1 γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ ≤ 2 .
2

But this inequality cannot hold if ω ' 0 and k is less than one, a contradiction.

53

Point (iii). The construction is based on the following intuition: in the absence of any trading
limits, the Walrasian allocation is obtained by trading the quantity 12 − ω of CDS’s with the
symmetric bank, 1 − ω, and nothing with banks ω̃ 6= 1 − ω. When trading capacity is large, then
approximate Walrasian volume is obtained by trading with a small measure of banks surrounding
the symmetric 1 − ω bank. Formally let us assume for this argument that n(ω) > 0 eveywhere so
that it is bounded below by n > 0. Given some integer I, consider the sequence ωi = 12 + 2Ii , for
i ∈ {1, . . . , I} and the symmetric sequence ω−i = 1 − ωi . Let Ωi ≡ [ωi−1 , ωi ] and its symmetric
Ω−i ≡ [ω−i , ω−i+1 ]. The mean endowment in Ωi is ωi? = E ω | ω ∈ Ωi , and by symmetry
? = 1 − ω ? . Now consider the collection of CDS contracts
the mean endowment in Ω−i is ω−i
i
γA (ω, ω̃) + γB (ω, ω̃), defined as follows. For ω ∈ Ωi and ω̃ ∈ Ω−i :
γA (ω, ω̃) =

1
2

− ωi?
,
N (ωi ) − N (ωi−1 )

and for ω ∈ Ωi and ω̃ ∈
/ Ω−i , γA (ω, ω̃) = 0. For ω ∈ Ωi and ω̃ ∈ Ωj ,


γB (ω, ω̃) = ωj? − ω̃ − ωi? − ω .
The contracts γA (ω, ω̃) prescribe trades amongst (ω, ω̃) belonging to symmetric intervals Ωi and
Ω−i . They are designed to bring a ω-trader’s exposure close to 12 . Namely after conducting
all the trades in γA (ω, ω̃) the exposure of a ω-trader is 21 − (ωi? − ω). When I is large enough,
ω ' ωi? and so this exposure is very close to 12 . Note that, because the aggregate exposure to
default risk is equal to 21 , the average residual exposure ωi? − ω must be equal to zero.
The contracts γB (ω, ω̃) prescribe a ω-trader to swap his residual endowment, ωi? − ω, with
the residual endowment of everyone else. Therefore, he ends up with the average residual
endowment, which is equal to zero as noted above. Taken together, the combined contracts,
γA (ω, ω̃) + γB (ω, ω̃), lead to post-trade exposures g(ω) = 12 .
Clearly, gross notionals created by γA (ω, ω̃) can be made arbitrarily close to their Walrasian
counterpart for I large enough. Likewise, the gross notionals created by γB (ω, ω̃) can be made
arbitrarily close to zero. Given that N (ωi ) − N (ωi−1 ) > n (ωi − ωi−1 ) = n/(2I) > 0, choosing k
large enough makes these contracts feasible, establishing the claim.

A.6

Proof of Proposition 7

When D is normally distributed, Γ [x] is quadratic, and so we have the identity:
Γ [y] = Γ [x] + Γ0 [x] (y − x) +

Γ00
(y − x)2 ,
2

where Γ00 = αV [D] is the constant second derivative of Γ [x]. It thus follows that competitive
surplus must be equal to:
2
 αV [D]
K(ω) = Γ [ω] − Γ [g(ω)] + Γ0 [g(ω)] g(ω) − ω =
g(ω) − ω .
2
The property that K(ω) is U-shaped obtains from the fact that g 0 (ω) ≤ 1 and g( 12 ) = 12 .

54

The formula from the frictional surplus is:
Z 1
Γ0 [g(ω̃)] − Γ0 [g(ω)] n(ω̃) dω̃
F (ω) =
0
Z ω
Z

0
0
=
Γ [g(ω)] − Γ [g(ω̃)] n(ω̃) dω̃ +
0

1


Γ0 [g(ω̃)] − Γ0 [g(ω)] n(ω̃) dω̃.

ω

Now take derivatives

F 0 (ω) = Γ00 [g(ω)] g 0 (ω) 2N (ω) − 1 ,
which is negative for ω below the median, and positive for ω above the median, which in our
symmetric case is ω = 21 .

A.7
A.7.1

Proof of Proposition 8
Preliminaries

To apply the fixed point theorem, we first need to establish properties of the operators mapping
the distribution of traders, n, to the post-trade exposure function, g, and to the entry payoff, ∆.
Consider the set C 0 ([0, 1]) of continuous functions over [0, 1], equipped with
R 1 the sup norm. Let
0
N be the set of n ∈ C ([0, 1]) such that n(ω) > 0 almost everywhere and 0 n(ω) dω = 1. Let G
be the set of post-trade exposures functions, g, and let D be the set of entry payoff functions,
∆, generated by distributions in N . Clearly, by Proposition 2, G is a subset of C 0 ([0, 1]), and so
is D. Moreover:
Lemma 4. The sets G and D are equibounded and equicontinuous, and so their closures, Ḡ and
D̄, are compact.
For G, boundedness follows because g(ω) ∈ [0, 1] and equicontinuity because, as shown in
Proposition 2, post-trade exposures are Lipchitz with coefficient 1. For D, boundedness follows
because g is bounded. For equicontinuity, it is enough to show that all ∆ ∈ D are Lipchitz with a
coefficient that is independent
 of n ∈ N . This follows from the observation that K(ω) = Γ [ω] −
Γ [g(ω)]+Γ0 [g(ω)] g(ω)−ω is Lipchitz with a coefficient independent of n. Indeed, g is Lipchitz
with coefficient one, because both Γ [x] and Γ0 [x] are continuously differentiable, and because
the Lipchitz property over a compact set is preserved by sum, product, and composition. So all
we need to show is that the frictional surplus is Lipchitz with a coefficient that is independent
from n. To that end, consider ω2 > ω1 and note that:

Z 1
0
0
0
0
F (ω1 ) − F (ω2 ) =
Γ [g(ω̃)] − Γ [g(ω2 )] − Γ [g(ω̃)] − Γ [g(ω1 )] n(ω̃) dω̃
0
Z 1
≤
Γ0 [g(ω̃)] − Γ0 [g(ω2 )] − Γ0 [g(ω̃)] − Γ0 [g(ω1 )] n(ω̃) dω̃
0
Z 1
Γ0 [g(ω2 )] − Γ0 [g(ω1 )] n(ω̃) dω̃ = Γ0 [g(ω2 )] − Γ0 [g(ω1 )] ,
≤
0

where the inequality on the third line follows by an application of the reverse triangle inequality.
Since Γ0 [g] is Lipchitz, and since g is Lipchitz with coefficient one, the result follows. The
compactness of Ḡ and D̄ then follows from Arzela-Ascoli Theorem (see Theorem 11.28 in Rudin,
1974).

55

Next, we establish a first continuity property:
Lemma 5. The operator mapping distributions, n ∈ N , into post-trade exposures, g ∈ G, is
continuous.
To show this result, consider some n ∈ N , and let g and γ be the associated equilibrium posttrade exposures and CDS contracts. Let n(p) be a sequence of distributions converging to n, and
let γ (p) and g (p) be the associated sequences of CDS contracts and post-trade exposures. Keep
in mind that we equipped C 0 ([0, 1]) with the sup norm, so convergence is uniform. Given that Ḡ
is compact, in order to show continuity it is sufficient to show that all convergent subsequences
of g (p) share the same limit, and that this limit is equal to g. Without loss of generality, we
thus assume that g (p) is convergent, and denote its limit by g ? . Since all g (p) are continuous and
convergence is uniform, g ? must be continuous. By construction, g (p) , γ (p) and n(p) satisfy:
Z 1
(p)
γ (p) (ω, ω̃)n(p) (ω̃) dω̃.
g (ω) = ω +
0

Consider the auxiliary post-trade exposures:
Z 1
(p)
γ (p) (ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃
ĝ (ω) ≡ ω +
0
Z 1
g̃ (p) (ω) ≡ ω +
γ(ω, ω̃)n(p) (ω̃) dω̃.
0

In words, ĝ (p) is the post-trade exposure generated by γ (p) if the underlying distribution of
traders is n, and g̃ (p) is the post-trade exposure generated by γ if the underlying distribution is
n(p) . Since γ (p) is bounded by k and since n(p) → n, we have ||ĝ (p) − g (p) || → 0 and so ĝ (p) → g ? .
Likewise, g̃ (p) → g.
R1
Let J(g, n) ≡ 0 Γ [g(ω)] n(ω) dω be the average cost of risk bearing generated by post-trade
exposures g under distribution n. Recall that (γ, g) solves the planning problem of Proposition
1 given n, i.e., it minimizes J amongst feasible risk allocations. Since (γ (p) , ĝ (p) ) is feasible for
this planning problem, we must have J(g, n) ≤ J(ĝ (p) , n). Going to the limit p → ∞, we obtain
by dominated convergence that J(g, n) ≤ J(g ? , n). Likewise, g (p) solves the planning problem
given n(p) . Since (γ, g̃ (p) ) is feasible for this planning problem, we must have J(g (p) , n(p) ) ≤
J(g̃ (p) , n(p) ). Going to the limit p → ∞, we obtain by dominated convergence that J(g ? , n) ≤
J(g, n). Taken together, we thus have that J(g ? , n) = J(g, n). Now suppose that g ? 6= g. Then
by convexity of Γ[g] we have that for all λ ∈ (0, 1):
J(λg + (1 − λ)g ? , n) < J(g, n).
But λγ + (1 − λ)γ (p) is feasible, generates post trade exposure λg + (1 − λ)ĝ (p) given n, and
converges to λg + (1 − λ)g ? as p → ∞. Therefore, for p large enough, J(λg + (1 − λ)ĝ (p) , n) <
J(g, n), which is impossible given that (γ, g) solves the planning problem. Therefore, g = g ?
almost everywhere, since we restricted attention to n such that n(ω) > 0 almost everywhere.
Since g and g ? are continuous, we obtain that g = g ∗ everywhere.
Next we have the corollary:
Corollary 16. The operator mapping distributions, n ∈ N , into entry-utility functions, ∆ ∈ D,
is continuous.

56



Note that ∆(ω) = A ω, g(ω), N (ω) + B ω, g, n , where
k
A(ω, g, N ) = Γ [ω] − Γ [g] − Γ0 [g] (ω − g) + (2N − 1) Γ0 [g]
2
Z
Z

k 1 0
k ω 0
Γ [g(ω̃)] n(ω̃) dω̃ +
Γ [g(ω̃)] n(ω̃) dω̃.
B ω, g(·), n(·) = −
2 0
2 ω
Now given any n(p) → n, we already know that the associated g (p) → g. Note also, that
N (p) → N (uniformly as well). Since A(ω, g, N ) is continuous and (ω, g, N ) ∈ [0, 1]3 , it follows
(p)
that A(ω, g (p) (ω),
 N (ω)) →
 A(ω, g(ω), N (ω)) uniformly. Likewise, by dominated convergence,
(p)
(p)
B ω, g , n
→ B ω, g, n uniformly.
Lastly an important property for what follows is:
Lemma 6 (0 6= D̄). The function ∆(ω) = 0 does not belong to the closure of D.
Towards a contradiction, assume it does: there is a sequence n(p) such that the associated

→ 0. Note that, by strict convexity of Γ [g(ω)], Γ [ω] − Γ [g(ω)] + Γ0 [g(ω)] g(ω) − ω ≥ 0,
with an equality if and only if g(ω) = ω. Given that the frictional surplus is non-negative, this
implies that:
h
i
h
i

Γ [ω] − Γ g (p) (ω) − Γ0 g (p) (ω) ω − g (p) (ω) → 0,

∆(p)

and that all convergent subsequence of g (p) are such that g (p) (ω) → ω. Given that Ḡ is compact,
we thus have that g (p) (ω) → ω uniformly over ω ∈ [0, 1]. Now turning to the last term of ∆(ω)
evaluated at ω = 0, we have:
Z 1 h
i
h
i
Γ0 g (p) (ω̃) − Γ0 g (p) (0) n(p) (ω̃) dω̃ → 0,
0
(p)
(p)
where we can Rremove the absolute
since
for any ω > 0,

value
  (p)g (ω) ≥ g (0). In particular,
1
0
(p)
0
(p)
we have that ω Γ g (ω̃) − Γ g (0) n (ω̃) dω̃ → 0. Given that g (p) (ω̃) ≥ g (p) (ω) for





ω̃ ∈ [ω, 1], this implies in turn that Γ0 g (p) (ω) − Γ0 g (p) (0) 1 − N (p) (ω) → 0. Since
g (p) (ω) → ω, we thus have that N (p) (ω) → 1, i.e., the distribution n(p) converges to a Dirac at
ω = 0. The intuition is simple: the only way ω = 0 has no gain from entering, i.e. ∆(ω) = 0, is
if it only meets traders of her kind, i.e., ω̃ = 0 with probability one. But this means that ω 6= 0
must have strictly positive gains from entering. Formally, given that g (p) (ω) converges towards
ω, uniformly over ω ∈ [0, 1], this implies that, for every ω ∈ (0, 1], the last term of ∆(p) (ω)
converges to k2 Γ0 (0) − Γ0 (ω) > 0, which is a contradiction.

A.7.2

Properties of the fixed-point equation

For this section it is convenient to rewrite the fixed-point equation as:
T [n] (ω) = R 1
0

Υ [∆(ω)]
Υ [∆(ω̃)] dω̃

, where Υ(x) ≡ Ψ

c
x

.

(24)

We start by establishing basic properties of the function Υ(x):

Lemma 7. Let, for x > 0, Υ(x) ≡ Ψ xc and let Υ(0) = 0. Then the function Υ(x) is bounded,
non-decreasing, continuous, piecewise continuously differentiable with bounded derivative.

57

The function Υ(x) is bounded and non-deacreasing since Ψ(x) ∈ [0, 1] and non-increasing.
It is obviously continuous for x > 0, and it is also continuous at zero since limS→∞ Ψ(S) = 0. It
is differentiable for all x > 0 and x 6= Sc . For x ∈ (0, Sc ), Υ0 (x) = −c2 /x3 ϕ(c/x). Now recall that
limx→0 Υ0 (x) = 1c × limS→∞ S 3 ϕ(S), which we assumed
h
 exists. Given that ϕ(S) is continuous,

this implies in turns that Ψ0 (x) is bounded over 0, Sc . For x >
continuously differentiable and bounded. Moreover,
1 c 1
c
Ψ
= ×
x
x
c x

Z

∞
c
x

1
c
zϕ(z) dz = ×
c x

Z
0

x
c

1
ϕ
y3

c
S,

Υ0 (x) = 0 and is obviously

 
1
1
dy → × lim S 3 ϕ(S),
y
c S→∞

where the first equality follows from the definition of Ψ(S), the second equality from the change of
variable y = 1/z, and the third equality follows because of our assumption that limS→∞ S 3 ϕ(S)
exists. Therefore, Υ(x) is continuously differentiable at zero, implying that its derivative is
bounded over [0, Sc ).
Lemma 8 (Properties of T ). The operator T is continuous and uniformly bounded. The set
T [N ] is included in N and is equicontinuous.
Continuity follows because Υ(x) is continuous, and because, by Corollary 16, the operator
mapping n to ∆ is continuous. For boundedness, we first observe that the numerator of (24) is
positive and less than one. So all we need to show is that denominator is bounded away from
zero. For this it suffices to show that:
Z 1


inf
Υ ∆(ω) dω > 0.
∆∈D̄

0

Since D̄ is compact by Lemma 4, and since the functional that is minimized is continuous in
∆, it follows that the infimum is achieved for some continuous function ∆∗ ∈ D̄. By Lemma 6,
∆∗ 6= 0. Since Ψ(x) ≥ 0 with an equality if and only if x = 0, it follows that the infimum is
strictly positive.
R1
Next we show that T [N ] ⊆ N , i.e., that T [n](ω) is continuous, satisfies 0 n(ω) dω = 1,
and
R 1 n(ω) > 0 almost everywhere. Continuity follows because ∆(ω) and Υ(x) are continuous;
0 n(ω) dω = 1 follows by construction. To show that T [n](ω) > 0 almost everywhere, we show
that there is at most one ω ? such that T [n](ω ? ) = 0. Indeed, since Υ(x) = 0 if and only if
x = 0, T [n](ω ? ) = 0 implies Υ [∆(ω ? )] = ∆(ω ? ) = K(ω ? ) = F (ω ? ) = 0. Because F (ω ? ) = 0, and
keeping in mind that n(ω) > 0 almost everywhere, it follows that Γ0 [g(ω)] = Γ0 [g(ω ? )] and thus
?
g(ω) = g(ω
g(ω̃) is continuous, it Rfollows that g(ω) is constant and
R 1 ) almost everywhere. Since
1
equal to 0 ωn(ω) dω. But then K(ω ∗ ) = 0 implies that ω ? = 0 ωn(ω) dω, and is thus uniquely
determined.
Turning to equicontinuity, we first observe that, since Ψ [x] is piecewise differentiable with
bounded derivatives, it is Lipchitz. Recall from the proof of Lemma 4 that all ∆ ∈ D are
Lipchitz with a coefficient that is independent of n ∈ N . Given that the Lipchitz property is
preserved by composition, this shows that ω 7→ Ψ [∆(ω)] is Lipchitz with a coefficient that is
independent of n ∈ N . Lastly, from argument above, the denominator of T [n](ω) is bounded
away from zero. Taken together, this shows that the function T [n] is Lipchitz with a coefficient
that is independent of n ∈ N .

58

A.7.3

Applying the Schauder fixed point theorem

Let M be the uniform upper bound of the operator T we obtained in the proof of Lemma 8.
Consider the closed and bounded set NM of all n ∈ N such that ||n|| ≤ M . Note that N is
convex and that a convex combination of functions bounded by M remains bounded by M .
Therefore, NM is convex as well. Clearly, the operator T maps NM into itself. Moreover, by
Lemma 8, the family T [NM ] is equicontinuous. Taken together all these properties allow to
apply Theorem 17.4 in Stokey and Lucas (1989), establishing the existence of a fixed point.

A.8

Proof of Corollary 9

The result follows by applying the Schauder fixed point theorem in the set NS of n ∈ NM which
are U-Shaped and symmetric. Clearly, this set is closed and convex. Moreover, when Γ [x] the
operator T maps NS into itself. The result follows.

A.9

Proof of Proposition 10

The first step is to derive the distribution of traders conditional on size, n(ω | S). The entry
threshold at ω, Σ(ω), is a hump-shaped function of ω. This means that, if a bank of size S is
active in the market, then its endowment per capita, ω, must be either small enough or large
enough. Precisely, for S ∈ [Σ(0), Σ( 12 )], let ω̄(S) ∈ [0, 21 ] be the solution of Σ(ω) = S. For
S > Σ( 12 ), let ω̄(S) = 12 . Then if a bank of size S ∈ [Σ(0), ∞) is active in the OTC market,
its endowment per-capita of a bank of size must either belong to [0, ω̄(S)] or [1 − ω̄(S), 1]. Now
recall that the endowment per trader is drawn uniformly conditional on S. This implies that
the measure of traders conditional on S must be uniform over its support, that is:

n(ω | S) =

1
if ω ∈ [0, ω̄(S)] ∪ [1 − ω̄(S), 1]
2ω̄(S)

and n(ω | S) = 0 otherwise. Clearly, if S 0 > S, then n(ω | S 0 ) puts more mass towards the middle
of the ω spectrum than n(ω | S), because middle-ω banks are predominantly large. Mathematically, given symmetry, this property can be expressed as follows:
Lemma 9. Consider (S, S 0 ) in [Σ(0), Σ( 21 )]2 . If S 0 > S, then n(ω | S 0 , ω ≤
stochastically dominates n(ω | S, ω ≤ 12 ).

1
2)

first order

Now consider any function x(ω) that is U-shaped and symmetric and calculate:
Z

1

Z
x(ω)n(ω | S) dω = 2

ES [x(ω)] =
0

0

1
2

x(ω)n(ω | S, ω ≤ 21 ) dω,

where the second equality follows because x(ω) is symmetric. Now, given that x(ω) is decreasing
over [0, 21 ], it follows from the above lemma that ES [x(ω)] is non-increasing. The opposite is
true if x(ω) is hump-shaped and symmetric. Except for price dispersion, the results then follow
from Proposition 14. For price dispersion, recall that, given that Γ0 [g] = E [D] + α V[D]
2 g and so:


αV [D]
R(ω, ω̃) = E [D] +
g(ω) + g(ω̃)
2

59

Given that n(ω | S) is symmetric around 12 , ES [g(ω)] =
price is:
ES [R(ω, ω̃)] = E [D] +

1
2

and so the conditional mean of CDS

αV [D]
.
2

The conditional dispersion is, up to some multiplicative constant:
h
ES

g(ω) −

1
2

+ g(ω̃) −


1 2
2

i

= 2ES

h

g(ω) −


1 2
2

i

Z
=2

1
2

g(ω) −

0


1 2
2 n(ω | S, ω

≤ 21 ) dω,

where the first equality follows because ω and ω̃ are drawn independently, and the second equality
follows by symmetry. Now observe that, over [0, 12 ], g(ω) − 12 is non-decreasing and negative, so
2
that g(ω) − 21 is non-increasing. The result then follows from the Lemma.

A.10

Proof of the results in Section 6.3.3

In this section we formulate and solve the model we use for comparative statics with respect to
c and k. The distribution of per-capita endowments is taken to be uniform over {0, 12 , 1}, and
independent from the size distribution. The loss-upon-default, D, is assumed to be normally
distributed, so that the cost of risk-bearing, Γ [g], is quadratic. Lastly, the distribution of
bank size is Pareto: the measure of traders in banks with size greater than some S ≥ S is
Ψ(S) = (S/S)−θ , for some θ > 1.

A.10.1

Equilibrium in the OTC market, post entry

We first solve for an equilibrium in the OTC market, post entry. We gain tractability by
noting that, with three possible values for the endowment ω, the distribution of traders can be
parameterized by a single number, the fraction of traders from ω = 12 banks: n( 12 ) ≡ n. Given
symmetry, it must be the case that n(0) = n(1) = 1−n
2 . We now consider three cases.
Case 1: when k(1 + n) < 1. Then, we guess and verify that risk sharing is imperfect. Thus, all
traders sign k contracts whenever they meet a trader with ω̃ 6= ω. This implies that:
g(0) = kn + k

1−n
k(1 + n)
=
.
2
2

We also have g(1) = 1 − g(0) and g( 12 ) = 12 . The aggregate gross exposure is:
G(k, n) = (1 − n)k

1+n
k(1 − n)(1 + 3n)
+ nk(1 − n) =
.
2
2

(25)

The first term is the exposures of extreme-ω banks. The fraction of ω ∈ {0, 1} traders is equal to
1 − n. Each such extreme-ω trader transacts with a middle-ω trader with probability n, or with
the opposite extreme-ω trader with probability (1 − n)/2. The total probability of a transaction
is (1 + n)/2, and all transactions are of size k. The second term is the exposure of middle-ω
banks. The fraction of middle-ω traders is n. Each such trader transacts with extreme-ω traders
with probability 1−n, and all transactions are of size k. We can calculate, similarly, the absolute
net exposure per capita. For extreme-ω banks, net and gross exposures are the same, and for
middle-ω banks the net exposure is zero. The same calculation as above thus shows that the

60

absolute net exposure is:
N (k, n) =

k(1 − n)(1 + n)
2

(26)

Net and gross exposures grow linearly with k. When k(1 + n) = 1 and full risk sharing is
achieved, we have that N (k) < G(k). This is the sense in which the intermediation services of
middle-ω banks are essential to achieve full risk sharing. The ratio of net-to-gross exposures:
ρ(n) ≡

N (k, n)
1+n
=
,
G(k, n)
1 + 3n

(27)

is immediately shown to be decreasing in n.
Case 2.1: if k(1 + n) ≥ 1 but k(1 − n) < 1. The first inequality means that full risk sharing
obtains in equilibrium. The second inequality means that the intermediation services of middleω are essential to achieve full risk-sharing. Indeed, if ω = 0 traders only transacted with ω = 1
1
traders, then g(0) would be equal to k 1−n
2 < 2 . As we will see below this case never arises in
an entry equilibrium.
Case 2.2: if k(1 − n) ≥ 1. Then full risk sharing obtains without using the intermediation
services of ω = 12 -traders: γ(0, 1) = 21 and γ(0, 12 ) = 0. In that case net and gross exposures
coincide and are both equal to 1−n
2 .

A.10.2

Entry

First recall the proof of Proposition 7, in Section A.6 that:
αV [D]
K(ω) =
(g(ω) − ω)2
2

Z
and

Ψ(Σ(ω)) =

max{Σ(ω), S}
S

|g(ω) − g(ω̃)| n(ω̃) dω̃,
0

and ∆(ω) = K(ω) + 21 F (ω). The entry threshold is Σ(ω) =
the measure of traders above Σ(ω) is equal to


1

F (ω) = αV [D]

−θ

c
∆(ω) .

With a Pareto distribution



−θ

θ
Σ(ω)
S∆(ω)
= max
,1
= min
,1 ,
S
c

where the last equality follows from the definition of the entry threshold. The fixed point
equation for the distribution of types becomes:

T [n] (ω) = R
1
0

min

n

min

n

S∆(ω)
c ,1

S∆(ω̃)
c ,1

oθ

oθ

dω̃

Adapting the above formula for a discrete number of types, we obtain after some algebra,
gathered in Section A.10.3, that the value of entry for extreme-ω banks is



 αV[D]k 1 − k(1−n2 )
if k(1 + n) < 1
4
2
∆(0) = ∆(1) =
 αV[D]
if k(1 + n) ≥ 1.
8

61

For middle-ω banks, it is
(
∆( 12 ) =

αV[D]k
4

(1 − n) [1 − k (1 + n)]

0

if k(1 + n) < 1
if k(1 + n) ≥ 1.

By symmetry, the value of entry for ω = 1 banks is the same as that of ω = 0 banks. When
k(1 + n) ≥ 1, then there is full risk-sharing and so middle-ω banks have no incentives to enter.
Lastly, one can verify that ∆(0) > ∆( 12 ), i.e., extreme-ω banks have stronger incentives to enter
than middle-ω banks. The fixed point equation is:


1
S∆( 2 )
min
,1
c
F (n)θ
o.
n
(28)
n=
, where F (n) ≡
2 + F (n)θ
,
1
min S∆(0)
c
Proposition 17. Equation (28) has a unique solution, n. It is equal to zero if k ≥ 1, and it is
positive and less than k1 − 1 if k < 1.
The detailed proof is in Section A.10.4. When k ≥ 1 then k(1 + n) ≥ 1: thus, there is
full risk-sharing in any equilibrium, ∆( 21 ) = 0, and so n = 0. Conversely, n = 0 is indeed
an equilibrium. When k < 1, the solution of the fixed point equation cannot be such that
k(1 + n) ≥ 1. Indeed, when k < 1 we need sufficiently positive entry of middle-ω banks to
sustain full risk sharing, but if there is full risk sharing middle-ω banks have no incentive to
enter. This verifies that Case 2.1 above never arises once we consider entry. The proposition
also shows that the symmetric equilibrium is unique. The force that underlies uniqueness is
that the entry decisions of middle-ω banks are strategic substitutes. This is because, when more
middle-ω banks enter, risk-sharing improves and intermediation profits are eroded.
Our first set of comparative statics is with respect to the fixed cost of entry, c:
Proposition 18 (Changes in c). Holding all other parameters the same, there are two cost
thresholds c and c such that:
• If c < c, all banks enter and n = 13 .
• If c ∈ (c, c), all extreme-ω banks enter, and only some of the middle-ω banks enter. When
c increases, the fraction of middle-ω traders decreases, and the total measure of traders in
the market decreases.
• If c ≥ c, only some of the extreme-ω and middle-ω banks enter. When c increases, the
fraction of middle-ω traders, n, does not not change, but the total measure of traders in
the market decreases.
When c is small enough, c < c, then all banks enter regardless of their size. When c is in the
intermediate range [c, c], then all extreme-ω banks and only large enough middle-ω banks enter.
Indeed, extreme-ω banks have greater incentives to participate in the market. As c increases,
fewer middle-ω banks enter, and the size of the market, as measured by the total measure of
active traders, decreases. When c is large enough, then we have partial entry at all ω’s. An
increase in c reduces the size of the market but does not change its composition. This follows
from the Pareto size distribution, which implies that, when c increases, the measures of middleand extreme-ω traders are scaled down by the same constant.
Next, we turn to comparative statics with respect to k:

62

Proposition 19 (Changes in k). Changes in the line limit, k, have non-monotonic effects on
intermediation activity:


• The measure of middle-ω traders, Ψ Σ( 12 ) , is a non-monotonic function of k. It increases
with k when k is close to zero, and it goes to zero as k → 1.
• The fraction of middle-ω traders, n, is positive when k = 0 and equal to zero when k = 1.
It decreases with k for k ' 0 and ' 1, but can increase with k otherwise.
An increase in k has two opposite effects on middle-ω banks’ entry incentives. On the one
hand, there is a positive partial equilibrium effect: when k is larger, each trader in a given bank
can increase the size of its position and thus earn larger profits. But, on the other hand, there
is a general equilibrium effect: risk sharing improves, which reduces intermediation profits. The
first effect dominates when k ' 0, increasing the measure of middle-ω traders. But the second
effect dominates when k ' 1, decreasing the measure of middle-ω traders. To understand the
effects on the fraction of middle-ω traders, note that, when k ' 0, an increase in k causes both
middle-ω and extreme-ω traders to enter. But extreme-ω traders enter more, resulting in a
decrease in n. When k ' 1, the risk-sharing is almost perfect and so n decreases towards zero.
These comparative statics translate into predictions about the evolution of gross exposures
and net exposures as frictions decrease.
Corollary 20 (Exposures). A reduction in frictions has the following effects on exposures:
• When c decreases, gross exposures per capita increase weakly, and the ratio of net to gross
exposure decreases weakly.
• When k increases, k ' 0 or k ' 1, gross exposures increase, and the ratio of net to gross
exposures increases.
One sees that, in both cases, reducing frictions increases trading volume, in the sense of
increasing gross notionals outstanding per capita. When c decreases, the increase in trading
volume is due to an increase in intermediation. Middle-ω banks enter more, and the ratio of
net to gross notional decreases. When k increases, by contrast, the increase in trading volume
comes about because of larger customer-to-customer trades, and less intermediation, and the
ratio of net to gross notional increases. Therefore, according to the model, the evolution of the
net-to-gross notional ratio can help in telling apart a decrease in frictions due to an improvement
in entry costs versus risk-management technologies.

A.10.3

Detailed calculations of entry incentives

Let us calculate ∆(0) when k(1 + n) ≤ 1:



 1−n
αV [D]
2
1
∆(0) =
g(0) + k n 2 − g(ω) +
(g(1) − g(0)) .
2
2

But g(1) − g(0) = 1 − 2g(0) = 2 21 − g(0) , and so:







αV [D]
αV [D]
k(1 + n) 2
k(1 + n)
2
1
1
∆(0) =
g(0) + k 2 − g(ω) =
+k 2 −
2
2
2
2


2
k 1−n
αV [D] k
=
1−
4
2

63

When k(1 + n) > 1, ∆(0) is constant equal to αV [D] k/8. Similar calculations lead to:


 αV [D] k
1
αV [D] k
k(1 + n)
1
1
∆( 2 ) =
(1 − n) 2 − g(0) =
(1 − n) 2 −
2
2
2
αV [D] k
=
(1 − n) [1 − k (1 + n)] .
4
When k(1 + n) > 1, ∆( 12 ) is constant equal to zero. The fixed point equation for n is then:
1
3

n = T [n]

where

T [n] =
1
3


min


min

θ
1
S∆( 2 )
,
1
c

θ
1
S∆( 2 )
,1
c

=
+ 32 min

n

oθ

S∆(0)
c ,1

F (n)θ
,
2 + F (n)θ

where F (n) is defined in the text.

A.10.4

Proof of Proposition 17

The right-hand size of (28) is continuous, is positive at n = 0 and equal to 0 at n = 1/k − 1.
Thus, by the intermediate value theorem, a solution exists. To establish uniqueness it is enough
to show that the right-hand side is non-increasing. We thus distinguish three cases. If both Σ(0)
and Σ( 21 ) are lower than S, then F (n) = 1 and so the property holds. If Σ(0) is lower than S but
Σ( 12 ) is greater than S, then F (n) = S∆( 21 )/c, which is clearly decreasing in n ∈ (0, 1/k − 1). If
both Σ(0) and Σ( 12 ) are greater than S, then
F (n) =

(1 − n)(1 − k(1 + n))
−1 + k/2 + k 2 n2 /2 + kn
0
=⇒
F
(n)
=
.
1 − k/2(1 − n2 )
(1 − k/2(1 − n2 ))2

Given that n ∈ (0, 1/k − 1), we have k < 1/(1 + n) and so the numerator in the expression of
F 0 (n) is less than:


n2
n
1
1
n2
1
+
+
=
−
+
<0
−1 +
2(1 + n) 2(1 + n)2 1 + n
2
1 + n (1 + n)2
where the last inequality follows because n2 < 1 and 1/(1 + n) > 1/(1 + n)2 . This establishes
the claim.

A.10.5

Proof of Proposition 18

Given that ∆(0) > ∆( 21 ) we have Σ(0) < Σ( 21 ), and thus there are three cases to consider.
When all banks enter: Σ( 12 ) ≤ S. If all banks enter then n = 13 and both Σ(0) and Σ( 12 ) are
less than S. In particular, Σ( 12 ) < S can be written, given n = 13 :


αSV [D] 2k
4k
c≤
1−
= c.
4
3
3
Conversely, if this condition is satisfied, n = 31 solves the equilibrium equation (28). Clearly, in
that case, the measure of traders in the economy is constant.

64

When only some extreme- and middle-ω banks enter: Σ(0) ≥ S. Then, the fixed point
equation, and thus n, does not depend on c. Let n denote the solution of the fixed point equation
in this case and let


k(1 − n2 )
αV [D] k
1−
S.
c ≡ S∆(0, n) =
4
2
In words, c is the cost threshold such that Σ(0) = S, given that n = n. One can verify that
c > c. Clearly, if Σ(0) > S, then c ≥ c. Conversely, if c ≥ c, then n = n solves the equilibrium
fixed point equation. When c ≥ c, the threshold Σ(0) and Σ( 21 ) are increasing in c, and so the
total measure of traders in the economy is decreasing in c.
When all extreme-ω banks but only some the middle-ω banks enter: when Σ(0) < S
but Σ( 12 ) > S. From the previous two paragraphs, this occurs if and only if c ∈ (c, c). Because
Σ(0) < S, all extreme-ω traders enter: the measure of extreme-ω traders is thus equal to 2/3
and does not change with c. Together with the fact that the fraction of middle-ω traders, n, is
decreasing in c, this implies that the measure of middle-ω traders is decreasing in c. Thus, the
total measure of traders is decreasing in c.

A.10.6

Proof of Proposition 19

We first establish a number of preliminary results, and then turn to the results stated in the
proposition.
Lemma 10. When Σ(0) > S, the fraction of middle-ω traders decreases with k.
When Σ(0) > S,
F (n, k) =

(1 − n) [1 − k(1 + n)]
∂F
1−n
=⇒
=−
1 − k/2(1 − n2 )
∂k
[1 − k/2(1 − n2 )]2



n2
1
+n+
2
2


< 0.

But we already know that ∂F/∂n < 0, from the proof of Proposition 17, in Section A.10.4.
Thus, the equilibrium fixed-point equation, (28), is increasing in both n and k, establishing the
claim.
Lemma 11. When Σ( 21 ) > S > Σ(0), the fraction of middle-ω traders, n, increases in k if
k(1 + n) < 21 , and decreases in k if k(1 + n) > 21 .
When Σ( 12 ) > S > Σ(0),
F (n, k) =

SαV [D]
[1 − n] × k × [1 − k(1 + n)] .
4c

It thus follows that F (n, k) increases with k when k(1 + n) < 12 and decreases with k when
k(1 + n) > 21 . But we already know from the proof of Proposition 17, in Section A.10.4, that
∂F/∂n < 0, establishing the claim.26
One can easily find parameter values such that, in equilibrium, either k(1 + n) < 12 or k(1 + n) > 21 .
To find parameter values such that k(1 + n) < 12 , one first picks some k such that k(1 + 13 ) < 12 . Then,
given this k, one picks c ∈ (c, c), as constructed in the proof of Proposition 18, so that Σ( 21 ) > S > Σ(0).
But then we know that the equilibrium n has to be less than 13 , and so it follows from k(1 + 13 ) < 12 that
k(1 + n) < 12 as well. Likewise, if k > 12 and c ∈ (c, c), then k(1 + n) > 12 and n decreases with k.
26

65

Lemma 12. When k ' 0, the fraction of middle-ω traders, n, decreases with k, and entry
incentives for all banks, ∆(0) and ∆( 21 ), both increase with k.
Note that ∆(0) and ∆( 21 ) are less than αV [D] k/4, which goes to zero when k goes to zero.
Therefore, for k sufficiently small, we know that both Σ(0) and Σ( 12 ) must be greater than S,
and the first part of the result follows from Lemma 10 that n is a decreasing function of k. Let
n(0) denote the limit of n as k → 0. By continuity, n(0) must solve the fixed point equation
n−

(1 − n)(1 − k(1 + n))
F (n, 0)θ
= 0 ⇔ n − (1 − n)θ = 0, where F (n, k) =
θ
1 − k/2(1 − n2 )
2 + F (n, 0)

In particular, n(0) ∈ (0, 1). Given that ∂F (n, k)/∂n ≤ 0, the partial derivative of the above
equation with respect to n must be larger than one. We can thus apply the implicit function
theorem and find that n is continuously differentiable with respect to k in a neighborhood of
k = 0, with bounded derivatives. The second part of the result then follows by differentiating
∆(0) and ∆( 21 ) with respect to k.
Lemma 13. When k ' 1, the fraction of middle-ω traders can be written as n(k) = max{n1 (k), n2 (k)},
where both n1 (k) and n2 (k) are continuously differentiable and satisfy n1 (1) = n2 (1) = n01 (1) =
n02 (1) = 0.
For this Lemma we start by noting that since n ∈ (0, 1 − 1/k), we must have that n → 0 as
k → 1. It then follows that k(1 + n) → 1, S∆( 21 )/c → 0, and that n must solve either one of the
following two equations:
n−

F1 (n, k)θ
= 0,
2 + F1 (n, k)θ

F2 (n, k)θ
n−
= 0,
2 + F2 (n, k)θ

where F1 (n, k) =

1
S∆( 2 )
c

=

αV [D]
[1 − n] [1 − k(1 + n)]
4

(29)

where F2 (n, k) =

1
S∆( 2 )
c
S∆(0)
c

=

[1 − n] [1 − k(1 + n)]
.
1 − k2 (1 − n2 )

(30)

The same calculations as in the proof of Proposition 17, in Section A.10.4, show that each of these
equation has a unique solution in (0, 1 − 1/k), which we denote by n1 (k) and n2 (k) respectively.
Clearly, both n1 (k) and n2 (k) go to zero as k goes to one. Moreover the implicit function
theorem applies to both equations at (n, k) = (0, 1) since both are continuously differentiable
in (n, k), with a partial derivative with respect to n that is greater than one. Moreover, since
F1 (0, 1) = F2 (0, 1) = 0 and θ > 1, it follows that the partial derivative with respect to k is zero
at (n, k) = (0, 1). Therefore, n01 (1) = n02 (1) = 0.
The last thing to show is that n(k) = max{n1 (k), n2 (k)}. To see this, note that if n = n1 (k),
then it must be the case that S∆(0)/c ≥ 1, from which it follows that F1 (n1 (k), k) ≥ F2 (n1 (k), k),
and so that n1 (k) ≥ n2 (k). Similarly, when n = n2 (k), we have that S∆(0)/c ≤ 1, that
F2 (n2 (k), k) ≥ F1 (n2 (k), k), and so n2 (k) ≥ n1 (k).

Proof of the proposition. For the first statement of the first bullet point, recall Lemma
1
1
12: when
 k1 is close to zero, ∆( 2 ) is an increasing function of k and Σ( 2 ) > S. It thus follows
that Ψ Σ( 2 ) is increasing in k. For the second statement of the first bullet point, recall Lemma
13: when k → 1, n goes to zero.
 1At
 the same time, the total measure of traders in the market
cannot exceed one, and so Ψ Σ( 2 ) ≤ n. The second bullet point follows directly from Lemma
11 and Lemma 10.

66

A.10.7

Proof of Corollary 20

Gross exposures per capita, G(n, k), are increasing in n ∈ [0, 13 ], and the net-to-gross notional
ratio, ρ(n), is decreasing in n. Since n is non-increasing in c, the first bullet point follows.
For the second bullet point, consider first gross exposures. The result when k ' 0 follows by applying the same argument as in the proof of Lemma 12. When k ' 1, the argument follows by first noting that, since G(n, k) is increasing in n ∈ (0, 13 ), we can write
G(n(k), k) = max{G(n1 (k), k), G(n2 (k), k)}. Using that the ni (k)’s are continuously differentiable with ni (1) = n0i (1) = 0, one obtains that G(ni (k), k) is increasing for k ' 1, and so is
G(n(k), k). The result in the second bullet point about the net-to-gross notional ratio, ρ(n(k)),
follows because, on the one hand, ρ(n) is a decreasing function of n and, from Proposition 19,
n(k) is decreasing in k for k ' 0 and k ' 1.

A.11

Proof of Proposition 11

We study each terms of W (ε, δ) in turns. To ease exposition, we start with the third term, then
move on to the first term, and finally study the second term.

Derivative of the third term. Note that Σε (ω) = Ψ−1 [M n(ω) + εδ(ω)] and that the
derivative of Φ ◦ Ψ−1 [x] is 1/Ψ−1 [x]. Therefore, the derivative of the third term is:
Z

1

δ(ω)
dω.
Σ(ω)

−c
0

Derivative of the first term. The derivative of the first term is, clearly:
Z

1

δ(ω)Γ [ω] dω.
0

Derivative of the second term. For this define δ̄ ≡
nε (ω) ≡

R1
0

δ(ω) dω and let

M n(ω) + εδ(ω)
.
M + εδ̄

Recall that, conditional on entry, the equilibrium allocation of risk is efficient. That is, the
second term can be written:


Z 1
Z 1

− M + εδ̄ × inf
nε (ω)Γ ω +
γ(ω, ω̃) nε (ω̃)dω̃ dω,
γ(ω,ω̃) 0

0

By the envelope theorem (see paragraph below for the detailed formal argument), the derivative
of “inf” is equal to the partial derivative of the objective with respect to ε evaluated at the
δ̄
ε (ω)
= δ(ω)−n(ω)
, the derivative of the third term is:
optimal γ(ω, ω̃). Given that ∂n∂ε
M
ε=0
Z
− δ̄
Z
−
0

0
1

1

Z

1



n(ω)Γ [g(ω)] dω −
δ(ω) − n(ω)δ̄ Γ [g(ω)] dω
0


Z 1
0
n(ω)Γ [g(ω)]
γ(ω, ω̃) δ(ω̃) − δ̄n(ω̃) dω̃dω.
0

67

Changing the order of integration and using γ(ω, ω̃) = −γ(ω̃, ω) we obtain that the term on the
second line above is:
Z 1
Z 1

0
γ(ω, ω̃) δ(ω̃) − δ̄n(ω̃) dω̃ dω
n(ω)Γ [g(ω)]
−
0
0
Z 1
Z
 1 0
Γ [g(ω̃)] γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ dω
=
δ(ω) − δ̄n(ω̃)
0

0

Some more algebra. Collecting the derivatives of the first, second, and third term we
obtain:
1



Z 1
c
0
W (0, δ) =
δ(ω) −
Γ [g(ω̃)] γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ dω
+ Γ [ω] − Γ [g(ω)] +
Σ(ω)
0
0
Z 1Z 1
Γ0 [g(ω̃)] γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω)n(ω̃) dωdω̃.
− δ̄
Z

0

0

(31)
(32)

0

R1
Just as in the calculation
of entry incentives, in Section 6.1, we add and subtract 0 Γ0 [g(ω)] γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ =

Γ0 [g(ω)] g(ω) − ω to the integral in the first line, (31). We obtain that this integral is equal
to:


Z 1
c
δ(ω) −
+ K(ω) + F (ω) dω.
Σ(ω)
0
Now moving on to the second line, (32), we note that:
Z
0

1Z 1

Γ0 [g(ω̃)] γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃)n(ω) dω̃dω

0

Z Z
Z Z
1 1 1 0
1 1 1 0
=
Γ [g(ω̃)] γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃)n(ω) dω̃dω +
Γ [g(ω̃)] γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃)n(ω) dω̃dω
2 0 0
2 0 0
Z Z
Z Z
1 1 1 0
1 1 1 0
=
Γ [g(ω̃)] γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃)n(ω) dω̃dω −
Γ [g(ω̃)] γ(ω̃, ω)n(ω̃)n(ω) dω̃dω
2 0 0
2 0 0
Z Z
Z Z
1 1 1 0
1 1 1 0
=
Γ [g(ω̃)] γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃)n(ω) dω̃dω −
Γ [g(ω)] γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω)n(ω̃) dωdω̃
2 0 0
2 0 0

Z Z 
Z
1 1
1 1 1
0
0
=
Γ [g(ω̃)] − Γ [g(ω)] γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃)n(ω) dω̃dω =
F (ω)n(ω) dω.
2 0 0
2 0
where: the first equality follows trivially; the second equality follows from γ(ω̃, ω) = −γ(ω, ω̃);
the third equality from relabeling ω by ω̃ and vice versa; and the last line by collecting terms,
using (11), as well as the definition of the frictional surplus. Collecting all terms, and using that
∆(ω) = K(ω) + 12 F (ω), we arrive at the formula of the proposition.

The formal application of the envelope theorem. Consider the optimization problem
Z

1

K(ε) = min

φ(ω, γ, ε) dω,

γ(ω,ω̃) 0

68

(33)

subject to γ(ω, ω̃) + γ(ω̃, ω) = 0 and γ(ω, ω̃) ∈ [−k, k] and where:


Z 1
γ(ω, ω̃) nε (ω̃)dω̃ dω
φ(ω, γ, ε) ≡ nε (ω)Γ ω +
0


Z 1
Z 1
M n(ω) + εδ(ω)
ε
M
=
γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ +
γ(ω, ω̃)δ(ω̃) dω̃ .
Γ ω+
M + εδ̄
M + εδ̄ 0
M + εδ̄ 0
2

∂ φ
Clearly, both ∂φ
∂ε and ∂ε2 exist. Moreover, since because γ(ω, ω̃), n(ω̃) and δ(ω̃) are bounded,
2
these derivatives are bounded uniformly in (ω,
R 1ε) ∈ [0, 1] . Therefore, using Theorem 9.42 in
∂f
Rudin (1953), we obtain ∂ε by differentiating 0 φ(ω, γ, ε) dω under the integral sign. Moreover,
2

∂φ
since ∂∂εφ2 is bounded uniformly in (ω, ε), it follows that ∂φ
∂ε and thus ∂ε is Lipchitz with respect
to ε, with a Lipchitz coefficient that is independent from ω. This allows us to apply Theorem 3
in Milgrom and Segal (2002) and assert that:

Z

0

K (0) = lim

ε→0 0

1

∂φ
(ω, γε , 0) dω,
∂ε

where γε is, for each ε, a solution of the minimization problem (33). All we need to show is,
therefore, that
Z 1
Z 1
∂φ
∂φ
lim
(ω, γε , 0) dω =
(ω, γ, 0) dω,
ε→0 0 ∂ε
0 ∂ε
where γ is a solution of the minimization problem when ε = 0. To that end we first take
derivatives with respect to ε:
Z 1
Z 1
∂φ
M
(ω, γε , ε) dω =
[δ(ω) − δn(ω)] Γ [g̃ε (ω)] dω
0 ∂ε
0


Z 1
Z 1
Z 1
0
+
n(ω)Γ [g̃ε (ω)] − δ
γε (ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ +
γε (ω, ω̃)δ(ω̃) dω̃ dω,
0

0

0

R1
where g̃ε (ω) ≡ ω + 0 γε (ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ is the post-trade exposure generated by γε (ω, ω̃) if the
underlying distribution of traders is n(ω). Given that nε (ω) → n(ω) uniformly, we know from
the proof of RLemma 5 that g̃ε (ω) → g(ω) uniformly. Given
R 1the definition of g̃ε (ω) this also
1
implies that 0 γε (ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ = g̃ε (ω) − ω → g(ω) − ω = 0 γ(ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ uniformly. This
implies that all terms except perhaps the last one converge to their ε = 0 counterparts. To show
that the last term converges as well, rewrite it as:
Z 1Z 1
n(ω)Γ0 [g̃ε (ω)] γε (ω, ω̃)δ(ω̃) dω̃ dω
0
0


Z 1Z 1
Z 1Z 1
0
0
=
n(ω) Γ [g̃ε (ω)] − Γ [g̃ε (ω̃)] γε (ω, ω̃)δ(ω̃) dω̃ dω +
n(ω)Γ0 [g̃ε (ω̃)] γε (ω, ω̃)δ(ω̃) dω̃ dω
0
0
0
0
Z 1Z 1
Z 1
Z 1
Γ0 [g̃ε (ω)] δ(ω)
γε (ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ dω,
=−
n(ω) Γ0 [g̃ε (ω)] − Γ0 [g̃ε (ω̃)] kδ(ω̃) dω̃ dω −
0

0

0

0

where the second line follows from subtracting and adding Γ0 [gε (ω̃)], and the third line follows,
for the first term, from the optimality condition (11) and, for the second term, from the fact
γ(ω, ω̃) = −γ(ω̃, ω) and by switching integrating variables. The result follows because, as noted

69

before, both g̃ε (ω̃) and

A.12

R1
0

γε (ω, ω̃)n(ω̃) dω̃ converge uniformly to their ε = 0 counterparts.

Equilibrium market size is socially optimal given n(ω)

Go back to the beginning of Section 7.1 and let the planner choose the number M of traders in
the OTC market, holding market composition n(ω) the same. The corresponding entry threshold
is ΣM (ω) and solves ΣM (ω) = Ψ−1 [M n(ω)]. Moreover the threshold ΣM (ω) is decreasing in
M because Ψ [S] is decreasing in M . Note as well that there is a maximum market size, M̄ ,
consistent with n(ω). The maximum size M̄ is attained when the threshold reaches zero for
some ω. When M rises above M̄ , it is no longer possible to increase entry at the extreme and
so it is no longer possible to keep market composition the same. Given that the threshold is
lowest at ω = 0, M̄ solves Ψ [0] = M̄ n(0).
For M ∈ (0, M̄ ] the derivative of the welfare function with respect to M is given by the
directional derivative of Proposition 11, evaluated at ΣM (ω) and δ(ω) = n(ω):


Z 1
c
n(ω) Γ [g(ω)] − Γ [ω] −
dω.
ΣM (ω)
0
Note that g(ω) only depends on n(ω) and, therefore, does not depend on M . Therefore, the
directional derivative only depends on M through ΣM (ω). Given that ΣM (ω) is a decreasing
function of M , the derivative is decreasing, the planning problem is strictly concave in M , and
the first-order condition for optimality is sufficient.

70

