NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF EARLY LEAD EXPOSURE:
EVIDENCE FROM A CASE OF ENVIRONMENTAL NEGLIGENCE
Tomás Rau
Loreto Reyes
Sergio S. Urzúa
Working Paper 18915
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18915

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013
We have benefitted from the discussion with Orly Ashenfelter, Lori Beaman, David Card, Brian Jacob,
Pat Kline, Fabian Lange, Giordano Palloni, Jeff Smith, Duncan Thomas, and comments from seminar
participants at Duke University, Aarhus Universitet, NBER Summer Institute, University of California-Berkeley,
Northwestern University, University of Michigan, University of Maryland, University of Chile, Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile, Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez, Universidad Diego Portales, XV Annual
Meeting of the Latin American and Caribbean Economic Association LACEA - 2010 (Medellín, Colombia),
National Environmental Commission of Chile (Comisión Nacional de Medio Ambiente, CONAMA),
the XVI Annual Meeting of the Network on Inequality and Poverty NIP - 2011 (Cuernavaca, México)
and the Northeast Universities Development Consortium Conference 2011 (NEUDC). We thank the
team of the TV show "Contacto'' for some of the data analyzed in this paper. We also thank Andrei
N. Tchernitchin for his guidance on the medical literature documenting the effects of lead on humans.
Tomas Rau and Sergio Urzúa thank the support of Centro de Microdatos at the University of Chile
through the Millennium Science Initiative sponsored by the Chilean Ministry of Economics, Development
and Tourism, Project NS100041. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Tomás Rau, Loreto Reyes, and Sergio S. Urzúa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Long-term Effects of Early Lead Exposure: Evidence from a case of Environmental Negligence
Tomás Rau, Loreto Reyes, and Sergio S. Urzúa
NBER Working Paper No. 18915
March 2013
JEL No. I15,I18,I25,J17,O1,Q5,Q51,Q53,Q56
ABSTRACT
This paper estimates the effect of early lead exposure on academic achievement and adult earnings.
We analyze longitudinal information from individuals attending primary and secondary schools in
the city of Arica (in northern Chile). Between 1984 and 1989, Arica received more than 20,000 tons
of toxic chemicals containing high concentrations of lead. Initially, the chemical waste was located
several kilometers from the city. However, Arica's rapid expansion, which included the construction
of housing projects just meters away from the waste deposit, put a large number of families at risk.
Our data include information on residential proximity to the polluted area, levels of lead exposure,
comprehensive demographic information, nationally representative academic test scores and administrative
data on adult earnings.
We document a strong relationship between blood lead levels and student academic performance.
We find that an increase of one microgram of lead per deciliter of blood reduces math and language
scores by 0.15 and 0.21 standard deviations, respectively. For earnings, we estimate that for each
extra microgram of lead, monthly earnings decrease by CLP 11,458 (or USD 22.92). This translates
into a reduction of USD 6,000 in lifetime earnings per microgram of lead per deciliter of blood.

Tomás Rau
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
Avda. Vicuna Mackenna 4860, Macul
Santiago, Chile
trau@uc.cl
Loreto Reyes
Ministry of Finance, Chile
Teatinos 120, Piso 12
Santiago, Chile
lreyes@hacienda.gov.cl


Sergio S. Urzúa
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall #3115C
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
urzua@econ.umd.edu

1

Introduction

In recent decades, lead pollution has received increasing attention, especially in developing countries. This emphasis has led to the development of programs to prevent and communicate the
harmful eﬀects of lead on human health, the implementation of public policies aimed at reducing emissions from major pollution sources (fuel, paints, light industries, and mineral processing
manipulation, etc.), and more accurate measurement of lead concentration thresholds in soil, air,
water, and blood. In 1991 for example, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
deﬁned a threshold of 10 micrograms per deciliter of blood (10μg/dL), above which negative eﬀects
of lead on IQ, impaired hearing, behavioral problems (aggression) and delayed bone growth have
been documented.1 At higher levels, lead is associated with deterioration in the nervous system,
severe liver damage, anemia and even death (PTF, 2000; ATDSR, 2007). Furthermore, because
brain functions develop in early childhood, young children are especially vulnerable to the eﬀects
of lead. Early lead exposure might cause severe and irreversible eﬀects on intellectual development
(ATDSR, 2007; Tchernitchin et al., 2005).
In this paper we analyze the eﬀects of blood lead concentration on the academic performance
of students in the city of Arica (in northern Chile). As we describe in detail below, this provides
a unique opportunity to study the eﬀects of early lead exposure on humans. The presence of lead
in Arica is attributed to the importation of 20,000 tons of mineral residues/waste from Sweden,
between 1984 and 1989. The waste was imported by the Chilean company PROMEL, initially to
be reprocessed to extract gold and silver. However, PROMEL quickly reported this would not be
economically proﬁtable and decided not to continue. As a result, the waste was left on the outskirts
of the city at a location known as site F. According to the company, the toxic waste was removed
in 1998, but as documented below, this area still presents high levels of lead today.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s Arica experienced rapid economic growth leading to an increasing demand for social housing projects. Unfortunately, and probably explained by the ignorance
surrounding the situation, the regional government decided to construct social housing projects
very close to site F. In 1995, two housing projects, Cerro Chuño and Los Industriales, were built
only meters away from the site and hundreds of families moved to the area.
1

For further details see CDC (1991).

1

We follow these precipitating events and evaluate the eﬀect of lead exposure on academic
achievement. We exploit the relationship between household distance to the contaminated area
(site F ), and lead blood concentration to estimate the consequences on academic achievement.
First, we estimate a reduced-form eﬀect of household proximity to contaminated areas on student
academic performance. Then, using an empirical strategy in the spirit of the Two Sample Instrumental Variables (TSIV) (Angrist and Krueger, 1992), we estimate the eﬀect of lead blood levels
on academic achievement.
Our empirical strategy utilizes multiple sources of information. From the Chilean College
Admission System (Prueba de Selección Universitaria or PSU) data set, we gather information
on proximity to the polluted area (from home address to site F ), multiple test scores (math and
language) and a comprehensive set of individual and household socioeconomic variables for a large
population of individuals living in Arica in 2008. We complement this data with individual’s city
of residence in 2004, also obtained from administrative records. By combining these sources of
information, we identify more than one thousand individuals who lived in Arica between 2004 and
2008, and potentially for many more years. We restrict our analysis to this sample. We also utilize
information from a large sample of intravenous tests collected from local residences in 2000. This
provides us with individual-level measures of lead blood levels.
Anticipating our main results, we ﬁnd that moving one kilometer (0.6 miles) away from the
polluted site increases math scores by 0.10 standard deviations (controlling for age, gender, parental
educational levels, and school characteristics). For language, the estimated eﬀect is 0.13 standard
deviations.2 In terms of lead blood levels, our ﬁndings suggest that an increase of one microgram of
lead per deciliter of blood reduces math PSU scores by 0.15 standard deviations (after controlling
for age, gender, parental educational levels, and school characteristics). The corresponding eﬀect
for language scores is a reduction of 0.21 standard deviations.
Finally, we translate our estimated eﬀects into monetary losses. We do this by exploiting the
empirical relationship between PSU scores and annual earnings (during adulthood). Our estimates
indicate that appropriate compensation would be approximately six thousand dollars per microgram
of lead per deciliter of blood. This ignores any non-pecuniary costs associated with blood lead levels
2
In both cases, the thought experiment involves increasing the distance from the place of residence to site F from
0.5 kilometers to 1.5 kilometers.

2

and is therefore likely a lower bound of the true cost. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
estimate of this kind in the literature.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we explain the origin of the lead pollution in the
city of Arica. Section 3 reviews the literature on the eﬀects of lead on health and the association
between lead levels in blood and decreased cognitive function and academic performance. In section
4 we describe our data. Section 5 presents our identiﬁcation strategy and empirical ﬁndings.
Robustness checks are presented in Section 6. Section 7 concludes.

2

Exposure to Toxic Waste in Arica: A Brief History

The Arrival and Abandonment of Waste Material. PROMEL is a Chilean private company
founded in the 1970s. The company operated in the north of Chile and oﬀered secure transportation
and processing services for mineral and chemical waste. On March 21st of 1984, PROMEL requested
authorization from the Chilean National Border Agency to import mineral waste from Sweden.
The request was based on the company’s intention to reprocess these minerals to extract gold.3
The chemical description of the minerals included in the oﬃcial request indicated the presence of
copper, gold, silver, iron, lead, mercury, and a number of other substances. With respect to the
level of toxicity, PROMEL described the waste as being “non-toxic metallic mud unless eaten or
handled without proper protection.” After few months of deliberation, the Chilean government
granted permission to import the minerals. As a result, between August 29th, 1984 and July 17th,
1985, Arica received three shipments of 8,096, 6,997 and 4,041 tons of minerals, respectively. The
importation of these products continued until January 21st, 1989 (CONGRESS, 2009). By that
time, approximately 21,091 tons of toxic waste had entered Chile. The collection point of the waste
became known as site F (sitio F ). The area was located northeast of downtown Arica, which at that
point, was outside the city limits. PROMEL rented this site from the Bureau of Land Management
(Ministerio de Bienes Nacionales). The area was initially secured by a concrete perimeter and was
marked with warning signs indicating the presence of hazardous waste.
In December 1993, PROMEL requested permission to abandon the mineral waste.4 The com3

The complete process would have been involved cleaning the mineral wastes from arsenic, then converting the
resulting material into trioxide and, ﬁnally, extracting gold.
4
The request was directed to the National Border Agency. This agency owned the wastes after PROMEL decided
not to pay the taxes on the importation.

3

pany argued that the high costs of inputs, the constant ﬂuctuation of metal prices in international
markets (particularly of cooper and silver), and the exchange rate policy made the originally profitable project nonviable.
The Housing Projects. During the 1980s the city of Arica faced an increasing demand for
government subsidized housing. In 1985 the central government launched the construction of the
ﬁrst social housing project, which later became the neighborhood of Los Industriales I. It was
located only meters away from site F. It is unknown why Chilean authorities decided to build at
that location, but there was likely a lack of information about the characteristics of the materials
contaminating the area.5 Moreover, even if the local authority (Municipalidad de Arica) had
wanted to stop or prevent the construction, this would have not been possible since the land was
originally outside the city limits (in a non-residential area), and consequently, it was not under its
jurisdiction. The neighborhood’s location outside of the cities jurisdiction had another consequence
on future residents. According to the Chilean legislation, house titles can only be granted by local
governments. Therefore, since the housing projects were originally outside the city limits, the new
home-owners did not receive oﬃcial titles for several years. Only after 1996, once the city limits
were extended, were house titles granted. As we discuss below, this prevented houses from being
sold.
The construction of Los Industriales I (1985) was followed by Los Industriales II and III (1990),
Los Industriales IV (1991) and Cerro Chuño I-VII (between 1993 and 1996). Table 1 presents the
exact date of completion for each project. Figures 1 and 2 present satellite photographs of the area
before and after the construction of the housing projects. They clearly illustrate the proximity
of the neighborhoods to site F. Thus, hundreds of families were exposed, many for more than a
decade, to the toxic waste.
Government Responses, Evaluation of Consequences and Compensations. In December of 1996, after multiple complains from the local residents, the Health Service of Arica began a
series of actions aimed at removing the toxic waste from site F. In 1997 the department of chemistry
at the University of Tarapaca (a local university) carried out the ﬁrst scientiﬁc study of the levels
of pollution in Arica. The results documented the presence of high concentrations of toxic minerals
5
It is worth noting that the original decision was made by the central government, speciﬁcally by the Chilean
Department of Housing (Ministerio de Vivienda y Urbanismo).

4

in the city.6 These were conﬁrmed by a second study conducted in the same year, prepared by
the National Service of Geology and Mining (Servicio Nacional de Minerı́a y Geologı́a, SERNAGEOMIN). The second study included a detailed analysis of the concentration of material in site
F ’s stockpiles. The analysis concluded that the material was approximately 10% of arsenic, 4.4%
lead, 2.1% zinc, 1.5% copper, and also contained other heavy metals such as mercury, antimony,
bismuth, and tin.
Given this evidence, the Chilean government declared the situation to be an “environmental
health emergency.” The re-location of the waste began in January of 1998, under the supervision of
the Arica Department of Environmental Protection, and with the approval of the local government.7
Between July 14th and September 8th of 2000, the Chilean Ministry of Health carried out a
third study, “Lead in Cerro Chuño and Los Industriales” (CONAMA, 2009). In this study, blood
samples were taken from about 5000 residents. The tests showed high concentrations for 579 of
the residents. As a result of these studies, residents of Cerro Chuño and Los Industriales initiated
legal actions against PROMEL and the Arica Health Service, demanding ﬁnancial compensation.
In 2007, the Supreme Court upheld the claims, and decided on a compensation of 8 million pesos
(approximately USD 16,000) per claim (Suprema, 2007).
Between August of 2008 and October of 2009, the National Environmental Commission (Comisión
Nacional de Medio Ambiente, CONAMA) carried out a new environmental study speciﬁcally designed to identify sources of pollution in the city.8 The results demonstrate the presence of three
diﬀerent sources of pollution: site F, the Arica-La Paz Line Railroad and a set of 26 points whose
lead levels exceeded the international standard of 400 milligrams of lead per kilogram of soil analysis (400mg/Kg).9 Site F was identiﬁed as the oldest source of lead contamination in Arica. The
study also showed that both the rail line and the 26 points were associated with contemporary
6

The study was motivated by the increasing complains of the residents of Cerro Chuño and Los Industriales, and
it had the support of the Peace and Justice Service of Chile (Servicio de Paz y Justicia de Chile, SERPAJ).
7
Some of the actions outlined in this plan were materialized through the re-location of the toxic wastes to Quebrada
Encantada, an area located northeast, almost straight ahead, to site F. Figures 1 and 2 show the location site F,
Cerro Chuño, Los Industriales, and Quebrada Encantada. Notice that the distance between houses located at the
eastern edge of Cerro Chuño and the new point of collection of toxic waste is approximately 600 meters (or 0.375
miles).
8
In order to establish the chemical composition of soil and subsoil of the city of Arica, the study followed a
sampling scheme that considered the division of the city in 40 quadrants. For each quadrant, an average of 11
random samples were taken in 3 levels (surface, 15 cm and 30 cm below surface).
9
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) established a risk value of 400mg/Kg lead to sites where children
are active (Soil Hazard Standard for Children Play’s Area, SHSCPA).

5

sources of contamination (Agriquem, 2009). Below we examine the relative importance of each of
these sources of pollution in our sample.
Finally, and using as an input the report by CONAMA, the Department of Health established
a multidisciplinary committee to investigate the eﬀects of metal residue contamination in Arica
and to develop policies leading to the relocation of the aﬀected families. This committee focused
on three highly contaminated areas: the harbor area (one of the 26 locations originally identiﬁed
by CONAMA), Maestranza (site associated with the Arica-La Paz railroad system) and site F.
They also considered two airstreams contributing to the dispersion of pollutants: south-southwest
(predominant) and northeast. They found lead (and arsenic) not only in the air, but also Arica’s
drinking water. Among the main policy initiatives resulting from this analysis was the relocation
of approximately 1,880 housing sites adjacent to site F and the development of special educational
programs for the students attending schools in the aﬀected areas.10

3

Literature Review

The toxicological eﬀects of lead on human health have been widely documented in the literature.
Depending on the dose and length of exposure, lead is associated with neurological, cardiovascular,
kidney and liver damage, and can even cause death in very high concentrations (ATDSR, 2007).
Although these eﬀects date back to ancient times,11 only in the last few decades has chronic
exposure to lead raised greater concerns worldwide. These concerns are reﬂected in recent decision
to amend the international standards of concentrations of lead in gasoline, paints, soil and air of
urban areas, all of which are considered major sources of lead exposure (Mielke and Reagan, 1998;
Mielke, 2002).
Notwithstanding the sustained reduction of lead levels in the population worldwide, the eﬀects
of lead on the deterioration of cognitive and behavioral functions, especially in children, is the main
focus of research in a number of developed countries (Koller et al., 2004). Relative to adults, children
are more susceptible to the toxicological eﬀects of lead for (at least) three reasons. First, small
children are more likely to put contaminated items (or any items) in their mouths. This increases the
10

For details see The Intervention in Areas with presence of polymetallic in Arica: A Master Plan (CONAMA,
2009). During 2010 and 2011, the Ministry of Housing granted 898 housing subsidies and approved the construction
of two housing projects to relocate 230 families of Cerro Chuño and Los Industriales (GORE, 2011).
11
Possibly explaining even the fall of the Roman Empire (Lewis, 1985)

6

likelihood of ingesting lead from the environment via powder or through wall drawings (Lanphear
et al., 2002; Tchernitchin et al., 2005; ATDSR, 2007). Second, children’s digestive systems also have
a higher degree of lead absorption (Ziegler et al., 1978; Tchernitchin et al., 2005; ATDSR, 2007).
Thus, for a given amount of exposure young children are more likely to absorb harmful quantities.
Finally, children’s developing nervous systems increase their vulnerability to lead exposure because
some functions of hormonal receptors, hormones, and neurotransmitters are altered, preventing
the generation of beneﬁcial substances for the organism (Lidsky and Schneider, 2003; Tchernitchin
et al., 2005).
The eﬀects of prolonged exposure to lead, especially when occurring at a young age, are irreversible. They can cause delay in bone growth, decreased intelligence and memory, and behavioral
changes. Needleman et al. (1979) and Banks et al. (1997) document a negative relationship between
blood lead levels and child IQ. Canﬁeld et al. (2003) supports this relationship and also states that
the deterioration of cognitive function of children could be manifested even under minimal exposure
(below the threshold of 10μg/dL set by CDC). Using longitudinal data, Bellinger et al. (1992) ﬁnd
that low-level lead exposure at age 24 months is associated with a decrease of 5.8 points in the
WISC-R Full Scale IQ test12 , 8.9 points in K-TEA Battery Composite13 and signiﬁcant reductions
in intellectual performance at age 10 (considering an increase of 10μg/dL). Wasserman et al. (2000)
show that, depending on whether the exposure to lead occurs in the pre- or post-natal period, the
decline in IQ can vary within the range of 1.07 to 2.82 points. Lanphear et al. (2000) document that
even after controlling for gender, parental education and children’s health status, there is strong
evidence supporting the inverse relationship between levels of lead in blood and four scores associated with cognitive functioning tests. They estimate that for every extra micrograms per deciliter
of blood of lead concentration, math and language scores decrease by 0.7 and 1 points, respectively.
12

The Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised (WISC-R) is a widely used individually administered
intelligence test for children (Wechsler, 1974).
13
The Kaufman Test of Educational Achievement (Kaufman and Kaufman, 1997).

7

Table A.1 in the appendix presents the eﬀects of lead on IQ documented in the literature.

14,15,16

The literature also examines the eﬀects of lead exposure on violent behavior and mortality.
Wolpaw (2007), using a reduction of the lead content in gasoline introduced by the United States
Clean Air Act of 1970, studies the relationship between lead exposure and crime. Her results indicate a signiﬁcant relationship between lead exposure during childhood and violent crime behavior
later in life. The estimates show that the elasticity of violent crime and childhood lead exposure is
approximately 0.8. This suggests that the reduction in lead exposure between 1970 and 1980 accounts for more than the 50% of the decrease in crime during 1990s (1992-2002). Clay et al. (2006)
analyze the eﬀect of lead water pipes on child mortality. Their results suggest that approximately
13 infants per 1,000 children died in 1900 as a consequence of lead pipes. This is staggering when
compared to the 5.7 deaths per 1,000 children from all causes in 2000. Using variations in water
composition of diﬀerent types of water delivery system across cities, Clay et al. (2010) extend their
previous analysis to study the eﬀect of water-born lead exposure on child mortality and worker productivity between 1900 and 1920. Exploiting the chemical relationship between water lead content
in pipes and its level of acidity (measured by the water’s pH), the authors ﬁnd that an increase in
pH from 6.7 to 7.5 was responsible for a decrease of 12.43% in infant mortality between 1900 and
1920 in cities with lead pipes. They also ﬁnd that manufacturing workers living in cities with lead
pipes have a lower salary and suggest this was caused by the lower productivity resulting from lead
exposure.
Tchernitchin et al. (2005) review the main sources of human exposure to lead in Chile. The
study identiﬁes gasoline and lead-based paint as the most common sources of lead exposure. It also
identiﬁes the cities of Arica and Antofagasta as examples of cities with high levels of lead contamination. The study also reviews two previous small-scale studies examining the concentrations of
lead in the blood of children exposed to pollution in Arica. The ﬁrst study analyzes the results of 32
14
In adults, the eﬀects of exposure to lead may be partially reversible after removal of the source of contamination,
decreasing levels of blood lead and after application of chelation treatments (Tchernitchin et al., 2005).
15
There is broad consensus on the eﬀects of lead at high concentrations. However, the eﬀects at low exposures
are still subject of debate (Bellinger et al., 1992; Lanphear et al., 2000). Kaufman (2001) review a series of articles
studying the relationship between low levels of blood lead and decreased IQ. The main criticisms are that there is
no adequate control for variables that could inﬂuence a child’s IQ (household socioeconomic status, parenting skills,
childhood diseases, parental IQ, among others), and that the evidence usually examines only the most extreme cases
omitting intermediate cases. According to Kaufman (2001), due to these considerations, the link between low-level
lead concentrations and IQ must be assessed with caution.
16
For a deeper discussion of the methodological issues in this literature, see Koller et al. (2004).

8

blood samples collected in 1998 from children with residences in Cerro Chuño and Los Industriales
(located within 200 meters of site F ). Nine samples from children living in Villa Santa Marı́a were
initially used as control group (this village is located approximately 1.7 kilometers from site F ).
However, the results showed high levels of lead in all three neighborhoods, potentially as a result
of the small sample size in the control areas. A second study extended the original sample. In this
second study, children living in Pampa Nueva (a village located 4 kilometers from site F ) were
chosen as a control group. In addition to the blood sample tests, the study included hair samples
and data on tests of motor responses to visual stimulus. The results conﬁrmed the high levels
of lead found in 1998 and also documented poor motor responses to visual stimulus even among
children with levels of lead below 10μg/dL.17

4

The data

In order to estimate the eﬀect of early lead exposure on academic achievement we use several
sources of information.
Blood samples. We use data from the study “Lead in Cerro Chuño and Los Industriales”
(LCCI), carried out by the Chilean Ministry of Health in 2000 to get blood lead level concentrations.
This study included the collection of 4,990 intravenous blood tests from local residents: 3,240
children (aged 0 to 15 years) and 1,750 adults (aged 16 or older). The results show that 4,411
people had concentrations of lead of 10 micrograms per deciliter of blood or less, the maximum
level of lead allowed by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).18 For the
remaining 579 cases the study found levels exceeding the maximum standards. Of these, 538 were
re-examined by the Institute of Public Health through the leadcare system.19 This new examination
found that a total of 407 samples had concentrations of lead below the CDC standard, while 131
17

Coria et al. (2009) study the long-term consequences of lead poisoning on children from another unfortunate
experience of lead exposure that occurred in 1996 in the city of Ñuble (south of Chile). The authors combined
historical records of lead concentration for 77 people 10-25 years old, scores from intelligence tests, and the results
from physical examinations taken place ten years after exposure. The ﬁndings showed that 21% of the sample had
subnormal levels of IQ, and the lowest among individuals whose lead exposure occurred prior to the age of six. In
particular, the psychometric results show lower performance on tests of arithmetic reasoning, which revealed that the
lead was compromising frontal lobe functions.
18
In the absence of substantial changes in lead exposure blood lead levels in adults are stable and for their
environmental monitoring a single blood lead concentration is an excellent biological indicator (Delves et al., 1984).
19
The ﬁnal report indicated that the remaining 41 individuals were contacted multiple times (including attempts
via home visits), but they did not attended the examination.

9

had levels at or above the standard (120 were children between ages 0 to 15 years). Importantly,
the data contains information on each individual’s street address. This allows us to link lead
levels to distance to site F. Figure 3 presents the distributions of lead levels in blood for the two
examinations.20
Test scores. We use data from two national standardized tests: the SIMCE (Sistema de
Medición de la Calidad de la Educación) and the Chilean college admission tests or PSU (Prueba
de Selección Universitaria).
The SIMCE (language and math) tests are aimed at measuring the quality of teaching and
the degree of student learning at various educational levels in Chile. The tests are taken annually
by students enrolled in 4th, 8th, and 10th grade.21 The system started in 1988 so we are able
to identify schools near site F at the time the chemical waste was brought to the country. As
discussed below, this allows us to analyze test scores before and after students were exposed to lead
pollution from site F (fourth graders in 1988 were born in 1978 or 1979). Unfortunately, from 1988
to 1997 the SIMCE data is available at the school level only. This is not the case for the data from
the college admission test system (PSU). Therefore, we perform our main analysis using individual
level data from the 2008 college admission system.
The 2008 PSU data contain information on individual characteristics (age, gender), individuallevel math and language test scores, family background variables (mother’s and father’s education,
family income, mother or father absence), high school-level information (private, voucher or public),
and residential address. A large proportion of the sample has just graduated from high school (18
year old on average). For this group we gather information from the 2004 SIMCE test scores
when they were enrolled in 8th grade. This allows us to observe multiple measures of academic
achievement, and also to identify each individual’s place of residence (municipality) in 2004 and
2008.22 We restrict our main analysis to the sample of individuals who reported living in Arica in
both years.
Descriptive statistics for this sample are presented in Table 2. We use the data from those not
20

Table A.2 in appendix presents the descriptive statistics of this sample.
Since 2006, SIMCE tests 4th graders and alternates between 8th and 10th graders every other year.
22
From the 2004 SIMCE data we extract the exact location of individual’s high school. We use this information to
analyze the impact of pollution on test scores as a function of the distance from site F to high schools. Unfortunately,
the information on individual’s place of residence is only available in 2008 PSU.
21

10

living in Arica in either 2004 or 2008 to perform robustness checks.23
Labor market outcomes. Lastly, we use administrative records from the Chilean Unemployment Insurance (UI) system to analyze the impact of pollution on adult earnings. The UI data
contain information on labor income and individual labor market histories in the formal sector
(approximately 80% of the employment in the country) on a monthly basis since November 2002.
We merge individual-level data on earnings with PSU test scores. As described below, we use
the estimated relationship between earnings and PSU scores to compute the appropriate monetary
compensation for the irreversible health damage and loss of productivity associated with early lead
exposure. Given that a sizable fraction of individuals who took the PSU in 2008 do not show up in
the UI system - many are still enrolled in tertiary institutions- we use information from the 2004
PSU and the 2010-2011 UI data. Hence, most individuals enrolled at a higher education institutions
in 2004 were working in 2011, and the information about their wages is reported in the UI data.
We choose the 2004 PSU because the 2004 version is the ﬁrst year of the PSU. This ensures the
comparability of our results.
Table 3 presents summary statistics for the sample of individuals who took the PSU in 2004
and for whom we have data on monthly earnings between 2010 and 2011.

5
5.1

Empirical Analysis
Identifying Sources of Pollution

Over the last 20 years the population of Arica has been exposed to multiple sources of pollution.
In order to identify the main source of pollution in the city, we ﬁrst evaluate the importance of all
of the sources of pollution originally identiﬁed by CONAMA: site F, Arica-La Paz line railroad and
a set of 26 points whose lead levels exceeded the international standard of 400 milligrams of lead
per kilogram of soil (400mg/Kg) (see CONAMA, 2009, for further details). Since current levels
of lead at each location are not available, we establish their relative importance by analyzing the
relationship between the lead levels in blood from the sample of residents of Cerro Chuño and Los
23
The sample of students in both 2004 SIMCE and 2008 PSU datasets are not exactly the same. We do not
observe PSU scores for those who took the SIMCE in 2004 and did not take the PSU in 2008. Therefore, we do not
observe the PSU scores nor the place of residence in 2008 for those who retained a course during high school, dropped
out of high school or for those high school graduates who opted to not take the PSU in 2008. The 2004 SIMCE data
contains 272,198 observations whereas the 2008 PSU contains information for 240,682 high school graduates.

11

Industriales and the distance between their places of residence and the diﬀerent locations.24 As
previously explained, the original sample of blood tests was collected in 2000 from 4,990 residents
of Cerro Chuño and Los Industriales (Servicio de Salud de Arica, 2001). We focus our analysis
on the 579 individuals whose blood lead levels exceeded the risk threshold deﬁned by the CDC
(10μg/dL). As previously explained, for them we have data from two diﬀerent independent blood
lead level measures.
Using this data, we evaluate which of the three sources of lead exposure is most highly correlated
with the blood lead levels observed among individuals living in Cerro Chuño and Los Industriales
by 2000. We estimate linear regression models of individual’s blood lead levels on (ln) distance
from home to each of the three sources of contamination.25 We include as additional controls in
these regressions gender and age (at time of testing). Finally, in order to reduce the measurement
error we use the average blood lead level of the two samples.26
Thus, for each of the sources of pollution we estimate a regression model of the form:

P bi = α0 + α1 ln Dhome,i + α2 Genderi + α3 Agei + ηi ,

(1)

where P bi is the blood lead level associated with individual i (measured in micrograms per deciliter
of blood, μg/dL), Dhome,i is the distance between individual’s i place of residence and the location
of the respective contaminated area in Arica.
Table 4 presents the estimated coeﬃcients for our measures of exposure to lead and the three
24
We follow (Sinnott, 1984) and generate the distance between two locations A and B as follows. Let A and B
be two diﬀerent locations, with associated latitudes and longitudes (lat(A),lon(A)) and (lat(B),lon(B)), respectively.
We compute the distance between A and B (d(A, B)) from:


2
2
sin(lat(B) − lat(A))
(lon(B) − lon(A))
τ (A, B) =
+ cos(lat(A)) × cos(lat(B)) × sin
2
2


d(A, B) = 6367 × (2 × arctan( τ (A, B), 1 − τ (A, B)))

where d(A, B) is expressed in kilometers, arctan(x, y) is the arctangent of x/y, and 6,367 is the radius of the earth
expressed in kilometers.
25
Distances were obtained as follows. We ﬁrst deﬁne 33 centroids of pollution covering the full extent of the
railway. Similarly, we deﬁne 26 points of contamination in soil. The distance from household to railway is deﬁned as
the minimum distance between household and the 33 centroids. Likewise, distance from household to leaded soil is
calculated as the minimum distance of each household to any of the 26 centroids. In the case of site F, we consider
Chapiquiña 3066 as reference address. This corresponds to the place rented by PROMEL to carry out the tasks of
extracting gold and silver from the chemical wastes. GoogleEarth did not recognize some of the addresses in the data
(mostly rural), and the sample size was reduced to 390 tests.
26
Our results are robust to the use of either sample (ISP or SERMUS). Results are available from the authors
upon request.

12

measures of distances.27 The results presented in column (1) indicate a signiﬁcant correlation between concentration of lead in blood and distance to site F. Speciﬁcally, we estimate that increasing
the distance in one kilometer (0.6 miles), from 0.16 to 1.16 kilometers to site F, would imply a
reduction of 1.26 micrograms of lead per deciliter of blood (or 0.413 standard deviation).28 Thus,
the evidence conﬁrms the association between distance to site F and blood lead levels. As columns
(2) and (3) show, the coeﬃcients associated with distances to the railway and leaded soil sites have
the opposite sign from expected and they are not signiﬁcant.
The results are conclusive in pointing to site F as the main source of lead pollution in the city
of Arica. Consequently, we focus our analysis on this source.

5.2

Distance to Site F and Academic Achievement

We ﬁrst analyze school-level data for diﬀerent years from SIMCE data sets. Figure 4 presents
the (standardized) school-level average test scores from 4th graders enrolled in schools located less
than 1.5 kilometers from site F, in schools located between 1.5 and 3 kilometers from site F, and in
schools located 3 or more kilometers away from site F. We present the evolution of the test scores
from 1988 to 2010.
The results show a clear pattern. At the time the chemical waste arrived to the area (1988),
schools near site F had a better performance than those located between 1.5 and 3 kilometers from
the site. Just four years after the arrival of the material, average test scores for those schools start
reducing dramatically, potentially because of the prolonged exposure to lead. Table 5 conﬁrms
these ﬁndings. Here we show raw school-level averages on math and language PSU tests as a
function of each school’s distance to site F for the period 1988-2010. As in the previous ﬁgure, the
evidence does not suggest any relationship between distance from the school to site F and scores
between 1988 and 1992. However, we ﬁnd that after 1992 schools located closer to site F (i.e at
less than 1 kilometer) have lower math and language test scores than schools located further away
27
To avoid inﬂuential observations, we restrict our sample to those individuals whose blood lead levels were lower
than the 99th percentile using Cook’s distance (Cook, 1979).
28
The non-linear association between P bi and Dhome,i implies that the magnitudes of the eﬀects depend on the
original distance to site F. For example, increasing the distance from 0.66 to 1.66 kilometers to site F would imply a
reduction of 0.587 micrograms of lead per deciliter of blood (or 0.193 standard deviation). Likewise, increasing the
distance from 1.3 to 2.3 kilometers would imply a reduction of 0.363 micrograms of lead per deciliter of blood (or
0.119 standard deviation).

13

from the site.29,30 However, these strong patterns are obtained using aggregate data and without
controlling for confounding factors. We utilize individual level data from PSU to deal with these
potential concerns.31
Let P SUi denote individual’s i PSU test score and Dhome,i the distance between student’s place
of residence and site F. We estimate the following model:

P SUi = γ0 + γ1 ln Dhome,i + γ2 Age + γ3 Gender + γXi + γ5 Zschool,i + ηi ,

(2)

where Xi represents a set of individual-speciﬁc exogenous controls (family background, and variables
controlling for the direction of wind), Zschool,i is a vector of variables describing the characteristics of
the high school from which the individual graduated from, and ηi is an idiosyncratic component.32
Table 6 presents the results from estimating equation (2) for math and reading PSU test scores under
diﬀerent speciﬁcations.33 The evidence shows that, even after controlling for family background,
high school characteristics, and geographic factors, there is a strong relationship between PSU scores
and distance from student’s place of residence to site F. Our preferred speciﬁcations (columns (5)
and (6), imply that increasing the distance one kilometer (starting at 100 meters from the site)
would increase language and math test scores in approximately 29.55 (0.31 standard deviations) and
21.06 (0.22 standard deviations) points, respectively. The nonlinear model implies decreasing eﬀects
as we move away from the pollution site. These magnitudes are robust to diﬀerent speciﬁcations.34
The larger eﬀects for language when compared to math suggest that lead exposure might have a
higher negative impact on brain functions associated with language skills than arithmetic and math
skills.35
29

We use the school-level data on test scores (Tj (t)) and distance from school to site F (Distj ), to estimate the
model Tj (t) = α(t) + β ln Distj + νj (t), where t denotes year. We obtain β̂=0.19 (t=2.21). The results from the
alternative model Tj (t) = α(t) + β0 ln Distj + β1 ln Distj × Dt>1996 + νj (t), where Dt>1996 is a dummy variable that
ˆ 0 =-0.008 (t=-0.06) and beta
ˆ 1 =0.36 (t=2.04). These results
takes a value of one if t is larger than 1996, delivers beta
conﬁrm the patterns observed in Figure 4 and Table 5.
30
Since 1999 SIMCE test scores changed their scales. This explain the diﬀerence in levels between 1988-1996 and
1999-2010.
31
Furthermore, since the LCCI data does not contain information on the school attended, we could not implement
our empirical strategy using only school-level data.
32
Currie and Walker (2011) use a similar reduced form speciﬁcation to study the link between health outcomes
and distance to a source of pollution.
33
In order to restrict our analysis to individuals living in Arica, we restrict the PSU sample to those individuals
reporting a home street address at most four kilometers away from the site F. This is consistent with the maximum
distance from site F to the edge of the city.
34
These results are available upon request from the authors.
35
An obvious concern regarding the previous regression model is that our measure of distance Dhome,i might

14

5.3

Blood levels and academic achievement

We now assess the impact of blood lead levels on individual test scores. Our identiﬁcation strategy
is similar to the Two Sample Instrumental Variables (TSIV) approach developed by Angrist and
Krueger (1992). Speciﬁcally, consider the following system of equations:

P SUi = β0 + β1 P bi + β2 Xi + β3 Zschool,i + εi ,
P bi = α0 + α1 ln Dhome,i + α2 Agei + α3 Genderi + ηi .

(3)
(4)

We interpret equation (3) as the structural equation describing the eﬀect of blood lead levels, P bi ,
on individual’s test scores, P SUi , whereas equation (4) represents our model for blood lead levels
as a function of distance to the source of pollution. As discussed above, we can use the LCCI data
to estimate equation (4). These results were reported in Table 4. However, we do not have blood
lead levels (P bi ) and test scores (P SUi ) for the same sample of individuals, so equation (3) cannot
be estimated directly. This is where TSIV strategy is useful. By substituting expression (4) into
(3) we can derive the reduce form equation (2), linking PSU scores to distance to site F. In this
context, it is straightforward to show that γ1 in equation (2) is equal to (β1 × α1 ). Thus, and given
that the model is exactly identiﬁed, we can estimate β1 from equations (2) and (4) as:

β̂1,T SIV

=

γ̂1
.
α̂1

By combining the results from equations (2) (reduced form model) and (4) (ﬁrst stage), we can
obtain the (structural) eﬀect of lead exposure on academic achievement.36 We obtain standard
errors using the Delta Method.37
be endogenously determined. In principle, families could have decided to live far from the site F depending on
their characteristics, leading to biased estimates for the eﬀect of distance on test scores. In order to investigate
the endogeneity of Dhome,i , we empirically investigate the association between our distance variable and family
background variables. Table A.3 presents the results. We ﬁnd that parental education is positively correlated with
distance from home to site F, so our results suggest that more educated parents have avoided living close to site F.
In the estimation of equation 2 we account for this by including parental education in the set of controls.
36
Our non-linear speciﬁcations are motivated by the estimation of non- and semi-parametric models of the relationship between PSU test scores and distance from place of residence to site F. Figures A.1 and A.2 in the appendix
present the results for math and language scores, respectively. The results suggest that the natural logarithm of the
distance variable provides a good description of the data. Fortunately, this speciﬁcation also allows us to directly
implement the TSIV strategy.
37
Assuming that cov(γ̂1 , α̂1 ) = 0, the variance of β̂T SIV is giving by the following expression: V ar(β̂T SIV ) =
V ar(γ̂1 )/α̂12 + (γ̂12 /α̂14 ) × V ar(α̂1 ).

15

Table 7 presents the estimated eﬀect of lead blood level on math and language test scores.
The estimated β̂1,T SIV implies a reduction of 13.81 (or 0.15 standard deviations) points for one
microgram of lead per deciliter of blood for math and 19.37 (or 0.21 standard deviations) points
for one microgram of lead per deciliter of blood for language. Overall our results suggest negative
and large eﬀects of proximity to the pollution site on test scores.
Although we ﬁnd signiﬁcant results for γ̂1 and α̂1 , as expected, we lose power when computing
the ratio. Nevertheless, we obtain signiﬁcant results (at the 10% percent level) in the case of
language test scores. This ﬁnding is in line with the results for the eﬀect of lead on verbal IQ as
reported in Needleman et al. (1979).38
Caveats. A natural threat to our identiﬁcation strategy is the possibility of endogenous migration. Once alerted to the presence of the chemical waste, families could have decided to move
away from the vicinity of site F and even to out-migrate from the city. Other related threat is
endogenous sorting of educated parents that may decide to change their kids from schools near
site F to others away from it. In what follows, we demonstrate that these might not be serious
concerns.
Table 8 presents the proportion of parents with college education with children enrolled in
schools in Arica. The numbers are obtained from the SIMCE records. We present these numbers
by school distance to site F for 1989, 1999 and 2008. The proportion of parents with college
education for schools located 1.5 kilometer or less from site F is very stable in almost 20 years,
suggesting that endogenous migration as a function of parental education did not occur during the
period. On the other hand, we observe a sharp increase in the fraction of college educated parents
with kids enrolled in schools located between 1.5 and 3 kilometers from the site. However, most
of the increase can be explained by a single school.

39

For schools located more than 3 kilometers

away from site F there is a less pronounced increase which agrees with the national trend during
38
Also, we perform linear regression models to study the eﬀect of the school’s proximity to site F on the academic
achievement of the students of Arica using SIMCE scores between 2003 and 2006. As we previously described, in
SIMCE we only have the distance from schools to site F. Tables A.4 and A.5 in the appendix present descriptive
statistics of SIMCE 2003-2006 scores and the results from the linear regression models, respectively. The ﬁnding
conﬁrm our main results. Even after controlling for gender, parental education, school characteristics, we obtain
positive eﬀects from (natural logarithm) distance between the school and site F on school-level math and language
test scores.
39
Colegio Arica College explains most of the increase in parental education between 1999 and 2008. If we exclude
this school from this calculation, the distribution of parents with college education with children enrolled in schools
between 1.5 and 3 kilometers from site F increases by 1.3 percentage point (instead of 10) during the period.

16

the period. These results suggest endogenous migrations might not be a serious threat to our
identiﬁcation strategy.
Figure 5 presents further evidence along these lines. It shows the trends of the distributions of
enrollment by school distance to site F for fourth graders between 1988 y 2008 in Arica. Again, we
observe that the proportions are stable over time. Figure A.3 in the appendix presents similar trends
but for the distributions of elementary schools. The results conﬁrm the stability of enrollment.
These results are consistent with the literature documenting little regional migration in Chile.
Soto and Torche (2004) show that on average the regional migration rate for the 1965-2000 period
was 0.6% per year, which is especially low considering the existence of factors that could promote
greater regional movements (homogenous population across regions and high rates of urbanization).
Also, data from the CASEN 2006 survey40 shows that 86.17% of respondents aged 17 or younger
who lived in Arica reported that they were born in Arica. Likewise, among the same individuals,
96% reported they were living in Arica in 2002. On the other hand, the literature shows that residential mobility is largely explained by schooling and employment decisions (Leslie and Richardson,
1961). For Chile, Ruiz-Tagle and Sehnbruch (2009) estimate that the average job spell for a formal
worker is about 5 years. Therefore, if we believe that residential mobility is related to employment
opportunities, on average, families should live in the same place for at least 5 years, providing extra
support for our approach.
Institutional features of the social housing system also support our empirical strategy. Specifically, the 18th article of the Supreme Decree on “The Regulation on Social Housings” (MINVU,
1990), establishes that houses in Cerro Chuño and Los Industriales could not be sold before 5 years
after the inscription date of the house in the registry of deeds (Conservador de Bienes Raı́ces). As
mentioned in Section 2, since the housing projects were originally outside the city limits, the new
home-owners did not receive oﬃcial titles for several years. In fact, only after 1996, once the city
limits were extended, were house titles granted.41 Therefore, we can assume that the families and
their children were exposed to lead for a long period of time, although the possibility remains that
they could have rented their houses and moved to other places in order to avoid lead contamination.
40

CASEN (Socioeconomic Characterization Survey) 2006 corresponds to a cross-sectional household survey representative of the population in 2006.
41
The law establishes that if the owners want to sell the house before the mandatory deadline, they have to
request authorization from the Housing Service (Servicio de Vivienda y Urbanismo, SERVIU). This rule increases
the probability that those families lived for at least 5 years near the toxic waste.

17

Therefore, even though we cannot rule it out, endogenous migration does not seem to pose a
serious threat to our identiﬁcation strategy. Nevertheless, we control for it by analyzing residents
of Arica in 2004 and 2008. In this context, our analysis suggests that four years of lead exposure
is enough time to observe its long-term eﬀects on academic performance, and potentially, they can
be extrapolated to diﬀerent setups.

5.4

Blood lead levels and earnings: Estimating compensations

The literature documenting the monetary consequences of lead exposure at the individual level is
scarce. Landrigan et al. (2002) quantify the IQ loss in children exposed to lead and link this loss
to lower revenues for future generations.42 We extend this literature by documenting the eﬀects of
early lead exposure on future earnings at a more disaggregate level.
After obtaining the eﬀect of blood lead level on PSU scores for students in Arica, we can
compute the eﬀect on earnings by linking labor market outcomes and PSU scores for a diﬀerent but
similar sample. This is a signiﬁcant contribution to the public policies associated with determining
compensation for the serious (and irreversible) damage to the health of residents of Cerro Chuño
and Los Industriales. It also provides a comparison to the actual monetary compensations paid to
a fraction of the population over the past few years. In 2007 the Supreme Court ruled that there
should be a compensation payment of CLP 8 million (USD 16,000) per claimant made by the Arica
Health Service to 365 residents of Cerro Chuño and Los Industriales (Suprema, 2007).
We use information on monthly earnings from the Unemployment Insurance Database (UI) and
PSU scores to estimate the following Mincer-type regression model:

ln wi = β0 + β1 P SUi,math + β2 P SUi,lang + β3 Qi + i ,

(5)

where wi corresponds to the average monthly wage obtained by individual i between 2010 and
42

Landrigan et al. (2002) estimate the annual costs of the incidence, prevalence, mortality and pediatric assistance
produced by environmental pollution on the health of American children. Their results show that the annual costs
because of children lead poisoning in the U.S. correspond to USD 43.4 billion, a ﬁgure higher than the estimated
annual cost of asthma (USD 2 billion), cancer (USD 0.3 billion) and mental disability (USD 9.2 billion). Muennig
and Bao (2009), extends the estimated costs of lead exposure in children in New Jersey, including special education
costs, direct medical costs associated with treatment and hospitalization, social costs for juvenile and adult crime
and dropout graduate rates. The results indicate that if blood lead levels in a single cohort of children between 0 and
6 years were reduced to less than 1 microgram per deciliter of blood, the contribution to the society of New Jersey
would be at least USD 27 billion.

18

2011 and P SUi,j denotes his 2004 PSU test scores (j={math, language}).43 We also include a
vector of observable characteristics, Qi , which include gender, age, age squared, parent education,
high-school characteristics and regional dummies. Table 9 presents our results. We ﬁnd positive
and signiﬁcant eﬀects of math and language scores on monthly earnings. Our estimates suggest
that each additional point in math test score increases earnings approximately by 0.17 percent. In
the case of language scores, the eﬀect is 0.01 percent.
In order to provide a better understanding of the magnitudes of these eﬀects, we compute
the partial derivative of monthly earnings (in levels) with respect to PSU scores.44 Our results,
presented in Table 10, indicate that one extra point on the PSU increases monthly earnings by 745
and 60 Chilean pesos (or USD 1.49 and 0.12) for math and language PSU scores, respectively.
In order to compute the individual-level monetary impact of lead exposure, we combine our
previous results with the marginal eﬀect of lead on PSU test scores. Formally, we compute:
∂W
∂P b

=

∂P SUlang
∂W
∂W
∂P SUmath
+
.
×
×
∂P SUlang
∂P b
∂P SUmath
∂P b

(6)

Table 11 presents these partial derivatives obtained using the results in Table 7 (∂P SU /∂P b) and
Table 10 (∂W/∂P SU ). We estimate that for each extra microgram of lead, monthly earnings
decrease by 11,458 Chilean pesos (or USD 22.92). This represents a 2.9% decrease in average
monthly wages (of the average monthly earnings for our sample: 395,447 pesos per month).45
We extend this analysis to study the eﬀects of proximity to a source of pollution on individual
earnings. In particular, we analyze the eﬀect of the distance from home to site F on average
monthly earnings between 2009 and 2010 using the following expression:
∂W
∂Dhome

=

∂W
∂P SUlang

×

∂P SUlang
∂ ln(Dhome)

D

43

+

∂W
∂P SUmath

×
D

∂P SUmath
∂ ln(Dhome)

.

(7)

As it was explained in Section 4, we use data for the ﬁrst version of the PSU (2004) linked with UI wage data
because a sizable fraction of students who took the PSU in 2008 are still enrolled in tertiary institutions in 2010-2011
and, thus, not participating in the labor market.
44
The marginal eﬀect of an increase on PSU score on the monthly earnings is given by β̂1 × exp(β̂0 + β̂1 P SU¯math +
β̂2 P SU¯lang + β̂3 Q̄ + σ̂ 2 /2), where we evaluate the regressors at the respective sample means.
45
We work with a nationwide sample to estimate the parameters for the Mincer equation. For consistency purposes,
we estimate the eﬀects of lead on earnings using the whole sample. We performed the analysis using a subsample
including only Arica ﬁnding very similar results. Indeed, the average monthly wage of the subsample of Arica is CLP
381,938, very close to the national wage.

19

Using the estimated coeﬃcients from equations (2) and (5) (presented in Tables 6 and 9, respectively), we obtain the eﬀect of an increase of one kilometer in the distance from home to site F for
diﬀerent values of the initial distance. The estimated coeﬃcients of this relationship are presented
in Table 12. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁrst row shows that for each kilometer increase in distance from a
base of 0.1 km, individual monthly earnings increase by US$ 145.75. This corresponds to a 18.4%
increase in monthly earnings. The impact decreases for individuals located far away from site F.
Finally, we use our results to estimate the losses in terms of lifetime earnings (present discounted
value) due to lead exposure. Using the results presented in Table 11 we simulate the stream of
earnings of an individual aﬀected by lead exposure and compare it with the simulated proﬁle of a
representative individual not exposed to the sources of pollution.46 We ﬁnd a diﬀerence of CLP$
3 million (or US$ 6,000 dollars) for each microgram of lead per deciliter of blood. At an average
of 10 μg/dL in the sample, the mean compensation should have been about 3.8 times the amount
dictated by the Supreme Court in 2005.

6

Robustness Checks

Although we are controlling for a comprehensive set of family background variables in the reduced
form equation, the potential correlation between the residential location decision and unobserved
variables could compromise the validity of distance as an instrument for blood lead levels.
We attempt to tackle this issue by implementing the following strategy. First, we isolate the
impact of family background, individual and school characteristics on PSU scores using a large
sample of individuals living in areas not aﬀected by lead pollution. More precisely, from a sample
of individuals residing in three provinces not aﬀected by lead pollution (Parinacota, Iquique, and
Tamarugal ), we estimate the following version of our reduced form model:

P SUi = γ0 + γ2 Agei + γ3 Genderi + γ4 Xi + γ5 Zschool,i + ηi .

(8)

The estimated parameters are consistent estimates of the association between the exogenous variables and PSU scores. Obviously, we do not include γ1 ln Dhome,i since the regression is estimated
46

The predicted lifetime proﬁle of annual earnings is generated from Mincer-type regressions estimated using the
UI data. We assumed a discount rate of 4%.

20

with data from provinces excluding Arica, and thus, far away from site F.
Second, using the estimated parameters from equation (8) and the sample of individuals exposed
ˆ −D , as follows:
to pollution in Arica, we construct a predicted value for the PSU, P SU
ˆ −D = γˆ0 + γˆ2 Age + γˆ3 Gender + γˆ4 Xi + γˆ5 Zschool,i .
P SU
ˆ −D (Age, Gender, X, Z) captures the eﬀect of family background, individual
ˆ −D = P SU
Thus, P SU
and school characteristics on PSU. Since, it is constructed from estimated parameters obtained from
a large sample of individuals not exposed to pollution, we avoid the consequences of the potential
biases due to the endogeneity of distance to the site F.
ˆ −D and distance from home to site
Finally, we estimate the reduced form model of PSU on P SU
F for the sample of students exposed to lead pollution:

P SU

ˆ −D + ε.
= γ0 + γ1 ln Dhome + γ2 P SU

(9)

Note that if we follow a Constrained Least Squares (CLS) approach, by ﬁxing γ2 , we avoid any
residual correlation between the family background and unobservables determining the PSU test
scores. Additionally, note that by restricting γ2 = 1, under the null hypothesis of no correlation between family background and distance from home to site F, the coeﬃcient γ1 should be comparable
to the one obtained in Table 6.
Table 13 presents the results of this exercise. Our ﬁndings are consistent with those of Table
Table 6. For math scores, we ﬁnd a point estimate that is very similar to the eﬀect of distance
on PSU score reported in Table 6 (but with lower statistical power). Similarly, for language test
scores we ﬁnd comparable results to those presented in Table 7 (signiﬁcant at 1% level).
In Table 14 we perform a sensitivity analysis constraining γ2 at diﬀerent values. In practice,
we vary γ2 from 0.8 to 1.2. Thus, by ﬁxing γ2 and estimating by CLS, we avoid any residual
correlation between family background and unobservables determining PSU score. Interestingly,
even when the family background parameter is set to 1.2, i.e. when the role of family background
is “ampliﬁed”, the estimated eﬀects of distance to site F are consistent with the results presented
in Table 6.
We also analyze the robustness of our results analyzing the association between distance to site
21

F and test scores for those individuals who took PSU 2008 in Arica but SIMCE 2004 in another
region and for those who took SIMCE 2004 in Arica but PSU 2008 in another place. In the ﬁrst case
we obtain positive but non-signiﬁcant eﬀects, whereas for the second group we obtain ambiguous
signs and non-signiﬁcant eﬀects. These results are presented in Tables A.7 and A.6 in the appendix.

7

Conclusions

In this paper we estimate the long term eﬀects of early lead exposure on academic performance
and labor market outcomes. We exploit a massive and unfortunate lead intoxication incident
that occurred in the city of Arica in northern Chile. Between 1984 and 1989 the Chilean company
PROMEL imported 20,000 tons of chemical waste to extract gold and silver. Years later, PROMEL
decided not to continue with the project and abandoned the waste in an area known as site F. In
the early 1990s, the neighborhoods of Cerro Chuño and Los Industriales were built a few meters
from site F. The residents of these neighborhoods became exposed to abnormally high levels of
chemical waste.
We ﬁnd a strong empirical relationship between blood lead levels and student academic performance. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that an increase of one microgram of lead per deciliter of blood reduces
math and language scores by 0.15 and 0.21 standard deviations, respectively. These results persist even after controlling for individual and school characteristics. We also show that endogenous
migration is not a serious threat to our identiﬁcation strategy.
Using administrative data on labor market outcomes, we also investigate the impact of lead
exposure on future earnings. The results suggest that an increase of one microgram of lead per
deciliter of blood results in an average reduction of 2.9% in annual earnings during adulthood.
Comparing outcomes by residential proximity to site F, we ﬁnd that a one kilometer increase in
the distance between home and Site F increases individual monthly earnings by USD 145.75. This
corresponds to a 18.4% increase in monthly earnings.
Finally, we calculate the eﬀect of lead exposure on the net present value of earnings. Our results
suggest a decrease of approximately USD 6,000 per microgram of lead per deciliter of blood. This
evidence should inform policy makers when determining appropriate compensation for individuals
exposed to events such as the one observed in Arica.

22

References
Agriquem (2009, October). Análisis quı́mico de suelos de la ciudad de Arica.
Angrist, J. and A. Krueger (1992). The eﬀect of age at school entry on educational attainment: An
application of instrumental variables with moments from two samples. Journal of the American
Statistical Association 87, 328–336.
ATDSR (2007, August). Toxicological proﬁle for lead. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Banks, E., L. Ferretti, and D. Schucard (1997). Eﬀects of low level lead exposure on cognitive
function in children: a review of behavioral, neuropsychological and biological evidence. Neurotoxicology 18 (1), 237–281.
Bellinger, D., K. Stiles, and H. Needleman (1992). Low-level lead exposure, intelligence and academic achievement: A long term follow-up study. Pedriatrics 90, 855–861.
Canﬁeld, R., C. Henderson, D. Cory-Slechta, C. Cox, T. Jusko, and B. Lanphear (2003, April).
Intellectual impairment in children with blood lead concentrations below 10≤ μg per deciliter.
The New England Journal of Medicine 348 (16), 1517–1526.
CDC (1991). Preventing lead poisoning in young children. Report, Atlanta, GA: US Department
of Health and Human Services.
Clay, K., W. Troesken, and M. R. Haines (2006, October). Lead Pipes and Child Mortality. National
Bureau of Economic Research, NBER, Working Paper 12603 .
Clay, K., W. Troesken, and M. R. Haines (2010). Lead, Mortality and Productivity. National
Bureau of Economic Research, NBER, Working Paper 16480 .
CONAMA (2009). Programa Maestro de Intervención en Zonas con presencia de Polimetales en
Arica. Report, Comisión Nacional de Medio Ambiente.
CONGRESS (2009). Informe sobre acopios de residuos tóxicos y peligrosos internados ilegalmente por la empresa Promel en sectores poblacionales de la comuna de Arica. Report, Chilean
Congress.
23

Cook, R. D. (1979, March). Inﬂuential observations in linear regression. Journal of the American
Statistical Association 74 (365), 169–174.
Coria, C., A. Cabello, E. Tassara, E. López, H. Rosales, M. Pérez, C. Zavala, P. Muñoz, G. Orellana,
M. I. Inostroza, L. Contreras, and L. Kristen (2009). Long term consequences among children
exposed to lead poisoning. Revista Médica de Chile 137, 1037–1044.
Currie, J. and R. Walker (2011). Traﬃc congestion and infant health: Evidence from e-zpass.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3.
Delves, H. T., J. C. Sherlock, and M. Quinn (1984, November-December). Temporal stability of
blood lead concentrations in adults exposed only to environmental lead. Human and Experimental
Toxicology 3 (4), 279–288.
GORE (2011). Cuenta Pública 2011. Report, Gobierno Regional de Arica y Parinacota.
Kaufman, A. (2001). Do low levels of lead produce IQ loss in children? A careful examination of
the literature. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology 16 (4), 303–341.
Kaufman, A. and N. Kaufman (1997). K-TEA: Kaufman Test of Educational Achievement: Comprehensive form Manual. American Guidance Service.
Koller, K., T. Brown, A. Spurgeon, and L. Levy (2004, June). Recent developments in low-level
lead exposure and intellectual impairment in children. Environmental Health Perspectives 112 (9),
987–994.
Landrigan, P. J., C. B. Schecter, J. M. Lipton, M. C. Fahs, and J. Schwartz (2002, July). Environmental pollutants and disease in american children: estimates of morbidity, mortality and
cost for lead poisoning, asthma, cancer and developmental disabilities. Environmental Health
Perspectives 110 (7), 721–728.
Lanphear, B., K. Dietrich, P. Auinger, and C. Cox (2000, November-December). Cognitive deﬁcits
associated with blood lead concentrations 10μg/dL in US children and adolescents. Public Health
Reports 115 (6), 521–529.
Lanphear, B., R. Hornung, M. Ho, C. Howard, S. Eberly, and K. Knauf (2002, January). Environmental lead exposure during early childhood. The Journals of Pediatrics 140 (1), 40–47.
24

Leslie, G. R. and A. H. Richardson (1961, Diciembre). Life-cycle, career pattern and the decision
to move. American Sociological Review 26 (6), 894–902.
Lewis, J. (1985, May). Lead poisoning: A historical perspective. EPA Journal .
Lidsky, T. and J. S. Schneider (2003, January). Lead neurotoxicity in children: basic mechanisms
and clinical correlates. Brain 126 (1), 5–19.
Mielke, H. (2002, April). Research ethics in pediatric environmental health: Lessons from lead.
Neurotoxicology and Teratology 24, 467–469.
Mielke, H. and P. Reagan (1998, February). Soils is an important pathway of human lead exposure.
Environmental Health Perspectives 106 (1), 217–229.
MINVU (1990). Decreto Supremo 140 que Reglamenta Programa de Viviendas Sociales. Technical
report, División Jurı́dica, Ministerio de Vivienda y Urbanismo.
Muennig, P. and P. Bao (2009, December). The social cost of childhood lead exposure in New
Jersey. New Jersey Department of Public Advocate.
Needleman, H., C. Gunnoe, A. Leviton, R. Reed, H. Peresie, C. Maher, and P. Barret (1979,
March). Deﬁcits in psychologic and classroom performance of children with elevated dentine
lead levels. The New England Journal of Medicine 300 (13), 689–695.
PTF (2000, February). Eliminating childhood lead poisoning: A federal strategy targeting lead
paint hazards. President’s Task Force on Environmental Health Risks and Safety Risks to Children.
Ruiz-Tagle, J. and K. Sehnbruch (2009). Elaboración de un Indicador de la Calidad del Empleo.
Report, United Nations Procurement Division (UNPD).
SERPAJ (1996). Diagnóstico medioambiental población Los Industriales y Cerro Chuño. Report,
Servicio de Paz y Justicia.
Servicio de Salud de Arica (2001). Listado de personas con niveles de plomo en sangre superiores a
10μg/dL con contramuestras conﬁrmadas por el I.S.P. efectuadas el año 2000 a las poblaciones

25

Cerro Chuño y Los Industriales. Servicio de Salud de Arica, Subdirección Médica, Unidad de
Epidemiologı́a.
Sinnott, R. W. (1984). Virtues of the Haversine. Sky and Telescope 98 (2), 159.
Soto, R. and A. Torche (2004, Diciembre). Spatial inequality, migration and economic growth in
Chile. Cuadernos de economı́a 41 (7), 401–404.
Suprema, C. (2007). Fallo Corte Suprema Rol 3174-2005, Resolución 12947. Technical report,
Corte Suprema.
Tchernitchin, A., L. Nina, L. Molina, G. Molina, N. Tchernitchin, C. Acevedo, and P. Alonso
(2005). Human exposure to lead in chile. Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 185 (6), 93–139.
Wasserman, G., X. Liu, D. Popovac, P. Factor-Litvak, J. Kline, C. Waternaux, N. Lolacono, and
J. Graziano (2000, November-December). The Yugoslavia prospective lead study: contributions
of prenatal and postnatal lead exposure to early exposure to early intelligence. Neurotoxicology
and Teratology 22 (6), 811–818.
Wechsler, D. (1974). Manual for the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children Revised. New York:
Psychological Corporation.
Wolpaw, J. (2007, May). Environmental Policy as Social Policy? The Impact of Childhood Lead
Exposure on Crime. The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, Berkeley Electronic
Press 7 (1).
Ziegler, E., B. Edwards, R. Jensen, K. Mahaﬀey, and S. Fomon (1978, January). Absorption and
retention of lead by infants. Pediatric Research 12 (1), 29–34.

26

27

Construction
date
(2)
1985
N.A.
1990
1991
1993
1994
1994
1995
1994
1995
1996

Number of
houses built
(3)
536
316
279
405
149
60
203
38
185
110
134

Completion
date
(4)
March, 1989
29th April, 1991
29th April, 1991
17 th December, 1992
N.A.
N.A.
N.A.
N.A.
N.A.
N.A.
N.A.

Building
authorization date
(5)
N.A.
21th November, 1994
11th June, 1997
th
21 November, 1994
4th January, 2001
4th January, 2001
4th January, 2001
4th January, 2001
4th January, 2001
4th January, 2001
4th January, 2001

Reception
date
(6)
N.A.
N.A.
16th September, 1997
N.A.
9th September, 2001
9th September, 2001
24th September, 2001
11th September, 2001
9th October, 2001
4th October, 2001
9th October, 2001

Number of
houses receptioned
(7)
N.A.
N.A.
279
N.A.
118
N.A.
105
19
44
47
36

Notes: The information provided in this table was obtained from documents of Chilean Congress and from a report elaborated by Peace and Justice Service
(SERPAJ, 1996). Columns (2), (3), and (4) show the construction dates, number of houses built, and houses completion dates. Since the neighborhoods were
built in areas destined for industrial activities, the Housing Ministry (Ministerio de Vivienda y Urbanismo) did not request the building authorization of the
neighborhoods to the Municipality. In turn, the Municipality of Arica could not authorize the construction of housings projects due to the fact that areas were
out of its jurisdiction. As soon as the areas were incorporated into the regulatory plane of the city, the Housing Ministry requested the building authorizations to
the Municipality in the dates in column (5) and the property titles domain were delivered to the residents. The ﬁnal reception dates and the number of houses
receptioned by the Municipality are presented in columns (6) and (7), respectively.

(1)
Los Industriales I
Los Industriales II
Los Industriales III
Los Industriales IV
Cerro Chuño I
Cerro Chuño II
Cerro Chuño III-a
Cerro Chuño III-b
Cerro Chuño IV
Cerro Chuño V
Cerro Chuño VII

Housing Project

Table 1: Construction, completion, and reception dates of Housing Projects in Arica

Table 2: Summary Statistics. PSU 2008
Variable
Distance from site F to home
Home located to the east of site F
Age
Male
Mother absence
Father absence
Mother with less than 8 years of education
Mother with 8-11 years of education
Mother with 12 years of education
Mother with more than 12 years of education
Father with less than 8 years of education
Father with 8-11 years of education
Father with 12 years of education
Father with more than 12 years of education
Private school
Voucher school
Public school
Math PSU 2008 score
Language PSU 2008 score
N. of Obs.

Mean
2.321
0.153
18.591
0.446
0.059
0.275
0.165
0.150
0.237
0.386
0.121
0.108
0.182
0.312
0.0481
0.459
0.492
502.805
483.632

Std. Dev.
0.938
0.360
0.535
0.497
0.236
0.446
0.371
0.357
0.426
0.487
0.327
0.311
0.386
0.463
0.214
0.498
0.500
92.341
93.900
1,076

Min.
0.222
0
18
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
203
204

Max.
4.049
1
21
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
800
747

Source: PSU 2008. Notes: Distances are expressed in kilometers. In order to consider the winds currents and the
dispersion of pollutants around the city, we include the variable home located to the east of site F. It is equal to 1 if
the student’s home is located to the east of the site F (main contaminated area) and 0 in otherwise. Parent’s absence
is equal to 1 if the biological or stepfather/stepmother parent does not live with the student. Parental education was
tabulated only if parents were present.

28

Table 3: Summary Statistics. PSU 2004 and Wages 2009-2010
Variable
Average monthly wage 2010-2011 (Chilean pesos)
Language PSU 2004 score
Math PSU 2004 score
Age
Male
Mother with less than 8 years of education
Mother with 8-11 years of education
Mother with 12 years of education
Mother with more than 12 years of education
Father with less than 8 years of education
Father with 8-11 years of education
Father with 12 years of education
Father with more than 12 years of education
Public school
Region
N. of Obs.

Mean
395,447
480.356
482.956
26.096
0.501
0.166
0.287
0.302
0.243
0.222
0.231
0.271
0.273
0.466
9.459

Std. Dev. Min.
282,095
10,044
119.291
190
107.917
112
3.229
20
0.500
0
0.372
0
0.452
0
0.459
0
0.429
0
0.416
0
0.421
0
0.444
0
0.445
0
0.498
0
3.867
1
65,497

Max.
2,136,248
840
840
64
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
13

Source: PSU 2004 and Unemployment Insurance Database. Notes: Parent’s absence is equal to 1 if the biological
or stepfather/stepmother parent does not live with the student. Parent’s education was tabulated only if parents
were present. Region corresponds to a ﬁxed eﬀect to consider the place where students took the test in 2004.

29

Table 4: The Eﬀect of Distances to Sources of Pollution on Blood Lead Levels (BLLs)
(1)
-0.636**

Variable
(ln) distance from site F to home

(2)

(3)

(0.318)

(ln) distance from railway to home

0.114
(0.337)

(ln) distance from leaded soil to home

0.159
(0.148)

Constant
Age and Male
Observations
R2

9.973***

10.242***

10.501***

(0.324)

(0.287)

(0.341)

Yes
377
0.0428

Yes
377
0.0369

Yes
378
0.0377

Notes: All distances are expressed in kilometers. BLLs are measured in micrograms per deciliter of blood
(μg/dL). As we described in the text, we use the average of two independent blood tests taken to residents of Cerro
Chuño and Los Industriales during 2000. One of these samples was taken by Municipal Health Service (SERMUS)
and another, which is the conﬁrmation of these ﬁndings, were performed by the Public Health Institute (ISP). We
present the estimated coeﬃcients of regressions of home distance to the nearest centroid of pollution of each of the
three sources of lead contamination using the average of these two measures of blood lead levels. In this case we
control for inﬂuential observations using Cook’s distance (Cook, 1979). All the numbers in the table are robust to
this procedure. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01,** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

30

31
61.2
(13.65)

(16.63)

(8.59)

39.53

(18.47)

(8.67)

60.46

42.49

(10.68)

(6.98)

64.08

46.99

(11.75)

(6.82)

60.93

(4.56)

42.53

1989
(2)
60.43

(14.29)

(11.70)

1988
(1)
43.42

59.57

(12.54)

(13.94)

32.03

58.74

(10.63)

33

(11.16)

(7.69)

59.24

(12.32)

41.38

61.96

(11.26)

(3.87)

36.41

1989
(2)
61.22

1988
(1)
38.88

(10.63)

65.57

(9.78)

66.42

(6.28)

69.43

(6.83)

66.48

(6.77)

1990
(3)
67.73

(12.00)

64.74

(8.97)

65.24

(9.01)

69.17

(7.51)

64.5

(7.70)

1990
(3)
67.92

(15.61)

53.98

(6.75)

56.93

(8.72)

60.6

(4.14)

55.77

(3.07)

1991
(4)
61.73

(16.91)

48.7

(11.10)

55.66

(10.98)

57.72

(9.15)

58.2

(7.40)

1991
(4)
64.88

(11.36)

71.95

(7.09)

71.77

(7.35)

72.61

(6.12)

73.06

(5.81)

1992
(5)
71.36

(9.69)

72.98

(6.48)

71.07

(8.11)

73.6

(5.29)

73.25

(7.29)

1992
(5)
71.52
(7.57)

(6.26)

75.16

(6.28)

73.61

(4.57)

75.64

(6.59)

70.45

(7.63)

66.34

(6.34)

70.97

(6.08)

70.99

(6.00)

69.30

(4.89)

(5.87)

76.27

(6.11)

74.91

(4.22)

75.05

(6.87)

70.98

(6.94)

Language
1994 1996
(6)
(7)
65.65 70.17

(7.59)

71.90

(7.79)

74.10

(7.29)

75.10

(6.92)

73.67

(7.05)

Math
1994 1996
(6)
(7)
69.00 69.94

(39.90)

245.25

(27.68)

257.58

(11.99)

252.25

(18.68)

243.67

(25.96)

1999
(8)
249.17

(34.84)

247.25

(22.37)

255.92

(10.60)

255.42

(16.48)

244.22

(27.08)

1999
(8)
252.5

(29.61)

251.94

(23.01)

252.08

(16.77)

252.21

(13.56)

248.89

(21.36)

2002
(9)
239.49

(22.73)

252.74

(20.85)

251.12

(14.66)

248.05

(13.42)

249.33

(17.38)

2002
(9)
239.49

(31.96)

233.54

(15.22)

261.42

(20.37)

256.04

(23.16)

249.41

(25.34)

2005
(10)
242.02

(37.11)

247.37

(15.75)

254.5

(20.06)

257.96

(26.74)

246.17

(26.92)

2005
(10)
235.51

(32.55)

259.31

(13.98)

253.98

(18.33)

244.23

(22.21)

254.89

(26.38)

2006
(11)
239.97

(37.30)

259.37

(15.25)

251.52

(19.59)

242.81

(27.19)

256.91

(27.35)

2006
(11)
236.79

(26.19)

270.56

(19.72)

261.42

(19.61)

260.26

(27.21)

264.66

(24.94)

2008
(12)
244.54

(34.65)

242.06

(21.52)

250.93

(23.53)

244.87

(37.21)

249.54

(28.49)

2008
(12)
225.2

(25.66)

275.29

(19.28)

270.57

(14.79)

265.68

(27.26)

278.44

(17.58)

2010
(13)
259.8

(29.91)

259.91

(24.27)

254.28

(27.05)

255.12

(34.11)

265.71

(16.89)

2010
(13)
240.65

SIMCE changed its measurement scale. This explain the difference of scores between 1988-1992 and 1999-2010. Standard deviations in parentheses.

Source: SIMCE 1988-2010. Notes: We present the weighted average SIMCE scores for math and language. Distances are expressed in kilometers. From 1999,

More than 4.5 kilometers

Between 3.5 and 4.5 kilometers

Between 2.5 and 3.5 kilometers

Between 1.5 and 2.5 kilometers

Less than 1.5 kilometer

Distance from school to Site F

More than 4.5 kilometers

Between 3.5 and 4.5 kilometers

Between 2.5 and 3.5 kilometers

Between 1.5 and 2.5 kilometers

Less than 1.5 kilometer

Distance from school to Site F

Table 5: School-level average math and language SIMCE test scores: Schools in Arica, 1988-2010

Table 6: Estimates from Reduced Form Model: The eﬀect of distance on math and language
PSU scores
Variable
(ln) distance from site F to home
Home located to the east of site F
Constant
Age and Gender
Mother and Father absence
Parental education
Type of school
R2
Observations

Math
(1)
13.901**

Language
(2)
17.430***

Math
(3)
10.005*

Language
(4)
13.234***

Math
(5)
8.783**

Language
(6)
12.325***

(6.204 )

(4.922 )

(5.097 )

-7.028

-5.306

-3.731

(3.801)

(3.951)

(4.074)

0.848

-4.665

(13.108 )

(12.077 )

(12.304 )

0.153

( 10.627)

(10.764)

(9.983)

675.479***

614.243***

(89.074 )

(72.226 )

642.450***

572.473

635.424***

567.244***

(87.259 )

(76.082 )

(85.916)

Yes
No
No
No
0.0396

Yes
No
No
No
0.0269

(80.579)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
0.0939

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
0.0789

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.0939

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.0871

1,076

Notes: Distances are expressed in kilometers. In order to consider the winds currents and the dispersion of
pollutants around the city, we include the variable home located to the east of site F. It is equal to 1 if the student’s
home is located to the east of site F (main contaminated area), 0 otherwise. Parent’s absence is equal to 1 if the
biological or stepfather/stepmother parent does not live with the student. Parent’s education was tabulated only
if parents were present. Clustered standard errors (at the school level) in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.

32

Table 7: The eﬀect of lead on math and language PSU test scores
Stage
First Stage

Reduced From

TSIV
Observations

Math
(1)
-0.636**

Language
(2)
-0.636**

(0.318)

(0.318)

8.783**

12.325***

(3.951)

(4.074)

-13.810

-19.379*

(9.288)

(11.615)

1,076

1,076

Notes: The causal eﬀect of lead on PSU scores is expressed in PSU points. Standard errors were calculated
using the Delta Method. Assuming that cov(γ̂1 , α̂1 ) = 0, the variance of β̂T SIV is giving by the following expression:
V ar(β̂T SIV ) = V ar(γ̂1 )/α̂12 + (γ̂12 /α̂14 ) · V ar(α̂1 ). Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

33

Table 8: Proportion of parents with college education with children enrolled in primary schools
in Arica, by distance from school to site F

Distance from school to site F

1989

1999

2008

Less than 1.5 kilometers
Between 1.5 and 3 kilometers
More than 3 kilometers

10.2%
1.7%
23.9%

9.7%
2.1%
30.3%

11.4%
12.0%
31.3%

Source: SIMCE 1989-2008. Notes: We present the proportion of parents with college for three diﬀerent categories
of distance from home to site F.

34

Table 9: PSU 2004 Scores on Average Monthly Wages 2010-2011 (National Level)
Variable
Math PSU 2004 score

(1)
0.0017***

Language PSU 2004 score

0.0001***

Constant

11.7713***

(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.106)

Region ﬁxed eﬀect
Family background
Age and gender
School-level variables
N. of Obs.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
65,497

Source: PSU 2004 and Unemployment Insurance Database. Region corresponds to the region in which the
student took the test in 2004. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

35

Table 10: Marginal eﬀect of PSU points on monthly wages

∂W
∂P SU

(Pesos/PSU points)

Math

Language

745

60

Notes: Using the estimated coeﬃcients of the relationship between wages and PSU scores we can obtain the
marginal eﬀect of an increase in language and math PSU scores on the monthly wages of the students who took PSU
in 2004 and for whom we observe their wages in 2010 and 2011. Due the fact that the dependent variable in the
regression estimated in Table 9 is expressed as the natural logarithm of the monthly wages, under the assumption of
¯ + β̂2 X̄ + σ̂ 2 /2). As we
normality, we can write the marginal eﬀect of an increase in PSU score as β̂1 × exp(β̂0 + β̂1 P SU
discussed in the text, P SU corresponds to the scores obtained in math or language tests, X corresponds to a vector
of observed characteristics (such as gender, age at the moment of which we observe the wages, parental education
and the region in which they took the test). Then, replacing the coeﬃcients presented in Table 9, we ﬁnd that on
average, for each extra point in math PSU scores, the monthly wage increases in 745 CLP (or 1.49 dollars), while in
the case language PSU this eﬀect corresponds to 60 CLP (or 0.12 dollars). We use 1 dollar=500 pesos.

Table 11: Marginal eﬀect of lead on monthly wages

(1)

∂W
∂P b

(2)

mean
% ∂W∂P
b

P esos
μg/dL


%

P esos
μg/dL

Math

Language

Total Eﬀect

-10,296

-1,162

-11,458

-2.6%

-0.3%

-2.9%



Notes: In order to analyze the eﬀect of lead exposure on wages, we develop an expression that relates: (1)
the marginal eﬀect of blood lead concentration on PSU scores and (2) the marginal eﬀect of PSU scores on wages
(i.e,

∂W
∂P b

=

∂W
∂P SUlang

×

∂P SUlang
∂P b

+

∂W
∂P SUmath

×

∂P SUmath
∂P b

). Using data from blood tests taken to residents of the

neighborhoods nearest to site F (main source of exposure to lead in Arica) during 2000 and PSU scores in the subjects
of math and language, we obtain the eﬀect in terms of PSU points of an increase of 1 microgram of lead per deciliter
of blood (i.e,

∂P SU
∂P b

). Table 7 presents these results diﬀerentiated by subject (math and language). Then, using a

sample of wages and PSU 2004 scores, we explore the relationship between scores PSU and wages (i.e,

∂W
∂P SU

). In

particular, we estimate a Mincer equation taking as dependent variable the natural logarithm of the average monthly
wages obtained between 2010 and 2011 by the students who took PSU in 2004. The estimated coeﬃcients of this
relationship are presented in Table 9 while the marginal eﬀect of the increase in 1 PSU point on monthly wages is
∂W
presented in Table 10. Then, combining both estimated eﬀects ( ∂P
and
SU

∂P SU
∂P b

), we obtain the eﬀect of an increase

of 1 microgram of lead per deciliter of bood (1μg/dL) on monthly wages. The ﬁrst row of the table shows these
results. Then, for each increase of 1 microgram on individual’s blood lead level, on his (her) monthly wage will
decrease in CLP 11,458 pesos (or equivalently US 22.92 dollars). Finally, the row (2) shows the marginal eﬀect of
lead on annual wages as percentage of the average monthly wage of the sample used (CLP 395,447 pesos per month).

36

Table 12: Marginal eﬀects of distance from home to Site F on monthly wages
Distance
0.1
0.5
1.5
2.5

kms
kms
kms
kms

Math
(CLP) (US$)
65,480 130.96
13,096 26.19
4,365
8.73
2,619
5.24

Language
(CLP) (US$)
7,393
14.79
1,479
2.96
493
0.99
296
0.59

Math+Lang
(CLP) (US$)
72,873 145.75
14,575 29.15
4,858
9.72
2,915
5.83

Percentage
%
18.4
3.7
1.2
0.9

Notes: In order to analyze the eﬀect of lead exposure (measured through the distance from home to the
main source of pollution in Arica) on wages, we develop an expression that relates: (1) the marginal eﬀect of
distance from home to site F on PSU scores and (2) the marginal eﬀect of PSU scores on wages (i.e,
∂P SU
∂W
× ∂ ln(D lang
∂P SUlang
home)

D

+

∂P SU
∂W
× ∂ ln(D math
∂P SUmath
home)

D

∂W
∂Dhome

=

Using the estimated coeﬃcients of equation 2 , we obtain the eﬀect

in terms of PSU points of an increase of 1 kilometer of the distance from student’s home to site F. Then, using a
sample of wages and PSU 2004 scores, we explore the relationship between scores PSU and earnings (i.e,

∂W
∂P SU

). In

particular, we estimate a Mincer equation taking as dependent variable the natural logarithm of the average monthly
earnings obtained between 2010 and 2011 by the students who took PSU in 2004. The estimated coeﬃcients of this
relationship are presented in Table 9 while the marginal eﬀect of the increase in 1 PSU point on monthly wages
∂W
is presented in Table 10. Then, combining both estimated eﬀects ( ∂P
and
SU

∂P SU
),
∂Dhome

we obtain the eﬀect of an

increase of 1 kilometer in the distance from student’s home to site F on monthly wages. The ﬁrst row of the table
shows these results for Distance equal to 0.1km (people living very close to site F ). Then, for each increase of 1
kilometer in the distance to site F, on his (her) monthly wage will increase in CLP 72,873 pesos (or equivalently US
145.75 dollars).

37

Table 13: Estimated coeﬃcients for Equation (8)
Natural logarithm of the distance from site F to home
ˆ −D )
Family Background and characteristics (P SU
Home located to the east of site F
Constant
Observations

Math
8.881*

Language
12.436***

(5.157)

(3.975)

0.524***

0.555***

(0.133)

(0.145)

-3.747

-1.681

(12.271)

(10.907)

237.515*

203.567**

(75.890)

(76.208)

1,076

1,076

Notes: Robustness check. Ordinary Least Squares estimates of the eﬀect of distance to site F on 2008 PSU scores.
Instead of family background and characteristics, we include the predicted value of the PSU using the parameters
of three northern provinces not aﬀected by lead (Parinacota, Iquique, and Tamarugal), hence these parameters are
consistent and not aﬀected by correlation between unobservables and distance from site F.

Table 14: Constrained estimated coeﬃcients for Equation (9)
Variable

Natural logarithm of the distance from site F to home
ˆ −D )
Family Background and characteristics (P SU
Home located to the east of site F
Constant
Observations

γ2 =0.8
(1)
6.344

Math
γ2 =1
(2)
4.507

γ2 =1.2
(3)
2,670

γ2 =0.8
(4)
10.283***

Language
γ2 =1
γ2 =1.2
(5)
(6)
8.524***
6.765***

(5.874)

(5.975)

(6.149)

(3.422)

(3.218)

(3.129)

0.8

1

1.2

0.8

1

1.2

(.)

(.)

(.)

(.)

(.)

(.)

-0.907

1.149

3.2050

0.546

2.367

4.187

(11.407)

(10.914)

(10.460)

(10.532)

(10.062)

(9.616)

102.66***

4.005

-94.057*

85.251***

-11.473

-108.198***

(13.384)

(13.158)

(12.956)

(9.521)

(9.231)

(8.964)

1.076

1.076

1.076

1.076

1.076

1.076

Notes: Constrained Least Squares for diﬀerent values of γ2 . Thus, by ﬁxing γ2 and estimating by CLS, we are
avoiding any residual correlation between the family background and unobservables determining the PSU score.

38

Figure 1: Site F before the construction of housing projects

Figure 2: Site F after the construction of housing projects

LOS INDUSTRIALES

SITIO F
CERRO CHUÑO
QUEBRADA ENCANTADA

39

Figure 3: Histogram of blood lead levels: ISP and SERMUS samples

50
45
40

frecuency

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
0,5

2

3,5

5

6,5

8

9,5

11 12,5 14 15,5 17 18,5 20 21,5 23 24,5 26 27,5 29 >30

micrograms per deciliter of blood (ug/dL)

ISP

SERMUS

Note: This ﬁgure presents histograms of blood lead level samples collected from the residents of Cerro Chuño
and Los Industriales during 2000. For each individual, we have two measures: SERMUS and ISP.

40

Figure 4: Evolution of mean school academic achievement by distance to site F

Mean standardized test scores by distance to site F

-.6

-.4

-.2

0

.2

.4

Fourth grade

1988

1990
< 1.5 kms

1992

1996

1999

2002

Between 1.5 and 3 kms

2006

2008

>3 kms

Note: This ﬁgure shows mean standardized test scores of schools located at 1.5 or less kilometers from site F,
schools between 1.5 and 3 kilometers from site F and schools 3 or kilometers from site F. The results consider 4th
grades test score results.

41

Figure 5: The trends in the distribution of enrollment by school distance to site F : Fourth
graders
















  








   

Source: SIMCE.

42


  





Appendix

43

44
WRAT Arithmetic: M: 93.5 pts., Std. Dev.: 0.5 pts.
WRAT Reading: M: 91.9 pts., Std. Dev: 0.5 pts.
WISC-R: Block Design: M: 9.5 pts., Std.Dev.: 0.1 pts.
WISC-R: Digit Span: M 8.7 pts., Std. Dev.: 0.1 pts.

WRAT: Arithmetic and Reading (Std.M: 100 pts.,
Std. Dev.: 15 pts.) and WISC-R: Block Design and Digit
Span subsets (Std. M: 10 pts., Std.Dev.: 3 pts.)

WISC-R - 3rd Version (M: 100 pts., Std.Dev.: 15 pts.)

Lanphear et al. (2002)

Wasserman et al. (2000)

After an increase form 10 μg/dL to 30 μg/dL authors
document: -4.3 pts. in WISC III Full Scale, -3.4 pts.
in Verbal WISC III and -4.5 pts. WISC III.

For each increase of 1 μg/dL: -0.7 points in Arithmetic,
-0.99 pts. in Reading, -0.1 points in Block Design
and -0.05 pts. in Digit Span scores.

For each increase of 1 μg/dL: -0.58 pts. in WISCR Full Scale
and -0.89 pts. in KTEA Battery Composite.

For each increase of 1 μg/dL: -0.46 pts. and 0.74 pts.
with a linear and non linear model, resp.

Eﬀects of lead on IQ
Authors report Pvalue of the diﬀerence between
IQ scores for high and low lead children. Full
Scale Pvalue: 0.03, Verbal IQ: 0.03, Performance: 0.08.

Notes: (a) IQ Test correspond to: WISC-R: Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children - Revised, SBIS: Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale, KTEA: Kaufman Test of
Educational Achievement and WRAT: Wide Range Achievement Test - Revised. (b) Needleman et al. (1979) deﬁne two groups of study depending on the
concentration of lead on children’s dentine: low levels (LL) <100 ppm and high levels (HL)>20 ppm.

WISCR Full Scale: M: 119.1 pts., Std. Dev.: 14.8 pts.
KTEA Battery Composite: M: 118.18 pts., Std. Dev: 16.3 pts.

WISC-R - 3rd Version (M: 100 pts., Std. Dev.: 15 pts.)
KTEA (M: 100 pts., Std. Dev.: 15 pts.)

Bellinger et al. (1992)

Sample IQ Scores
WISCR Full Scale: M: 106.6 pts. for LL and 102.1 pts. for HL children.
WISCR Verbal: M: 103.9 pts. for LL and 99.3 pts. for HL children.
WISCR Performance: M: 108.7 pts. for LL and 104.9 pts. for HL children.
M: 89.9 pts, Std. Dev.: 11.4 pts.

IQ Measurement Test

SBIS- 4th Ed. (Std. M: 100 pts., Std. Dev.: 16 pts.)

WISC-R

Canﬁeld et al. (2003)

Needleman et al. (1979)

Table A.1: Eﬀects of lead on IQ

Table A.2: Summary Statistics. Blood lead levels (BLLs) of the residents of Cerro Chuño and
Los Industriales and distances between their homes and diﬀerent sources of pollution
Variable
Age
Male
BLL: IPS Measure
BLL: SERMUS Measure
BLL: Average ISP and SERMUS Measures
Distance from site F to home
Distance from railway to home
Distance from leaded soil to home

Obs.
376
376
376
376
376
376
376
376

Mean
9.305
0.638
7.281
13.593
10.437
0.668
1.066
0.505

Std. Dev.
10.599
0.481
3.836
3.966
3.047
0.316
0.419
0.382

Min.
1
0
1
8.6
5.55
0.166
0.243
0.009

Max.
78
1
21
42.8
24.4
1.300
1.776
1.225

Notes: BLLs are expresed in micrograms per deciliter of blood (μg/dL). All distances are expressed in kilometers.
Male is equal to 1 for male, 0 for female. Blood lead levels correspond to 390 blood tests taken to Cerro Chuño and
Los Industriales residents during 2000. As described in the text, each sample reports two measures: one taken by
Municipal Health Service (SERMUS) and another, which is the conﬁrmation of these ﬁndings made by the Public
Health Institute (ISP). From this data we consider distances beetween his/her home and three sources of pollution:
the site F, Line Railroad Arica-La Paz and a set of 26 points whose lead levels exceeded the EPA’s international
standard for soil (400 miligrams of lead for kilo of soil in analysis). Speciﬁcally, we geo-reference residential addresses
and calculate the minimum distance between home and 33 centroids of pollution covering the full extent of the
railway line and the 26 points of contamination in soil. In the case of site F, we consider Chapiquiña 3066 as
reference direction.

45

Table A.3: Distance from home to Site F and parent’s education
Variable
Mother absence

0.101
(0.141)

Father absence

0.087
(0.103)

Mother with 8-11 years of education

0.113
(0.103)

Mother with 12 years of education

0.118
(0.095)

Mother with more than 12 years of education

0.241***
(0.091)

Father with 8-11 years of education

-0.093

Father with 12 years of education

-0.055

Father with more than 12 years of education

0.202*

(0.120)
(0.110)
(0.105)

Male

0.001
(0.057)

Constant

2.110***
(0.095)

Observations
R2

1,076
0.0284

Source: PSU 2008. Notes: Distances are expressed in kilometers. Parent’s absence is equal to 1 if the biological
or stepfather/stepmother parent does not live with the student. Parental education was tabulated only if parents
were present. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

46

47

Mean
2.845
0.894
0.084
0.501
0.088
0.248
0.138
0.315
0.288
0.168
0.096
0.230
0.269
0.155
0.636
0.311
0.051
250.86
236.82
2,459

2003
Std. Dev.
1.826
0.548
0.278
0.500
0.284
0.431
0.345
0.465
0.453
0.374
0.295
0.421
0.443
0.362
0.481
0.463
0.220
49.255
56.889
2,459
Min.
0.774
-0.255
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
129.62
104.52
2,459

Max.
12.899
2.557
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
397.16
428.92
2,459

Mean
2.957
0.975
0.160
0.526
0.083
0.271
0.138
0.325
0.287
0.164
0.082
0.247
0.249
0.149
0.586
0.386
0.027
245.63
252.32
1,946

2004
Std. Dev.
1.555
0.470
0.367
0.499
0.277
0.445
0.345
0.468
0.452
0.370
0.275
0.431
0.432
0.356
0.492
0.487
0.162
49.340
46.230
1,946
Min.
0.774
-0.255
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
101.68
124.71
1,946

Max.
12.899
2.557
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
380.8
391.04
1,946

Mean
2.962
0.982
0.167
0.502
0.001
0.031
0.095
0.267
0.362
0.272
0.076
0.255
0.357
0.279
0.430
0.535
0.034
254.191
251.882
2,786

2005
Std. Dev.
1.445
0.468
0.373
0.500
0.042
0.173
0.293
0.442
0.480
0.445
0.266
0.436
0.479
0.448
0.495
0.498
0.181
51.464
53.451
2,786
Min.
0.774
-0.255
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
108.63
91.23
2,786

Max.
12.899
2.557
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
364.77
363.62
2,786

Mean
2.898
0.905
0.109
0.492
0.006
0.041
0.122
0.287
0.351
0.232
0.097
0.273
0.342
0.244
0.538
0.430
0.030
250.19
245.62
2,470

2006
Std. Dev.
1.815
0.571
0.312
0.500
0.077
0.199
0.328
0.452
0.477
0.422
0.297
0.445
0.474
0.429
0.498
0.495
0.172
50.781
63.055
2,470

Min.
0.774
-0.255
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
130.27
93.48
2,470

Max.
12.899
2.557
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
394.14
426.58
2,470

Source: SIMCE 2003-2006. Notes: Distances are expressed in kilometers. In order to consider the winds currents and the dispersion of pollutants around the city, we
include the variable school located to the east of site F. It is equal to 1 if the school is located to the east of the site F (main contaminated area) and 0 in otherwise.
Male is equal to 1 for male, 0 for female. Parent’s absence is equal to 1 if the biological or stepfather/stepmother parent does not live with the student. Parent education was tabulated only if parents were present.

Variable
Distance from school to site F
Natural logarithm of the distance from school to site F
School located to the east of site F
Male
Mother absence
Father absence
Mother with less than 8 years of education
Mother with 8-11 years of education
Mother with 12 years of education
Mother with more than 12 years of education
Father with less than 8 years of education
Father with 8-11 years of education
Father with 12 years of education
Father with more than 12 years of education
Public school
Voucher school
Private school
Language SIMCE score
Math SIMCE score
Observations

Table A.4: Summary Statistics. SIMCE 2003-2006

48
1,946
0.1170

(7.850)

(9.727)

2,459
0.1481

227.083***

(6.172)

(19.477)

197.612***

35.123***

57.119***

(4.511)

(14.132)

(5.044)

11.657**

15.980

(9.151)

(4.680)

16.592***

(5.922)

26.122***

4972

(4.351)

(4.162)

10.555*

1456

(4.439)

(8.927)

7130

21.503***

(3.631)

(5.393)

19.207**

10.991***

15.085**

3134
(3.394)

3973

(4.265)

(4.917)
(2.645)

0.835

(4.939)

(3.456)

10.324**

2.962

(2.447)

2075

11.406***

(3.259)

(8.008)

(12.827)

7.948**

-3.215

-10.548

2005
(3)

2,786
0.0829

(8.303)

222.753***

(7.468)

46.270***

(6.450)

14.808**

(3.685)

1.252

(3.665)

-2.430

(4.667)

-6.821

(5.295)

11.844**

(4.111)

8.183*

(4.237)

3.346

(6.219)

-11.383*

(24.067)

-14.393

(2.837)

7.799***

(4.889)

-14.927***

(4.780)

13.998***

Math

2,470
0.1346

(17.440)

201.995***

(23.745)

52.492**

(18.355)

11.804

(10.225)

31.988***

(6.050)

16.372**

(5.567)

6.984

(6.567)

23.642***

(5.091)

14.429***

(3.858)

3.731

(7.451)

8.255

(12.615)

13.280

(3.877)

8.746**

(16.883)

-2.401

(11.126)

6.070

2006
(4)

2,459
0.1236

(7.949)

222.198***

(14.839)

43.647***

(10.641)

11.157

(7.324)

15.987**

(4.636)

4.841

(4.612)

2.224

(9.482)

17.015*

(6.344)

13.186*

(3.545)

3.817

(3.358)

5.645

(4.840)

0.664

(2.146)

-1.645

(8.957)

-9.481

(5.932)

12.227*

2003
(5)

1,946
0.1107

(6.866)

223.507***

(7.854)

24.115***

(4.698)

10.291**

(5.521)

18.469***

(4.684)

10.405**

(4.499)

2.662

(5.067)

27.212***

(3.966)

13.893***

(3.437)

1.619

(4.761)

5.674

(5.251)

2.731

(2.498)

-3.886

(6.665)

-3.726

(4.872)

3.461

2,786
0.0819

(7.974)

234.134***

(9.194)

38.227***

(5.403)

14.619***

(3.771)

3.897

(4.078)

-1.715

(4.667)

-7.074

(4.654)

14.948***

(4.062)

10.102**

(3.998)

3.529

(5.454)

-4.771

(13.677)

-17.796

(2.383)

-4.347*

(5.533)

-14.592**

(4.962)

8.530*

Language
2004
2005
(6)
(7)

2,470
0.1295

(10.824)

222.040***

(11.529)

30.660**

(12.223)

6.069

(5.829)

23.530***

(2.687)

10.024***

(2.292)

-0.202

(5.288)

22.563***

(4.720)

13.855***

(3.706)

5.959

(4.682)

5.144

(11.487)

21.243*

(2.793)

-5.491*

(10.016)

-3.049

(7.456)

7.005

2006
(8)

Source: SIMCE 2003-2006. Notes: Distances are expressed in kilometers. In order to consider the winds currents and the dispersion of pollutants
around the city, we include the variable school located to the east of site F. It is equal to 1 if the school is located to the east of the site F (main
contaminated area) and 0 in otherwise. Male is equal to 1 for male, 0 for female. Parent’s absence is equal to 1 if the biological or stepfather
/stepmother parent does not live with the student. Parent education was tabulated only if parents were present. Standard errors in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Observations
R2

Constant

Private school

Voucher school

Father with more than 12 years of education

Father with 12 years of education

Father with 8-11 years of education

Mother with more than 12 years of education

Mother with 12 years of education

Mother with 8-11 years of education

Father absence

Mother absence

Male

School located to the east of site F

2.083
(5.727)

9.016
(8.434)

Natural logarithm of the distance from school to site F

2004
(2)

2003
(1)

Variable

Table A.5: Distance from school to site F on SIMCE 2003-2006 scores

Table A.6: Indviduals who took PSU 2008 in Arica but SIMCE 2004 in a diﬀerent region

(ln) Distance from site F to home
Age and Gender
Father/Mother absence
Parental Education
School type
N. of Obs.

Math
(1)
12.127
(19.158)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
78

Language
(2)
5.188
(21.028)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
77

Notes: Distances are expressed in kilometers. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table A.7: Individuals who took SIMCE 2004 in Arica but PSU 2009 in a diﬀerent region

(ln) Distance from site F to school
Age and Gender
Father/Mother absence
Parental Education
School type
N. of Obs.

Math
(1)
-19.063
(31.217)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
109

Language
(2)
0.419
(25.160)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
103

Notes: Distances are expressed in kilometers. Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

49

0
ï20

ï10

PSU points

10

20

Figure A.1: Semi-parametric derivative: Math PSU score

Point estimate
95% confidence int.
0

1

2

3

4

Distance to Site F

Note: Semi-parametric model using penalized splines:
PSU = β0 + β1 X + β2 Z + g(Dhome ) + ε
We plot the derivative of g(·).

50

(10)

0
ï20

ï10

PSU points

10

20

Figure A.2: Semi-parametric derivative: Language PSU score

Point estimate
95% confidence int.
0

1

2

3

4

Distance to Site F

Note: Semi-parametric model using penalized splines:
PSU = β0 + β1 X + β2 Z + g(Dhome ) + ε
We plot the derivative of g(·).

51

(11)

Figure A.3: The trends in the distribution of elementary schools by their
distance to site F - City of Arica
















  








     

Source: SIMCE.

52


  





