                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               INEFFICIENT HIRING IN ENTRY-LEVEL LABOR MARKETS

                                          Amanda Pallais

                                       Working Paper 18917
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18917


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2013




I would especially like to thank David Autor, Esther Duflo, and Daron Acemoglu for their guidance.
I would also like to thank Jason Abaluck, Leila Agha, Josh Angrist, Bob Gibbons, Michael Greenstone,
Jon Gruber, Lawrence Katz, Daniel Keniston, Danielle Li, Christopher Palmer, Iuliana Pascu, Jim
Poterba, David Powell, Michael Powell, Simone Schaner, Joe Shapiro, Pian Shu, Jean Tirole, Juuso
Toikka, Sarah Turner, Heidi Williams and seminar participants at Booth, Boston University, Columbia,
Cornell, Harvard, Michigan State, MIT, Princeton, Stanford, UC-Irvine, UC-San Diego, University
of Chicago, University of Virginia, Wharton, and Yale for their many helpful comments and suggestions.
I am grateful to Anand Hattiangi, Dmitry Diskin, and the oDesk Corporation for help understanding
and accessing the oDesk data. Financial support from the George and Obie Shultz Fund, David Autor,
and Esther Duflo is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Amanda Pallais. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Inefficient Hiring in Entry-Level Labor Markets
Amanda Pallais
NBER Working Paper No. 18917
March 2013
JEL No. J01,J20,J60

                                            ABSTRACT

Hiring inexperienced workers generates information about their abilities. If this information is public,
workers obtain its benefits. If workers cannot compensate firms for hiring them, firms will hire too
few inexperienced workers. I determine the effects of hiring workers and revealing more information
about their abilities through a field experiment in an online marketplace. I hired 952 randomly-selected
workers, giving them either detailed or coarse public evaluations. Both hiring workers and providing
more detailed evaluations substantially improved workers' subsequent employment outcomes. Under
plausible assumptions, the experiment's market-level benefits exceeded its cost, suggesting that some
experimental workers had been inefficiently unemployed.


Amanda Pallais
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
apallais@fas.harvard.edu
1     Introduction
Young workers are more likely to be unemployed than older, more experienced workers.1
A key question in designing policies to improve young workers’ labor market outcomes is
whether their poor outcomes result from human capital de…ciencies or barriers to labor
market entry. If it is the former, then these workers may need to engage in intensive education
or training programs to succeed in the labor market. If it is the latter, then programs that
simply give these workers a foot in the door may have long-lasting bene…ts.
    This paper evaluates whether inexperienced workers would bene…t, on average, from
simply obtaining a job because it would give them a chance to demonstrate their abilities.
Employers are uncertain about the abilities of inexperienced workers. Hiring these workers
generates information about their abilities (e.g., Farber and Gibbons, 1996; Altonji and Pier-
ret, 2001). This information is valuable because it allows …rms to hire higher-ability workers
in the future. But, …rms might not have su¢ cient incentive to generate this information
because, if it is partially public, workers receive part of its value as higher earnings. Hiring
workers is costly. Managers must spend time explaining the jobs to workers and monitor-
ing workers’ progress. Moreover, …rms incur an opportunity cost of lost time if jobs are
not completed correctly or timely. If workers cannot compensate …rms for hiring them and
producing the information, for example because a minimum wage or adverse selection (e.g.,
Weiss, 1980) prevents wages from falling or because bonding is prohibitively di¢ cult (e.g.,
Dickens et al., 1989), …rms will hire ine¢ ciently few entry-level workers.
    Through a …eld experiment in an online marketplace, this paper assesses the impact of (1)
giving jobs to relatively inexperienced workers and (2) giving the market more information
about workers’job performance on their future employment outcomes and the market as a
whole. The online marketplace, oDesk, consists of workers all over the world who complete
approximately 200,000 hours of work per week remotely.2 Importantly, when an oDesk
employer terminates a job, it is required to publicly disclose a rating of the worker on a
one-to-…ve scale and can, if it chooses, provide a short comment.
    In this experiment, I invited low-wage data-entry specialists to apply for 10-hour data-
entry jobs. When workers applied, they proposed hourly wage rates for the job. The 3,767
workers who applied proposing wages of $3 per hour or less formed the experimental sample.
Workers in the sample were randomized into three groups: two treatment groups (with
   1
     For example, in December 2012, 12.8% of workers 20 to 24 years old were unemployed, compared with
only 6.7% of workers 25 to 54 years old. These statistics are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’s Table
A-13 (http://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/cpseea13.pdf), last accessed January 10, 2013.
   2
     All statistics about the marketplace describe oDesk in July 2010, immediately after the experiment.
This statistic was generated by oDesk and is reported at https://www.odesk.com/oconomy/activity (last
accessed February 13, 2012).




                                                   2
476 workers in each) and a control group (containing the remaining 2,815 workers). The
size of the treatment groups (together approximately 25% of the sample) was determined
by …nancial constraints. I did not hire control group workers. I hired workers in both
the "coarse evaluation treatment" and "detailed evaluation treatment" groups. I provided
workers in both treatment groups with a public one-to-…ve rating, calculated from their
actual performance statistics and normed to match the distribution of ratings in the market.
The ratings were calculated without reference to what treatment group the workers were
in. The di¤erence between the two treatment groups was the amount of information about
workers’performance that was in the public comment I provided. The comments workers
in the coarse evaluation treatment received were designed to be as uninformative as the
comments typically left in the marketplace. However, in the detailed comment treatment,
workers receiving a rating of four or higher received a detailed comment with objective
information about their data entry speed, accuracy, following of directions, and timely task
completion. Due to IRB restrictions, I was not allowed to provide detailed evaluations to
workers with low ratings. Thus, for workers earning below four, the detailed evaluation
treatment was identical to the coarse evaluation treatment. Because of the large fraction of
workers earning high ratings on oDesk, only 17% of workers earned ratings below four.
    Using the marketplace’s administrative data, I then observed the experimental workers’
subsequent oDesk employment outcomes. Workers bene…tted from obtaining an experimen-
tal job. After the experiment, workers in the coarse evaluation treatment were more likely
to be employed, requested higher wages, and had higher earnings than control group work-
ers. In the two months after the experiment, inexperienced workers’earnings approximately
tripled as a result of obtaining a job. Providing workers with more detailed evaluations
also increased their earnings and the wages they requested. This is consistent with the idea
that more information about worker quality makes workers more valuable to …rms. As the-
ory suggests, the bene…ts of detailed evaluations were not universal: detailed performance
evaluations helped those who performed well and hurt those who performed poorly.
    The interpretation of these results depends on whether the treatments a¤ected outcomes
by revealing information about worker ability or through another mechanism. I consider
whether …ve alternative mechanisms could explain the experiment’s results: (1) the treatment
jobs provided human capital, (2) the act of hiring workers led the market to positively update
its belief about their abilities, (3) the fact that workers received detailed evaluations led the
market to positively update its belief about their abilities, (4) obtaining an experimental
job induced workers to apply to more oDesk jobs, but did not change employers’ beliefs
about workers’ abilities, and (5) I gave workers more positive ratings than they deserved.
None of these alternative explanations can explain all the experiment’s results. For example,



                                               3
the …rst two explanations cannot explain the results of the detailed evaluation treatment.
Moreover, it does not appear that the act of hiring workers in itself led the market to
positively update its beliefs about workers abilities: obtaining a job did not improve workers’
employment outcomes when the market observed only that they had been hired (and not
their evaluations), but outcomes improved immediately after the evaluations became public.
    The fact that the treatments bene…tted treatment group workers does not imply that
they increased overall market welfare. That is, treatment group workers could have simply
displaced other equivalent oDesk workers. While I do not have experimental variation that
allows me to estimate the e¤ect of the experiment on the market as a whole, I compare how
employment and wages changed after the experiment across oDesk’s 74 job categories, based
on the intensity with which the categories were a¤ected by the experiment. I …nd that,
after the experiment, total employment increased in more-a¤ected job categories relative to
less-a¤ected ones, while average wages decreased in the former relative to the latter. I use
these results to estimate the experiment’s e¤ects on total market surplus. Under plausible
assumptions, the bene…ts to market participants of the increased employment induced by
the experiment outweighed the experiment’s social cost (the time workers spent working and
I spent managing them). While I do not directly observe outcomes outside of oDesk, this
calculation does account for workers’ and …rms’ opportunity costs of the increased oDesk
employment. The result obtains despite the fact that the experimental jobs did not create
usable output and I consider only bene…ts within six months of the experiment. It suggests
that ine¢ ciently low hiring of novice workers led to diminished employment and output in
this market.
    This paper directly relates to three strands of the literature. First is the literature
on …rm provision of general skills training. Public information about workers’ abilities is
similar to general human capital. While public information does not increase workers’output
conditional on their working, it increases the aggregate output of a group of workers by
allowing …rms to hire only the highest-ability workers. Thus, discovering a worker’s ability is
similar to general skills training: both produce future productivity bene…ts, but require up-
front investments. Becker (1964) shows that, because workers receive the bene…ts of general
skills training, it will be underprovided if …rms cannot be compensated for providing it.
More recent work shows that if …rms have monopsony power in the labor market (Acemoglu
and Pischke, 1999), obtain private information about worker quality (Acemoglu and Pischke,
1998), or can use training to screen workers (Autor, 2001), they will provide some general
skills training. There is some empirical evidence that …rms provide general skills training
that is not fully o¤set by lower wages (e.g., Autor, 2001; Loewenstein and Spletzer, 1998).
However, neither the theoretical nor the empirical literature shows that …rms recoup the full



                                              4
value of their training investments resulting in their providing the optimal level of training.
This paper provides evidence that information about worker ability is underprovided by
…rms.
    If not provided by …rms, general skills training can be provided by schools; but output
and information about workers’ abilities are jointly produced. Worker attributes such as
reliability, enthusiasm, and maturity are di¢ cult to verify outside of an employment context.
Thus, if …rms do not generate this information, there may be few alternative mechanisms
for its production.
    The most closely related paper to this one is Tervio (2009), which proposes that the
combination of hiring costs and publicly-observable performance could generate ine¢ ciently
high wages and low employment for CEOs and entertainers. This paper shows that a similar
ine¢ ciency may lead to ine¢ ciently low employment in entry-level labor markets, making
interventions that give workers a chance to demonstrate their abilities particularly e¤ective.
There is substantial uncertainty about the abilities of entry-level workers, particularly those
with little education and few credentials. Firms often cannot conceal whether they have
…red, retained, or promoted a worker, an important signal of entry-level worker performance.
Workers’expected output is low, so minimum wages may be binding, making it di¢ cult for
workers to compensate …rms for hiring them.
    Entry-level labor markets have institutions and policies that, in theory, reduce this ine¢ -
ciency: some reduce …rms’cost of hiring inexperienced workers and some directly credential
workers in return for compensation. For example, internships and hiring subsidies for young
workers reduce …rms’ costs of hiring inexperienced workers. Fixed-term contracts (in Eu-
rope) reduce …rms’hiring costs by allowing …rms to dismiss low-ability young workers more
easily. In many occupations, workers can pay to take tests demonstrating their competence
at a given activity. Temporary help …rms play a similar role. They screen workers for a
variety of competencies (e.g., Microsoft Word skills) and, in return for endorsing the worker,
receive part of the worker’s compensation.3 However, it is di¢ cult for private …rms to en-
tirely remove the ine¢ ciency. While tests can determine workers’skills and aptitude, they
may not capture workers’dedication and enthusiasm. Moreover, while policies may reduce
…rms’costs of hiring workers, in most cases, workers are not legally allowed to pay …rms for
hiring them or agree to indentured servitude contracts.
    Finally, this paper relates to the large literature evaluating whether programs that help
young and disadvantaged workers enter the labor market can improve their long-term out-
   3
   oDesk, the online marketplace that is the setting for the paper’s empirical work, has similar institutions.
Workers can take approximately 300 skills tests to demonstrate pro…ciency in subjects ranging from English to
Microsoft Excel and C++. Moreover, Stanton and Thomas (2012) discuss agencies, which allow established
workers to vouch for inexperienced workers in return for a percentage of their earnings.




                                                      5
comes. The …ndings from this literature are mixed.4 This paper has two primary advantages
relative to this literature. First, while other programs typically combine many di¤erent el-
ements, this experiment is able to isolate the e¤ect of information about workers’abilities
from on-the-job training, job placement services, or stigma from participating in a given pro-
gram. Second, because the experiment was so large relative to the marketplace, this paper
can address the concern that bene…ts for hired workers came entirely at the expense of other
non-studied workers. I …nd that this was not the case: that the bene…ts to experimental
workers far outweighed any cost to other oDesk workers.
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the online marketplace,
lays out the experimental design, and assesses the randomization. Section 3 presents the
theoretical framework and generates testable predictions for the e¤ects of the experimental
treatments. Section 4 analyzes the worker-level e¤ects of the experiment and discusses
whether they could have been generated by alternative mechanisms. Section 5 estimates
the e¤ect of the experiment on net market surplus. Section 6 concludes and discusses the
application of these results to other settings as well as public policies that could potentially
reduce the ine¢ ciency.


2       Experimental Context and Design
2.1     The Marketplace
oDesk is an online marketplace in which employers hire independent contractors to perform
tasks remotely. The marketplace is large: immediately following the experiment in July,
2010, oDesk workers completed approximately 200,000 hours of work per week, the equiva-
lent of 5,000 full-time employees. oDesk workers are located around the world. Right after
the experiment, a plurality (37%) lived in the United States, while India (15%) and the
Philippines (14%) were the next most common countries of residence.5 In contrast, approxi-
mately 80% of employers were located in the United States. The most common types of jobs
on oDesk were web programming, website design, and data entry. In general, oDesk jobs
were shorter than traditional, o- ine jobs. But, there was a lot of variation in the length
of oDesk jobs: some jobs lasted for only a few hours, while others constituted full-time em-
ployment. The average job lasted 69 hours. Repeat interactions occurred, but were not the
    4
     See, for example, Couch (1992), Bell and Orr (1994), Bloom et al. (1997), Autor and Houseman (2010),
Redcross et al. (2009), Bloom et al. (2009), and Holister et al. (1984). Bloom (2010) and Stanley et al.
(1998) provide summaries of the literature.
   5
     All statistics in this section aside from the total number of hours per week worked on oDesk are from
my calculations using the oDesk database.




                                                    6
norm. The average worker with any employment had 5.9 jobs with 4.7 unique employers.
    Employers posted job openings in 74 job categories. These postings described the job
and any necessary worker characteristics. When employers posted, they chose whether to
o¤er hourly or …xed wage jobs. Hourly jobs, the type created in this experiment, constituted
70% of jobs on oDesk. In these jobs, oDesk tracked the number of hours worked and each
worker earned an established hourly wage. oDesk guaranteed that the employer would pay
for the hours worked, though the employer could stop the job at any time. In a …xed wage
job, the worker and employer agreed to a price for the entire project, hours worked were not
recorded, and the employer had complete discretion over how much it paid.
    Workers posted public pro…les, describing their skills and the types of jobs they were
seeking. An example is displayed in Figure 1. (This worker was not in the sample because
her proposed hourly wage was too high.) Workers could apply directly to jobs; alternatively,
employers could search for workers and invite them to apply. When employers searched for
workers, they could search for workers with di¤erent levels of experience, choosing to contact
only workers who had worked a certain number of hours or had a certain feedback score.
However, employers rarely invited workers in this sample to apply: less than 9% of appli-
cations sent by treatment group workers after the experiment were initiated by employers.
Under either application method, the worker proposed a price: an hourly wage (in an hourly
job) or an amount for the entire project (in a …xed wage job). After reviewing their applicant
pools, employers could hire as many or few applicants as they deemed suitable.
    Each worker posted her preferred hourly wage rate at the top of her pro…le. When
applying for a job, a worker could suggest a di¤erent wage to employers, but employers saw
her posted wage as well. As soon as a worker began working in an hourly job, the job title,
number of hours worked, and hourly wage were automatically posted to her pro…le. In …xed
wage jobs, the job title and agreed job price were automatically posted. When an employer
ended a job, it had to rate the worker from one to …ve on six dimensions: availability,
communication, cooperation, deadlines, quality, and skills. These scores were averaged to
form the worker’s overall rating for the job. The worker rated the employer on the same six
dimensions (before seeing her own rating); these scores were averaged to form the employer’s
overall rating. Because oDesk wanted the employee to be able to present her side of the story,
both composite ratings were automatically posted to the worker’s pro…le. A worker could not
remove the ratings without refunding the remuneration received. Employers’ ratings were
typically very positive: before the experiment, 64% of low-wage data entry workers received
a rating of exactly …ve, while 83% averaged at least four. Workers and employers could
also choose to provide short comments about the employment experience, which were also
automatically posted to the worker’s pro…le. Comments were generally one or two positive



                                              7
sentences providing little objective information. Unlike the numerical ratings, workers could
remove employer comments without penalty, but overall only 4% of oDesk workers did.
    In addition to the employer feedback mechanism, oDesk developed a number of ways to
let workers demonstrate their abilities. Because workers’listed skills and experience could be
hard to verify, oDesk developed its own skills tests: 40 minute, 40 multiple choice question
tests on subjects such as written English, Microsoft Word, and C++. Workers’scores and
performance relative to other oDesk workers could then be directly posted to their pro…les.
Workers could also display their "quali…cations," certi…cations from other online platforms,
and post a portfolio of their prior work.
    Workers could also join agencies, groups of workers typically coordinated by an estab-
lished worker, in return for a fraction of their earnings. The pro…le of each agency-a¢ liated
worker contained the agency’s average feedback score as well as the worker’s own feedback
score. Stanton and Thomas (2012) show that agencies were a way for workers to signal their
quality. They …nd that agency-a¢ liated workers were much more likely to obtain a …rst job
and earned higher wages in their …rst jobs than non-a¢ liated workers. However, once the
market observed feedback on the workers’own abilities, workers no longer bene…tted from
being in an agency. While agencies were more common among high-wage workers (only 7%
of my treatment group workers were in an agency), their presence suggests the di¢ culties
oDesk workers had in developing reputations.


2.2     Sample Selection
I recruited subjects for this experiment by posting hourly data-entry jobs to the marketplace
and inviting workers to apply.6 The jobs were expected to take approximately 10 hours and
involved entering Census records from a PDF …le into a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet. I
invited applications from every oDesk worker who had a public pro…le, listed her specialty
as data entry, posted an hourly wage of $3 or less to her pro…le, and had applied for at
least one job in the prior three months. Because hiring so many workers at one time would
be both logistically di¢ cult and a large shock to the market, I contacted workers in two
waves, two weeks apart. Workers were randomly allocated to a wave. The 3,767 workers
who applied to the jobs and requested a wage of $3 or less formed the experimental sample.
    Appendix Table 1 shows the sample selection. Slightly fewer than 10,000 workers …t the
sample selection criteria, most of whom had never had an oDesk job. Thirty-nine percent of
the workers applied to the jobs, all but 85 of whom requested a wage of $3 or less. Workers
   6
    I posted these jobs from the accounts of 23 di¤erent employers. Each employer posted 10 separate
(but identical) jobs, so that no one employer or job applicant pool would appear too large. Workers in the
sampling frame were randomly assigned to an employer and a job.




                                                    8
with prior oDesk experience were substantially more likely to apply than inexperienced
workers (54% and 33% applied, respectively).


2.3     Experimental Protocol
Figure 2 displays the experimental design. Workers were …rst randomized into either the
control group or one of two treatment groups: the detailed evaluation or the coarse evaluation
treatment group. Randomization into any treatment group was strati…ed on prior oDesk
experience, such that workers without oDesk experience had a higher chance of being in
any treatment group (32%) than experienced workers (15%). Conditional on receiving any
treatment, all workers had a 50% chance of receiving the detailed evaluation treatment.
Inexperienced workers constituted approximately three quarters of each treatment group.
    The coarse evaluation treatment was designed to be equivalent to being hired (and, thus,
evaluated) by a typical employer in the marketplace. The detailed evaluation treatment was
identical to the coarse evaluation treatment except that it provided the market with more
information about some workers’job performance. Workers in both treatment groups were
hired and given a maximum of 10 hours over one week to enter the data. They were told
that if, after spending 10 hours on the task, they had not completed it, they should send the
…le back un…nished. I recorded objective measures of workers’performance: their data entry
speed, their error rate, the date they returned the data …le, and three measures of whether
they had followed the data entry instructions. I rated all hired workers on a one-to-…ve scale
using a weighted average of workers’scores on these performance measures. The distribution
of scores from my job was designed to match the distribution of scores low-wage data entry
workers received in the marketplace, adjusted for the fact that a worker in my sample was
more likely to be inexperienced than a typical oDesk worker.7 The scores were calculated
in the same way for workers in both treatment groups. Approximately 18% of workers did
not return the …le or log any hours. Under oDesk’s protocol, these workers were not rated.
Thus, the treatments should be considered as an intent to hire.
    The particular treatment group to which workers were assigned a¤ected only the type of
comment workers were eligible to receive. No workers in either treatment group received a
comment if they earned a rating below three. The remaining workers in the coarse evalua-
tion treatment received an uninformative comment. The remaining workers in the detailed
evaluation treatment received a detailed comment if they scored at least a four and an unin-
formative comment if they scored between three and four. (The human subjects committee
   7
    In fact, the distributions of feedback scores received by experienced and inexperienced workers were not
statistically distinct.




                                                     9
permitted detailed evaluations only for workers scoring at least four.)8 Workers in the de-
tailed evaluation treatment did not know that they would receive a detailed evaluation until
it was posted.
    The uninformative comment was chosen to be short and positive, like most of the com-
ments in the marketplace. The detailed comment provided objective information on the
worker’s data entry speed and accuracy, whether the worker met the deadline, and whether
she followed the job’s instructions. Additionally, it repeated the uninformative comment, so
the only di¤erence between the two comment types was the objective information provided
in the detailed evaluation.
    The uninformative comment read as follows, where only the words in brackets varied by
worker.

            “It was a pleasure working with [x].”

       The detailed comment read:

             “[x] completed the project [y days before the deadline, by the deadline, z
         days after the deadline] and [followed our instructions perfectly, followed our
         instructions, followed most of our instructions, did not follow our instructions].
         [x] was in the [top 10%, top third, middle third, bottom third, bottom 10%]
         of providers in speed and the [top 10%, top third, middle third, bottom third,
         bottom 10%] in accuracy. It was a pleasure working with [x].”9

    Because such a high fraction of oDesk workers generally earned a rating of …ve, many
treatment group workers who received this rating were in the bottom third of speed, accuracy,
or both. If employers, particularly those new to oDesk, did not realize that so many workers
received …ves, these detailed comments would have appeared very negative.
    I did not hire workers in the control group. However, some of these workers were hired by
outside employers while the treatment group worked on my job. This was rare for workers
   8
     MIT’s human subjects committee was concerned that giving workers negative evaluations would harm
workers. It allowed me to give low numerical ratings, which were essential to the experiment. However, it
permitted me to provide detailed comments only to workers who did well overall on the task. There is no
censoring of the comment for people receiving a rating of four or above, so the detailed comments do provide
negative information about aspects of these workers’ performance (e.g., they were in the bottom 10% of
workers I hired in speed or accuracy).
   9
     In order to test whether any e¤ect of the detailed comment was a result of it simply being longer than
the coarse comment or signaling that the worker was hired by a larger or more competent …rm, I also
randomized whether the comment mentioned that the hiring …rm was large. I added the (true) sentence
"Our organization has hired hundreds of providers on oDesk" to randomly-selected coarse comments and
the sentence "This is based on our experience with hundreds of providers on oDesk," to randomly-selected
detailed comments. These sentences had no e¤ect on workers’subsequent employment outcomes.



                                                    10
without prior experience: only 4% of inexperienced control group workers worked during this
period. Unsurprisingly, a higher fraction of experienced control group workers, 27%, obtained
jobs from other employers during this period. Because inexperienced workers comprised over
three quarters of the treatment group, this suggests that fewer than 9% of treatment group
workers would have been hired during this period in the absence of the experiment.


2.4    Data Collection
I directly collected data on workers’job performance. The remaining worker characteristic
and outcome data used in this project are administrative data obtained from oDesk’s server
with oDesk’s permission. oDesk’s server automatically records information on workers’pro-
…les, job applications, and employment. The primary worker-level outcomes are measures of
workers’employment, earnings, and reservation wages.
    I consider three measures of employment: whether a worker obtained any job after the
experiment, the number of jobs obtained, and the number of hours worked (in hourly jobs).
I also use the wages workers posted to their pro…les as a measure of their reservation wages.
All workers had to post a wage to their pro…les, so this measure is free from selection
concerns. I observe the wage workers posted before the experiment and the timing of all
subsequent changes to this posted wage, so I can determine the wage posted at any point
in time. In a fully competitive market, workers would post their reservation wages. While
workers do accept wages below their posted wages, there is no reason to believe the treatment
a¤ected the relationship between workers’posted wages and their reservation wages. Finally,
I calculate workers’earnings from all oDesk jobs.
    Three weeks after the initial randomization, I invited 630 workers to apply to another
data-entry job with a …xed wage rate of either $0.75, $1, or $2 per hour. These workers
were randomly selected without reference to their prior experience or whether they had been
placed into the control group or a treatment group. The invitation was sent from a new
employer and workers were randomized into either the $0.75, $1, or $2 job. I recorded which
workers applied and o¤ered a job to a randomly-selected 5% of applicants. I use data on
whether workers applied to this job to calculate their opportunity cost of working in the
welfare calculations.


2.5    Randomization Assessment
Tables 1 and 2 assess the randomization and present descriptive statistics about the sample.
Table 1 shows that the majority (63%) of workers were from the Philippines, while relatively
few (under 3%) were from the United States. On average, workers without prior experience



                                             11
had been on oDesk for just over 4 months, passed 2.7 oDesk skills tests, and sent about 23
applications. Workers with previous jobs had been on oDesk for about twice as long and
sent over seven times as many applications. They had an average of seven previous jobs (the
median worker had four).
    Table 1 compares the pre-experiment characteristics of workers in a treatment group with
those of workers in the control group. It compares workers separately by prior experience
because the randomization strati…ed on this variable. The treatment and control samples
look similar based on covariates. Out of the 24 comparisons examined, one is statistically
di¤erent at the 5% level and one is signi…cantly di¤erent at the 10% level. In neither case,
is there a signi…cant di¤erence between workers in the treatment and control groups when
I pool the sample of workers with and without previous experience and control for workers’
prior experience.
    Table 2 compares workers randomized into the detailed and coarse evaluation treatment
groups. Conditional on being in a treatment group, all workers had a 50% chance of being
in either treatment group. The table also separately compares the covariates of workers who
received ratings of four or …ve in the two treatment groups since these are the only workers
for whom the two treatments di¤ered. In both cases, the randomization produced similar
samples.


3      Model
This section provides a simple framework that formalizes the insight that …rms will hire
ine¢ ciently few inexperienced workers when they do not receive the bene…t from discovering
talented novices. It then de…nes two shocks to the market that are the model equivalents of
the coarse and detailed evaluation treatments and generates predictions about the e¤ects of
these shocks.


3.1     Model Set-Up
The marketplace comprises a mass 1 of …rms and potential workers. Workers (indexed by
i) live for two periods (period 0; the “novice” period and period 1; the “veteran” period).
Each period, one generation of workers with mass 12 exits the market and a new generation
enters. Firms (indexed by j) live for one period.
    Workers vary in their ability (ai ); which is normally distributed in the population:10 Each
  10
    The key aspect of this assumption is that it ensures that some workers have expected abilities below
…rms’hiring costs, and thus, they will not be hired. This assumption seems reasonable on oDesk: …ve percent
of the workers I hired charged time for the job, but never turned in the entered data and 30% of those who



                                                    12
…rm o¤ers one identical task in which workers’output is yi = ai : Before a worker’s novice
period, the market observes her expected ability: a   ^i0 = ai + "ia where "ia N (0; 2ai ) and
is independent of ai : If the worker does not work in her novice period, the market does not
update its beliefs about her ability and her expected ability before her veteran period (^ ai1 )
equals a
       ^i0 . If a worker is employed in her novice period, the market observes a signal of her
output, y^iM :
                             y^iM = ai + "iM where "iM N 0; 2M :

Firms use this signal and Bayesian updating to update their beliefs. For simplicity, workers
have the same information about their abilities as the market.
   Each …rm must pay a …rm-speci…c …xed cost, cj ; to hire a worker. This cost includes
the time to explain the job to the worker as well as any related overhead costs, such as for
equipment or o¢ ce space. It is continuously distributed across …rms on [0; 1), generating a
downward-sloping labor demand curve. Worker i’s net marginal product at …rm j is ai cj :
   Each period, …rms make wage o¤ers to workers, who can accept at most one o¤er. Each
agent is either in an employment relationship with wages wij or takes her outside option.
Wages are restricted to be non-negative. Both …rms’and workers’outside options are zero.
Workers and …rms are risk neutral and discount the future at rate < 1. If agents are
indi¤erent between an employment relationship and their outside option, they enter the
employment relationship. The timing of events within each period is as follows.

   1. A new generation of …rms and novice workers enters the market.

   2. Firms observe each worker’s novice-period expected ability (^     ai0 ) and novice-period
      output signal (^
                     yiM ); if it exists. They calculate each worker’s expected ability.

   3. Firms make wage o¤ers to workers.

   4. Workers accept or reject their wage o¤ers.

   5. Hired workers work, producing output yi and receiving their wages.

   6. Veteran workers and all …rms exit the market. Novice workers become veterans.
did turn in the data entered over a third of the cells incorrectly. Hiring these workers for an actual job would
provide low bene…ts compared to the time cost of administering the job and the opportunity cost of waiting
for the worker to complete the task. In a more general context, it seems reasonable that some workers would
have expected marginal products below the cost of hiring them (including any minimum wage). Low-skill
workers who steal or do not show up for work impose large costs on …rms compared to the bene…ts they
produce if they perform well.




                                                      13
    This model is stylized, but the assumptions are empirically-motivated. The assumptions
that …rms live only one period and that wages are non-negative rule out bonding and long-
term contracts. In the oDesk setting, these assumptions seem reasonable. More than 50%
of oDesk …rms o¤ered only one job ever. oDesk did not allow contracts with negative wages
and it would have been di¢ cult for third-world oDesk workers to transfer money to U.S.
…rms outside of the marketplace. More generally, Dickens et al. (1989) suggests bonding
is di¢ cult in the labor market. Workers may be liquidity constrained and bonding may
negatively a¤ect workers’ attitudes and morale and harm …rms’ public images. Bonding
may generate moral hazard problems where …rms have incentives to report that workers
performed poorly. Moreover, courts will not enforce contract provisions that call for workers
to pay large penalties for poor performance and most indentured servitude contracts are
unenforceable.
    There was a minimum wage of 0 on oDesk. However, this assumption is not necessary.
Any wage rigidity that prevents wages from falling will lead to a similar ine¢ ciency where
…rms hire too few novice workers. For example, Weiss (1980) presents a model where adverse
selection prevents wages from falling. While some unemployed workers would be willing to
work for lower wages, because outside options are correlated with unobserved ability, high-
ability workers would select out of the job if wages fell. Thus, …rms will not decrease wages.
    The assumption that …rms live only one period precludes …rms from having monopsony
power over veteran workers as they do in models of asymmetric information (e.g., Wald-
man, 1984 and Greenwald, 1986). While there is evidence of asymmetric information (e.g.,
Gibbons and Katz, 1991 and Kahn, 2012), there is also evidence that public learning about
workers’abilities is important for inexperienced workers and early career earnings dynamics
(e.g., Farber and Gibbons, 1996, Altonji and Pierret, 2001, and Schönberg, 2007). It is cer-
tainly possible that the oDesk employers that remain in the market have private information
about their previous hires. To the extent that private information or mobility costs allow
…rms to hire previously-employed workers at wages below the workers’ expected marginal
products, this would increase the bene…t of hiring novice workers and reduce the ine¢ ciency.
Asymmetric information would also decrease the bene…ts of being hired for an experimental
job because the market would negatively update its beliefs about workers’abilities from the
fact that I did not rehire them.


3.2    Market Equilibrium and Social Planner’s Solution

Proposition 1 The perfect Bayesian equilibrium of this game exists and has unique actions
along the equilibrium path. There is a threshold, c, such that all …rms with …xed costs cj c



                                             14
will hire a worker, while no …rm with cj > c will. All workers with expected ability a
                                                                                     ^i          c
and only these workers will be employed. These workers will earn wages wij = a^i c:

Proof. See Appendix A.
    Because there is a mass of workers with expected abilities below every …rm’s …xed cost,
not all workers will be employed. In particular, low-ability novices expected to generate
losses when working at the marginal …rm will not be hired. However, they would like to
work and would compensate …rms for hiring them because being hired in their novice period
would increase their expected veteran-period earnings. If a low-ability novice does not work,
her expected ability will not change and she will not be hired in her veteran period. If she
works, with some probability, she will perform well enough to earn strictly positive veteran-
period wages. However, novices cannot compensate …rms for hiring them: they cannot accept
negative wages, post bonds, or commit to accept low wages in the future. This generates the
ine¢ ciency. It also implies that this equilibrium would not change if workers knew their own
abilities. High-ability workers would be willing to compensate …rms more for hiring them
than would lower-ability workers, but they would not be able to do so.
                                                                        ^i1H : worker i0 s veteran-
    In specifying the social planner’s solution, it is helpful to de…ne a
period expected ability if she is hired in her novice period.

Proposition 2 The solution of a utilitarian social planner who has the same information
as the market and maximizes expected market surplus (the sum of expected worker and …rm
surplus) is as follows. There exists a threshold, c > c, such that every …rm with cj c and
only these …rms hire workers. All veteran workers with expected ability a^i1 c are employed
as are all novice workers with (^ai0 c ) + Pr(^    ai1H   c ) E[^ ai1H c j^ ai1H   c ] 0: A
larger mass of novice workers is employed in the social planner’s solution than in the market
equilibrium and c > c .

Proof. See Appendix A.
    The social planner’s solution is the equilibrium that would be enacted if novices could
accept negative wages. This solution employs some novices who would be unemployed in the
market equilibrium because they generate an expected loss in novice-period work. However,
the expected veteran-period bene…t these workers receive from novice-period work exceeds
this expected loss. In general, hiring novices provides bene…ts in the subsequent period
because it produces information about their abilities that allows them to be more e¢ ciently
allocated to either market work or unemployment. While …rms have to pay the hiring cost
to produce the information, workers obtain its bene…ts (they earn their expected marginal
products which are higher because workers have been more e¢ ciently allocated to sectors).



                                                15
3.3    Model Predictions

Motivated by my experiment, I consider the comparative statics of two shocks to the market
equilibrium. The …rst models the coarse evaluation treatment. In this shock, an outside
employer (Employer C) enters the market for one period. This employer has the same
information as the market at the beginning of the period, but hires novices without regard
to their expected abilities. At the end of the period, it relays an output signal for each
hired worker to the market. This output signal has the same distribution as the output
signal generated in market jobs. (It represents the one-to-…ve rating left by employers.) The
second shock models the detailed evaluation treatment. As in the prior shock, an outside
employer (Employer D) enters the market for one period with the same information as the
market, hires novice workers without regard to their expected abilities, and relays an output
signal for each hired worker to the market. However, Employer D relays a more precise
output signal than Employer C. It relays y^iD where y^iD = ai + "iD , "iD N (0; 2D ) and is
independent of all other variables and 2D < 2M : (Here, y^iD represents the one-to-…ve rating
plus the detailed comment.) In both shocks, if a worker is not hired by the outside employer,
she remains in the market and is either hired by another …rm or takes her outside option.
    An important assumption is that neither the fact that a worker was hired by an outside
employer or the precision of the output signal conveys information about the worker’s ability.
The market updates its beliefs based only on the output signal itself. This assumption seems
plausible. In the experiment, the market should not have updated its beliefs based on either
of these factors since they were randomly determined (conditional on observables). Moreover,
since all oDesk employers see the same worker pro…le and there is no face-to-face interaction,
there is less scope for an employer to have private information before hiring on oDesk. The
detailed evaluations were formulaic, often negative, and commonplace, characteristic of a
particular employer, not the sign of a particularly talented worker. Nevertheless, I revisit
this assumption when testing for alternative explanations in Section 4.2.

Proposition 3 Relative to being in the market equilibrium, being hired by Employer C dur-
ing the novice period weakly increases a worker’s expected veteran-period probability of em-
ployment, earnings, and reservation wages. It strictly increases these outcomes for workers
with a
     ^i0 < c. Relative to being hired by Employer C, being hired by Employer D during
the novice period strictly increases a worker’s expected veteran-period earnings and reserva-
tion wages, regardless of her novice-period expected ability, a^i0 : It increases her probability
of veteran-period employment when a   ^i0 < c and decreases her probability of veteran-period
employment when a  ^i0 > c:



                                               16
Proof. See Appendix A.
    The key intuition is that being hired by Employer C a¤ects the expected veteran-period
outcomes only of workers who would not have been hired in the market equilibrium (workers
with a  ^i0 < c): If they remain in the market equilibrium and are not hired in their novice
periods, their expected abilities will not change and they will not be hired in their veteran
periods. Their earnings and reservation wages will equal zero. But, if they are hired by
Employer C, there is some probability that they will receive a su¢ ciently positive output
signal to be employed with positive earnings and reservation wages in their veteran periods.
    On the other hand, being hired by Employer D (relative to being hired by Employer
C) a¤ects workers of all expected abilities. The more precise performance signal causes the
market to update its beliefs to a greater extent based on the output signal. This leads to
lower probabilities of employment for workers who would have been employed without the
output signal (those with a   ^i0 > c) and to higher probabilities of employment for workers
who would have been unemployed without the signal (those with a        ^i0 < c). However, more
updating increases expected earnings and reservation wages for workers of all expected abili-
ties. Consider a worker with expected ability a ^i0 > c: If the market did not update its beliefs
about her ability, she would be employed with certainty in her veteran period. Her earnings
would equal her expected marginal product at the marginal …rm, a     ^i0 c. This is the average
of positive marginal products for states of the world when her true ability is above the hiring
threshold and negative marginal products for states of the world when her true ability is
below the threshold. If, instead, the market learned her true ability in her novice period, she
would be unemployed in states of the world where her actual marginal product was negative.
However, her expected earnings would no longer be driven down by the fact that she could
generate a negative marginal product. She would still be rewarded for her positive marginal
product in states of the world where her ability was above the hiring threshold, but states
of the world where she was unemployed would contribute a zero marginal product. Thus,
her expected earnings would be higher when the market knew her true ability even though
her expected employment rate was lower.
    In this model, a more precise output signal allows workers to be more e¤ectively sorted
into either market work or unemployment. This is the mechanism through which the signal’s
precision a¤ects expected earnings. Without unemployment, the signal’s precision would
only a¤ect the variance of earnings, not mean earnings.
    Sections 4, 5, and 6 of Appendix A present and prove three additional propositions. The
…rst, Proposition 5, says that the e¤ect of being hired by Employer C, relative to remaining
in the market equilibrium, is increasing in the initial uncertainty over the workers’ ability
( 2ai ): This is intuitive. When it is more uncertain about a worker’s ability, the market puts



                                               17
more weight on the output signal, so being hired by Employer C has a larger e¤ect on the
worker’s expected veteran-period outcomes. However, counterintuitively, the proposition
also says that the e¤ect of being hired by Employer D relative to being hired Employer C
is not necessarily increasing in 2ai . Employer D’s output signal does cause the market to
update its beliefs about workers with uncertain abilities more, but so does Employer C’s
output signal. Thus, relative to being hired by Employer C, being hired by Employer D does
not necessarily have larger e¤ects for workers with more uncertain abilities.
    Proposition 6 says that while, ex ante, being hired by Employer D (relative to Employer
C) increases all workers’expected earnings, ex post, being hired by Employer D can decrease
workers’actual earnings. Workers who receive su¢ ciently poor output signals from Employer
D have lower earnings and reservation wages than they would have if they had been hired by
Employer C. Similarly, workers who receive su¢ ciently positive output signals from Employer
D have higher earnings and reservation wages.
    The stylized model presented above does not include the worker’s choice to exit the market
because including this choice adds little insight. However, because I observe workers exiting
the market, I extend the model in Section 6 of Appendix A to give workers non-zero outside
options and a choice to exit the market before each period. Proposition 7 says that being
hired by Employer C in the novice period (relative to remaining in the market equilibrium)
weakly increases workers’probabilities of remaining in the market in their veteran periods.
This is because being hired by Employer C weakly improves all workers’subsequent market
employment outcomes. On the other hand, being hired by Employer D (relative to being
hired by Employer C) can increase or decrease the probability that a worker remains in the
market. The market updates its beliefs more after a worker is hired by Employer D. This
leads to lower probabilities of remaining in the market for workers who would have done so
without the performance signal and higher probabilities of remaining in the market for those
who would not have.
    The …nal proposition considers the e¤ect of Employer C on market employment, wages,
and surplus.

Proposition 4 If Employer C hires a non-zero fraction of novice workers in the subsequent
period, the hiring threshold, c; will increase to c0 , total market employment will increase,
wages will decrease conditional on expected ability from a ^i c to a^i c0 , and market surplus
will increase.

Proof. See Appendix A.
   Employer C’s hiring increases the mass of veterans with expected ability a
                                                                            ^i1 c in the
subsequent period. This produces an excess supply of labor, which increases employment


                                             18
and decreases wages, conditional on expected ability. Market surplus increases both because
employment increases (more employment relationships generate surplus) and because workers
hired by Employer C replace lower expected ability workers (the same mass of jobs produces
more surplus).
    Because being hired by Employer D decreases the expected veteran-period employment
probabilities of workers with a
                              ^i0 > c, Employer D’s hiring a non-zero fraction of novices could
decrease the mass of veterans with a  ^i1  c: This would decrease employment and increase
wages, conditional on expected ability. This seems unlikely to happen in the empirical
context as far less than 50% of control group workers were hired during the treatment
period, suggesting that most workers had a^i0 < c. Thus, I expect that the detailed and coarse
evaluation treatments should have the same qualitative e¤ect on market wages, employment,
and surplus. However, even if Employer D decreased market employment, it would still
increase market surplus by allowing employers to hire higher-ability workers.


4     Worker-Level E¤ects
4.1    Treatment E¤ects
I …rst assess the e¤ects of the coarse evaluation treatment on workers’subsequent employment
outcomes. Proposition 3 predicts that obtaining a job with a coarse evaluation will increase
workers’employment rates, earnings, and reservation wages relative to being in the control
group. Proposition 5 predicts that, conditional on workers’ expected ability, the coarse
evaluation treatment will have larger e¤ects on workers about whom the market is more
uncertain.
    Table 3 compares the employment outcomes of the three experimental groups in the two
months following the experiment. Workers are categorized by the treatment they were as-
signed to at the beginning of the experiment, even though 18% of workers in the treatment
groups did not accept treatment jobs and workers earning low ratings in the detailed evalua-
tion treatment did not receive detailed comments. Posted wages are measured at the end of
the two-month period and the experimental jobs themselves are excluded from any outcomes.
The results are presented separately for workers with and without prior oDesk experience
as the randomization strati…ed on this variable. I use prior oDesk experience as a proxy
for certainty about a worker’s ability, assuming that the market is more uncertain about
inexperienced workers’ abilities. This is not a perfect proxy because experienced workers
may have higher expected abilities than inexperienced workers.
    The coarse evaluation treatment’s e¤ects re‡ect the model’s predictions: it had positive



                                              19
e¤ects on employment outcomes for workers without prior oDesk experience, but no e¤ect
for experienced workers. Inexperienced control group workers performed poorly in the la-
bor market: only 12% obtained any job in the next two months for an average earnings
(unconditional on working) of approximately $10. The coarse evaluation treatment signi…-
cantly improved all …ve employment outcome measures for inexperienced workers. It almost
tripled the fraction of these workers with any employment from 12% to 30% and the average
worker’s earnings from $10 to $27. It also increased the wage these workers posted on their
pro…les by approximately 10%.
    Experienced control group workers performed much better than inexperienced control
group workers: over half (55%) worked on oDesk in the two months after the experiment for
an average earnings of $121. However, the coarse evaluation treatment did not signi…cantly
improve any of the …ve employment outcomes for experienced workers.
    Table 3 also allows me to assess the e¤ects of the detailed evaluation treatment. Propo-
sition 3 predicts that workers in the detailed evaluation treatment will have higher earnings
and reservation wages than those in the coarse evaluation treatment, while the treatment’s
e¤ect on employment is ambiguous. The table shows that, relative to the coarse evaluation
treatment, the detailed evaluation treatment increased experienced workers’ average earn-
ings from $101 to $187 and their average posted wages by approximately 15%. The earnings
gains did not come at the expense of employment; the detailed evaluation increased the
fraction of workers with any subsequent employment from 53% to 69%.
    However, the detailed evaluation treatment did not improve average employment out-
comes of inexperienced workers relative to the coarse evaluation treatment. While workers
in the detailed evaluation treatment had better outcomes on four out of the …ve employ-
ment measures than workers in the coarse evaluation treatment, the di¤erences are neither
large nor signi…cant. There are three potential explanations for the somewhat surprising
result that the detailed evaluation treatment had larger e¤ects for experienced than inexpe-
rienced workers. First, Proposition 5 says that, conditional on expected ability, the e¤ect
of the detailed evaluation relative to the coarse evaluation is not necessarily increasing in
uncertainty about worker ability. Second, the detailed evaluation should have the most im-
pact for workers with expected abilities near the hiring threshold because there is the most
uncertainty about whether these workers should be hired. Experienced workers may have
expected abilities that are closer to the hiring threshold. Finally, a higher fraction of expe-
rienced than inexperienced workers in the detailed evaluation treatment actually received a
detailed evaluation (74% vs. 66%).
    I next consider the robustness of the treatments’e¤ects on the pooled sample of expe-
rienced and inexperienced workers. Panel A of Table 4 displays the results of regressing



                                              20
each employment outcome on an indicator for being in the detailed evaluation treatment, an
indicator for being in the coarse evaluation treatment, and indicator for having prior oDesk
experience. I control for a number of covariates.11
    The table shows that both treatments improved employment outcomes for the pooled
sample. Relative to the control group, the detailed evaluation treatment increased the frac-
tion of workers employed in the next two months by 17 percentage points, while the coarse
evaluation treatment increased this fraction by 13 percentage points. Both treatments in-
creased the wage workers posted on their pro…les (by $0.26 for the detailed treatment and
$0.15 for the coarse treatment relative to the control group mean of $2.19). The detailed
treatment increased workers’earnings by $29 on average. The regression indicates that the
coarse treatment increased earnings by approximately $10, 17% of the control group mean,
but this coe¢ cient is far from signi…cant. While the treatment e¤ects are large relative to the
control group’s average employment outcomes, they are smaller than the coe¢ cient on the
indicator for prior oDesk experience. This is expected as this latter coe¢ cient includes both
the treatment e¤ects of multiple previous jobs and di¤erential selection into employment.
    Panel B shows the e¤ect of receiving any experimental job, whether or not it came with
the possibility of a detailed evaluation. It displays the results of regressing each employment
outcome on an indicator for receiving any treatment job, an indicator for prior oDesk expe-
rience, and the same controls as in the previous panel. It shows that obtaining a treatment
job increased workers’ average earnings by approximately $20, which exceeds the average
amount I spent to hire a worker ($16.64).
    Panel A of Table 5 further probes the impact of the detailed evaluations by estimating
their e¤ects on workers who received a score of four or …ve in my jobs (those who were
eligible to receive detailed evaluations). It displays the results of regressing each employment
outcome on an indicator for being in the detailed evaluation treatment group. I do not control
for prior oDesk experience since, conditional on receiving any treatment, all workers had a
50% chance of being assigned to each treatment. The treatment a worker was assigned to
did not a¤ect her rating; the treatments were identical until the evaluation was made public.
The table shows that receiving a detailed evaluation increased earnings and posted wages
relative to receiving a coarse evaluation. Detailed evaluations increased average earnings by
$24 within two months, 44% of the mean for workers receiving fours and …ves in the coarse
  11
     I control for the tests the worker took (dummies for passing one test, two or three tests, and four or
more tests, an indicator for having taken the most popular skills test among the sample, and an indicator
for passing it), the number of quali…cations the worker had (dummies for listing two to four quali…cations
and …ve or more quali…cations), the number of oDesk applications the worker sent before the experiment
(dummies for having sent three to …ve, six to 15, 16 to 50, 51 to 100, and over 100 applications), the wage
proposed for the experimental job (dummies for o¤ering $1 to $1.99, $2 to $2.99, and exactly $3), the number
of jobs the worker had before the experiment, and an indicator for being in the second experimental wave.




                                                    21
evaluation treatment. They increased workers’average posted wages by $0.24, 10% of the
mean for high-scoring coarse evaluation workers. Both e¤ects are signi…cant at the 10% level.
After one month, these e¤ects are signi…cant at the 5% level. Appendix Table 2 shows that
the estimates do not change when the controls used in the previous table are added.12
    The e¤ects of the treatments persisted and even increased over time. I calculate each
worker’s cumulative employment and earnings outcomes for each week from one to 26 weeks
after the treatment jobs ended. I also record each worker’s posted wages at the end of each
week. Then, I regress these employment outcomes on an indicator for receiving any treatment
job, controlling for prior oDesk experience. Panels A and B of Figure 3 plot the coe¢ cients
on the treatment indicator by week. The e¤ect of obtaining a treatment job on earnings
more than tripled from $19.72 after two months to $65.56 after six months. The e¤ect of
the treatment job on hours worked (which is not plotted) almost tripled, increasing from 9.7
after two months to 25.3 after six months (the p-value is only 0.11 after six months). It is
striking that the treatment e¤ects are so large given that the treatment was not restricted to
those who would most bene…t from it: some treatment group workers already had so much
prior experience and such high expected abilities that they were unlikely to bene…t, while
others had such low expected abilities that even successfully completing one job would not
increase their expected abilities above the hiring threshold.
    The e¤ects of receiving a detailed evaluation also appears to persist over time, but they
are much noisier. For example, when I regress cumulative earnings on an indicator for
receiving a detailed evaluation in the sample of workers earning fours and …ves in my jobs,
the e¤ect is positive and signi…cant at the 5% level through week seven and signi…cant at the
10% level through week nine. After six months, the measured e¤ect on earnings is $60.17,
2.5 times the e¤ect after two months, but it has a t-statistic of only 1.1.
    Finally, I test Proposition 6, which says that detailed evaluations do not always help
workers. It says that detailed evaluations that are more negative than both a worker’s
initial expected ability and the coarse evaluation she would have received impair subsequent
employment outcomes relative to coarse evaluations. Detailed evaluations that are more
positive than both her initial expected ability and the coarse evaluation she would have
received improve outcomes. Because I know all treatment group workers’ performance, I
can determine the e¤ect of a particular detailed evaluation by comparing the outcomes of
  12
    Another robustness check is to measure the e¤ect of the detailed evaluation treatment for workers scoring
below four. Relative to the coarse evaluation treatment, the detailed evaluation treatment should have no
e¤ect for these workers. Replicating Panel A of Table 5 for workers rated below four shows that one of the
…ve coe¢ cients, the e¤ect on the number of jobs obtained, is signi…cantly positive. This is driven by a few
outliers, one who obtained 24 jobs and one who obtained 15 jobs in the two month period, relative to a
maximum of 5 jobs among workers receiving coarse evaluations. None of the other coe¢ cients are signi…cant
and the point estimate indicates detailed evaluations had a negative e¤ect on posted wages for this group.




                                                     22
workers who received that evaluation with the outcomes of workers who would have received
that evaluation had they been in the detailed evaluation treatment.
    I consider the e¤ect of revealing whether a worker met the deadline on workers earning
fours and …ves in my jobs. Since the vast majority of workers earning fours and …ves met the
deadline, not meeting the deadline was a very negative signal. It is likely more negative than
the coarse rating of four or …ve and most workers’initial expected abilities. Thus, revealing it
should have impaired workers’subsequent employment outcomes. Meeting the deadline was
a positive signal, but may not have been more positive than a rating of …ve or many workers’
initial expected abilities. Panel B of Table 5 shows the results of regressing each employment
outcome on an indicator for meeting the deadline interacted with an indicator for being in
the detailed evaluation treatment, an indicator for missing the deadline interacted with the
detailed treatment indicator, and the indicator for meeting the deadline itself.
    Revealing that a worker missed the deadline decreased her earnings in the subsequent
two months by $35 on average. Revealing that she met the deadline increased her earnings
by $24. These e¤ects are large relative to mean earnings ($54 for workers with ratings of four
or …ve in the coarse evaluation treatment). The estimates indicate that revealing whether
the worker met the deadline had large e¤ects on the other employment outcomes as well,
but these are imprecisely measured.
    Whether the worker met the deadline is the only piece of information that appeared to
matter to employers. Appendix Table 3 shows that revealing that workers did not follow
all the instructions, were in the bottom third of workers in speed, or were in the bottom
third of workers in accuracy did not impair their employment outcomes. This could be
because these are less negative signals than missing the deadline. Alternatively, it could be
because whether the worker met the deadline was the …rst piece of information revealed in
the comment. Because of the comment’s length, the parts about speed and accuracy were
not immediately visible on most workers’ pro…les; one had to click on the continuation to
see them. This was unintentional.


4.2    Mechanisms
The previous section showed that the treatments’e¤ects were consistent with the model’s
predictions. Here, I assess whether the experimental results could also be explained by
alternative mechanisms. If the model’s mechanism is correct, then workers with higher
ratings should have better subsequent employment outcomes, all else equal. This is true
in the data: after two months, workers who received ratings of …ve had earned $34 more
than the control group, while workers who received ratings of one and two had earned $23




                                              23
less. However, since that these ratings were not randomly assigned, it could simply be that
highly-rated workers would have earned more even without the experiment.
    The …rst alternative is that completing a treatment job provided workers with human
capital. Many existing programs that employ disadvantaged workers explicitly provide on-
the-job training and, even in those that do not, workers could easily gain human capital by
working for several months. It is much less likely that workers accumulated human capital
in these jobs. Workers worked a maximum of 10 hours; the average hire worked for only 7.6
hours. Given workers’o- ine experience, this was a very small increment to their total work
experience. I did not provide training or guidance as it was impractical given the number of
workers hired at one time. Moreover, workers in both treatment groups completed the same
task, so human capital accumulation cannot explain the e¤ects of the detailed evaluations.
    The second alternative is that the act of hiring a worker caused the market to positively
update its belief about the worker’s ability. Hiring a worker would cause the market to
positively update its belief if di¤erent employers received di¤erent signals of worker quality.
This is less likely on oDesk than in a traditional labor market because, on oDesk, all employers
saw exactly the same resume and there were no face-to-face interactions. However, employers
could interview workers and they might have valued the same information di¤erently.
    An empirical test of this explanation utilizes the fact that the market observed that
treatment group workers were hired as soon as they began working, but could not see their
ratings until nine to 11 days later. In the week the workers were completing my job (during
which the market only observed that they had been hired, not their evaluations), treatment
group workers were no more likely to obtain jobs from other employers than control group
workers. In contrast, in the week immediately after the rating became public, treatment
group workers obtained signi…cantly more jobs and were more likely to be employed than
control group workers. This is not simply because treatment group workers were too busy to
apply to jobs while they were completing my task: they actually applied to more jobs than
control group workers during this period. Moreover, it does not appear that oDesk employers
typically penalized job applicants for being currently employed on other jobs. Among oDesk
workers with at least twenty previous jobs (whose reputation should not have substantially
changed with another evaluation), a given worker’s job application was slightly more likely
to be successful if she applied while working on another job.
    This alternative cannot explain the e¤ects of the detailed evaluations since the market
observed that workers in both treatment groups were hired. However, a similar alternative
is that the market positively updated its beliefs about a worker’s ability based on the fact
that she received a detailed evaluation. I think this is unlikely. The detailed comments were
often negative. Twenty-seven percent of workers were revealed to be in the bottom third or



                                              24
bottom 10% of speed, while 28% were revealed to be in the bottom third or bottom 10%
of accuracy. (These are less than 33% because workers earning ratings below four were not
given detailed comments.) Less than 19% of workers were described as being in the top
third or top 10% of both speed and accuracy. Perhaps more importantly, these comments
were formulaic, contained no subjective information, and were common in the marketplace.
In the two months after the experiment, only 12% of the applications workers with detailed
evaluations sent went to …rms that did not have another applicant who had received a
detailed evaluation (with the exact same formula). Thus, these comments likely appeared
to be the hallmark of a particular employer, not a particularly good worker.
    A fourth alternative is that receiving a treatment job induced workers to apply to more
oDesk jobs for reasons unrelated to the evaluations. For example, treatment group workers
may have realized oDesk jobs were more desirable than they had thought or their initial
hiring may have led them to believe it was easy to obtain oDesk employment. However,
Proposition 7 also predicts that the coarse evaluation treatment should have induced workers
to remain in the market by improving their oDesk employment opportunities. It is di¢ cult
to distinguish these two explanations because they have the same prediction. This prediction
is borne out in the data: treatment group workers did apply to more jobs than control group
workers after the experiment. However, the alternative explanation cannot explain the entire
e¤ect of the treatments because the treatments signi…cantly increased the probability that a
worker obtained a given job she applied to. Appendix B describes these results in much more
detail. The explanation similarly cannot explain why receiving a treatment job increased
workers’posted wages or the e¤ects of the detailed evaluation, which did not alter workers’
application patterns.
    A …nal alternative is that I gave workers more positive ratings and comments than they
deserved, despite the facts that my ratings matched the distribution of one-to-…ve ratings
in the market (controlling for the relative inexperience of my workers) and that the detailed
comment contained some objective information. If this explanation were correct, the treat-
ments should have had a diminished e¤ect over time as the market learned more about the
workers’true capabilities. The data do not show this pattern: the e¤ects of both treatments
on weekly earnings appears to remain constant over time.


5    Welfare Analysis
In this section, I estimate a lower bound on the experiment’s e¤ect on oDesk market surplus
in the six months after the experiment. Proposition 4’s proof suggests that the experiment
increased welfare through two channels: (1) by increasing employment and (2) by allowing



                                            25
…rms that would have hired workers in the absence of the experiment to hire workers with
higher expected abilities. In this section, I estimate the e¤ect of the extra employment on
market surplus. I compare this increase in surplus to the costs of the experiment: the direct
costs of the experimental jobs and workers’ and …rms’ opportunity costs of the extra em-
ployment. I consider this a lower bound on oDesk market surplus because I cannot estimate
the bene…t …rms received from hiring workers with higher expected abilities. However, this
calculation only includes surplus obtained by oDesk workers and …rms, not other agents that
were a¤ected by the experiment. For example, when workers increased their oDesk employ-
ment, they may have forgone o- ine jobs. This calculation includes their opportunity costs
of not taking the o- ine jobs, but it does not account for either the lost pro…t of the …rms
that would have hired them or the increased earnings of the workers who took the o- ine
jobs in their absence.
    I …rst estimate the e¤ect of the experiment on market employment. While I do not have
experimental variation I can use to estimate this, I can compare the change in employment
after the experiment in those oDesk sectors more and less a¤ected by the experiment. For
each of oDesk’s 74 job categories, I calculate a measure of the experiment’s e¤ect on the
number of experienced workers in the category: "% change experience." First, I estimate
the number of workers I hired in each category: 952 (the total number of workers I hired)
multiplied by the share of treatment group applications sent to jobs in that category in the
month before the experiment. Then, I divide this by the number of experienced workers
working in that category before the experiment. This fraction averaged 8.5% for the entire
marketplace, ranging from 55% in data entry and 79% in email response handling to less
than 1% in 25 job categories, primarily ones that required speci…c computer skills such as
web programming or game development.13
    Panels A and B of Table 6 show the results of regressing two measures of log employment
(log jobs created and log hours worked) in a job category-week on the interaction of "% change
experience" and an indicator for a week after the experiment.14 I control for week …xed
e¤ects, job category …xed e¤ects, and job category-speci…c linear time trends. Each regression
includes 26 weeks of data before the experiment, omitting the weeks of the experiment and
all jobs I o¤ered. The …rst three columns use data roughly two, four, and six months
(8, 17, and 26 weeks) after the experiment. The fourth column adds job category-speci…c
  13
     The variable "% change experience" should not be interpreted as the actual percentage change in the
number of workers with any oDesk experience because 23% of the treatment group already had oDesk
experience. However, it provides a simple metric measuring the intensity with which the experiment a¤ected
each job category.
  14
     For the one week between the two waves of the experiment, I set this indicator equal to 608
                                                                                             952 ; the fraction
of hired workers in the …rst wave.




                                                      26
quadratic time trends and the …fth drops data entry, which accounts for approximately half
of the experimental workers’employment. Observations are weighted by job category size
in a preperiod and standard errors are clustered by job category. The key assumption is
that, conditional on job category-speci…c linear and quadratic trends, employment would
have changed similarly after the experiment in job categories more and less a¤ected by the
experiment.15
    In all three time windows, the e¤ect of the experiment on new jobs was positive and
signi…cant. The elasticity ranged from 0.22 after two months to 0.27 after six months.
The e¤ect on hours worked was also positive across all three time periods, with an elasticity
ranging from 0.10 to 0.14. Including job category-speci…c quadratic time trends has virtually
no e¤ect on the employment estimates and the results persist even when data entry is
excluded.
    The total increase in worker earnings due to this increased employment is the level change
in hours worked multiplied by the average hourly wage in these new jobs. This excludes any
increase in …xed wage employment. To calculate this change in hours worked per week,
I multiply the most conservative hours coe¢ cient in Table 6 (0.099) by the average hours
worked per week and the average value of % change experience. This increase of 950 hours
worked per week is smaller than the increase in the number of hours worked by the treatment
group (1010), but not much smaller, suggesting that treatment group workers crowded out
relatively little other employment.16
    To determine the average wage in these new jobs, I compare the wage distributions of
treatment and control group workers after the experiment, adjusting for the strati…cation.17
Some of the new jobs obtained by treatment group workers represented aggregate employ-
ment increases while the rest replaced jobs that would have been held by lower expected-
ability workers. I de…ne the replacement jobs as the fraction (1010     950)
                                                                     1010
                                                                             of these new jobs
  15
     In approximately 2% of job category-weeks, there were no jobs created and in approximately 0.4% of
job category-weeks, there were no hours worked. For these observations, I set log jobs created and log hours
worked equal to zero (the log of 1). This assumption has very little impact on the results. Dropping any job
category with any week with zero jobs created does not change any of the coe¢ cients by more than 0.01,
while imputing log jobs created as log(0.1) instead of log(1) does not change any of the coe¢ cients by more
than 0.002. For the hours regressions, neither dropping any job category with a week with zero hours worked
nor imputing log hours worked as log(0.1) changes any of the coe¢ cients by more than 0.001.
  16
     While the model in Section 3 predicts that experimental workers should displace non-experimental
workers, other models would predict that an increase in the number of oDesk workers recognized to be of
adequate ability might actually improve other workers’employment outcomes, for example by inducing new
employers to join the marketplace or existing employers to remain in the marketplace.
  17
     I do this by categorizing jobs based on their wages: wages less than $1, exactly $1, $1 to $2, exactly
$2, $2 to $3, exactly $3, and $3 or more per hour. I calculate the number of additional hours the treatment
group worked over the control group in each category, adjusting for the strati…cation. I calculate the average
wage in each of these categories and use these to form a weighted average of the wage at which the extra
hours were worked.




                                                     27
with the lowest wages. This provides the average wages in the new jobs as $2.11, slightly
lower than treatment group workers’average wage after the experiment ($2.20). Using these
estimates, the total increase in worker earnings from the employment expansion was

                                     hours
                       (26 weeks 950       )                 $2:11
                                                             | {z }     $52; 000:
                       |        {z    week}
                                                        Wage Level
                          Increase in Employment


    Firms also bene…tted from the increased employment. In particular, the theory predicts
that …rms with …xed costs between c and c0 hired oDesk workers after the experiment. Their
average pro…t was E[^  ai wij cj jc < cj c0 ] = E[^
                                                  ai (^ai c0 ) cj jc < cj c0 ] = E[c0 cj jc <
cj c0 ]: If cj is uniformly distributed between c and c0 ; this is 12 (c0 c): I can approximate
c0 c using the decrease in market-level wages induced by the experiment. This is only an
approximation, however, because the change in market wages captures both the change in
the marginal …rm’s hiring cost and the change in hired workers’expected abilities. If hired
workers’expected abilities increased after the experiment, the market-level wage change is
a lower bound on the change in the …xed cost of the marginal …rm.
    Panel C of Table 6 estimates the experiment’s e¤ect on market-level wages. It regresses
the hourly wage for a given job in a given week on interaction of the job category’s % change
experience with the indicator for a week after the experiment. It controls for week …xed
e¤ects, job category …xed e¤ects, and job category-speci…c linear time trends. Assuming
that, conditional on the category-speci…c trends, wages would have changed similarly in
a¤ected and una¤ected categories, the results show that the experiment substantially de-
creased wages. This is true in all three time periods, with elasticities ranging from 0.27 to
0.44. While adding category-speci…c quadratic time trends does not substantially a¤ect the
estimates, the experiment’s e¤ect on wages was driven primarily by its e¤ect on the data-
entry market. I determine the experiment’s e¤ect on the wage level ($0.22) analogously to
the level change in hours using the same column’s estimate of the wage change (-0.265). If
cj is uniformly distributed, the increase in …rm pro…t from the additional employment was:

                                   hours                 1
                     (26 weeks 950       )                      $0:22      $2; 800:
                     |        {z    week}               |2     {z }
                        Increase in Employment      Average Pro…t/Job


    Table 7 estimates the overall e¤ect of the experiment on market surplus in the six months
after the experiment by combining the above estimates of the experiment’s bene…ts with es-
timates of the experiment’s costs. The middle column presents the most realistic estimates,
while the right- and left-hand columns make more and less conservative assumptions, re-




                                                   28
spectively. Panel A presents the measured bene…ts of the experiment. Panel B estimates
workers’ and …rms’ opportunity costs of the additional employment after the experiment,
while Panel C estimates the cost of the experimental jobs themselves.
    I assess workers’opportunity costs of working by using their willingness to apply to the
jobs I posted three weeks after the experiment. I assume that workers applied to these jobs
if and only if their opportunity costs were below the jobs’wages. If there was a time cost
of applying, this overstates workers’ opportunity costs, particularly for workers with low
probabilities of getting the jobs. (Experienced workers were more likely to apply to these
jobs than were workers with fewer other options, suggesting that the probability of obtaining
a job might be an important determinant of application behavior.) This may also slightly
overestimate the average opportunity cost of the work induced by the experiment because
workers with lower posted wages saw (insigni…cantly) larger employment gains as a result of
the treatments. Because 49% of the treatment group applied to the $1 wage job, I use this as
the “best-guess”estimate of workers’average opportunity cost. To make a more conservative
estimate, I assume that if workers did not apply to my second job, they were not willing to
accept any wage below their initial posted wage. I categorize treatment group workers into
…ve groups based on the wages they proposed for the initial treatment job. Then, I calculate
an average opportunity cost for each group using the fraction of workers that applied to the
$0.75, $1, and $2 jobs and their posted wages.18 The weighted average of these opportunity
costs for the entire sample was $1.49.
    I have less information on …rms’ opportunity costs. However, as I estimate that the
increase in …rm pro…ts was only about 5% of the increase in worker earnings, even assum-
ing that …rms did not bene…t from the increased employment does not a¤ect the welfare
conclusions.
    Panel C assesses the opportunity cost of the experimental jobs themselves. The oppor-
tunity cost of workers’ time is calculated as in the previous panel. In a traditional job,
these costs would have been o¤set by the value of the output produced. However, in this
experiment, the output had no value. Because workers were not expected to produce usable
output, my time cost of employing them was relatively low (…ve minutes per worker).
    Even under the conservative assumptions in the right-most column, the estimates suggest
that hiring 952 randomly-selected, relatively inexperienced workers for a meaningless task
  18
    These …ve categories are workers proposing wages below $1, $1 to $2, exactly $2, $2 to $3, and exactly
$3. For example, 21.4% of the group proposing wages of $3 was willing to accept a job with a $0.75 wage, an
additional 19.5% was willing to accept a job with a $1 wage, and an additional 12.9% was willing to accept
a job with a $2 wage. I assume the remaining 46.2% was not willing to accept any wage below $3. So, the
average opportunity cost of workers o¤ering wages of exactly $3 was estimated to be 21:4% $0:75 + 19:5%
$1 + 12:9% $2 + 46:2% $3 = $2:




                                                    29
increased market surplus by over $2,700 in the subsequent six months. As the bene…ts of
this experiment for treatment group workers and the overall market appear to have increased
steadily over time, extending the time frame over which the bene…ts were calculated would
likely lead to larger estimates of the experiment’s e¤ect on market surplus. These calculations
suggest that, before the experiment, novice employment on oDesk was ine¢ ciently low.


6     Conclusion
There is a debate in the literature over whether simply helping young and disadvantaged
workers enter the labor market can improve their long-term employment outcomes or whether
intensive skills training is required. This paper proposes that merely giving workers a …rst
job bene…ts them by providing the market with information about their abilities, which in
turn, makes them more valuable to …rms. However, to the extent this information is public,
its bene…ts accrue to workers, so …rms may hire too few inexperienced workers. In particular,
…rms will hire too few inexperienced workers if hiring is costly, they do not receive the bene…ts
of the information produced, and workers cannot fully compensate them for being hired.
    This paper uses a …eld experiment in an online marketplace to test whether giving work-
ers a chance to demonstrate their abilities improves their labor market outcomes. In the
experiment, workers were randomly selected to receive a job with a coarse evaluation, a job
with a detailed evaluation, or no job. Simply giving workers a job substantially increased
their subsequent employment rates, earnings, and reservation wages. Giving the market more
detailed information about their job performance also increased their average earnings and
reservation wages. These results are consistent with the paper’s proposed mechanism: infor-
mation about their abilities made workers more valuable to employers, but are inconsistent
with several alternative mechanisms. Despite the fact that the experiment was not designed
with this purpose, under plausible assumptions, it increased market surplus by more than
its social cost, suggesting that, before the experiment, oDesk …rms hired ine¢ ciently few
inexperienced workers.
    These results come from a particular marketplace and an important question is whether
and how they would generalize to other contexts. The oDesk setting is probably most
similar to traditional low-wage labor markets. It is characterized by high unemployment
rates and its data-entry workers earn wages just above the allowable minimum. However,
oDesk employers are likely more uncertain about the abilities of job applicants than o- ine
employers of low-wage workers. They typically have less hiring experience, may be unfamiliar
with credentials from foreign schools or employers, and have limited ability to verify these
credentials. This suggests that the bene…ts of performance evaluations may be particularly



                                               30
large in the oDesk marketplace. On the other hand, oDesk has particularly low hiring costs.
There is no positive minimum wage on oDesk and …rms do not provide employment bene…ts
or supplies. oDesk workers can be hired with the click of a mouse and …red instantaneously
with no penalty. The tasks they complete are typically well-de…ned, easy to explain, and
require no training. This suggests that the labor market ine¢ ciency and the bene…ts of the
treatments might be larger in a traditional labor market.
    Assuming these results would generalize to traditional low-wage labor markets, there are
several public policy responses that might reduce the ine¢ ciency. First, a government could
partially or fully subsidize …rms for hiring young workers. Second, the government could
itself hire young workers. For this to be maximally e¤ective, the government would have to
provide the market with honest measures of worker performance and ensure the jobs would
not be negatively stigmatized. Avoiding stigmatization might entail hiring some workers
already recognized by the market to be high-ability (as I did in this experiment). This would
increase the program’s costs but also the output of hired workers. Finally, the government
or a subsidized …rm could provide employment tests, simulated work experiences designed to
reliably measure workers’capabilities and diligence. These tests could be designed (as was
the task in this experiment), to require little managerial time, but provide a useful signal of
workers’performance to potential hiring …rms.
    As most oDesk jobs are o¤shored from U.S. employers to foreign workers, the paper’s
results may shed light on whether developing a reputation is a signi…cant barrier to o¤shoring,
and on a grander scale, trade between foreign and domestic …rms. Unlike in other forms
of o¤shoring and international trade, the only signi…cant barrier to transacting on oDesk is
the di¢ culty of building a reputation. Firms o¤shoring o- ine may face signi…cant costs of
identifying available labor. Similarly, foreign and domestic …rms wanting to trade must invest
in identifying and communicating with each other as well as, potentially, in new plants and
capital. In contrast, oDesk workers and …rms can join the marketplace and search for each
other costlessly and quickly. This experiment shows that the cost of building a reputation
alone is su¢ cient to reduce the volume of trade, but, when reputations are established, trade
volume increases. The extent to which the results of this experiment can be applied to more
general trade contexts is an important question for future research.


References
Acemoglu, D. and J.-S. Pischke (1998). Why Do Firms Train? Theory and Evidence.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (1), 79–118.




                                              31
Acemoglu, D. and J.-S. Pischke (1999). Beyond Becker: Training in Imperfect Labour
  Markets. The Economic Journal 109 (453), F112–F142.

Altonji, J. and C. Pierret (2001). Employer Learning and Statistical Discrimination. Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics 116 (1), 313–350.

Autor, D. (2001). Why Do Temporary Help Firms Provide Free General Skills Training?
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (4), 1409–1448.

Autor, D. and S. Houseman (2010). Do Temporary-Help Jobs Improve Labor Market Out-
 comes for Low-Skilled Workers? Evidence from ’Work First’. American Economic Journal:
 Applied Economics 2 (3), 96–128.

Becker, G. (1964). Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special
  Reference to Education. Columbia University Press.

Bell, S. and L. Orr (1994). Is Subsidized Employment Cost E¤ective for Welfare Recip-
  ients? Experimental Evidence from Seven State Demonstrations. Journal of Human
  Resources 29 (1), 42–61.

Bloom, D. (2010). Transitional Jobs: Background, Program Models, and Evaluation Evi-
  dence. New York, NY: MDRC.

Bloom, D., S. Rich, C. Redcross, E. Jacobs, J. Yahner, and N. Pindus (2009). Alternative
  Welfare-to-Work Strategies for the Hard-to-Employ: Testing Transitional Jobs and Pre-
  Employment Services in Philadelphia. New York, NY: MDRC.

Bloom, H., L. Orr, S. Bell, G. Cave, F. Doolittle, W. Lin, and J. Bos (1997). The Bene…ts
  and Cost of JTPA Title II-A Programs: Key Findings from the National Job Training
  Parternship Act Study. Journal of Human Resources 32 (3), 549–576.

Couch, K. (1992). New Evidence on the Long-Term E¤ects of Employment Training Pro-
  grams. Journal of Labor Economics 10 (4), 380–388.

Dickens, W., L. Katz, K. Lang, and L. Summers (1989). Employee Crime and the Monitoring
  Puzzle. Journal of Labor Economics 7 (3), 331–347.

Farber, H. and R. Gibbons (1996). Learning and Wage Dynamics. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 111 (4), 1007–1047.

Gibbons, R. and L. F. Katz (1991). Layo¤s and lemons. Journal of Labor Economics 9 (4),
  351–380.


                                           32
Greenwald, B. C. (1986). Adverse Selection in the Labour Market. The Review of Economic
  Studies 53 (3), 325–347.

Hollister Jr., R., P. Kemper, and R. Maynard (1984). The National Supported Work Demon-
  stration. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.

Kahn, L. (2012). Asymmetric Information between Employers. Working Paper.

Loewenstein, M. and J. Spletzer (1998). Dividing the Costs and Returns to General Training.
  Journal of Labor Economics 16 (1), 142–171.

Redcross, C., D. Bloom, G. Azurdia, J. Zweig, and N. Pindus (2009). Transitional Jobs for
  Ex-Prisoners: Implementation, Two-Year Impacts and Cost of the Center for Employment
  Opportunities (CEO) Prisoner Reentry Program. New York, NY: MDRC.

Schönberg, U. (2007). Testing for Asymmetric Employer Learning. Journal of Labor Eco-
  nomics 25 (4), 651–691.

Stanley, M., L. Katz, and A. Krueger (1998). Developing Skills: What We Know About the
  Impact of American Educational and Training Programs on Employment, Earnings and
  Educational Outcomes. Report for G8 Economic Summit October.

Stanton, C. and C. Thomas (2012). Landing the First Job: the Value of Intermediaries in
  Online Hiring. Working Paper.

Tervio, M. (2009). Superstars and Mediocrities: Market Failure in the Discovery of Talent.
  Review of Economic Studies 76 (2), 829–850.

Waldman, M. (1984). Job Assignments, Signalling, and E¢ ciency. The RAND Journal of
 Economics 15 (2), 255–267.

Weiss, A. (1980). Job Queues and Layo¤s in Labor Markets with Flexible Wages. Journal
 of Political Economy 88 (3), 526–538.




                                            33
7     Appendix A: Proposition Proofs
7.1    Proof of Proposition 1
Any perfect Bayesian equilibrium must have a single-crossing property. That is, if a worker
with expected ability a  ^1i is hired, all workers with expected abilities a
                                                                           ^2i > a ^1i will also be
hired. All workers weakly prefer working at any non-negative wage to their outside options
and, at the same wage, …rms strictly prefer to hire workers with higher expected abilities.
Similarly, if a …rm with …xed cost c1j hires a worker, all …rms with c2j < c1j also hire a worker.
    Some agents accept their outside options: every …rm prefers its outside option of zero
to hiring a worker with negative expected ability at a non-negative wage. However, not all
agents take their outside options: …rms with cj arbitrarily close to zero and workers with
arbitrarily high expected abilities prefer employment relationships with each other to their
outside options. Thus, there exists thresholds a  ^w and cf such that only workers with a   ^i a ^w
and …rms with cj cf are in employment relationships. These inequalities are weak because
of the assumption that indi¤erent agents enter the market.
    Market wages must equal wij = a    ^i b for some b: If a
                                                           ^i wij were not constant for all hired
workers, for some " > 0; there would exist a hiring …rm that would bene…t by o¤ering a wage
of wij + " to a worker employed by another …rm at a wage of wij : Because the marginal …rm
and worker must earn zero pro…t and wages, cf = b = a     ^w c: This c exists such that the the
market clears: as c increases on [0; ); the mass of …rms with cj c increases monotonically
from 0 to 1; while the mass of workers with a    ^i c decreases monotonically to 0.
    There are no pro…table deviations from this equilibrium. Hiring …rms earn expected
pro…t c cj from hiring any worker with a      ^i c; which weakly exceeds their outside option:
Firms with cj > c would earn negative pro…t from paying market wages. All …rms would
earn lower pro…t from hiring workers with a     ^i < c at non-negative wages. No workers with
a
^i    c strictly prefer their outside option to market work. Veteran workers’wages weakly
exceed their outside options. If novices work, they earn a   ^i c in their novice period which
weakly exceeds their total maximum earnings over two periods if they take their outside
options: 0 + (^  ai c).




                                                34
7.2    Proof of Proposition 2
Let l 2 [0; 1] index workers and …rms in each period such that only agents with l             l
participate in the market. The utilitarian social planner maximizes

                                       X
                                       1         Z    l
                                             t
                                                          (^
                                                           al   cl )dl
                                       t=0        0


Here, l 2 (0; 1). If l = 0, having …rms with arbitrarily low …xed costs hire novices with
arbitrarily high expected abilities would increase social surplus. If l = 1, having veterans
with negative expected abilities take their outside options would increase expected surplus.
There is a single-crossing property where if a …rm with c1j hires a worker, …rms with c2j < c1j
also hire a worker. Thus, there exists a c ; such that all …rms with cj     c and only those
…rms hire workers. (This relies on the assumption that if entering the market and taking
their outside options generate equal social surplus, agents enter the market.)
    The current-period expected social surplus from hiring the additional worker i is a
                                                                                      ^i c :
Veterans will be hired if and only if a
                                      ^i1 c : The social planner will employ novices if and
only if
                (^
                 a     c) +       Pr(^ai1H c ) E[^   a       c j^
                                                                ai1H c ]     0:            (1)
                | i0 {z }      |                   {z i1H               }
               Novice-Period Surplus             Veteran-Period Surplus

The social planner employs all novices with a^i0 c : (Equation (1) holds for these workers.)
If unemployed, these workers generate a maximum surplus of 0 + (^        ai0 c ) over their
lives, which is less than the novice-period surplus generated from hiring them: a ^i0 c . If
novices with a ^i0 < c are unemployed, they will have a         ^i0 < c and be unemployed
                                                          ^i1 = a
as veterans; generating zero social surplus over their lives. If employed as novices, the
left-hand side of Equation (1) gives the lifetime surplus produced: they will be hired as
veterans with probability Pr(^ ai1H c ), in which case, they will generate expected surplus
E[^ai1H c j^ ai1H c ].
    A c exists that clears the market: as c increases on [0; 1); the mass of …rms with cj c
increases monotonically from 0 to 1 while the mass of veterans with a ^i1 c and the mass of
novices for whom Equation (1) holds decrease monotonically to 0.
    It must be that c > c. For any hiring threshold c; more novices and veterans are hired in
the social planner’s solution than in the market equilibrium. (The social planner’s solution
employs some novices with a   ^i0 < c; which leads to more veterans with a ^i1   c:) Thus, if
c     c, the social planner’s solution would have more employed workers than hiring …rms.
The social planner’s solution must employ more novices than the market equilibrium. If it did
not, it would employ fewer veterans than the market equilibrium. Both the social planner’s



                                                      35
solution and the market equilibrium hire novices with a ^i0    c : A higher fraction of these
workers will be hired as veterans in the market equilibrium, since c > c. The remaining
novices hired by the market have a ^i0    c; so they have more than a 50% chance of being
rehired as veterans, while the remaining novices hired by the social planner have a
                                                                                  ^i1 < c ; so
they have less than a 50% chance of being rehired as veterans. The social planner’s solution
cannot hire fewer veterans and no more novices than the market equilibrium while having
more hiring …rms (c > c):


7.3    Proof of Proposition 3
Relative to remaining in the market equilibrium, being hired by Employer C does not a¤ect
the expected veteran-period employment outcomes of novices with a        ^i0    c. These workers
will be hired and receive an output signal with the same distribution whether Employer C
hires them or they remain in the market. In contrast, if not hired by Employer C, novices
with a^i0 < c will not be hired. Thus, they will have a         ^i0 < c and will be unemployed
                                                          ^i1 = a
with no earnings and with reservation wages equal to their outside option of zero in their
veteran periods. However, if hired by Employer C, some will receive su¢ ciently high output
signals that their veteran-period expected abilities will exceed c. They will be employed in
their veteran periods with positive earnings and reservation wages.
    Now, I consider the e¤ect of being hired by Employer D relative to Employer C. The
market uses Bayesian updating to determine its expectation of workers’abilities. The mar-
ket’s expectations of worker i’s ability if she is hired by Employer C (^ ai1C ) and Employer D
(^
 ai1D ), respectively, are:

                                              2         2
                                              Ma^i0 +   ai y
                                                           ^iM
                                  a
                                  ^i1C =          2      2
                                                  M +    ai
                                              2         2
                                              Da^i0 +   ai y
                                                           ^iD
                                  a
                                  ^i1D =         2      2
                                                 D +    ai


The terms y^iM and y^iD can be rewritten as

                            y^iM = ai + "iM = (^
                                               ai0       "ia ) + "iM
                             y^iD = ai + "iM = (^
                                                ai0      "ia ) + "iD




                                              36
Substituting these expressions into the above equations gives
                                        2                 2
                                        Ma^i0     +       ai (^
                                                              ai0       "ia + "iM )
                            a
                            ^i1C =                          2          2
                                                            M +        ai
                                                  2
                                                  ai     ( "ia + "iM )
                            a
                            ^i1C = a
                                   ^i0 +                  2     2
                                                          M + ai
                                                             4
                                                             ai
                            a
                            ^i1C      N     a
                                            ^i0 ;        2        2
                                                         M   +    ai



                                          2               2
                                          Da^i0   +       ai (^
                                                              ai0 "ia        + "iD )
                            a
                            ^i1D =                          2    2
                                                            D + ai
                                                    2
                                                    ai   ( "ia + "iD )
                            a
                            ^i1D = a
                                   ^i0 +                  2     2
                                                          D + ai
                                                             4
                                                             ai
                            a
                            ^i1D       N     a
                                             ^i0 ;       2        2
                                                         D   +    ai


    Since 2D < 2M ; the distribution of a^i1D is a mean-preserving spread of the distribution of
^i1C : Worker’s expected veteran-period earnings and reservation wages are E [max (^
a                                                                                      ai1 c; 0)] ;
a convex function of a
                     ^i1 : Thus, by Jensen’s inequality, E [max (^
                                                                 ai1D c; 0)] > E [max (^  ai1C c; 0)]:
being hired by Employer D relative to Employer C strictly increases workers’expected earn-
ings and reservation wages.
    A worker is employed in her veteran period with probability Pr [^ai1 cj^ ai0 ] : The probabil-
ities that a worker will be employed in her veteran period after being employed by Employers
C and D, respectively are
                                                                            p                 !
                                                                                 2       2
                                                           (^
                                                            ai0        c)        M   +   ai
                       Pr [^
                           ai1C    cj^
                                     ai0 ] =                                2
                                                                                                  (2)
                                                                            ai
                                                                            p                 !
                                                                                 2       2
                                                           (^
                                                            ai0        c)        D   +   ai
                       Pr [^
                           ai1D    cj^
                                     ai0 ] =                                2
                                                                            ai


where is the standard normal cumulative distribution function. Since 2D < 2M ; a worker
with a^i0 < c has a higher probability of veteran-period employment after being hired by Em-
ployer D, while a worker with a^i0 > c has a higher probability of veteran-period employment
after being hired by Employer C.




                                                     37
7.4    Proposition 5
Proposition 5 Conditional on novice expected ability, a       ^i0 ; the e¤ect of being hired by Em-
ployer C (relative to remaining in the market equilibrium) on expected veteran-period employ-
ment, earnings, and reservation wages is weakly increasing in the market’s initial uncertainty
about the worker’s ability, 2ai : The e¤ect is strictly increasing in 2ai for workers with a ^i0 < c:
However, conditional on a  ^i0 , the e¤ect of being hired by Employer D (relative to being hired
by Employer C) on expected veteran-period employment, earnings, and reservation wages is
not monotonic in 2ai .

Proof. First, I consider the e¤ect of being hired by Employer C relative to remaining in
the market equilibrium. Being hired by Employer C has no e¤ect on expected employment
outcomes for workers with a^i0 c: Thus, all that remains to prove is that the e¤ect of being
hired by Employer C is strictly increasing in 2ai for workers with a
                                                                   ^i0 < c. The probability
that a worker with a
                   ^i0 < c who was hired by Employer C is hired in her veteran period is

                 Pr (^
                     ai1C    c) = Pr (^
                                      yiM > a
                                            ^i0 )         Pr (^
                                                              ai1C            cj^
                                                                                yiM > a
                                                                                      ^i0 )
                                 + Pr (^
                                       yiM       a
                                                 ^i0 )    Pr (^
                                                              ai1C          cj^
                                                                              yiM      a
                                                                                       ^i0 )
                 Pr (^
                     ai1C    c) = Pr (^
                                      yiM > a
                                            ^i0 )         Pr (^
                                                              ai1C            cj^
                                                                                yiM > a
                                                                                      ^i0 ) + 0:

The second line follows because if y^iM       ^i0 < c; then a
                                              a              ^i1C < c: When, y^iM > a     ^i1C is
                                                                                    ^i0 ; a
                       2                                               2
strictly increasing in ai : Since Pr (^     ^i0 ) does not depend on ai , Pr (^
                                      yiM > a                                 ai1C c) is strictly
increasing in 2ai :
    Similarly, workers’expected earnings and reservation wages are

                                    E [1 [^
                                          ai1C      c]    (^
                                                           ai1C         c)]

where 1[] is an indicator for the expression being true. This can be rewritten as

                     Pr (^
                         yiM > a
                               ^i0 )       E [1 [^
                                                 ai1C     c]        (^
                                                                     ai1C      c) j^
                                                                                   yiM > a
                                                                                         ^i0 ]
                     + Pr (^
                           yiM     a
                                   ^i0 )     E [1 [^
                                                   ai1C        c]     (^
                                                                       ai1C      c) j^
                                                                                     yiM       a
                                                                                               ^i0 ]
                 = Pr (^
                       yiM > a
                             ^i0 )         E [1 [^
                                                 ai1C     c]        (^
                                                                     ai1C      c) j^
                                                                                   yiM > a
                                                                                         ^i0 ] + 0:

As above, the equality follows because when y^iM         a     ^i1C < c: When y^iM > a
                                                         ^i0 ; a                           ^i1C is
                                                                                     ^i0 ; a
                        2                                                 2
strictly increasing in ai . Since Pr (^
                                      yiM > a ^i0 ) does not depend on ai ; the right-hand side
                                          2
of the equation is strictly increasing in ai :
    Now I consider the e¤ect of being hired by Employer D relative to being hired by Em-
ployer C on expected earnings and reservation wages. Given the lack of closed form solutions


                                                    38
to integrating the normal distribution, it is easiest to see the result by example. The dis-
tributions of a
              ^i1C and a ^i1D are given in Section 7.3. Let 2M = 2, 2D = 1; a  ^i0 = 1, and
c = 2: Then, expected earnings after being hired by Employers D and C are as follows for
di¤erent levels of 2ai :

            2
            ai   Earnings after D Earnings after C Earnings Di¤erence: D - C
           1     0.025            0.010            0.015
           10    0.768            0.720            0.048
           20    1.286            1.247            0.039

    As 2ai increases from 1 to 10; the earnings and reservation wage bene…t from being hired
by Employer D relative to Employer C increases from 0.015 to 0.048, but it decreases to
0.039 as 2ai increases to 20. Thus, the earnings and reservation wage increase from being
hired by Employer D relative to Employer C is not monotonic in 2ai :
    Finally, I consider the e¤ect of being hired by Employer D relative to Employer C on the
expected probability of employment. Equation (2) provides the probabilities of employment
after being hired by Employers C and D. For any a    ^1i0 ; let a
                                                                ^2i0 be de…ned such that a
                                                                                         ^1i0 c =
c a ^2i0 : Then, by the symmetry of the normal distribution

      Pr a
         ^i1D       a1i0
                  cj^      Pr a
                              ^i1C        a1i0 =
                                        cj^             Pr a
                                                           ^i1D         a2i0
                                                                      cj^       Pr a
                                                                                   ^i1C        a2i0
                                                                                             cj^         :

                                                                                                             2
Thus, if the e¤ect of being hired by Employer D on employment is increasing in                               ai   at
a     ^1i0 ; then it is decreasing at a
^i0 = a                                     ^2i0 and vice versa.
                                      ^i0 = a


7.5    Proposition 6
Proposition 6 Being hired by Employer D (relative to Employer C) weakly decreases work-
ers’ veteran-period probability of employment, earnings, and reservation wages when y^iD
min(^ai0 ; y^iM ) and weakly increases these outcomes when y^iD max(^
                                                                    ai0 ; y^iM ):

Proof. Since expected earnings, reservation wages, and employment probabilities are weakly
increasing functions of a
                        ^i1 ; all I need to show is that when y^iD min(^   ai0 ; y^iM ); a
                                                                                         ^i1D a
                                                                                              ^i1C
and when y^iD max(^   ai0 ; y^iM ); a
                                    ^i1D a ^i1C : The di¤erence in expected abilities after having
been hired by Employers D and C is:
                             2
                             Da ^i0 + 2ai y^iD        2
                                                      Ma^i0 + 2ai y^iM
          a
          ^i1D   a
                 ^i1C =          2       2                2     2
                                 D + ai                   M + ai

                             2     [ 2D (^
                                         ai0     y^iM ) + 2M (^
                                                              yiD a     ^i0 ) + 2ai (^
                                                                                     yiD   y^iM )]
          a
          ^i1D   a
                 ^i1C =      ai                          2    2       2        2
                                                                                                     :
                                                      ( D + ai )( M + ai )


                                                   39
Since variances are always positive, the sign of this expression will be determined by the sign
of the terms in brackets. If y^iD min(^ ai0 ; y^iM )

                   2                     2                    2
                   D (^
                      ai0     y^iM ) +   M (^
                                            yiD     a
                                                    ^i0 ) +   ai (^
                                                                  yiD    y^iM )
                   2                     2                    2                     2
                   D (^
                      ai0     y^iM ) +   M (^
                                            yiD     a
                                                    ^i0 ) +   ai (^
                                                                  yiD    y^iM ) +   D (^
                                                                                       yiM   y^iD )
                    2       2                      2
             = (    M       D )(^
                                yiD      a
                                         ^i0 ) +   ai (^
                                                       yiD    y^iM )    0:

So, a
    ^i1D   a
           ^iC   0: If y^iD     max(^
                                    ai0 ; y^iM )

                   2                     2                    2
                   D (^
                      ai0     y^iM ) +   M (^
                                            yiD     a
                                                    ^i0 ) +   ai (^
                                                                  yiD    y^iM )
                   2                     2                    2                     2
                   D (^
                      ai0     y^iM ) +   M (^
                                            yiD     a
                                                    ^i0 ) +   ai (^
                                                                  yiD    y^iM ) +   D (^
                                                                                       yiM   y^iD )
                    2       2                      2
             = (    M       D )(^
                                yiD      a
                                         ^i0 ) +   ai (^
                                                       yiD    y^iM )    0:

So; a
    ^i1D   a
           ^iC   0:


7.6    Proposition 7
I extend the model as follows: before each period, a worker observes her period-speci…c
outside option. With probability > 0; her outside option is w1 > 0; with probability 1        ;
it is w0 = 0: She then decides whether to accept her outside option. If she does, she exits the
market. Otherwise, she remains in the market. The market clears after workers make their
exit decisions. There is some randomness in hiring: after the market clears, with probability
", each worker who has not received a job receives a wage o¤er of > 0 such that w1 > " :
This randomness re‡ects the fact that some …rms hire workers without reading workers’
resumes. It a¤ects the model only by ensuring that workers with outside option w0 = 0 do
not exit the market and thereby removes the multiplicity of equilibria.

Proposition 7 Being hired by Employer C (relative to remaining in the market equilibrium)
weakly increases all workers’probability of remaining in the market in their veteran periods
and strictly increases this probability for workers with a
                                                         ^i0 < c. Being hired by Employer D
(relative to being hired by Employer C) increases this probability for workers with a
                                                                                    ^i0 < w1 +c
and decreases this probability for workers with a^i0 > w1 + c:

Proof. No worker with w0 = 0 will exit the market. If she exits, she receives 0; while if she
remains in the market, her expected gain is at least " : Workers o¤ered outside option w1
will remain in the market if and only if their market earnings (^
                                                                ai1 c) weakly exceed their
outside option: a
                ^i1 w1 + c: Being hired by Employer C only a¤ects novices with a    ^i0 < c.



                                                      40
If these workers were not hired by Employer C, they would have a       ^i0 < c < w1 + c and
                                                                 ^i1 = a
would exit the market if o¤ered outside option w1 : On the other hand, if hired by Employer
C, some would have su¢ ciently positive output signals that a^i1C > w1 + c and they would
remain in the market even with outside option w1 :
    I now consider the e¤ect of being hired by Employer D relative to Employer C. The
probabilities that a worker remains in the market after being hired by Employers C and D
are, respectively
                                                                       p                !
                                                                           2       2
                                                      (^
                                                       ai0   w1   c)       M   +   ai
                  Pr [^
                      ai1C    w1 + cj^
                                     ai0 ] =                      2
                                                                  ai
                                                                       p                !
                                                                           2       2
                                                      (^
                                                       ai0   w1   c)       D   +   ai
                  Pr [^
                      ai1D    w1 + cj^
                                     ai0 ] =                      2
                                                                  ai


Since 2M > 2D ; when a
                     ^i0 > w1 + c; the probability of remaining in the market is higher after
being hired by Employer C, while when a ^i0 < w1 + c the opposite is true.


7.7     Proof of Proposition 4
In the period after Employer C hires, there will be a larger mass of veterans with a         ^i1    c:
Employer C directly hires novices with a       ^i0 < c. Because Employer C removes novices with
a
^i0   c from the market, the market hiring threshold adjusts from c to c~ < c and novice
workers with c~ a   ^i0 < c are hired. Some of these novices will have a    ^i1 c. In the subsequent
period, the mass of workers with a      ^i c will exceed the mass of …rms with …xed costs cj c,
so the hiring threshold will increase to c0 . Total employment increases with the mass of
hiring …rms. Wages fall, conditional on workers’ expected abilities, from wij = a           ^i c to
  0         0
wij = a
      ^i c :
    To de…ne the change in market surplus, I de…ne k 2 [0; 1] which, in each period, indexes
…rms from lowest to highest hiring cost and workers from highest to lowest expected ability.
That is, k      Fc (ck )     1 Fa^ (^  ak ) where Fc (:) and Fa^ (:) are the cumulative distribution
functions of cj and a ^i ; respectively. I de…ne k1 such that in the standard market equilibrium
only workers and …rms with k k1 are in employment relationships (^             ak1 = ck1 = c). In the
period after Employer C hires, employment expands, so I de…ne k2 > k1 such that agents
with k k2 are in employment relationships in that period: Employer C’s hiring also changes
the distribution of a ^k to a ^0k : For all c c; Employer C increases the mass of workers with
^i c in the subsequent period. That implies that a
a                                                          ^0k > a^k for all k k1 .




                                                 41
    The change in the subsequent period’s market surplus due to Employer C is
                       Z    k2                     Z    k1
                                  a0k
                                 (^       ck )dk             (^
                                                              ak ck )dk
                       |0           {z         }   |0           {z    }
                        After Employer C               No Employer C
                       Z    k2                                    Z       k1
                   =              a0k
                                 (^        ck )dk +                             a0k a
                                                                               (^     ^k )dk   > 0:
                           k1                                         0
                       |                {z      }                 |                {z      }
                       Increased Employment           Higher Expected Ability Workers Hired


Both terms in the second line are strictly positive. The …rst is the increased surplus due
to employment expanding from k1 to k2 : It is positive because a^0k > ck for all k < k2 : The
second term is the increased surplus from higher expected ability workers displacing lower
expected ability workers at …rms with k k1 . It is positive since a^0k > a
                                                                         ^k for k k1 :


8     Appendix B
This appendix analyzes the treatments’ e¤ects on workers’ application patterns. First, it
assesses the treatments’ e¤ects on the number and types of job applications workers sent.
Then, it analyzes their e¤ects on the probability that a given job application was successful.
    Panel A of Appendix Table 4 displays the results of regressing (1) an indicator for sending
at least one application in the two months after the experiment and (2) the number of
applications sent in these two months on a dummy for being in either treatment group and
an indicator for having prior oDesk experience. The table shows that the average treatment
group worker was 24 percentage points more likely to send at least one application and
sent 24 more applications than the average control group worker. Panel B displays the
results of regressing the same dependent variables on a dummy for being in the detailed
evaluation treatment. The regressions are limited to workers earning ratings of at least four
in my treatment job. The results show that, relative to the coarse evaluation, the detailed
evaluation did not a¤ect the probability that a worker sent any application or the average
number of applications she sent.
    Appendix Table 5 analyzes the treatments’e¤ects on the types of jobs workers applied
to. The …rst column of the table lists several objective features of jobs. Employers had
to indicate whether each opening was an hourly (as opposed to …xed wage) job, its job
category, and whether they had preferences for workers with certain credentials such as a
given self-assessed English ability or level of oDesk feedback. I also observe the number of
applicants to each job. Each characteristic is correlated with a job being more competitive.
That is, when I consider the sample of applications experimental workers sent in the month



                                                             42
before the experiment and separately regress a dummy for an application’s success on each
characteristic, controlling for worker …xed e¤ects, each coe¢ cient is statistically signi…cantly
negative.
    Each cell in Panels A and B of Appendix Table 5 shows the results of a separate regression.
Observations in these regressions are applications sent by experimental workers in the two
months after the experiment. Panel A shows the results of regressing the indicated job
characteristic on a dummy for being in either treatment group, controlling for a dummy
for prior oDesk experience. It shows that being in a treatment group induced workers to
apply to more-competitive jobs. Panel B shows the results of regressing the indicated job
characteristic on a dummy for being in the detailed evaluation treatment, limiting the sample
to applications sent by workers earning fours and …ves in my treatment jobs. Similar to the
results in the previous table, these regressions show that, relative to the coarse evaluation
treatment, the detailed evaluation treatment did not change workers’application patterns.
    Finally, Appendix Table 6 evaluates the treatments’e¤ects on workers’application suc-
cess. Panels A and B consider the same sample of applications as the corresponding panels in
the previous table. Panel A displays the result of regressing an indicator that an application
was successful (multiplied by 100 for ease of viewing) on an indicator for being in one of
the treatment groups and a dummy for having prior oDesk experience. The …rst column
includes no worker or job controls. Because receiving a job a¤ected both the set of workers
who applied for jobs and the types of jobs workers applied to, Column 2 adds controls for
the job characteristics listed in Appendix Table 5 and employer …xed e¤ects and Column 3
additionally includes controls for worker characteristics and the wage the worker proposed
for the job.19 Once these job and worker characteristics are included, receiving a treatment
job is estimated to have increased the probability that a given worker’s job application was
successful by approximately 10%. While this regression controls for the treatments’ e¤ect
on selection into the regression on observable characteristics, this estimate will be biased
if the treatments change selection on unobservable characteristics as well. In particular, if
the selection on unobservables biases the coe¢ cient in the same direction as the selection
on observables, the regression underestimates the true e¤ect of obtaining a treatment job on
application success.
    Panel B shows the results of regressing the same dependent variable on an indicator that
a worker was in the detailed evaluation treatment. Columns 2 and 3 add the same controls
as in Panel A. The estimates suggest that the detailed evaluation had a positive e¤ect on
the probability that a worker obtained a given job she applied to, but it is very imprecise.
  19
    These are dummies for requesting a wage less than $1 per hour, exactly $1, between $1 and $2, exactly
$2, between $2 and $3, exactly $3, and more than $3.




                                                   43
This is similar to the positive, imprecise e¤ect the detailed evaluation had on employment.




                                            44
                        Figure 1. Example oDesk Profile




                                                                                                    



                       Figure 2. Experimental Design
                                   ExperimentalSample:
                                   ApplywithWage$3
                                         (3,767)




                            TreatmentJob                          TreatmentJob
NoTreatmentJob
                           CoarseEvaluation                     DetailedEvaluation
     (2,815)
                                 (476)                                  (476)




     Rating=1,2,                 Rating=4     Rating=1,2,                   Rating=4
                      Rating=3                                       Rating=3
       orNone                        or5          orNone                          or5
                         (38)                                             (54)
        (111)                         (327)            (105)                          (317)




         No                 Short                    No               Short         Detailed
       Comment             Comment                   Comment           Comment         Comment


                      Note: Dashed lines indicate random assignment.
                                           45
                                             Figure 3a. Effect of Treatment Job by Week
                                                          Any Job and Total Jobs




                                                                                                     1.5
           .2
           .15




                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                              Total Jobs
Any Job
           .1




                                                                                                     .5
           .05
           0




                                                                                                     0
                 0                     5                   10            15               20    25
                                                      Weeks Since Job Completion

                                                       Any Job                     Total Jobs
                 Note: Dashed lines indicate 95% confidence intervals.




                                             Figure 3b: Effect of Treatment Job by Week
                                                       Earnings and Posted Wage
                                                                                                     .6
           100




                                                                                                     .4
           75




                                                                                                           Posted Wage
Earnings
           50




                                                                                                     .2
           25




                                                                                                     0
           0




                 0                     5                   10            15              20     25
                                                      Weeks Since Job Completion

                                                   Earnings                    Posted Wage
                 Note: Dashed lines indicate 95% confidence intervals.




                                                                              46
                          Table 1. Randomization Assessment: Treatment vs. Control Groups

                                           A. No Previous Job           B. With Previous Jobs         C. All Workers
                                         Treatment Control            Treatment       Control
                                           Group       Group            Group         Group
Posted Wage                                 2.18        2.16             2.23          2.27               1.98
Days Since Joining oDesk                    137         126              251            257               179
Number of Applications Sent                 25*         22*              160            167                27
Proposed Wage for Treatment Job             2.18        2.16             2.29          2.32               2.01
Number of Tests Passed                       2.7         2.7              4.5           4.7                3.5
Number of Qualifications                     2.9         3.0              4.6           4.8                3.7
Percent with Portfolio                       7%          6%              26%           25%                14%
Philippines                                 63%         61%              63%           64%                63%
India                                       10%         11%              10%           12%                11%
Bangladesh                                  10%         10%             15%**         10%**               10%
Pakistan                                    6.3%        7.0%             5.1%          4.6%               5.9%
United States                               2.9%        2.6%             2.3%          2.5%               2.6%

Number of Previous Jobs                                                   7.3           6.9                6.9
Average Feedback Score                                                    4.4           4.4                4.4

Observations                                   736        1562             216            1253               3,767
Notes: Each cell presents the mean value of the indicated characteristic for the indicated group of workers
immediately before the experiment. "Qualifications" are certifications from entities other than oDesk that are posted
to the worker's profile. A "portfolio" is where a worker posts examples of her prior work. One asterisk indicates the
difference between treatment and control group workers is significant at the 10% level and two asterisks indicate the
difference is significant at the 5% level.




                                                                47
               Table 2. Randomization Assessment: Detailed vs. Coarse Evaluation Treatment Groups

                                         A. All Treatment Group Workers          B. Workers with Ratings of 4 and 5
                                            Detailed           Coarse                Detailed           Coarse
                                          Treatment          Treatment              Treatment         Treatment
Posted Wage                                   2.17              2.22                   2.21              2.25
Days Since Joining oDesk                       161              164                    163                164
Number of Applications Sent                     58               53                     55                 53
Proposed Wage for Experiment Job              2.19              2.22                   2.22              2.24
Number of Tests Passed                         3.1               3.2                    3.2               3.4
Number of Qualifications                       3.2               3.4                    3.4               3.6
Percent with Portfolio                        12%               11%                    13%               12%
Philippines                                   63%               62%                    67%               67%
India                                         10%               10%                     9%                8%
Bangladesh                                    12%               11%                    11%                9%
Pakistan                                      6.1%              5.9%                   4.7%              4.9%
United States                                 2.1%              3.4%                   1.6%              2.8%
Fraction with Previous Job                    23%               23%                    25%               25%

Workers with Previous Jobs Only
 Number of Previous Jobs                       7.3               6.9                   6.2                6.7
 Average Feedback Score                       4.6**             4.2**                  4.6*               4.3*

Observations                                       476            476                    317                327
Notes: Each cell presents the mean value of the indicated characteristic for the indicated group of workers
immediately before the experiment. "Qualifications" are certifications from entities other than oDesk that are
posted to the worker's profile. A "portfolio" is where a worker posts examples of her prior work. One asterisk
indicates the difference between workers in the two treatment groups is significant at the 10% level and two
asteriks indicate the difference is significant at the 5% level.




                                                               48
                                 Table 3. The Effects of the Treatments on Employment Outcomes
                                           During the Two Months After the Experiment

                                                A. Workers with No Previous Jobs                 B. Workers with Previous Jobs
                                              Detailed       Coarse       Control             Detailed       Coarse       Control
                                             Treatment     Treatment                         Treatment     Treatment
Total Jobs                                      0.883         0.731         0.284               2.889         2.037        1.958
 p‐value: Equal to Control                     (0.000)       (0.000)                           (0.005)       (0.809)
 p‐value: Equal to Coarse Treatment            (0.307)                                         (0.079)

Any Job                                         0.302           0.296         0.117             0.694         0.528         0.545
 p‐value: Equal to Control                     (0.000)         (0.000)                         (0.003)       (0.729)
 p‐value: Equal to Coarse Treatment            (0.872)                                         (0.012)

Hours Worked                                    11.32           13.49         5.36              74.46         47.52         47.80
 p‐value: Equal to Control                     (0.002)         (0.000)                         (0.006)       (0.977)
 p‐value: Equal to Coarse Treatment            (0.482)                                         (0.074)

Posted Wage                                     2.31            2.25          2.03              2.68          2.32           2.38
 p‐value: Equal to Control                     (0.000)         (0.000)                         (0.010)       (0.565)
 p‐value: Equal to Coarse Treatment            (0.573)                                         (0.043)

Earnings                                        29.72           27.14         10.06            186.84        101.19        120.60
 p‐value: Equal to Control                     (0.000)         (0.000)                         (0.008)       (0.423)
 p‐value: Equal to Coarse Treatment            (0.750)                                         (0.018)

Observations                                      368              368          1,562             108            108          1,253
Notes: Each statistic not in parentheses is the mean of the indicated employment outcome for workers in the indicated
experimental group. Employment outcomes are calculated for the two months after the experiment; all experimental jobs and
earnings are excluded. Each statistic in parentheses is a p‐value from a test that the means for the groups indicated by the row and
column are equal.




                                                                  49
                     Table 4. Regression Estimates of the Effects of the Treatments with Controls
                                    During the Two Months After the Experiment

                                   Total Jobs         Any Job         Hours Worked    Posted Wage       Earnings
                                      (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)            (5)

                                                              A. Treatments Separately
Detailed Treatment                   0.617**          0.165**          11.36**         0.26**           29.37**
                                     (0.127)          (0.022)           (3.42)         (0.08)            (8.74)

Coarse Treatment                     0.342**          0.126**            7.54**          0.15**            9.80
                                     (0.102)          (0.022)            (2.98)          (0.04)           (6.76)

Previous Job                         0.321**          0.199**           20.22**          0.20**         40.78**
                                     (0.104)          (0.019)            (3.23)          (0.04)          (7.65)

p‐value: Detailed = Coarse            0.07              0.19              0.34             0.21            0.05
Control Group Mean                    1.029            0.308             24.25             2.19           59.27
Observations                          3,767            3,767             3,767            3,767           3,767

                                                                B. Treatments Combined
Treatment Job                        0.480**          0.145**            9.45**        0.20**           19.59**
                                     (0.087)          (0.016)            (2.50)        (0.05)            (6.03)

Previous Job                         0.321**          0.199**           20.21**          0.20**         40.76**
                                     (0.104)          (0.019)            (3.23)          (0.04)          (7.66)

Control Group Mean                     1.029             0.308            24.25               2.19         59.27
Observations                           3,767             3,767            3,767              3,767         3,767
Notes: Each column in Panel A displays the results of regressing the dependent variable indicated by the column on
indicators for being in the detailed evaluation treatment, being in the coarse evaluation treatment, and having
prior oDesk employment. Each column in Panel B displays the results of regressing the same dependent variable on
indicators for being in any treatment group and having prior oDesk experience. All regressions control for the tests
the worker took (dummies for passing one test, two or three tests, and four or more tests, an indicator for having
taken the most popular skills test among the sample, and an indicator for passing it), the number of qualifications
the worker had (dummies for listing two to four qualifications and five or more qualifications), the number of
oDesk applications the worker sent before the experiment (dummies for having sent three to five, six to 15, 16 to
50, 51 to 100, and over 100 applications), the wage proposed for the experimental job (dummies for offering $1 to
$1.99, $2 to $2.99, and exactly $3), the number of jobs the worker had before the experiment, and an indicator for
being in the second experimental wave. Employment outcomes are calculated for the two months after the
experiment; all experimental jobs and earnings are excluded. Huber‐White standard errors are in parentheses. P‐
values in Panel A are from a test that the coefficients on the detailed evaluation treatment and coarse evaluation
treatment indicators are equal. Two asterisks indicate the coefficient is significant at the 5% level.




                                                                 50
           Table 5. The Effects of Receiving a Detailed Evaluation for Workers Earning Ratings of 4 or 5
                                   During the Two Months After the Experiment

                                          Total Jobs      Any Job     Hours Worked     Posted Wage         Earnings
                                             (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)              (5)

                                                           A. Main Effect of Detailed Evaluation
Detailed Treatment                           0.210         0.042           3.86            0.24*           24.06*
                                            (0.215)       (0.039)         (5.85)           (0.13)          (14.07)

Coarse Evaluation Mean                      1.346          0.416          26.95             2.34            54.36
Observations                                 644            644            644              644              644

                                                       B. Differential Effect of Detailed Evaluation
Met Deadline ×                               0.204         0.043            4.17            0.24*          24.39*
 Detailed Treatment                         (0.219)       (0.040)          (5.93)           (0.13)         (14.27)

Missed Deadline ×                           ‐0.238         ‐0.095        ‐27.40**          ‐0.28           ‐34.88**
 Detailed Treatment                         (0.388)       (0.331)         (13.98)          (0.60)           (15.51)

Met Deadline                               0.791**         ‐0.013         ‐0.47             0.06            19.90
                                           (0.311)        (0.190)        (14.53)           (0.37)          (17.61)

p‐value: Interaction Terms Equal               0.321         0.679          0.038            0.395          0.005
Coarse Evaluation Mean                         1.346         0.416          26.95             2.34          54.36
Observations                                     644          644            644              644            644
Notes: Each column in Panel A displays the results of regressing the dependent variable indicated by the column
on an indicator for being in the detailed evaluation treatment. Each column in Panel B displays the results of
regressing the same dependent variable on an indicator for meeting the deadline interacted with an indicator for
being in the detailed evaluation treatment, an indicator for missing the deadline interacted with the detailed
evaluation treatment dummy, and an indicator for meeting the deadline. Only workers who obtained a rating of
at least four in an experimental job are included. Employment outcomes are calculated for the two months after
the experiment; all experimental jobs and earnings are excluded. Huber‐White standard errors are in
parentheses. One asterisk indicates the coefficient is significant at the 10% level and two asterisks indicate the
coefficient is significant at the 5% level. The "Coarse Evaluation Mean" rows present the mean of the dependent
variables for workers in the coarse evaluation treatment who received a rating of at least four.




                                                               51
                                     Table 6. Market‐Level Effects of the Experiment

                                                                           A. Log Jobs
% Change Experience x After                0.220**           0.246**          0.273**         0.272**          0.352*
                                           (0.108)           (0.105)          (0.091)         (0.092)          (0.201)

Mean of Dependent Variable                   3.11              3.20             3.25            3.25             3.21

                                                                          B. Log Hours
% Change Experience x After                 0.142*           0.153**           0.099           0.102*           0.107
                                            (0.073)          (0.072)          (0.061)          (0.061)         (0.196)

Mean of Dependent Variable                   6.45              6.55             6.63            6.63             6.59

                                                                          C. Log Wages
% Change Experience x After                ‐0.418**          ‐0.437**         ‐0.265**        ‐0.315**          ‐0.034
                                            (0.112)           (0.097)          (0.095)         (0.096)         (0.149)

Mean of Dependent Variable                   1.86              1.86             1.85            1.85             1.94

Weeks After Experiment                         8                  17              26               26              26
Category‐Specific Time Trends                 Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
Category‐Specific Quadratic                   No                  No              No              Yes             Yes
Data‐Entry Included                           Yes                 Yes             Yes             Yes              No
Notes: Panels A, B, and C present the results of regressing the natural logarithm of jobs created in a job category‐week
(Panel A), the natural logarithm of hours worked in a job category‐week (Panel B), and the natural logarithm of a job's
hourly wages (Panel C), on "% Change Experience" interacted with a dummy for being after the experiment. All
regressions include week fixed effects, job category fixed effects, and job category linear time trends. The last two
columns additionally include job category quadratic time trends. These regressions contain outcomes from 26 weeks
before the experiment to 8, 17, or 26 weeks afterwards, excluding the weeks of the experiment. In Panels A and B,
observations are job category‐weeks and are weighted by the number of jobs created in the category in a pre‐period.
In Panel C, observations are individual job‐weeks and are unweighted. All standard errors are clustered by job
category. One asterisk indicates the coefficient is significant at the 10% level and two asterisks indicate the coefficient
is significant at the 5% level.




                                                                52
                Table 7. Estimated Effect of the Experiment on Market Welfare

                                       High Benefit,        Medium Benefit,          Low Benefit,
                                         Low Cost            Medium Cost              High Cost

                                                       A. Increased Market Surplus
Increased Worker Surplus                 $52,036                 $52,036              $52,036
(Excluding the Cost of Effort)

Increased Firm Profit                     $2,757                 $2,757                $2,757
(From Increased Employment)
                                               B. Opportunity Cost of Increased Work
Workers' Opportunity Cost                $12,351             $24,701               $36,884
(Alternative Hourly Wage)              ($0.50/hour)        ($1 per hour)       ($1.49 per hour)

Firms' Opportunity Cost                    $689                  $1,378                $2,757
(Fraction of Increased Profits)            (25%)                  (50%)                (100%)

                                                       C. Cost of Experimental Jobs
Workers' Opportunity Cost                $3,622                   $7,245              $10,818
(Alternative Hourly Wage)              ($0.50/hour)            ($1 per hour)      ($1.49 per hour)

Fixed Cost of Employing                   $476                   $793                $1,587
($10 per hour spent)                   3 min/worker           5 min/worker        10 min/worker

                                                       D. Overall Welfare Change
Total Market Surplus ‐ Cost               $37,655               $20,675               $2,747
Note: Each cell in Panel D is the difference of the column's entry in Panel A and its entries in
Panels B and C.




                                                                  53
                                         Appendix Table 1. Sample Selection

                                No Previous Job    Any Previous Job          Total                Percentage
Contacted                            7,136              2,826               9,962                   100%
Applied                              2,324              1,528               3,852                    39%
Applied with Wage ≤ $3               2,298              1,469               3,767                    38%
In Treatment Group                    736                216                  952       25% of experimental sample
Notes: The first row enumerates the workers invited to apply to the job while the second counts those who actually
applied. The third row is the experimental sample: workers who applied for the job requesting a wage less than or
equal to $3. The final row counts the workers who were randomly selected to be in either treatment group. Unless
otherwise indicated, percentages refer to the percentage of workers contacted.




                                                             54
                   Appendix Table 2. The Effects of Receiving a Detailed Evaluation with Controls
                                  During the Two Months After the Experiment

                                             Total Jobs      Any Job     Hours Worked      Posted Wage     Earnings
                                                (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)          (5)

                                                              A. Main Effect of Detailed Evaluation
Detailed Treatment                              0.219         0.040           3.09             0.20         22.66*
                                               (0.199)       (0.037)         (5.29)           (0.12)        (12.94)

Coarse Evaluation Mean                          1.346         0.416           26.95             2.34         54.36
Observations                                     644           644             644              644           644

                                                           B. Differential Effect of Detailed Evaluation
Met Deadline ×                                  0.205          0.040            3.20            0.21*       22.63*
 Detailed Treatment                            (0.201)        (0.037)          (5.37)           (0.12)      (13.12)

Missed Deadline ×                              ‐0.129         ‐0.076         ‐25.67            ‐0.47        ‐37.39
 Detailed Treatment                            (0.638)       (0.302)         (25.59)           (0.38)       (55.67)

Met Deadline                                   1.556**        0.092           15.55            ‐0.14         55.92
                                               (0.624)       (0.178)         (22.68)           (0.30)       (46.51)

p‐value: Interaction Terms Equal                  0.621          0.703          0.038            0.395         0.005
Coarse Evaluation Mean                            1.346          0.416           26.95            2.34         54.36
Observations                                       644            644             644             644           644
Notes: Each column in Panel A displays the results of regressing the dependent variable indicated by the column on
an indicator for being in the detailed evaluation treatment. Each column in Panel B displays the results of regressing
the same dependent variable on an indicator for meeting the deadline interacted with an indicator for being in the
detailed evaluation treatment, an indicator for missing the deadline interacted with the detailed evaluation
treatment dummy, and an indicator for meeting the deadline. Only workers who obtained a rating of at least four in
an experimental job are included. All regressions control for the tests the worker took (dummies for passing one
test, two or three tests, and four or more tests, an indicator for having taken the most popular skills test among the
sample, and an indicator for passing it), the number of qualifications the worker had (dummies for listing two to
four qualifications and five or more qualifications), the number of oDesk applications the worker sent before the
experiment (dummies for having sent three to five, six to 15, 16 to 50, 51 to 100, and over 100 applications), the
wage proposed for the experimental job (dummies for offering $1 to $1.99, $2 to $2.99, and exactly $3), the number
of jobs the worker had before the experiment, and an indicator for being in the second experimental wave.
Employment outcomes are calculated for the two months after the experiment; all experimental jobs and earnings
are excluded. Huber‐White standard errors are in parentheses. One asterisk indicates the coefficient is significant at
the 10% level and two asterisks indicate the coefficient is significant at the 5% level. The "Coarse Evaluation Mean"
rows present the mean of the dependent variables for workers in the coarse evaluation treatment who received a
rating of at least four.




                                                               55
       Appendix Table 3. Differential Effects of Detailed Evaluations: Instructions, Speed, and Accuracy
                                During the Two Months After the Experiment

                                         Total Jobs    Any Job    Hours Worked       Posted Wage    Earnings
                                            (1)          (2)           (3)                (4)          (5)

                                                                      A. Instructions
Follow All Instructions ×                   0.345       0.064           2.60            0.36**       26.48*
 Detailed Treatment                        (0.250)     (0.045)         (6.25)           (0.16)       (15.10)

Not Follow All Instructions ×              ‐0.234       ‐0.032         8.20             ‐0.17         15.82
 Detailed Treatment                        (0.415)     (0.080)        (14.49)           (0.20)       (34.57)

Follow All Instructions                     0.022       0.024           4.43            ‐0.31*        ‐6.95
                                           (0.316)     (0.065)         (9.77)           (0.18)       (21.95)

p‐value: Interaction Terms Equal            0.232       0.293          0.723            0.040         0.777

                                                                         B. Speed
Top Two Thirds ×                            0.183       0.029           ‐1.76            0.16         14.52
 Detailed Treatment                        (0.241)     (0.046)         (6.80)           (0.16)       (16.02)

Bottom Third ×                              0.288       0.071          18.47            0.46**       49.34*
 Detailed Treatment                        (0.457)     (0.074)        (11.89)           (0.23)       (29.78)

Top Two Thirds                             ‐0.017       0.067          12.09            0.047         16.80
                                           (0.340)     (0.059)         (7.14)           (0.13)       (16.02)

p‐value: Interaction Terms Equal            0.838       0.630          0.140            0.291         0.304

                                                                       C. Accuracy
Top Two Thirds ×                            0.245       0.032           5.89             0.12        29.93*
 Detailed Treatment                        (0.238)     (0.046)         (6.91)           (0.10)       (16.94)

Bottom Third ×                              0.111       0.067          ‐1.44             0.54          8.97
 Detailed Treatment                        (0.467)     (0.074)        (11.14)           (0.40)       (25.51)

Top Two Thirds                             ‐0.274       0.022          ‐5.73            ‐0.02         ‐9.95
                                           (0.360)     (0.061)        (10.16)           (0.11)       (22.29)

p‐value: Interaction Terms Equal                0.798      0.689         0.577           0.312           0.494
Coarse Evaluation Mean                          1.346      0.416         26.95            2.34           54.36
Observations                                     644        644           644             644             644
Notes: Each column in each panel presents the results of a separate regression of the dependent variable
indicated by the column on the variables listed in the first column. Only workers who obtained a rating of at
least four in an experimental job are included. Employment outcomes are calculated for the two months after
the experiment; all experimental jobs and earnings are excluded. Huber‐White standard errors are in
parentheses. One asterisk indicates the coefficient is significant at the 10% level and two asterisks indicate
the coefficient is significant at the 5% level. The "Coarse Evaluation Mean" row presents the mean of the
dependent variables for workers in the coarse evaluation treatment who received a rating of at least four.




                                                                 56
           Appendix Table 4. The Effects of the Treatments on Application Patterns
                       During the Two Months After the Experiment

                                        Sent Any Application             Applications Sent
                                                (1)                             (2)

                                                           A. Treatment Job
Treatment Job                                 0.238**                         23.96**
                                              (0.014)                          (2.18)

Previous Job                                  0.337**                         30.37**
                                              (0.013)                          (1.89)

Control Group Mean                             0.703                              25.90
Observations                                   3,767                              3,767

                                                         B. Detailed Evaluation
Detailed Treatment                             ‐0.007                              0.57
                                               (0.016)                            (5.30)

Coarse Evaluation Mean                               0.963                        53.12
Observations                                          644                          644
Notes: Panel A presents the results from regressing an indicator for whether the worker sent at
least one application in the two months after the experiment and the number of applications
she sent on indicators for receiving a treatment job and having prior oDesk experience. Panel B
presents the results of regressing the same dependent variables on an indicator for being in
the detailed evaluation treatment. The regressions in Panel B only include workers who
obtained a rating of at least four in an experimental job. Huber‐White standard errors are in
parentheses. No applications to experimental jobs are included in any regression. Two
asterisks indicate the coefficient is significant at the 5% level. The "Control Group Mean" row
presents the mean of the dependent variables for the entire control group; the "Coarse
Evaluation Mean" row presents the mean of the dependent variables for workers in the coarse
evaluation treatment who received a rating of at least four.




                                                                57
                             Appendix Table 5. The Effects of the Treatment on the Types of Jobs Applied to
                                             During the Two Months After the Experiment

                                           A. Independent Variable =           B. Independent Variable =           C. Mean of Dependent
                                         Indicator for Either Treatment           Indicator for Detailed            Variable for Control
                                                     Group                       Evaluation Treatment                     Group
Hourly Job                                            0.015                               ‐0.005                           0.754
                                                     (0.011)                             (0.018)

Number of Applicants                                14.670**                            ‐2.153                               146
                                                     (5.115)                            (9.342)

Data Entry                                          0.087**                              0.008                              0.428
                                                    (0.019)                             (0.033)

Preference for English Ability                      0.020**                             ‐0.003                              0.181
                                                    (0.005)                             (0.007)

Preference for Number of oDesk                      0.014**                             ‐0.003                              0.123
Hours                                               (0.004)                             (0.005)

Preference for Level of oDesk                       0.018**                             ‐0.002                              0.146
Feedback                                            (0.004)                             (0.006)

Preference for Maximum Wage                         0.014**                             ‐0.005                              0.094
below $5                                            (0.003)                             (0.004)

Preference for Minimum Wage                         0.008**                              0.000                              0.058
above $3                                            (0.002)                             (0.003)

Observations                                        114,082                             34,389                               72,919
Notes: Each cell in Panels A and B presents the results from a separate regression of the variable in the first column on an indicator for
being in either treatment group (Panel A) or an indicator for being in the detailed evaluation treatment (Panel B). Observations are
applications sent in the two months after the experiment; applications to experimental jobs are excluded. The regressions in Panel A
include applications sent by all experimental workers and control for whether workers have prior oDesk experience. The regressions in
Panel B only include applications sent by workers who obtained a rating of at least four in an experimental job and add no controls.
Standard errors are clustered by worker. Two asterisks indicate the coefficient is significant at the 5% level. Each cell in Panel C provides
the mean of the variable in the first column for the control group.




                                                                      58
                 Appendix Table 6. The Effects of the Treatments on Application Success
                 Dependent Variable: Indicator that an Application was Successful × 100

                                             (1)                       (2)                     (3)

                                                              A. Treatment Job
Treatment Job                               ‐0.330                   0.164                  0.361**
                                           (0.244)                  (0.187)                 (0.178)

Previous Job                               2.026**                   0.900**                0.774**
                                           (0.236)                   (0.180)                (0.202)

Control Group Mean                          4.04                      4.04                    4.04
Observations                              114,082                    114,082                114,082

                                                            B. Detailed Evaluation
Detailed Treatment                          0.295                    0.312                   0.227
                                           (0.339)                  (0.245)                 (0.220)

Coarse Evaluation Mean                      2.63                      2.63                    2.63
Observations                               34,389                    34,389                  34,389

Job Characteristics                             No                       Yes                     Yes
Employer Fixed Effects                          No                       Yes                     Yes
Worker Characteristics                          No                       No                      Yes
Notes: Each column in Panel A presents the results of regressing an indicator for a given job application
being successful multiplied by 100 on indicators for the worker being in any treatment group and having
prior oDesk experience. Each column in Panel B presents the results of regressing the same dependent
variable on an indicator for the worker being in the detailed evaluation treatment. Observations are
applications sent in the two months after the experiment; applications to experimental jobs are
excluded. The regressions in Panel B only include applications sent by workers who obtained a rating of
at least four in an experimental job. The regressions in Column 1 include no controls. The regressions in
Column 2 control for the variables in the first column of Appendix Table 5 and employer fixed effects. The
regressions in Column 3 add worker characteristics measured before the experiment: controsl for the
tests the worker took (dummies for passing one test, two or three tests, and four or more tests, an
indicator for having taken the most popular skills test among the sample, and an indicator for passing it),
the number of qualifications the worker had (dummies for listing two to four qualifications and five or
more qualifications), the number of oDesk applications the worker sent before the experiment (dummies
for having sent three to five, six to 15, 16 to 50, 51 to 100, and over 100 applications), the wage proposed
for the experimental job (dummies for offering $1 to $1.99, $2 to $2.99, and exactly $3), the number of
jobs the worker had before the experiment, and an indicator for being in the second experimental wave.
Column 3 also controls for the wage the worker proposed for the current job (dummies for offering $1 to
$1.99, $2 to $2.99, exactly $3, and more than $3). Standard errors are clustered by worker. Two asterisks
indicate the coefficient is significant at the 5% level. The "Control Group Mean" row presents the mean of
the dependent variable for the entire control group; the "Coarse Evaluation Mean" row presents the
mean of the dependent variable for workers in the coarse evaluation treatment who received a rating of
at least four.




                                                                59
