NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE OPTIMAL INFLATION RATE
IN AN OVERLAPPING-GENERATIONS
ECONOMY WITH LAND

Bennett T. McCallum

Working Paper No. 1892

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1986

Paper prepared for the Austin, Texas, conference of May 23-24,
1985, on New Approaches to Monetary Economics. I am indebted to
Andrew Abel, Rao Aiyagari, Martin Eichenbaum, and John Whitaker for
helpful discussions and to George Akerlof, John Taylor, and an anonymous referee for comments. Financial support by the National
Science Foundation (SES 84-08691) is gratefully acknowledged. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs in
Economic Fluctuations and in Financial Markets and Monetary

Economics.

Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1892
April 1986

The Optimal Inflation Rate in an OverlappingGenerations Economy with Land

ABSTRACT
This

paper is concerned with the optimal inflation rate in an

overlapping—generations economy in which (i) aggregate output is constrajned

by a standard neoclassical production function with diminishing marginal

products for both capital and labor and (ii) the transaction-facilitating
services of money are represented by means of a money—in—the—utility—function

specification. With monetary injections provided by lump-sum transfers, the
famous Chicago Rule prescription for monetary growth is necessary for Pareto
optimality but a competitive equilibrium may fail to be Pareto optimal with that

rule in force because of capital overaccumulation. The latter possibility does

not exist, however, if the economy includes an asset that is productive and
non—reproducible——i.e., if the economy is one with land. As this conclusion is

independent of the monetary aspects of the model, it is argued that the
possibility of capital overaccumulation should not be regarded as a matter of
theoretical concern, even in the absence of government debt, intergenerational
altruism, and social security systems or other "social contrivances."

Bennett

T. McCallum
Graduate School of Industrial
Admini stration

Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
(412)

268-2347

I. Introduction
Most of the

existing analyses of the optimal inflation rate1 that have been
carried out in models with finite—lived individuals have reached conclusions

that seem to contradict the famous "Chicago Rule" for optimal monetary
growth.2 An exception is provided by McCallum (1983, p. 38), which suggests

that analysis of overlapping-generations models is supportive of the Chicago
Rule provided that these models take account of the transaction—facilitating
(i.e., medium of exchange) services of money.3 More specifically, it is shown
that, in a version of the Wallace (1980) model amended to reflect the existence

of monetary transaction services, Pareto optimality of a stationary competitive

equilibrium requires a rate of deflation equal to the marginal product of
capital.,4 That particular model is one in which the marginal product of capital

does not vary with capital intensity, however, and might consequently be
judged inappropriate for analysis of this issue.5 One leading purpose of the
present paper, accordingly, is to reexamine the optimal inflation issue within a
specification that incorporates a standard neoclassical production function with
diminishing marginal productivity for both capital and labor inputs.

The investigation confirms that, within an overlapping-generations (OG)

framework of the specified type, the Chicago Rule is indeed necessary for
Pareto optimaljty. The analysis also indicates, however, that Pareto optimality
may fail to obtain for a reason not considered in my previous discussion,
namely, overaccumulation of capital.

In particular, the steady—state net

marginal product of capital (MPK) may exceed the rate of population growth, in

the manner emphasized in the famous paper by Diamond (1965).6 Because of
this possibility, then, it is not valid to conclude that competitive equilibria will
be Pareto optimal (in OG models with transaction—facilitating money) provided

merely that the Chicago Rule prescription for monetary growth is obeyed.

1

A second major purpose of the present paper, accordingly, is to show that

the possibility of capital overaccumulation does not exist7 if the economy in
question is one that includes a positive quantity of an asset that is
productive and non—reproducible——i.e., in an economy with land.

As this

conclusion is independent of the monetary aspects of the model economy, and
since all actual market economies do in fact include such assets, it follows that

the possibility of capital overaccumulation should not be regarded as a matter

of concern, even in the absence of government debt, intergenerational
altruism, and social security systems or other "social contrivances."

The paper's emphasis on this last—mentioned result should not be
interpreted as a claim that it has never before been recognized by an
economist. In fact, there are brief passages in papers by Samuelson (1958, p.
481) and Stiglitz (1974, p. 139) that indicate recognition of the impossibility of

capital overaccumulation.8 But the point has received very little attention in
the literature of monetary and macro economics, which includes various results

that are overturned by its recognition. It would seem, accordingly, that some
emphasis——as well as the exposition of an elementary proof——is warranted.

There are, of course, good reasons for being interested in analysis based

on different assumptions than ours concerning taxes9 and/or the optimality
criterion.10 Both tradition and the inherent logic of economic analysis speak

in favor, however, of addressing the issue initially with the Pareto criterion
and in a setting that is free of distortions due to income taxes and the like.

The organization of the paper is as follows.

In Section II the basic

monetary model——with a neoclassical production function but no land——is
specified and the conditions characterizing competitive equilibrium are derived.

Next, in Section III conditions sufficient for a Pareto optimum are obtained and

compared with those achieved as an automatic consequence of competitive
2

behavior. Then in Section IV the model is extended to recognize the existence

of land and the Pareto optimality analysis is conducted. Finally, in Section V
some general conclusions are offered.

3

II. An OG Model with Money

As indicated above, our object is to consider the optimal money growth
issue in an OG model with a specification that reflects the

transaction—facilitating services of money and, consequently, that asset's
distinctive role as a medium of exchange.1' For reasons argued at length in
McCallum (1983), it is my judgement that this can be accomplished more
satisfactorily by means of a specification of the money_in—the—utility—function

(MIUF) type than by available alternatives.'2 Actually, my argument is for a
specification in which agents derive utility only from consumption and leisure,

but in which an agent's shopping time necessary to obtain consumption goods

is reduced by holding increased amounts of real money balances (up to some
satiation level) so that larger balances enable him to consume larger quantities

of goods and/or leisure. For present purposes, however, it will suffice simply
to adopt a MIUF assumption,'3 keeping in mind that there is some quantity of
real balances——presumably a function of planned consumption——that will result

in a zero marginal utility for the services provided by those balances.

The first ingredient in our model, then, is a lifetime utility function for
two—period—lived agents born in t, which we write as
(1)

u(ct,xt÷i,mt+i).
is consumption when old, and mt+l is

Here ct is consumption when young,

real money balances (after transfers) at the start of old age. It is assumed
that u has first and second partial derivatives ul, U2, U3, and ull, u22, U33
< 0, U22 < 0, and U33 ' 0. It is also
0,
satisfying u > 0, u > 0, U3
assumed that Inada—like properties pertain to consumption when young and

old, so that agents will always choose positive amounts of c and xt4l, but
that U3 can be driven to zero for some value of mt÷1, denoted

4

These agents are endowed with one unit of labor when young, which they
supply inelastically, and none when old.

The second main ingredient of the model is a production function
(2)

f(nt,kt)

=

that is accessible to old persons. Here t is output by an old person in t, nt
is the number of manhours that he employs in t from young persons, and kt
is the quantity of capital that he saved when young (in period t-l). It is
assumed that f is homogenous of degree one and entirely well—behaved: f1 >
0, f2 > 0, f11 < 0,. f22 < 0, and Inada properties prevail.

The agents described by (1) and (2) live in an ongoing economy in which
the rate of population growth is v, in which there are competitive markets for

labor, output, capital, and loans, and in which the only governmental activity

is the injection of lump—sum monetary transfers to old agents. The real
quantity of such transfers to an old person during period t is denoted Vt.
Therefore, if we let t be the money price of output and let Mt be the nominal
money stock per old person after transfers in period t, then the government
budget identity can be written in per—old—person terms as
(3)

vtPt = Mt

Furthermore,
so that l+p
(4)

—

(i4-v-

Mt_i.

if t denotes the rate of growth of the aggregate money

stock,

(1+v)Mt/Mt....i, we also have

(i+Uj-)Mf_1 — Mi-_i

ui-mi-—i

(i+v)

(i+v)(l+lTt_1)

t

l+ir Pt÷i/Pt defines the inflation rate, rt. Note that the definitions
of
and 'r imply that in a steady state, with constant values of the growth
rates of all variables, we would have l+,r
where

5

In this setting, the behavior of a private agent born in t can be modelled
by maximizing u(ct,xt+l,mt+i) subject to the budget constraints faced when
young and old. With wt denoting the real wage rate in t, these constraints
can be written as 14

(5) w=c+
where

kt+1+t,

Et denotes real money balances held at the end of t, and

(6) f(nt÷i,kt+i) + (l—6)kt÷i —

15

w+n+ + v tPt/Pt÷i x+].

Also relevant, of course, is the identity
mt÷1 =

(7)

v--j + EtPt/Pt+i.

The first-order optimality conditions for this problem include (5)—(7) and the
following:

u2(ct,xt+1,mt.i.1) [f2(nt÷1,kt÷1) + 1—6]

ui(ct,xt+i,mt+i)

(8)
(9)

u3(ct,xt+1,mt+1)Pt/Pt+1 =

ul(ct,xt+1,nit+1)—u2(ct,xt+1,mt+1)Pt/Pt÷1

(10) fi(nt+i,kt+i) =

These determine the agent's decisions regarding ct, kt÷1, Et

mt+1, nt+i and

as functions of vt+i. and the prices faced parametrically.

For a condition of equilibrium, we also require (3) and the following
equalities
(11)

nt÷i.

1-4-v

(12) f(nt,kt) + (l—6)kt
Here

the

(11) equates

=

x

÷ (l+v)ct + (1+v)kt+i.

demand and supply of labor (per old person) while (12) is

overall resource constraint, also in per—old—person terms.

Those three

equations, in conjunction with (5)—(10), are adequate in number to govern the

behavior

of ct, kt+i, t, mt÷1, nt+1, xtA.l, vt wt, and t for an exogenously

specified

time path of the

policy variable Mt (or jt)

6

For analysis of steady—state conditions, with a constant

p,

the

foregoing system can be simplified to the following:
c +k+

(13)

fi(1+v,k) =

(14)

f(1+v,k) + (1—6)k

(15)

ul(c,x,ln)
U2 (c, x, in)

(16)

=

1(1+,k)(1÷) + v +

f2(1+v,k)

E/(1r)

x

+

ff2(1÷v,k) + 1—6] (1+7r) — 1

(17)

in

=v +

f'IO\
"jul

V

—
—

(19)

1+n =

Mm

(l+v)(1+,T)

(l+p)/(l÷v)

These determine c, k, x, , m, v, and r as functions of the money stock and
population

growth rates p and

v.

7

III. Conditions for Pareto Optimality

Our next step is to derive conditions relating to the attainment of Pareto

optimality and to determine what inflation rate will permit these to be
satisfied. Analytically, our approach will be to maximize the utility of a
member of one generation subject to con8trained value8 of the utility of
members of all later generations, as well as the social feasibility requirements.
Supposing that the date at which this calculation is made is t 1, the Pareto
problem is then to maximize u(c,xi,mi) subject to

t 1,2,...,
u(ct,xt4i,mt+i) = uj*
where the u,* are unknown solution values, and to
(20)

f(1+v,kt) + (1—6)kt =

(21)

for

t

(22)

Li =

(1+v)ct + (1+v)kt+i,

To find conditions sufficient for optimality, we formulate

1,2,....

Lagrangian

+

the

expression

u(c,x,nq)
+

÷ f

t= 1

Xt[f(1+v,kt)+(1—6)ktxt(1+v)ct(1+v)kt+1]
t=i

For simplicity, let us introduce the notation Ujt uj(ct,xt÷1,mt+1) and
f(nt,kt). The implied first—order conditions are then as follows, for t 1,2,...:
0

Xt(il-v)

(23a)

Otult —

(23b)

Otu2t — Xt÷1 = 0

(23c) Otu3t

0

(23d) At+1[f2t÷i + 1—61 —

(i+ii)Xt

=

0.

In addition, we have (20) and (21) plus
(24a)

u2(cO,X1,ml) — A1 = 0

(24b)

u3(cO,X1,ml)

0

and the traneversality condition'6

8

(25) ,m Xt+i kt÷2

0

All of these would more appropriately be expressed as two—part Kuhn—Tucker

conditions, reflecting the non—negativity of most of the model's variables, but

our assumptions on u and f are adequate to ensure that positive values will
be relevant and that the simpler equalities can be used.
To determine whether the foregoing conditions will be satisfied by a
competitive equilibrium, we refer back to equations (5)—(12) in

the previous
section. Doing so, we immediately see that the only possibilities for failure

involve (23c), (24b), and (25). For the first of these to be satisfied, it must
be the case——as we see from equations (8) and (9)——that t/fj equals 2t+1 +
1—6. That requirement can be reexpresesed as
(26)

Pi-—Pt+i = 2t÷1

—

6

t÷ 1

which is, of course, precisely the Chicago Rule prescription that the rate of
deflation be equated to the (net) marginal product of capital.'7 Condition
(24b) will obtain, moreover, if the Chicago Rule held in the past-—and
otherwise dictates the value of M1.

Thus we see that inflation at the Chicago—Rule rate is necessary for
Pareto optimality.

Since the discussion of Weiss (1980) might appear to deny

this, a brief word of explanation may be useful. The basic point is that
Weiss's assumptions concerning the utility function imply that u3t, the
marginal service yield of real money balances, is strictly positive for all
values of mt+1. Thus the possibility of monetary satiation is precluded by
assumption, with the consequence that Weiss's model is one in which no
Pareto—optimal equilibrium can exist. That this aspect of his specification
makes Weiss's model inapplicable to issues regarding Pareto optimality has
been recognized by Abel (1984)——whose own optimality criterion is more
9

demanding--and by Park (1986).

It cannot be conclud?d, however, that a policy of creating money and

inflation in accordance with the Chicago Rule is sufficient for Pareto
optimality, for that rule does not guarantee satisfaction of the transversality

condition (25). A simple way of seeing that point is to rearrange (23d) as
follows:

(27)

Xt+i = (1+v)A.j-

f2t+1+1—ö
Consider, then, the limiting behavior of At as the system approaches a steady
state

that

with

a constant value of kt÷i

1+, > f2 +

1—6,

k.

Clearly,

if

the

steady—state k is

such

the transversality condition (25) will not be satisfied and

the possibility of Pareto non—optimality will be introduced.

In fact, in this

case the economy's parameters are such that the competitive equilibrium leads

to a steady state with capital overaccumulation, so the equilibrium will not be

Pareto optimal despite adherence by the monetary authority to the Chicago
Rule prescription.

This "market failure" is, of course, the same as that

featured in the analyses of Diamond (1965), Cass and Yaari (1967), and Phelps
(1966).

10

IV. Extension to an Economy with Land

Reflection upon the nature of the capital overaccumulation phenomenon
suggests, however, that a crucial feature of reality has been omitted from the
model at hand. In particular, the reason for the phenomena's possible
occurrence is simply that, as expressed by Case and Yaari (1967, P. 251), "at

efficient rates of interest consumers may want to hold more real assets than
are available in the existing capital stock" (plus, in the present case, the real
But in an economy with land——a non—reproducible,
money stock).
non-depreciating, and productive asset--this possibility can not obtain, for the

real exchange value of land can and will be as large as is needed to
accommodate desired private saving at an efficient rate of interest.

To demonstrate the validity of this claim, we now modify the model of
previous sections by changing the per—capita production function to

't = f(nt,kt,*t)

(2')
where

is land

employed by a producer——an old agent——in t and where f

again homogeneous of degree one and well—behaved. In addition, it

is

is assumed

the economy (i.e., f and u) is capable of attaining a unique steady state
and that its dynamics are such that this steady state will be approached as
time passes.'8
that

With this modification, the budget constraints for an agent born in t
become

(5')

w c + kt+i

+ Et +

qtt+l

and

(6')

f(nt÷i,kt÷i,St÷i) ÷ (l—6)kt+i —

+v4. + EtPt/Pt÷i +

qt+ist+i

w4nj

x.fj

where q is the real price in period t of a unit of land.

11

The private

opt.imality conditions then become (5'), (6'), and (7')19 plus

(8')

uj = u2t(f2t÷l + 1—6)

(9')

U3t Pt/Pt+i =

uj — u2tPt/Pt+1

(10') it÷i = w.--j
and

also

(28)

uj

u2t(f3t÷1 +

qt÷i)/qt

For competitive equilibrium, we require satisfaction of (5')—(lO'), (28), the

budget

government

constraint

(3),

and

the

following

three

supply-equal-demand conditions:

(11') n+]. =

1+v

(12') f(nt,kt,tt) ÷ (16)kt = xj + (1+v)ct + (1+v)kt÷i
(29)

The

St+i =

last of these expresses an equality between the quantity of land

demanded and supplied per old person with

the land to old person ratio in

period 0. The 11 mentioned equations determine (for a given path of Mt or

itt) the values of ct, kt+i, 't+i, nt+i t, mt+i, xj., vt, w, Pt, and q.
Next we turn to the Pareto problem. In the present case it should be
clear that the relevant Lagrangian expression is
(30)

u(c,xi,mi) +
t=i
+ Xt[f(1+v,kt,So/(i+v)t)
Li

+

(1—6)kt—xt—(1+v)ct—(i+v)kt÷1]

t= 1

and that the first—order and transversality conditions are as follows:
(31a)

etuit —

At(1÷v)

(31b) BtU2t —

Xt÷i

(31c) Otu3t

0

= 0

= 0

12

(31d) At÷i[f2t÷l + 1t5J —

Xl

(32a)

U2(CO,Xi,Ifll) —

(32b)

U3(cO,X1,]nl) = 0

(33) m
As

Xt÷lkt+2

(i+v)At

0

= U

= 0.

in the previous section, it is easy to see that the Chicago

(34) Pf—Pf÷1 = 12t+1

Rule condition

—

t+i

must hold, and also that the behavior of At can be expressed as

(35) Xt÷l = (l+v)

2t+1

+

1—6

But the latter can now, in view of (28), alternatively be written as
(36)

Xj--i = (1+v)gjAt

f3++q+

Since the economy approaches a steady state, the limiting behavior of Xt+i/Xt

can be deduced from the limiting behavior of the right—hand side of (36). To
the evaluation of that expression we accordingly turn our attention.

In a steady state yt/kt must be constant, with the values of the
denominator and numerator each proportional to (i+v)(01.)t where

is a

positive fraction such that aggregate (not per capita) output grows according
to (1f.)at. 20 The steady state condition also requires thai factor shares be
constant, 21 so from the capital share expresion f2tkt/yt we see that f2t—-i.e.,

the marginal product of capital—-must be constant. The share of land, by
contrast, is f3tt/yt from which we deduce that 3t grows in the steady state

according to 3t f3Ø (1+v)at. Finally, with t constant, the labor—share
expression ftnt/yj. implies that wt it grows at the same (negative) rate as
yt——i.e., that wt it f10(l+v)(a1)t.
13

Continuing with the implications of steady state growth, we refer to
equation (12'), the economy's overall resource constraint. Since the left—hand

side grows like (l÷)(c)t, so must each term on the right—hand side—-which

implies that c/x1 is constant with numerator and denominator each growing

like (l+)(1)t. Inspection of (5') or (6') then indicates that the product qS
must grow like (l+)(1)t which in turn implies that qj behaves, in the
steady state, according to qj

qo(l+v)at.

From the foregoing, then, we can write the steady state value of the
right—hand side of (36) as
(37)

f3o(l+v)a(t)+qo(1+v)a(t+l)
where
know

(1+v)1

=

(1+v)g(1+v)t

f30 +

qo

g,

(l+,)ct has been cancelled from the latter expression.

that kt÷i/kt

But we also

(1+v)°1 in the steady state. Consequently, the steady

state behavior of At÷lkt+2 is given by
(38) Xt÷ikt +.
Atkt÷i

= ________
13Q + qo

But with f30 > 0, as assumed, the right—hand side of (38) is a positive fraction

which implies that the limiting behavior of Xt+lkt+2 is to approach 0 as t *
This guarantees that the transversality condition (33) is satisfied. Thus all of

the sufficient conditions for Pareto optimality are satisfied by the competitive

equilibrium in the economy under discussion provided only that the money
growth rate is such as to produce the Chicago Rule rate of inflation that
induces satiation in real money balances.22'23

14

V. Conclusions

The foregoing line of argument is straightforward enough that a summary
should be redundant. Instead, we conclude with a few observations on the
assumptions utilized and then on the significance of the main result.

Throughout the foregoing discussion, it has been implicitly assumed that

the economy under consideration does not benefit from technical progress. It
would appear, however, that a simple modification of the proof employed would

remain applicable in the presence of technical progress so long as the latter

is of a type that will accommodate a steady state. What then of the
assumption that steady state growth is feasible? It is my guess that that
condition too is unnecessary for the result, but this guess is at present only
that——I do not have a line of attack to propose for the more general case.

Mention should perhaps be made of the possibility of multiple solution
paths,24 which may obtain even under conditions implying a unique steady
state.

In a very useful and somewhat neglected paper, Calvo (1978) has
shown that multiple solutions-—bubble paths converging to the steady
state——are possible in a model with land but no capital or money, and it seems

clear that similar solution paths would also be possible in the model of Section

IV. As long as these pathè approach a steady state, however, their existence
will not invalidate our argument.25

As for the significance of our results, the main point regarding monetary
theory is simply that the insights expressed in the Chicago Rule are applicable

even to economies without infinite-lived agents. It could be added--at the
risk of belaboring the obvious-—that the Rule would remain applicable if the

economy's money paid interest; the optimum would then require not a zero
nominal rate of interest on non—monetary assets, however, but a nominal rate
equal to that paid on money.
15

In

terms

of

the

capital

accumulation

issue,

our

result——that

overaccumulation is precluded by the presence of land——can readily be seen to

obtain whether or not the economy is one with a medium of exchange.
Consequently, it suggests that conclusions of a non—monetary type that
require the possibility of overaccumulation should be reconsidered (at best).26
As a prominent example, consider the argument developed in the final sections
of Samuelson's original OG paper (1958, pp. 476—482). Evidently, these sections

are intended to suggest that Samuelson's OG model provides analytical support

for the notion that social "compacts" or "contrivances"——over and above the
existence of markets——are apt to be necessary to avoid Pareto suboptimality in

laissez faire economies that go on indefinitely.27 That this suggestion is not

overturned by relaxation of the assumption that all goods are highly
perishable is implied by Diamond's (1965) demonstration that inefficient
steady—state equilibria may exist in his model, a result that is in this respect
a generalization of Samuelson's.

But the analysis of the present paper

indicates that this type of inefficiency——capital overaccuinulation in a
competitive economy free from tax distortions——requires the assumed absence

of assets like land, an assumption that seems decidedly counterfactual and
analytically inappropriate.

16

References

Abel, Andrew B., "Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy in Overlapping
Generations Models," Harvard University, Working Paper, December 1984.

Barro, Robert J., "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political
Economy 82 (November/December 1974), 1095.4117,

Burmeister, Edwin. Capital Theory and Dynamics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1980.
Calvo, Guillerino A., "On the Indeterminacy of Interest Ratea and Wages with

Perfect Foresight," Journal of Economic Theory 19 (December 1978),
321—337.

Calvo, Gufflermo A, and Maurice Obatfeld, "Optimal Time—Consistent Fiscal

Policy with Uncertain Lifetimes," NBER Working Paper No. 1593, March
1985.

Cass, David, and Menahem E. Yaari, "Individual Saving, Aggregate Capital
Accumulation, and Efficient Growth." In Essays on the Theory of Optimal
Economic Growth, edited by K. Shell. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press,
1967.

Diamond, Peter A., "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model," American
Economic Review 55 (December 1965), 1126—1150.

Drazen, Allan, "Inflation and Capital Accumulation under a Finite Horizon,"
Journal of Monetary Economics 8 (March 1981), 247—260.

Feenstra, Robert C., "Functional Equivalence Between Liquidity Costs and the
Utility of Money," Columbia University, Working Paper, March 1985.

Friedman, Milton, A Program for Monetary Stability.

New York:

Fordham

University Press, 1960.

Friedman, Milton, The Optimum Quantity of Money and Other Essays. Chicago:
Aldine, 1969.

17

Helpman, Elhanan, and Efraim Sadka," Optimal Financing of the Government's
Budget: Taxes, Bonds, or Money?" American Economic Review 69 (March
1979), 152—160.

Marty, Alvin L., "Gurley and Shaw on Money in a Theory of Finance," Journal
of Political Economy 69 (February 1961), 56—62.

McCallum, Bennett T., "The Role of Overlapping—Generations Models in Monetary

Economics," Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 18
(Spring 1983), 9—44.

McCailum, Bennett T., "Some Issues Concerning Interest Rate Pegging, Price

Level Determinacy, and the Real Bills Doctrine," Journal of Monetary
Economics 17 (January 1986), forthcoming.

Meade, J.E., The Growing Economy. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company, 1968.

Meltzer, Allan H., and Scott F. Richard, "Debt and Taxes with Endogenous
Population, Or Why Public Social Security Systems are Prone to Crises,"
Carnegie—Mellon University, Working Paper, April 1985.

Niehans, Jurg, The Theory of Money.

Baltimore:

The Johns Hopkins

University Press, 1978.
Park, Wookyu, "Two Essays on Shopping Time Technology Monetary Economics,"
Ph.D. Thesis, Carnegie—Mellon University, 1986.

Phelps, Edmund S., Golden Rules of Economic Growth. New York: W.W. Norton
& Co., 1966.

Samuelson, Paul A., "An Exact Consumption—Loan Model of Interest With or
Without the Social Contrivance of Money," Journal of Political Economy 66
(December 1958), 467—482.

18

Samuelson, Paul A., "A Turnpike Refutation of the Golden Rule in a
Welfare-Maximizing Many—Year Plan,t' in Essays on the Theory of Optimal
Economic Growth, edited by K. Shell. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1967.

Samuelson, Paul A., "The Two Part Golden Rule Deduced as the Asymptotic
Turnpike of Catenary Motions," Western Economic Journal (March 1968),

Scheinknian, Jose, "Notes on Asset Trading in an Overlapping Generations
Model," Working Paper, 1980.

Solow, Robert M., "Intergenerational Equity and Exhaustible Resources," Review
of Economic Studies (Symposium, 1974), 29—45.

Stein, Jerome L., Money and Capacity Growth. New York: Columbia University
Press, 1971.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., "Growth with Exhaustible Natural Resources:

The

Competitive Economy," Review of Economic Studies (Symposium, 1974),
139—152.

Tirole, Jean, "Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations," Econometrica 53
(September 1985), 1071—1100.

Wallace, Neil, "The Overlapping Generations Model of Fiat Money," in Models of

Monetary Economics, edited by J.H. Kareken and N. Wallace. Minneapolis:
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 1980.

Weiss, Laurence, "The Effects of Money Supply on Economic Welfare in the
Steady State," Econometrica 48 (April 1980), 565—576.

Weitzman, Martin L., "Duality Theory for Infinite Horizon Convex Models,"
Management Science 19 (March 1973), 783—789.

Woodford, Michael, "Interest and Prices in a Cash—in—Advance Economy,"
Working Paper, February 1985.

19

Footnotes

1. This issue, also referred to under the heading of the "optimum quantity of
money," is of course concerned with the optimal average rate of inflation over

an extended period of time. Consequently, it abstracts entirely from matters
concerned with cyclical fluctuations.

2. An incomplete but representative list of examples includes Stein (1971),
Helpman and Sadka (1979), Wallace (1980), Weiss (1980), Drazen (1981), and
Woodford (1985).
3.

The main purpose of McCallum (1983) is to argue that those special

overlapping—generations models (or other models!) that fail to take account of
the transaction—facilitating services of money are highly inappropriate vehicles

for monetary analysis, i.e., for analysis in which it is necessary to distinguish

between assets that serve as a medium of exchange and those that do not.
Further discussion of the issue is presented in McCallum (1986).
4.

This rule, which received its most famous exposition in Friedman (1969),

was mentioned earlier by Friedman (1960, p. 73) and given a very clear
statement by Marty (1961, P. 57). It has been termed the Chicago Rule by
Niehans (1978, p. 93) and Weiss (1980). The discussion here and throughout

the present paper assumes that monetary injections are made by way of
lump—sum transfers to old agents.

5. That a variable marginal product of capital is crucial in this context has
apparently been suggested by Weiss (1980, p. 970).
6.

It has, of course, been pointed out by Barro (1974) that Diamond's result

presumes the absence of operative intergenerational transfers. Throughout
the present paper such an absence is taken for granted, not because I believe

that to be a particularly realistic assumption, but in order to consider its
implications for the optimality of the Chicago Rule. For the same reason, the
20

possibility

that population growth might be endogenous--as considered by

Meltzer and Richard (1985)——is ignored. For an introduction to the concept of
capital overaccumulation, see Burmeister (1980, pp. 57—74).

7. Even in the absence of intergenerational altruism, social security systems,
and government debt.

8. An ambitious recent paper by Tirole (1985), which is devoted primarily to
an investigation of the possibility of asset—price bubbles, considers a version
of the Diamond model extended to include rents. Much of the analysis assumes

that the aggregate quantity of rent is exogenously fixed, an assumption that
leads to some conclusions that do not pertain to an economy with a fixed stock
of land.

(Tirole's Proposition 2, for example, seems to be inapplicable to the

economy described in the present paper.) In one place, Tirole mentions the
possibility that rents could grow at the rate of population growth in which

case "a perfect foresight equilibrium must be efficient" (1985, p.1079), a
conclusion that is similar in spirit to mine. He does not, however, consider a
specification in which land, an asset fixed in total quantity, appears as a
useful input to the productive process for aggregate output. Thus, his
analysis provides no reason for believing that rents will tend to grow at the
same rate as output——and in that sense does not include my result as a
special case. A similar statement also applies to a much earlier but
unpublished paper by Scheinkman (1980), which emphasizes the implausibility

of capital overaccumulation. I am indebted to Olivier Blanchard for calling my

attention to Tirole's paper.
9. Helpman and Sadka (1980) assume that labor and capital returns are taxed

at flat rate8 in a setting otherwise similar to mine.
10.

Notable discussions of the appropriate criterion have been provided by

Sainuelson (1967)(1968), Abel (1984), Calvo and Obstfeld (1985), and others.

21

11. An extensive discussion of the issue in an OG model in which money"
does not provide transaction—facilitating services to its holders is given by
Wallace (1980).
12.

Cash—in—advance models amount to a special case of shopping-time or

MIUF models. For a useful recent discussion of some ways of recognizing the
transaction services of money see Feenstra (1985).
13.

Related analysis focussing explicitly on the shopping time specification

has been conducted by Park (1986).
14.

Strictly speaking, (5) and (6) should be written as inequalities.

Throughout the paper, however, we shall simplify by using equalities when the
conditions of the problem imply that they will hold as such in equilibrium.
15.

The possibility of making loans to (or borrowing from) other individuals

of the same generation is not made explicit in (6) because the equilibrium
quantity of such loans will be zero for each individual, as they are all alike.
The existence of an (inactive) loan market is assumed, however, and justifies
the form of condition (8), which implies that the (common) real rate of return
on capital and loans is taken exogenously by each individual.
16.

That the transversality condition and first—order conditions are jointly

sufficient for optimality in a setting such as this one is well-known from the
work of Weitzman (1973) and others. The first—order conditions are also
necessary.

17. That the deflation rate is here measured as (Pt—Pt÷i)/Pt+i rather than
(Pt-Pt+i)/Pt is an unimportant manifestation of our discrete-time framework.
18.

These assumptions make the situation with respect to existence,

uniqueness, and stability similar to that presumed by Diamond (1965, p. 1134).

Some comments on these assumptions will be provided below in Section V.

With a fixed total stock of land, the assumed possibility of a steady state
22

comes close to a requirement that f is Cobb—Douglas, a fact mentioned in a
different but related context by Solow (1974).

19. Here (7') is simply a new label for equation (7).
20.

If the production function is Cobb—Douglas with factor exponents of

a, and a3

(for

a,

nt kt, and St, respectively), then a would be equal to

21. This requirement stems from the same arithmetic fact that necessitates the

constancy of t / kt, namely, that for two terms and their sum all to grow at
constant rates, those rates must be equal.
22. This statement presumes that the Chicago Rule inflation rate held in the
most recent period so that the initial stock of real money balances induces
satiation.

23. That the steady-state value of the net marginal product of capital must
exceed the rate of growth can be seen, incidentally, by noting from (8') and
(28) that 2t + 1—6 (f3+q+)/q and then deducing that the steady—state
value of the right—hand side of the latter is ff30 + q(1+v)0(J/q > (l+v')".
24. Some analysts would probably contend that bubble solutions should be
accorded more emphasis then this statement implies. I would suggest,
however, that bubble phenomena and the possibility of capital

overaccumulation are distinct subjects that can best be understood in
isolation.
In particular, it would seem appropriate to discuss the
overaccumulation possibility first under the assumption that bubble paths are
excluded from consideration. (They are, of course, absent from the analysis of
Diamond (1965).)
25.

For a much more complete discussion of multiple solutions in OG models

the reader is referred to Tirole (1985). The reader should note, however, that
Tirole's definition of bubbles (and market fundamentals) differs, in the case of

23

Wallace (1980)—style OG models, from terminology previously employed by many
authors——including McCallum (1983, p.15).

Consequently, some of Tirole's

conclusions must be interpreted carefully.
26.

Here I am taking it for granted that no one would wish to argue that

actual economies possess no assets with the properties of land.

For many

issues, of course, it is convenient and not misleading to ignore such assets in
the analysis. But for issues relating to overaccumulation, recognition is
apparently essential.

27. In economies in which, in Samuelson's (1958, p. 482) words, "every today
is followed by a tomorrow."

24

