NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EMPLOYMENT EFFECTS OF STATE HIRING CREDITS DURING AND AFTER
THE GREAT RECESSION
David Neumark
Diego Grijalva
Working Paper 18928
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18928
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013

We are grateful to Patrick Button for outstanding research assistance. We are also grateful to the Annie
E. Casey Foundation for research support. All views expressed are our own, and are not those of the
Foundation. We thank Daniel Wilson for providing data on federal stimulus spending based on the
Recovery.gov website, Henry Farber and Robert Valletta for providing data on Unemployment Insurance
benefit extensions, Carl Klarner for providing data on state political control, and Wyatt Clarke, Graeme
Boushey, Garth Brazleton, and Adriana Kugler and anonymous referees for helpful comments. All
views expressed are our own, and are not those of the Foundation. We thank Daniel Wilson for providing
data on federal stimulus spending based on the Recovery.gov website, and Henry Farber and Robert
Valletta for providing data on Unemployment Insurance benefit extensions. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by David Neumark and Diego Grijalva. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Employment Effects of State Hiring Credits During and After the Great Recession
David Neumark and Diego Grijalva
NBER Working Paper No. 18928
March 2013, Revised June 2015
JEL No. J23,J38
ABSTRACT
State and federal policymakers grappling with the aftermath of the Great Recession sought ways to
spur job creation, in many cases adopting hiring credits to encourage employers to create new jobs.
However, there is virtually no evidence on the effects of these kinds of counter-recessionary hiring
credits – the only evidence coming from much earlier studies of the federal New Jobs Tax Credit in
the 1970s. This paper provides evidence on the effects of state hiring credits on job growth. For many
of the types of hiring credits we examine we do not find positive effects on job growth. However,
some specific types of hiring credits – most notably including those targeting the unemployed, those
that allow states to recapture credits when job creation goals are not met, and refundable hiring credits
– appear to have succeeded in boosting job growth, more so during the Great Recession period or perhaps
recessions generally. At the same time, some credits appear to generate hiring without increasing
employment or to generate much more hiring than net employment growth, consistent with these credits
leading to churning of employees that raises the costs of producing jobs via hiring credits.
David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu
Diego Grijalva
Department of Economics
University of California at Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
dgrijalv@uci.edu

I. Introduction
The Great Recession led to levels of job loss and unemployment that were the worst on record
since the Great Depression (Elsby et al., 2010; Martínez-García and Koech, 2010). For most states
unemployment rates climbed to higher levels than in any post-War recession, and in general the high
levels of unemployment reached during the Great Recession were more persistent than in past recessions
(Pittelko, 2011). Naturally, state and federal policymakers grappling with the aftermath of the Great
Recession sought ways to spur job creation, in many cases adopting hiring credits to encourage employers
to create new jobs. Many states enacted credits, and the Hiring Incentives to Restore Employment
(HIRE) Act established a modest credit for most of 2010 at the federal level. The goal of this paper is to
provide evidence on the effects on job growth of state hiring credits like those adopted during and after
the Great Recession, using evidence from this period and earlier.
As summarized in Neumark (2013), there is a research literature arguing that hiring credits are
ineffective (Bartik, 2001; Dickert-Conlin and Holtz-Eakin, 2000; Katz, 1998). However, most of the
evidence pointing to ineffective hiring credits comes from programs that target the disadvantaged, in
contrast to programs that are non-categorical or more broadly targeted, and which explicitly try to
incentivize job creation, especially during recessions. There is much less evidence on more-broadlytargeted or non-categorical hiring credits that explicitly try to boost hiring in the aggregate – with
essentially the only evidence coming from the federal New Jobs Tax Credit (NJTC) of the late 1970s,
enacted to spur recovery from the severe recession earlier in that decade.1 This evidence is more positive,
and suggests that a hiring credit that is non-categorical and creates explicit incentives for job creation can
help create jobs. However, the evidence on the NJTC is very limited – both because it is dated, and
because of the usual difficulties of identifying the effect of policy at the national level, stemming from the
problem of constructing a counterfactual for what would have happened absent the NJTC.
As this paper documents – for the first time, to the best of our knowledge – there is an extensive
1

Katz (1998) concludes that evidence from studies of the NJTC – the prime historical example of a hiring credit
targeting net job creation – shows that a “temporary, noncategorical, incremental subsidy has some potential for
stimulating employment growth” (p. 31). More recently, researchers have taken a stronger position on the NJTC’s
effectiveness (Bartik and Bishop, 2009; Bishop, 2008).

1

set of state hiring credits. Many of these were adopted prior to the Great Recession, and more were
enacted during and after the Great Recession. Yet there is virtually no empirical work on these state
credits.2 It is the combination of the conjectures (or weak evidence) about the beneficial effects of hiring
credits in the context of a severe recession, coupled with the availability of information on multiple statelevel hiring credits, which provide the motivation for the question this paper addresses: whether state
hiring credits of the type adopted during and after the Great Recession, as well as earlier, boost job
growth. We focus on state hiring credits for which we can more reliably identify policy effects.
Moreover, we estimate the differential effects of state hiring credits that vary along many dimensions, to
try to reach specific conclusions about how hiring credits should be constructed to be more effective. To
address this question, we devoted a great deal of effort to assembling a database of the various state hiring
credits that have been enacted, and our empirical analysis is geared towards estimating the effects of the
many different types of credits that have been adapted.
Finally, there is a long-standing concern that hiring credits can be very inefficient, rewarding
hiring that does not create net job growth, as firms churn employees to exploit hiring credits. By looking
at the effects of hiring credits on hiring as well as net job growth, we can assess the importance of these
inefficiencies, and see whether particular types of credits are more or less effective at creating net job
growth along with hiring.3
To be sure, there are limitations to what we can learn about the effects of hiring credits from the
available data and policy variation. As we discuss later, these limitations include potential endogeneity of
hiring credits, difficulties in measuring some features of hiring credits, and in some cases relatively few
2

There are only a few exceptions. Bartik and Erickcek (2010) evaluate the MEGA Tax Credit Program in
Michigan, which is quite different from other hiring credits. In addition, there are some evaluations of small-scale
more-targeted hiring credit (or “voucher”) experiments (see Burtless, 1985, and the discussion in Hollenbeck and
Willke, 1991). Finally, a recent, preliminary paper (Chirinko and Wilson, 2010) estimates the effects of state hiring
credits, finding some modest evidence of positive effects. They focus on some subtler issues of the timing of effects
based on the effective versus the signing date of the credit. Our paper differs in numerous ways, including using a
much more comprehensive database on state hiring credit programs. Indeed, we do not know which subset of the
many hiring credits we capture in our database are used in the Chirinko and Wilson analysis. They report a
maximum of 20 states with hiring credits in their sample period of 1990-August, 2009, far fewer than we find; and
they provide no information on the type of credits in their database whereas we focus explicitly on distinctions
between types of credits.
3
Another potential inefficiency, which we do not address, is windfalls in the form of credits paid to firms that would
have created new jobs absent the credit.

2

instances of a particular kind of credit. While taking these limitations seriously, we would argue that
given the lack of evidence on the effects of hiring credits, and such strong interest in whether government
policy can spur job creation, it is important to learn what we can from the existing data and policy
variation.
To summarize the findings, we find that although many types of state hiring credits did not spur
job growth, some specific types of hiring credits did succeed in boosting employment. The features
associated with effective credits are refundability, allowing for recapture of payments if the required goals
were not met, and targeting the unemployed. Some of the results are consistent with what we might
expect based on past research thinking about when credits should be more or less effective, and some of
the problems hiring credits have to be able to overcome to spur job growth (see the discussion in
Neumark, 2013). A refundable hiring credit ought to have a greater impact on firms because it is valuable
even if the firm does not have taxable income in the current period. Recapture provisions should make
hiring credits more effective. And credits targeting the unemployed, especially during a period such as
the Great Recession when unemployment should not be a stigmatizing characteristic, should be more
effective.4 Indeed, new evidence on federal hiring credits adopted in response to the Great Recession also
suggests that, for example, credits targeting the unemployed were effective in this period (Farooq and
Kugler, 2015). At the same time, some expectations are not borne out in the data. Perhaps most
significantly, we do not find a stronger positive effect (or indeed any positive effect) of temporary hiring
credits, although as we explain it is very difficult to determine whether a hiring credit was perceived as
temporary by employers. All in all, though, the results provide some evidence that judiciously chosen
hiring credits can help increase job growth, perhaps especially during severe downturns. At the same
time, we find some evidence justifying concerns in the previous literature that hiring credits generate
more gross hiring than net employment growth.
II. Empirical Approach
4

Kroft et al. (2013) provide evidence consistent with this idea. In particular, they find evidence that employers pay
attention to labor market conditions in interpreting unemployment as a negative signal. While employers are less
likely to call back those unemployed for a longer spell, the stigmatizing effect of a long unemployment spell is
weaker in a slacker labor market.

3

The empirical strategy uses differences-in-differences, contrasting the job growth experiences of
states that did and did not implement particular types of hiring credits, controlling for other factors so as
to isolate the effects of state hiring credits, including a counterfactual business cycle measure (PSE, for
“predicted state employment”) as well as other controls X discussed below. We include up to 12 lags of
the hiring credit variables in our analysis of monthly data, covering one year subsequent to the adoption
of the credits.5
To be more specific, denote the level of state employment as Ejt, and denote by HCjt a dummy
variable for a hiring credit in state j and period t. Let Tt denote period dummy variables (for each unique
month in the sample), Ss denote state dummy variables, and Mr denote a vector of calendar month dummy
variables.
The baseline model that underlies our estimates of the effects of hiring credits on employment is:
(1)
.
In this model HCj,t is a dummy variable that is equal to one in the month a hiring credit turns on
and every subsequent month, HCj,t-1 is equal to one in the month after a hiring credit turns on and every
subsequent month, etc. In other words, the effects of hiring credits arise contemporaneously and with a
lag, and the effect persists, not changing after 12 months (unless the credit ends).6
The specification includes the counterfactual business cycle measure, ln(PSE), also with lags up
to 12 months. In addition, there are time dummy variables (T) for each month in the sample, to control
for aggregate factors not captured in the controls. We include interactions between the state dummy
variables (S) and calendar month dummy variables (M) to allow for different monthly patterns of

5

The data on state hiring credits are discussed in the next section.
Consistent with the effects of hiring credits arising with a lag, Perloff and Wachter (1979) present evidence
suggesting that firms’ knowledge about the NJTC influenced whether it affected job growth, and conclude that lack
of information about the NJTC diminished its effectiveness. In addition, data on California’s New Jobs Credit
suggests that the number of jobs for which the credit was claimed was very low (200-300 jobs per month) in the first
couple of months after it took effect but then rose to a higher level, but still quite low – about 1,500 jobs per month.
(See https://www.ftb.ca.gov/businesses/New_Jobs_Credit.shtml, viewed December 21, 2012. We estimated jobs for
which the credit was claimed by dividing total credits paid by the maximum $3,000 credit per worker.)
6

4

employment changes by state.7 The interactions between the counterfactual cyclical measure and the
state dummy variables allow the effects of this cyclical variable to differ by state.8 State differences in
the effects of the business cycle measure could arise, for example, because the same magnitude of the
shock to two different states could reflect employment changes in different industries, with different
cyclical sensitivity. Or states may differ in their exposure to domestic versus international markets, even
if their industry composition is similar.
We estimate the model in first-differenced form, for the change in log employment (dropping the
first observation for each state), to ease interpretation and to scale states similarly, using the specification:
(2)
.
Note that this model is equivalent to one in which we first difference all of the variables in
equation (2), including the time dummy variables, the state-month interactions, etc.9 Robust inference
requires clustering the data at the level of the state to allow for arbitrary patterns of serial correlation
within states, and heteroscedasticity across states. With 50 states, the asymptotic approximations should
provide reliable inference (Cameron et al., 2008).
The key parameters in equation (2) are the βk’s, which capture the contemporaneous and lagged
effects of changes in hiring credits on employment. If hiring credits boost employment, we would expect
the values of the βk’s to be positive, at least for some period. In contrast, we could find the βk’s equal to
zero even if many employers claim hiring credits, when they are claiming credits for hiring that would
have occurred absent the credit, or otherwise manipulating their workforces in ways that make them
eligible for credits without creating jobs.
Our counterfactual business cycle measure is intended to capture cyclical influences on
employment growth in each state aside from state hiring credits that may respond to the state economic
7

Note that this sum is taken over all states but one, since the full set of month dummies will subsume the monthly
pattern for one state, and over all months, so that these subsume the standard fixed state effects. The inclusion of the
state fixed effects in the model in first differences implies that the model in levels has state-specific linear trends.
8
Again, the sum is taken over all states but one since the main effects capture the effect for one state.
9
That is, the dummy variables and interactions can remain in levels rather than first differenced, and the model fit is
the same.

5

cycle. We construct this counterfactual business cycle measure by applying national time-series changes
in disaggregated industry employment to the state, based on the state’s industry composition in a baseline
period of stable aggregate economic growth (as in Bartik, 1991). To provide a simple example, if a state,
at baseline, had 50% of employment in the auto industry and 50% in the restaurant industry, then the
counterfactual for employment change over a given period would be an equally-weighted average of the
employment change nationally in these two industries.
Data on total and industry employment come from the Quarterly Census of Employment and
Wages (QCEW).10 The QCEW provides monthly employment at the state level and by NAICS industry
level. To construct the counterfactual cyclical measure (PSE) we used industry employment at the NAICS
4-digit level.11 One issue is that in the disaggregated state-by-industry QCEW data the information is
suppressed in some months for confidentiality reasons. In these cases, we scale up the non-missing
entries proportionally to match total employment for the month. Second, to avoid noise in our baseline
industry composition, we compute the baseline industry employment by averaging over all 12 months in
1990, and then divide by the average of total employment across months. Finally, we have to assign a
baseline industry composition to one particular month to construct our counterfactual business cycle
measure for each subsequent month, but the annual averages do not match any specific month because we
have used an average of industry composition over the year. We therefore rescale industry employment
so that multiplication by this average share matches June 1990 employment, and then construct the
cyclical measure relative to that month. (When we look at the 2007-2011 sample to study the Great
Recession period separately, we use 2006 data to construct our baseline.)
More generally, let subscripts j index states, k industries, and b the baseline period. Denote by
SEjkb total employment in state j, industry k, and period b, denote by AEkt aggregate (national)
employment in each period t in industry k, and denote by AEkb aggregate employment in industry k in the
baseline period b. Then state employment based solely on aggregate developments is predicted in each
10

These data can be downloaded at http://www.bls.gov/cew/data.htm.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics introduced the new version NAICS 2012, which applies to the QCEW starting in
2011. However, because this changes industry classification only at lower levels of disaggregation, it does not
affect our classification.
11

6

period subsequent to b by applying the national changes to the baseline composition, as in
(3)

.
This equation predicts state employment in each period by applying the national growth rate of

employment in each industry between the baseline period and that period to the baseline employment
level in the corresponding industry in the state, and then aggregating, weighting by the baseline industry
distribution of employment in the state. It turns out that this counterfactual business cycle measure has
quite strong explanatory power for employment growth. In simple regressions of the first difference of
log employment on the contemporaneous and lagged values of PSE, as in the equation above (with no
other controls), for the three different sample periods we study, the R2 was between 0.63 and 0.65; adding
the state interactions increased the R2 to around 0.66.
We have numerous other controls in X. First, we want to capture other states policies that could
have varied contemporaneously with state hiring credits and affected hiring. To this end, we include
measures of prevailing state minimum wages (the higher of federal or state minimum wages), and
measures of extended Unemployment Insurance (UI) benefits, which can be important during
recessionary periods.12 Since we use a first difference model, these controls enter in first-difference form,
with contemporaneous values and 12 lags of the first difference.
Second, while these two policies strike us as among the most important for job growth, we
recognize that there may be other polices we fail to measure explicitly. As a result, we also include
measures of the political control of states in each year, on the presumption that the types of other policies
adopted may vary systematically with the political party in control. Specifically, we use a dummy
indicator for each year for whether the state has a Democratic Governor.13 This is entered in levels, on
12

For UI, we use Farber and Valletta’s (2011) measure of the number of weeks of extended Unemployment
Insurance benefits, both those added automatically from the Extended Benefits program and those from the
Emergency Unemployment Compensation program. Both Farber and Valletta (2011) and Rothstein (2011) show
that these recent expansions in the length of unemployment insurance led to increased unemployment durations,
particularly for the long-term unemployed. These extended benefits could therefore have slowed job growth. The
control variable we use is the number of weeks beyond the normal 26 weeks of Unemployment Insurance that are
available in that state and month.
13
These original data are from Klarner (2013), with updates provided by Klarner. We verified that the results were
insensitive to a richer coding that also captured control of the institutions in the state legislature, although this
precludes including Nebraska, which has a nonpartisan unicameral legislature. (Results are available upon request.)

7

the presumption that political variables may affect the growth rate of employment, so that, effectively, the
model in levels includes these variables multiplied by a time trend, leaving the level in the firstdifferenced model.14
Third, when we focus on analysis of the Great Recession period, we account for the fact that the
extent of the decline and the course of the recovery in each state was strongly influenced by housing
market developments. Housing market developments in each state are a potential confounding factor for
a few reasons: they could have directly or indirectly affected hiring via the construction industry and
spillovers from that industry; they could have spurred other responses during this period that are not
captured in the controls discussed thus far, which could also affect hiring; and they could have providing
advance warning to policymakers of a coming crash, that could have led them to adopt hiring credits in
anticipation of labor market changes, implying a causal effect in the opposite direction of the one we are
trying to estimate. To address these possibilities, for the analysis of the Great Recession period we
include state-specific measures of the price run-up in the 2000-2006 period, which are correlated with and
would have helped predict the extent of the decline by state.15 (We do not want to include measures of
the decline in prices during the Great Recession, since that could have been influenced by the same
policies.) Specifically, we construct dummy variables for the quantiles of the distribution of housing
price appreciation across states, and interact these with the month dummy variables, to allow for different
patterns of change by state associated with this pre-recession price appreciation.
The broader point here is that the counterfactual business cycle measure discussed above would
not be expected to be sufficient to fully predict the course of the state’s economy absent state hiring
credits. Bartik (1991) discusses the more general issue of non-traded as opposed to traded industries,
based on the concern that non-traded industries generally may not follow the national trends as well, but
he shows that these actually do track quite closely. However, the problem is precisely the case where
national industry trends applied to the state’s industry composition miss potentially important variation.
To include all states, we feature results for the specification based on the governorship.
14
This variable is measured on an annual basis. We verified that including this variable in first differences had no
impact on the results. (Results available upon request.)
15
We use data from the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA); see
http://www.fhfa.gov/DataTools/Downloads/pages/house-price-index.aspx (viewed April 24, 2015)

8

The housing market is of course a strong candidate for this kind of problem, as state trends during the
Great Recession period (and prior to it) diverged widely from national trends. Our reading of the
evidence, and events during our sample period, is that housing market changes in the latter part of our
sample period are likely the main source of large deviations of state trends from those predicted by
national industry trends, and hence we control for them explicitly (see Mian and Sufi, 2010). For similar
reasons, however, when we estimate our models for the 2007-2011 period, we also account for the major
federal effort to boost job growth in this period, namely the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
(ARRA).16
Fourth, as one additional way of adding much richer controls to the model, we estimate
specifications including a full set of Census division-month interactions. Note that the model written
above include interactions between state dummy variables and calendar months. But we cannot include a
full set of state-month interactions, since that is the level at which the state hiring credits vary.
Nonetheless, interactions between Census divisions and the full set of months restricts all identifying
variation to come from within-division variation, and hence controls for shocks or any other source of
variation over time that is common to Census divisions.
We are interested in the effects of different types of hiring credits. As described in detail in the
next section, we classify hiring credits along a number of dimensions, and then instead of having a single
dummy variable for the presence of a hiring credit, we have multiple dummy variables for the presence of
different types of hiring credits.
We also focus to some extent on the effects of hiring credits adopted during or after the Great
16

The Recovery.gov website provides historical data on spending under ARRA using two different measures:
obligations and outlays. Obligated funds are those that occur when a contract is assigned to a particular recipient;
outlays occur only after the terms of the contract are satisfied. We use spending based on obligations because it
precedes new employment creation. (Wilson’s (2012) analysis of fiscal spending job multipliers uses funding
announcements, which precede obligations by several months. We prefer obligations as these represent secured
funds that are more closely related to new employment creation both with respect to the time at which they occur
and their magnitude. In addition, we also include lags of obligated spending. In Wilson’s analysis, the qualitative
results are not affected by using the different measures of spending.) To be precise, our control is the log of
additional monthly ARRA obligated spending from all federal agencies excluding the Department of Labor (DOL).
We do not include DOL because these funds are mainly used for payment of extended and expanded UI benefits,
which we already include as a control. We use agency-reported data, following Wilson (2012), who notes that
agency-reported data cover all ARRA spending, while recipient-reported data cover only a little over half of it.
From May 2009 until December 2011 (when our sample period ends) the total amount of obligations was $421.3
billion, while the total amount of outlays was $365.2 billion.

9

Recession, because of the inherent interest in whether adopting hiring credits during steep recessions
contributed to the recovery.17 As the preceding discussion of our specification makes clear, we only
obtain identifying information from states where there are changes in hiring credits over the sample
period. As we document in the next section, states have adopted a large number of hiring credits over
recent decades, although the number adopted in the 2007-2011 period is of course smaller, limiting our
identifying information when we focus on this period. Moreover, there is even less adoption of or
variation in hiring credits with specific features.
Our analysis focuses on state hiring credits. As noted earlier, the federal HIRE Act, establishing
a modest credit, was enacted in 2010. However, we are limited to estimating the effects of state hiring
credits. In many studies of similar policies that vary at the state and federal level, if a policy exists in
some states, then adopting it at the federal level provides identifying information about the effect of the
policy. This requires, though, that the federal and state policies be substantively the same. In the context
of state hiring credits and the HIRE Act this is decidedly not the case, because state hiring credits provide
credits against state taxes, whereas the HIRE Act provided credits against federal taxes.18
Although we estimate a rich model and try to capture many important dimensions of hiring
credits and factors that could be confounded with them, there are still some limitations to what we can do.
First, it is possible that the endogeneity of the adoption of hiring credits biases the estimates from
equation (2). We do not think there is a good instrument available for hiring credits. To the extent that
they are adopted in response to shocks that hit a state’s economy, these shocks cannot be excluded from
the model – nor are they. And we are not aware of any political reason distinct from economic outcomes
that would explain why some states adopt these credits and some do not, let alone why this might vary

17

There is a related question of whether hiring credits that were already on the books when the Great Recession hit
served to moderate the effects of the recession. However, since these credits would not have lowered hiring costs
during the Great Recession there is no theoretical reason to expect such an effect.
18
Another federal credit that changed recently is the Work Opportunities Tax Credit (WOTC). The WOTC targets
veterans, short- and long-term TANF recipients, SNAP (food stamp) recipients, and others. It replaced the Targeted
Jobs Tax Credit in 1996. A 2011 Act (the VOW to Hire Heroes Act) extended benefits for veteran target groups,
and established new categories for veterans who have been unemployed and veterans with service-connected
disabilities (http://www.doleta.gov/business/incentives/opptax/eta_default.cfm, viewed March 10, 2013). The Act
was adopted in late 2011, and did not take effect until 2012. Scott (2013) reports that in 2012 veterans were fewer
than 4 percent of total WOTC certifications.

10

over time (which it would have to, given that the model includes fixed state effects). However, we are
able to do a few things to address this issue. First, we examine whether lagged changes in state
employment growth predict the adoption of credits. We find no such evidence, which makes it less likely
that endogeneity is a concern, although it cannot be ruled out. Second, this kind of analysis cannot rule
out endogenous adoption of policy based on predicted future employment growth, as opposed to lagged
employment growth. With regard to this problem, we believe that including the housing price run-up
controls in the analysis of the Great Recession period is a means of capturing a potentially endogenous
response, because the housing price run-up could have been the basis for the predicted decline when the
housing bubble burst. Third, our models effectively include state-specific linear trends (because the
model in first differences has a full set of state fixed effects for the growth of employment), which can
help control for prior trends associated with the adoption of credits.
A second limitation concerns our ability to capture some features of hiring credits, such as their
temporary nature as perceived by firms, their value, and the overall scope of a state’s hiring credit
programs, of which there are often many. These limitations are discussed in the following section, where
we describe the hiring credit database that we built for this research.
And third, as we also document in the next section, there is tremendous heterogeneity in hiring
credits, and as a consequence for many types of hiring credits there are relatively few cases in the data.
Especially for those credits that are not very common, this has to make one cautious in interpreting the
estimates as reflecting the effects of credits rather than other idiosyncratic shocks that happen to be
associated with the adoption of credits. This is an inherent limitation. We provide what information we
can by documenting which credits occur more frequently, and also by comparing results for longer
sample periods in which more credits of a particular type are sometimes adopted.
III. The State Hiring Credits Database
The key input into the empirical analysis is a detailed database on state hiring tax credits that we
have constructed. The construction of this database, and many issues that arose, are described in detail in
the Appendix. Here we note key features of this database and the state hiring credits we capture.

11

States offer a complex package of incentives ranging from tax incentives based on different
criteria (e.g., job creation), to financial assistance, technical support, training, incentives for creation of
infrastructure, etc. Hiring credits are only a part of this set of incentives, and thus the first step in
constructing the database is to define the criteria for inclusion of a program in the hiring credit database.
The main criterion is that the program intends to create (or retain) jobs. We used the following criteria for
the inclusion of a program in the state hiring credit database:


The program’s law or regulations require firms to create or retain jobs or to increase payroll.
Programs aimed at attracting new companies to the state (e.g., headquarters programs) are also
included since by definition they create new jobs and, in most cases, they include an explicit job
creation requirement.



The program is broad in the sense that it covers a large portion of the state’s firms or
employees.19



The program is targeted directly at the employer that is creating jobs. For instance, we do not
include programs that foster infrastructure improvement by local governments on behalf of a
business that is creating jobs.



The program is not geographically targeted. In particular, we do not include enterprise zone
programs or local hiring programs.20



The program’s costs are not borne by local governments. In particular, we do not include
property tax abatements and tax-increment financing districts.
In addition, we do not include programs based on training, apprenticeships, or internships, on

research and development, or those related to the film industry. Also, we do not include either
agricultural or financial programs (e.g., programs that provide loans or whose benefits are reductions in
the interest rate on previous loans). In contrast, we do include programs that have broad targeting by

19

For instance, we do not include the Arizona’s Credit for Employing National Guard Members or the
Massachusetts’s Jobs Incentive Payments for Certain Biotechnology Companies.
20
One exception is that Kansas’s Enterprise Zone Job Creation Tax Credit is included in the database, because the
incentives apply statewide.

12

industry (e.g., manufacturing), by company type (e.g., small businesses), or groups of workers (e.g., the
unemployed).
The hiring credits database provides information on job creation programs in all 50 states for the
period 1969-2012, for which we identified 147 hiring credits. In June, 2012, 128 of these programs were
current while 19 had expired or been replaced.21 As these numbers indicate, many states have multiple
credits. Figure 1 is a histogram showing the highest number of hiring credits that states had at any point
in our sample period. There are 45 states that had at least one hiring credit at some point during the whole
period. Five states did not have any program: Alaska, New Hampshire, South Dakota, Washington, and
Wyoming. And five states had at most one program: Hawaii, Maine, Minnesota, Montana, and Oregon.
The remaining 40 states had two or more hiring credits over the period, and of these, most had two to four
credits. Virginia is the state with the largest number of programs (a maximum of ten during the sample
period).
Table 1 provides information on when hiring credits were adopted, and their durations. Most
hiring credits were created after 1989, and more than one-third were created in 2000 or later. While the
table shows that many programs last for fewer than 10 years, this is driven partly by many credits being
adopted in later years. Overall, state hiring credits have lasted for an average of 12.5 years. Figure 2
presents a more detailed view at the number of programs created each year.
State hiring credits differ along several dimensions, although, as noted in the Appendix, almost
all (143) require the creation of new jobs. In Table 2 we provide a detailed description of the credits we
analyze, and an explanation of our coding. Table 3 summarizes the distribution of hiring credits along
these dimensions and Appendix Table 1 in the Appendix presents a list of all programs in our database,
with their particular features. We also capture the timing of the enactment and expiration of hiring
credits.
As Table 2 shows, hiring credit programs differ in a number of ways. Hiring credits can be
distinguished credits based on the outcome that the programs use as the basis to determine benefits
21

Two programs became ineffective after June 2012, and three additional programs became ineffective after
December 2012.

13

(number of new jobs, percentage of new payroll, percentage of new investment, or some other factor,
such as square footage of new facilities).
Hiring credits vary in terms of tax savings. Credits may limit the benefit to be equal to the tax
liability, or they may allow it to be higher than the tax liability. In the latter case, firms may either carry
forward to future years the fraction of the benefits above the current year’s tax liability, or they may
receive the full amount of the benefit in the current year (the credit is refundable). Almost one-third of
programs do not specify this limit and almost half provide a carry-forward provision (Table 3).
Since we are interested in the effect of hiring credits on job growth, another important dimension
is the type of new jobs required. Employment required can be full-time, FTE, or part-time. In a few
cases, the program does not specify the type of employment required. Full-time is the most common
requirement.
State hiring credits also differ in targeting based either on employee’s characteristics
(unemployed, disabled, and welfare recipients) or employer’s characteristics (industry, size of the firm).
Around half of all hiring credits have some type of targeting.
Hiring credits present some additional characteristics that may affect their impact on job creation.
First, many programs try to ensure that credits are paid for new job creation, by “recapturing” or “clawing
back” some of the tax credit if net job creation is lower than required for payment of the credit.22 One
might wonder whether these provisions of tax credits have any teeth. In fact there is evidence from state
reports that recapture provisions are actually used, and that states do recover credits (or other financial
incentives) when job creation or other goals are not met.23

22

For example, the Iowa new jobs and income act states that if the Department of Revenue “determines that
business has failed in any year to meet any one of the requirements of the new jobs and income Act … the business
or group of businesses is subject to repayment of all or a portion of the amount of incentives received.” Similarly,
the Arkansas economic development act calls for repayment of all benefits received by a business, plus penalty and
interest, if it does not create the required 100 new jobs within 24 months. Both programs allow for extensions for
businesses to meet job creation goals.
23
See, for example, reports on clawbacks for North Carolina
(http://www.nccommerce.com/Portals/0/Incentives/CLAWBACK-REPORT_Apr-2015.pdf), Indiana
(https://transparency.iedc.in.gov/Additional%20Public%20Information/Economic%20Incentives%20and%20Compl
iance%20Report%20Period%20ending%20December%2031,%202014.pdf), Florida
(http://www.floridajobs.org/business/DEO_EDP_PROD.htm, under “Quick Action Closing Fund, Inactive),
Mississippi (https://merlin.state.ms.us/reports/FY2013%20Mississippi%20Incentives%20Report.pdf, pp 20-11), and

14

In addition, several hiring credits determine either eligibility for the credit or the amount of the
credit based on the wage level of the new jobs. In some cases there is a minimum wage level to which
they apply, thus attempting to promote the creation of higher-wage or higher-skill jobs. Some programs
vary their credit values and specific provisions (such as the wage level required of new jobs) according to
the county (or type of county) where the new jobs are created.
Finally, credits can differ based on whether they are temporary or permanent. While this
distinction is clear at the theoretical level – and we would predict a stronger effect of a temporary credit
that shifts hiring to the period when the credit applies – this difference is not so clear in practice, as
discussed in the Appendix. For example, an apparently permanent credit can be repealed and a temporary
one extended.
Based on these features of hiring credits, we assign to each credit a value of one or zero to denote
the presence or absence of that particular feature. One potential limitation of the hiring credits database is
that each program is treated equally, i.e., we do not distinguish between “small” and “large” programs.
The reason is that this distinction is not clear between states or even within states. For instance the
Virginia economic development incentive grant (VEDIG) requires a minimum of 200 new jobs and a
capital investment of $6,500 per job and provides a discretionary grant, while the state’s Small business
jobs grant fund requires only five new jobs and provides a grant of between $500 and $2,000 per job.
Clearly, these two programs are quite different and aim at very different types of firms. Yet, it is not clear
which one should have a larger impact on employment, since the latter can potentially reach many more
firms. Thus, despite their differences, in the database the two programs are treated equally.
More generally, programs vary significantly within and across states. Much of this variation is of
course captured in the coding discussed above, but it would be ideal to have measure of the generosity of
the credits, to characterize them in terms of the strength of the incentives they create for firms using a
measure like the value of the credit per worker hired. However, it turns out that there are insurmountable
Maryland
(http://business.maryland.gov/Documents/ProgramReport/MarylandEconomicDevelopmentAssistanceAuthorityAnd
FundFY2011.pdf) (all viewed April 22, 2015). A list of websites providing information on penalties for
noncompliance is available in Appendix 5 of Good Jobs First (2012).

15

problems in trying to do this. First, the information available is very limited. Only some program laws
require the state to report the amount spent as well as the number of jobs created. And even in these
cases, since some programs are targeted at specific investment programs, the data are not released for
confidentiality reasons. In other cases, the information is available only for some years. Second, as noted
above, even when the programs provide information, they vary significantly in terms of the requirements
and specific incentives for job creation provided. This implies that expenditure by a specific program is
not necessarily comparable to expenditure by other programs. For example, some credits focus on
investment and have a small job creation component. While we do capture this by coding the credits
along various dimensions, it is not possible to define expenditure on a comparable basis.
Finally, even when this information could be comparable, it turns out that the impact on the level
of employment does not increase monotonically with expenditure, even for a specific program. To see
this in a specific example, Appendix Table A1 presents information on the amount spent as well as the
number of jobs created by the Alabama Income Tax Capital Credit for the period 1995-2012. For this
period, creating a new job costs on average $14,000. However, according to the information provided,
this amount varies from a minimum of $28.35 in 1996 to $62,146 in 2012. Thus, even for those programs
that provide expenditure information, reported expenditures per job created is not a reliable source to
measure the actual employment impact in different points in time. Furthermore, only a few programs
provide information on the actual number of jobs created. Given these limitations, we define a program
in terms of the characteristics discussed above, and do not try to quantify the size or scope of the credits.
Studying all dimensions of state hiring credits simultaneously is problematic and likely to lead to
low precision of estimates. Rather, we present analyses for related sets of features of specific classes of
hiring credits. Examples include: credits targeting the unemployed, the disabled, welfare recipients, or
none of these; credits that explicitly target net job creation versus those that do not; and credits that allow
for recapture or claw-backs versus those that do not. Thus, for example, for a two-way classification of
hiring credits, two dummy variables HC1jt and HC2jt can be defined, and substituted for the single HCjt in

16

equation (2) above. This allows the estimation of the effects on job growth of each type of credit within a
broad class of credits.24
As we also discussed in Section III, the identifying information for the effects of state hiring
credits on job growth comes from changes in state hiring credits during our sample period. As just noted,
for most of our analyses we focus simply on whether a state has a particular type of credit. Thus, we need
to know how many states experienced a change in whether there was a particular type of credit. This
information is reported in Table 4, for the classifications of hiring credits we consider. As the table
shows, for most features there is some variation in the number of states having a particular type of credit,
although in many cases there is not a lot of variation.
Finally, there is an issue of how to measure hiring credits. Much of the variation in hiring credits
comes from states where a program already existed, sometimes of the same type. For example, in the
aggregate, of the 38 programs created from January 2006 until December 2011, 36 were added in states
that already had at least one program. The remaining two were created in California and Wisconsin in
2009. This raises the question of whether additional programs of the same type provide additional
incentives to firms and thus might contribute to employment creation. We have chosen to code simply
the existence of a credit of a particular type, rather than the number of credits. Our sense is that the count
of credits often reflects the proliferation of a number of small programs in a state that add up to similar
coverage provided by single programs in other states.25 For that reason we view specifications based on
the presence or absence of a particular type of hiring credit as more informative about the effects of
enacting hiring credits.
IV. Results
Baseline Results
Our baseline results are from models estimated for the 1995-2011 period. We can extend the
sample back a bit earlier, to 1991, and we do so later. But data on the UI benefit extensions are available
24

Nonetheless, in results available upon request we show that results are qualitatively similar and sometimes
actually stronger statistically – although indeed less precise – when we estimate specifications including all the
credit types simultaneously.
25
For example, in Virginia there are separate credits targeting large and other businesses (the two Virginia
investment partnership programs) or targeting small and other businesses (the two Jobs investment programs).

17

beginning in 1995. Each panel in Table 5 reports estimates from a different specification. Thus, the first
panel reports estimates of the effect of a hiring credit of any kind, the second distinguishes between
credits based on new job growth, new payroll growth, new investment, or other criteria, etc. All
specifications include a contemporaneous dummy variables (or dummy variables) for the hiring credits
included, plus 12 monthly lags of these. The table report the contemporaneous coefficients, and then the
cumulative effect including lags through four, eight, and 12 months; the results are not qualitatively
different looking at or summing over somewhat different lag lengths.
As reported in the first panel, there is no evidence of an effect of hiring credits when no
distinctions are made among the features of hiring credits. To interpret the magnitudes, the estimated
coefficient of 0.0001 on the cumulative (through the 12-month lag) effect of hiring credits based on
investment implies that employment is increased by very small 0.01 percent by the enactment of a hiring
credit without regard to its specific features.
The second panel finds no evidence of significant positive effects of hiring credits whose benefits
are based on new jobs, new payroll, or new investment. We might have expected hiring credits that
provide benefits based on job growth to be the most successful at boosting employment, whereas a hiring
credit based on payroll growth would not necessarily be expected to boost employment, because in the
first case benefits are obtained exclusively through the creation of new jobs, while in the second case
benefits may be obtained through the creation of a limited number of high-wage jobs or increasing pay for
the same jobs.
The next panel distinguishes between credits based on job growth measured in terms of full-time
employment, FTE, and part-time employment (as well as not specified). Most of the point estimates in
this panel are negative, and some (for FTE and for part-time employment) are significant in the very short
run. If there were any prediction for hiring credits broken down this way, it likely would be for a negative
effect of credits based on full-time employment, which could encourage firms to combine part-time jobs
into full-time jobs. A negative effect on FTE or part-time employment is a bit harder to explain, unless

18

for some reason firms respond to the credit by increasing hours simultaneously with reducing the number
of workers (in relative terms).
The following panel distinguishes credits based on their tax treatment. We would expect
refundable credits to be the most valuable, since these give money to firms even if they do not have
taxable income in the current year – a circumstance we might expect to be more frequent during or after a
recession.26 The evidence is consistent with positive effects of refundable credits. For all the other taxtreatment classifications of hiring credits, the estimated effect are small and statistically insignificant, and
alternate signs. However, the estimated effects of refundable credits are all positive, and become
statistically significant at the 10-percent level over the longer-run. At the 12-month lag, the point
estimate of 0.0044 implies that job growth is increased by 0.44 percent, which is sizable.
The first panel in the second column of the table distinguishes between credits based on whether
they imposed some kind of minimum wage requirement. We might expect a larger effect for credits that
do not have a wage requirement, if the wage requirement is binding. On the other hand, it is possible that
higher-wage firms that meet the wage requirement anyway are more responsive to the credit. Regardless,
none of the estimated effects for this specification are positive, and most are insignificant (the exception
is the eight-month cumulative effect for credits with no wage requirement).
The following panel categorizes hiring credits based on whether there is a mechanism to
recapture the credits if job creation goals are not met. We would expect a recapture mechanism to lead to
more effective credits, either by enforcing job creation goals or encouraging only firms that could actually
meet them to apply for credits. The evidence is consistent with this prediction, as the estimates for hiring
credits with recapture provisions are positive, and the estimate through the eight-month lag is significant
at the 10-percent level. The examples discussed earlier indicate that states can recover benefits paid when
job creation goals are not met, and even if this recovery does not often occur, the threat of recovery may
enhance the effects of hiring credits with recapture provisions.

26

Credits with carry-forward provisions can have similar effects, if taxable income is expected in the near future.

19

Below this specification we distinguish among credits that target specific industries,
manufacturing in particular, or that do not target by industry. In no case do we find significant positive
effects. Interestingly, the effects of credits targeting manufacturing are negative and significant. A
possible interpretation of this result is that this kind of targeted hiring credit is more the result of political
pressure than of targeting to where the potential job creation effects are highest. However, as Table 4
shows, this evidence on credits targeting manufacturing comes from only one such credit enacted in the
sample period covered in Table 5, and (as shown below) is not robust to extending the sample period to
include another such credit.
The next panel looks at the type of worker targeted. As noted in the Introduction, many hiring
credits – and those generally deemed ineffective – have targeted the disadvantaged or disabled. What
might be of more interest, especially as a counter-recessionary policy, is a hiring credit targeting the
unemployed. There is no evidence of effects of hiring credits targeting welfare recipients or the
disadvantaged more generally, consistent with earlier work. In contrast, hiring credits targeting the
unemployed have positive effects on employment, with a short-term estimate (through four months) that
is statistically significant, indicating that such credit increased employment by about 0.44 percent over
this period; the effect appears to diminish, however, pointing to a temporary effect that may, in fact, be
the intended effect of such a countercyclical policy.
Finally, the last panel considers temporary versus permanent credits. Theory would predict that
temporary credits would have the greatest short-run effect, since they should shift hiring into the period
covered by the credit. However, recall from the discussion in Section III that in practice it is very hard to
classify credits as temporary or permanent. Perhaps as a result, we do not find any evidence that either
type of hiring credit has an effect, or of a difference between them.
Thus, the evidence from Table 5 suggests that a few specific types of hiring credits have
succeeded in boosting employment, but many did not. The effective credits include refundable hiring
credits, credits that allow for recapture of payments if the required goals were not met, and credits

20

targeting the unemployed, although to this point the statistical evidence for these positive effects is not
strong.27
One question is whether we obtain imprecise estimates by freely estimating contemporaneous and
12 lags of the effects of hiring credits, and then adding these together to estimate the effects of credits
over a given number of periods. Given that our effects sometimes grow over time, but also sometimes
diminish over time, we estimated more restrictive versions of our models where the effects of hiring
credits are captured in just two coefficients, which change, respectively, with terms that are linear and
quadratic in months for 12 months (the lag length in equation (2)). Thus, in levels the hiring credit
variable becomes:
(4)

.
So in the month the hiring credit turns on, the linear variable in the model is βL, in the next month

it is 2βL, etc., reaching a maximum of 13β at the equivalent of the full lag length in equation (2), while the
corresponding quadratic terms are βQ, 4βQ, etc. The effect of HC changes based on these coefficients (for
example, increasing at first if βL is positive, but at a decreasing rate and perhaps diminishing if βQ is
negative), reflecting a change in the effectiveness of the credit through the 13 months covered, at which
point the effect stops changing. As before, we estimate the model in first differences, so the effects arise
and change over the lag length of the credit variables, and then eventually revert to zero.
The resulting estimates are reported in Table 6. Focusing attention on the three credits for which
we have found some consistent evidence of positive effects – refundable credits, credits with recapture
provisions, and credits targeting the unemployed – there is not a notable difference in precision from
these more restrictive specifications, and the estimated magnitudes are of the same order of magnitude.

27

We also estimated specifications like in Table 5, but with a full set of interactions between Census division
dummy variables and all calendar months, so that the variation comes fully from within Census divisions, allowing
for unmeasured policy differences (or other effects) that vary regionally. The estimates are very robust. We also
estimated the specifications as in Table 5 defining the hiring credit variables as counts of the number of credits with
a particular feature, rather than dummy variables for the presence of a credit with a particular feature. As noted
earlier, the variation in the number of credits may not be meaningful if the addition of credits of a type that already
exists in a state simply indicates a proliferation of small programs that does little to change incentives to hire. Some
but not all of the results persist. We no longer find any evidence of positive effects of on employment growth from
refundable credits or credits allowing recapture. But we still find positive effects of credits targeting the
unemployed. (Results are available from the authors upon request.)

21

Only for credits targeting the unemployed are the coefficients statistically significant, with a positive
linear and negative quadratic effect – consistent with the increasing and then diminishing effect in Table
5. In our view, there is no a priori basis for imposing the restrictions in this table, and given that doing so
does not sharply increase the precision of the estimates, we prefer the unrestricted estimates.28
We also estimated models that interact the hiring credit variables with the indicator for
Democratic control of the statehouse (our political control variable). We did this for the credits for
which, in Table 5 and additional analyses below, we find the most consistent evidence that hiring credits
increase job growth – refundable credits, credits with recapture provisions, and credits targeting the
unemployed. Interestingly, in every case the interactions were positive, and generally significant for
hiring credits targeting the unemployed and for refundable credits (for the longer-term cumulative
effects). This could be related to unmeasured characteristics of the credits adopted when Democrats
served as governor, including perhaps generosity or breadth of the credits – which, as explained earlier,
we found difficult to measure. (These results are available upon request.) Thus, these specifications
provide stronger evidence of positive effects of these hiring credits, although we do not feature these
estimates because it is not clear why the party of the Governor is critical. Below, we consider an
alternative hypothesis – that the effects of hiring credits vary over the business cycle – for which we think
the predictions are clearer.
Alternative Sample Periods, and the Great Recession
Table 7 reports estimates extending the beginning of the sample period back to 1991, which
necessitates dropping the UI benefit extension controls. The estimates are little changed from Table 5,
which perhaps is not too surprising since there is a lot of overlap in the samples, and, to the extent that the
effects of hiring credits differ during recessions – a question we turn to below – we only get a little bit
more cyclical variation from the end of the recession in the early 1990s. We still find positive effects and
sometimes significant effects of refundable hiring credits and credits targeting the unemployed; but the
point estimates for credits with recapture provisions are smaller and no longer statistically significant.
28

Restricting the effects of hiring credits to follow a linear specification only – the first term in equation (4) – led to
much less precise estimates, likely because this specification does permit the diminution of effects of hiring credits
over time apparent in many cases in Table 5.

22

More interesting is restricting our focus to the period of the Great Recession, in part because of
interest in the credits adopted during this period, and, perhaps more so, because of general interest in
whether hiring credits can help boost job growth during a severe economic downturn. Anti-recessionary
hiring credits may be more effective, especially when coming on the heels of a steep recession, because
stigma effects are likely to be significantly weakened or eliminated for a credit that is either noncategorical or that targets the unemployed. Employers likely understand that many people become
unemployed in a recession because of external adverse shocks to their employers, rather than because of
individual low productivity, malfeasance, etc. And when employment has largely been falling, hiring
credits should do more to incentivize hiring that would not have occurred absent the credit.
The estimates for the 2007-2011 period are reported in Table 8. For this period, we can reintroduce the UI benefit extension controls. And as noted earlier we add controls for ARRA spending,
and for housing price appreciation prior to the Great Recession. For refundable hiring credits, the point
estimates are sometimes larger than for the longer sample period, although not statistically significant.
(The standard errors are a good deal larger, likely because of the much smaller sample.) The evidence for
positive effects of hiring credits including recapture provisions is stronger for this subperiod. The point
estimates are large and statistically significant (at the five- or 10-percent level) through four, eight, and 12
months. The same is true for hiring credits targeting the unemployed, which have positive and
statistically significant effects for all of the cumulative effects reported in the table. For recapture
provisions and credits targeting the unemployed, the effects are sizable. Credits with recapture provisions
boosted jobs by 0.8 percent by 12 months after the adoption of such a credit, and credits targeting the
unemployed by 1.16 percent.29 We do not have information on spending on such credits from the states
that adopted them, but it is highly unlikely that states spent anything close to 1 percent of their economy’s
payroll on these credits, suggesting the benefits could well outweigh the costs.30 Finally, for the analysis
29

Because the models estimated for the 2007-11 period include the additional housing appreciation and ARRA
spending controls, we also estimated models for the same period excluding these controls, to provide a better
comparison, based solely on the difference in sample period, with the estimates in Table 5. The resulting estimates
were very similar to those reported in Table 7, and if anything a bit stronger. (The estimates are available upon
request.)
30
Note that the effect of ARRA spending is positive (although not significant) at long lags. This is consistent with

23

of this period we also find a statistically significant positive effect, in the shorter-term, of hiring credits
based on investment. Credits incentivizing investment may not directly subsidize hiring, but the
additional investment, if it occurs, could entail more hiring.31
The stronger estimated effects of refundable credits and credits targeting the unemployed, in the
2007-11 period compared to the longer sample periods, suggests that they may have stronger effects
during recessions – perhaps especially during the kind of severe downturn that characterized the Great
Recession. To provide more evidence on this question, we reverted to the longest sample period (19912011), but introduced interactions between the hiring credit variables and an indicator for national
recessions (based on NBER recession dates) plus a period extending one year beyond the end of each
recession in this sample period, given the slow rebound of labor markets after recessions. We estimated
these interactive models focusing on the three hiring credits for which we have found evidence of effects
on job growth: refundable credits, credits with recapture provisions, and credits targeting the
unemployed.32
The estimates are reported in Table 9. Turning first to the latter two types of credits, for which
we found stronger effects during the 2007-11 period, for credits with recapture provisions, we do not find
any evidence that such credits were generally more effective during and immediately after recessions,
except in the very short term. For credits targeting the unemployed, the point estimates are consistent
with strong effects during and immediately after recessions. During other periods (as indicated by the
main effects in the first row), the estimated effects of these credits are near zero and statistically
insignificant. But during recessionary periods the point estimates are generally near 0.01 within a few
months of enactment, albeit statistically significant only for the cumulative effect through four lags (we
report the interaction as well as the sum of the main and interactive effects). Finally, the strongest
evidence of positive effects during recessions is for refundable credits, for which the estimated effects are
positive and significant in all cases, with estimates between 0.01 and 0.02. If the tax treatment of hiring
Wilson’s (2012) finding that long first-difference estimates of the effects of ARRA spending on job growth were
positive, although he estimates a much different specification – including some IV estimates – and finds large
positive effects that exceed substantially other estimates of job creation by the ARRA (see Neumark, 2013).
31
Because the evidence for this type of credit emerges only for the 2007-11 period, we do not emphasize it as much.
32
The notes to the table give more details on the exact specification.

24

credits matter, then it is perhaps not surprising that the refundability of credits is critical during
recessions, since in such periods it is far more likely that companies are losing money and do not have
taxable income, increasing the value of refundable credits.33 Overall, then, we have two types of evidence
pointing to positive effects during recessions, perhaps especially during a very steep recession, of hiring
credits that are refundable, that allow recapture, or that target the unemployed.
Endogenous Determination of Hiring Credits?
It is possible that credits are adopted in response to past changes in employment in ways that
could bias the estimated effects of credits in the previous tables. For example, there could be an
“Ashenfelter dip” phenomenon in which credits are adopted in response to negative shocks, from which
states then recover, imparting a positive bias to our estimated effects of hiring credits. Alternatively,
credit adoption could be associated with underlying employment trends, with negative trends implying
downward bias, and positive trends upward bias. However, we already noted that the models include
state-specific linear trends.
To try to assess whether endogenous determination of hiring credits based on past changes in job
growth drives our results, we estimated regression models for adoption of hiring credits. We include the
same control variables, as well as long lags of the first differences of log employment (up to 36 months).
We did this for the credits corresponding to what we regard as the most interesting findings thus far –
refundable credits, credits that allow recapture, and credits targeting the unemployed. And we do this for
the different sample periods and specifications we have considered. As reported in Table 10, we find
virtually no evidence of statistically significant relationships between past employment change and credit
adoption (there is one exception in the last column). Thus, the estimates in the table imply weak
associations between past employment changes and credit adoption, making it unlikely that there are
biases from endogenous adoption of credits. Moreover, there is a pattern of much weaker associations in
the shorter-term (say, through six or 12 months) than in the longer-term, making it even less likely that
the changes in employment after credits are adopted are in fact driven by earlier employment changes that
33

Credits with carry-forward provisions could also matter, if these companies expect to survive the recession, but
we did not find such evidence.

25

drove credit adoption. We also report the estimated effect of the political control variable in Table 10. It
is never statistically significant, and the sign varies across different lags and samples.
Statistical Significance
Our analysis of the effects of state hiring credits based on the statistical evidence we have
discussed the far leads to a few tentative conclusions. First, many types of hiring credits we study do not
have statistically significant effects on job growth. Second, however, there is evidence that refundable
hiring credits, credits with recapture provisions, and credits targeting the unemployed, boosted job
growth, particularly during recessions or even more so during the Great Recession.
Two issues arise in thinking about statistical significance of the findings. First, is the negative
conclusion regarding other hiring credits because of imprecise estimates – cases where the point estimates
are generally positive and non-negligible, but the estimates are not sufficiently precise to be statistically
significant? This is an issue that sometimes receives too little attention in empirical analyses of public
policies: In particular, if evidence points to positive effects (in this case), but the estimates are not
statistically significant, is a conclusion of “no evidence of an effect” one that might lead policymakers to
forego a policy that might have benefits?
In our view, a lack of precision is not the explanation of the absence of positive, significant
findings for many of the other types of hiring credits we study. To see this, look at Tables 5, 7, and 8 (the
estimates for the three sample periods we consider), and put aside the types of hiring credits for which we
sometimes find significant positive effects – credits based on investment, refundable credits, credits with
recapture, and credits targeting the unemployed. Across the three tables, for all of the other features of
hiring credits we consider, the estimated signs of the effects of hiring credits vary in sign or are negative,
and are very small, with the only exception of the hiring credits based on investment. Thus, in almost
every case, a more reasonable conclusion is that the true effect is very near zero.
The second issue is in some sense the opposite. Given that we study many type of hiring credits,
are the statistically significant effects that emerge for refundable credits, credits with recapture provisions,
and credits targeting the unemployed indicative of real policy effects, or are they just chance occurrences?

26

This is an example of the “multiple testing” problem (e.g., Anderson, 2008). The formal statistical
treatment of this problem entails adjusting the critical values to account for the fact that one is testing
multiple hypotheses simultaneously, and hence conventional critical values based on single hypothesis
tests are understated, and thus statistical significance of the estimated effects overstated, with too-frequent
rejections of the null hypothesis.
Our analysis of this question, for the three hiring credits with positive results, is reported in Table
11. There, we report, for each of our three sample periods, whether or not we reject the null hypothesis of
no effect, first using the conventional p-value from the single test of a coefficient (or sum of coefficients,
in the case of lags), and then using two different multiple testing procedures based on all the estimates
(and associated p-values from individual tests) shown in the corresponding Tables 5, 7, and 8.34 As we
would expect, in some cases we reject in the former case, but not the latter. In particular, for the longer
sample periods beginning in either 1991 or 1995, for which the evidence was always weaker, the multiple
testing procedures never lead to rejection of the null hypothesis of no effect. However, for the Great
Recession period things are reversed. For credits with recapture provisions, in one case (for the
cumulative effect through four months), with one of the two multiple testing methods we still reject the
null of no effect, even at the five-percent significance level.35 And for credits targeting the unemployed
we often reject the null hypothesis using either method, and for cumulative effects through different
numbers of lags.
Taken at face value, then, the multiple testing results weaken our findings, leaving us only with
significant effects of two types of hiring credits – those with recapture provisions, and more so those
targeting the unemployed – and only for the Great Recession period. However, we think the multiple

34

The Sidak procedure controls the “family-wise error rate,” like the Bonferroni method, but is more appropriate to
our case which is based on p-values from a set of two-tailed tests based on normally distributed test statistics. The
Simes procedure instead controls the “false discovery rate,” which is a less conservative approach, as reflected in the
results reported in the table. Newson and The ALSPAC Study Team (2013) characterize the general difference
between these approaches as, for an uncorrected p-value of 0.05, for example, being 95 percent confident that all
rejected hypotheses are false (family-wise error rate) versus being 95 percent confident that at least some of the
rejected hypotheses are false (false discovery rate), and discuss the merits and shortcomings of these two
approaches.
35
Because the results for the Great Recession period are stronger, we show results for both the five- and the 10percent significance levels for this period.

27

testing procedure may be too conservative in rejecting the null hypothesis of no effect for these two types
of credits as well as refundable credits, for two reasons. First, as discussed earlier, there are theoretical
reasons to expect positive effects of hiring credits targeting the unemployed, perhaps especially during
recessions. In addition, given what we know about the ineffectiveness of many hiring credits, we would
expect recapture provisions to matter. And refundable credits should be the most valuable, again more so
during recessions. It is true that there are theoretical predictions that other types of credits – including
temporary credits, and credits based on full-time jobs created – should be positive. But in the former
case, at least, we explained why the actual classification of credits as permanent versus temporary is
difficult.
The upshot is that we do not think that the types of credits for which we tend to find positive
employment effects fit a pattern of randomness. Moreover, the results are somewhat consistent across
different sample periods. Thus, while we believe the multiple testing results are interesting, we do not
necessarily regard them as definitive in our case. Individual readers have to weigh the alternative
interpretations of the evidence, based in part, we think, on how much they think the credits for which we
find positive effects accord with theoretical expectations. Nonetheless, the results show that even if one
does regard the multiple testing results as definitive, there is still statistical evidence for positive effects of
hiring credits targeting the unemployed during severe recessions, and perhaps also of credits with
recapture provisions.
Employment vs. Hiring
As noted earlier, one potential problem with hiring credits is that they can lead firms to churn
workers, earning more credits for hiring (and firing) workers with little of the intended impact on net
employment growth. We have already established some evidence of positive employment effects, so
there is no reason to believe that the hiring credits we study generate only churning, with no change in
employment. However, whether or not hiring credits generate a lot of churning is still an important
policy question because it can drive up the costs of using hiring credits, per job created. And we have
seen that for many types of credits, there is no evidence of positive employment effects. By using data

28

from the Quarterly Workforce Indicators (QWI), we can learn something about churning, because these
data allow measurement of hiring. We do this analysis for the 2007-2011 period, because the QWI data
do not provide a balanced panel before the mid-2000s.
The QWI data also have information on separations, but the Job Openings and Labor Turnover
Survey (JOLTS) data show that quits are generally more than 50 percent of separations, although of
course less so during and after the Great Recession, when layoffs and discharges rose.36 Given that we
cannot separate out involuntary separations that firms could use, along with hiring, to churn workers, we
present evidence only on hiring (and employment in the QWI, for comparability).37
The model is the same as the one used for the monthly data, but now the time unit is a quarter,
and this entails some modifications. We use as dependent variables the first difference of the log of
employment (number of jobs) at the beginning of the quarter, and of the number of workers who started a
new job in the quarter. The specification includes the first difference and four lags of the variable
capturing the existence of a job credit (or of a credit with a particular feature); this way the lags cover the
same period as our earlier specifications using monthly QCEW data. This variable is constructed from the
monthly dummies and is equal to 1/3, 2/3, and one if the credit (or a credit with a particular feature) is
present in a state for one, two, or three months in a given quarter. The specification also includes the first
difference of the log of the state-specific shock variable and four lags. This variable is constructed as the
average of the monthly shock variables in each quarter. In addition, the specification includes:
interactions of the first difference of the shock variable with state dummy variables; first differences by
quarter and four lags of the minimum wage prevailing in the state at the beginning of the quarter; first
differences by quarter and four lags of the control for extended UI benefits; dummy variables for each
36

See http://research.stlouisfed.org/fred2/categories/32241 (viewed February 11, 2013).
The QWI data are derived from the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) Program at the U.S.
Census Bureau. The employer and workplace reports are the same as the data reported to the BLS as part of the
QCEW, although the two sources are not exactly equal. Moreover, by using the linked employer information in the
LEHD, accessions of workers to new employers, and separations from those employers, can be observed.
Beginning of period employment is conceptually and empirically similar to QCEW month one employment.
Formally, a person is defined as employed at the beginning of a quarter when he has positive earnings with the same
employer in both the previous and current quarters. Hires are recorded when an individual has positive earnings
with a particular employer in the current quarter and not in the previous one. There is also a “new hiring” variable
defined when an individual has positive earnings in the current quarter, with no earnings from the same employer
during the previous four quarters, but here we use the “all hiring” measure.
37

29

quarter in the sample; and interactions between calendar quarter dummy variables and state dummy
variables.
Even though hiring is a (gross) flow into employment, we estimate the model for the change in
hiring, paralleling the specifications for the change in employment. The question we are asking is if a
hiring credit boosts the hiring response relative to the employment response, so that firms can claim more
credits when they increase hiring.38 First consider employment. When the credit is introduced,
employment should grow because the cost of labor has fallen for firms where employment is growing
(and which are therefore eligible for credit). In the steady state some firms are growing and some are
shrinking for random reasons. The growing firms are always eligible for the credit which means that, on
average, the cost of labor has declined. So we should see a permanently higher level of employment
when a credit is in place. However, the growth in employment should occur over some limited period;
that is, there is no reason the credit boosts the rate of employment growth permanently. Now consider
hiring. When employment is growing, firms have to at a minimum hire a number equal to employment
growth. If there is an incentive to churn, then they hire more (and fire some, which we do not measure).
They also may have to hire more than the net employment growth because of worker attrition, so a
slightly higher effect of a credit on the change in hiring than the change in employment would not be
indicative of churning.
Therefore we should look at the change in hiring in the period when there is a change in
employment, and compare magnitudes. Once employment growth stops, then again some firms are
always growing, and they have an incentive to churn because they are eligible for the credit. So hiring,
like employment, should be at a permanently higher level. Moreover, if we introduce attrition, then a
higher employment level in the long run has to be associated with a higher level of hiring even absent
churning incentives. However, the change in hiring (i.e., when hiring increases) should occur at the same
time as the change in employment. If we instead regress the level of hiring on the change in the hiring
38

In firm-level data we could test this directly, estimating a regression of hiring on the change in employment and
the change in employment interacted with eligibility for a credit. That is, for given net employment growth, is gross
employment growth greater when there is a credit? But in aggregate data this regression would not make sense, as
there is likely always some hiring occurring, even when total employment is shrinking, and hence some firms are
always eligible for a credit.

30

credit, we do not see the higher churning associated with the employment increase, because hiring should
be higher even when the credit is not changing. The longer-term effects of hiring credits on employment
and hiring are of interest. However, it seems likely that the main effects of hiring credits will arise, and
be detectable, in the period when the credits are implemented and induce a reduction in labor costs for
firms – including those induced to increase employment (and hiring) because of the credit.
The results for employment and hires are reported, respectively, in Tables 12 and 13. Some of
the employment results are quite comparable to Table 8, which is not surprising, since the QWI and
QCEW reflect the same underlying data. In particular, the recapture estimates are strongly positive, and
the estimates for credits targeting the unemployed are positive, although a bit smaller with larger standard
errors, and hence not significant. The estimated coefficients for refundable credits – which were the
weakest results in Table 7 – are no longer positive, nor are the estimates for credits based on investment.
There is also still evidence of negative effects of hiring credits targeting manufacturing. Where there is
evidence of an effect of hiring credits in Table 12, the effect is often larger than in Table 8, likely because
the data are quarterly.
Table 13 turns to our main evidence from the QWI data, on hires. To some extent these results
reflect the employment results. In particular, credits allowing recapture and credits targeting the
unemployed have large and significant positive effects. In both cases, however, the positive estimates are
about ten (or more) times as large as the effects on employment overall, suggesting that there may be
considerably churning generated by these credits. Note also that the negative results indicate that, even
with recapture provisions, firms seem to be able to claim credits for a good deal of hiring that does not
create new jobs on net.
There is also some evidence of positive effects of particular types of hiring credits on hiring for
which there was no evidence of positive effects on employment growth. This is the case, for example, for
credits targeting the disabled and credits based on payroll growth. Thus, these latter results are consistent

31

with credits in some cases leading to churning that spurs hiring but does not generate employment
growth.39
V. Conclusions
State and federal policymakers grappling with the aftermath of the Great Recession sought ways
to spur job creation, in many cases adopting hiring credits to encourage employers to create new jobs.
This paper provides new evidence on the effects of state hiring credits on job growth, both over the longer
term and also focusing in part on the influence of credits adopted during and after the Great Recession.
We find that many types of state hiring credits did not spur job growth, although specific types of hiring
credits succeeded in boosting employment. The features associated with effective credits are
refundability allowing for recapture of payments if the required goals were not met, and targeting the
unemployed. There is some evidence that the effects of these credits were stronger during and just after
the Great Recession, and evidence that refundable credits and credits targeting the unemployed were more
effective at promoting job growth during recessions generally. This state-level evidence complements
some recent evidence on positive impacts of federal hiring credits adopted in response to the Great
Recession (Farooq and Kugler, 2015).
There are some limitations to what can be learned about the effects of credits enacted in this
period, in part because of the many kinds of credits that have been adopted, as well as difficulties in
measuring all of their relevant features – especially generosity or the magnitude of incentives. Moreover,
there is a dearth of other evidence on the effects of hiring credit programs. As a result, the findings
should be interpreted cautiously.
Nonetheless, the results do provide some evidence that particular types of hiring credits may have
boosted job growth, more so during the Great Recession and perhaps also other recessions. Moreover,
some of the results are consistent with what we might expect. A refundable hiring credit ought to have a
greater impact on firms because it is valuable even if the firm does not have taxable income in the current
period, which is more likely to be true during recessions. Recapture provisions should make hiring
39

Unfortunately, the limited number of hiring credits precludes asking some interesting questions suggested by the
evidence, such as whether recapture provisions reduce the extent to which other types of credits generate hiring but
not net job creation.

32

credits more effective. And credits targeting the unemployed, especially during a period such as the Great
Recession when unemployment should not be a stigmatizing characteristic, should be more effective. At
the same time, some expectations are not borne out in the data. Perhaps most significantly, we do not find
a stronger positive effect (or indeed any positive effect) of temporary hiring credits, although as we have
explained it is very difficult to determine whether a hiring credit was perceived as temporary by
employers. All in all, though, the results provide some evidence that judiciously chosen hiring credits
help increase job growth, especially during recessions.
There is also some evidence justifying the concern that hiring credits generate more gross hiring
than net employment growth. As discussed in Neumark (2013), estimates from the existing literature
suggest that for every 10 hires for which hiring credits are paid, one net job is created. Nonetheless,
inefficiencies this high can still be consistent with costs per job created in the United States in the $30,000
or $40,000 range, for example, if the credits pay $3,000 to $4,000 per hire – costs that are likely
substantially below the costs of creating jobs through the fiscal stimulus in the form of the ARRA used to
counter the Great Recession. And the evidence gives a little guidance as to the kinds of features of hiring
credits likely to make them effective.
All in all, the evidence is not overwhelming that hiring credits should be (or should have been) an
important part of the policy response to the Great Recession, or should be part of the response to future
recessions more generally. But there is some evidence pointing in this direction, especially for particular
types of hiring credits. Given these findings, there may be merit to enacting legislation establishing welldesigned federal or state hiring credits that turn on automatically and aggressively when economic
downturns occur. Such credits would complement other “automatic stabilizers” that seek to boost
workers’ and families’ incomes when a recession occurs, such as Unemployment Insurance, welfare, and
progressive taxation. However, for reasons discussed in the paper, we clearly recognize that there are
some limitations to our evidence, and more work is needed to provide more definitive evidence on the
causal effects of hiring credits – whether adopted in response to recessions, or more generally.

33

References
Anderson, Michael L. 2008. “Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early
Intervention: A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian, Perry Preschool, and Early Training Projects.” Journal
of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 103, Issue 484, pp. 1481-95.
Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Bartik, Timothy J. 2001. Jobs for the Poor: Can Labor Demand Policies Help? New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Bartik, Timothy J., and John H. Bishop. 2009. “The Job Creation Tax Credit: Dismal Projections for
Employment Call for a Quick, Efficient, and Effective Response.” Economic Policy Institute Briefing
Paper No.248, Washington, DC, October 20.
Bartik, Timothy J., and George Erickcek. 2010. “The Employment and Fiscal Effects of Michigan’s
MEGA Tax Credit Program.” Upjohn Institute Working Paper No.10-164.
Bishop, John. 2008. “The 1977-78 New Jobs Tax Credit Was a Big Success. Can a Tax Credit for
Employment Growth in 2009 and 2010 Restore Animal Spirits and Help Jump Start the Economy.”
Cornell University,
http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1185&context=articles (viewed
December 21, 2010).
BLS & Co. n.d. State Economic Development Incentives and Demographic Profiles. Available at
http://www.blsstrategies.com/state-incentives (viewed June 12, 2012).
Burtless, Gary. 1985. “Are Targeted Wage Subsidies Harmful? Evidence from a Wage Voucher
Experiment. “Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol.39, No.1, October, pp. 105-14.
Business Facilities. n.d. States Incentives Guide. Available at http://businessfacilities.com/specialreport/2011-incentives-guide/ (viewed June 12, 2012).
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller, Douglas L. 2008. “Bootstrap-Based
Improvements for Inference with Clustered Errors.” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.90, No.3,
August, 414-427.
Chirinko, Robert S., and Daniel J. Wilson. 2010. “Job Creation Tax Credits and Job Growth: Whether,
When, and Where?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2010-25.
Dickert-Conlin, Stacy, and Douglas Holtz-Eakin. 2000. “Employee-Based Versus Employer-Based
Subsidies to Low-Wage Workers: A Public Finance Perspective.” In David E. Card and Rebecca M.
Blank, eds., Finding Jobs: Work and Welfare Reform. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 262-94.
Elsby, Michael, Bart Hobijn, and Aysegul Sahin. 2010. “The Labor Market in the Great Recession.”
Unpublished manuscript, Brookings Institution.
Fahey, Jennifer Campbell, Janine E. Kaczmarowski, and Dorothy Krauss. 1997. “States Use Several
Methods to Attract and Retain Business.” Journal of State Taxation, Vol. 16, No. 1, Summer, pp. 45-78.
Farber, Henry, and Robert Valletta. 2011. “Extended Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment
Duration in the Great Recession: The U.S. Experience.” Unpublished manuscript.

Farooq, Ammar, and Adriana Kugler. 2015. “What Factors Contributed to Changes in Employment
During and After the Great Recession.” IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 4:3, on-line.
Good Jobs First. 2012. Money-Back Guarantees for Taxpayers: Clawbacks and Other Enforcement
Safeguards in State Economic Development Subsidy Programs. Washington, DC: Good Jobs First.
Hollenbeck, Kevin M., and Richard J. Willke. 1991. “The Employment and Earnings Impact of the
Targeted Jobs Tax Credit.” Upjohn Institute Staff Working Paper 91-07, Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn
Institute for Employment Research.
Katz, Lawrence F. 1998. “Wage Subsidies for the Disadvantaged.” In Richard B. Freeman and Peter
Gottschalk, eds., Generating Jobs: How to Increase Demand for Less-Skilled Workers. New York, NY:
Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 21-53.
Klarner, Carl. 2013. “State Partisan Balance Data, 1937 – 2011.” Available at
http://hdl.handle.net/1902.1/20403 IQSS Dataverse Network (Distributor) V1 (Version).
Kroft, Kory, Fabian Lange, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2013. “Duration Dependence and Labor Market
Conditions: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 128, No. 3,
August, pp. 1123-67.
Martínez-García, Enrique, and Janet Koech. 2010. “A Historical Look at the Labor Market During
Recessions.” Economic Letter, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Vol.5, No.1, January.
Mattera, Philip, Thomas Cafcas, Leigh McIlvaine, Andrew Seifter, and Kasia Tarczynska. 2011. Money
for Something: Job Creation and Job Quality Standards in State Economic Development Subsidy
Programs, Good Jobs First, available at
http://www.goodjobsfirst.org/sites/default/files/docs/pdf/moneyforsomething.pdf (viewed Nov. 5, 2012).
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2010. “Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007-09.” IMF Economic
Review, Vol. 58, No. 1, pp. 74-117.
National Association of State Development Agencies. 1983. Directory of Incentives for Business
Investment and Development in the United States: A State-By-State Guide, 1sted. Washington D.C.: The
Urban Institute Press.
National Association of State Development Agencies. 1986. Directory of Incentives for Business
Investment and Development in the United States: A State-By-State Guide, 2nded. Washington D.C.: The
Urban Institute Press.
National Association of State Development Agencies. 1991. Directory of Incentives for Business
Investment and Development in the United States: A State-By-State Guide, 3rded. Washington D.C.: The
Urban Institute Press.
National Association of State Development Agencies. 2003. State by State Guide to Incentives for
Business Investment and Development. Austin: Summers Press.
Neumark, David. 2013. “Spurring Job Creation in Response to Severe Recessions: Reconsidering Hiring
Credits.” Journal of Policy Analysis & Management, Vol. 32, No. 1, pp. 142-71.
Newson, Roger, and The ALSPAC Study Team. 2003. “Multiple-Test Procedures and Smile Plots.” The
Stata Journal, Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 109-32.
Perloff, Jeffrey M., and Michael L. Wachter. 1979. “The New Jobs Tax Credit: An Evaluation of the

1977-78 Wage Subsidy Program.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 69, No. 5,
pp. 173-179.
Pittelko, Brian. 2011. “Trends in States’ Unemployment Rates.” The Upjohn Institute Blog, April 22.
Available at http://www.upjohninst.org/blog (viewed April 26, 2011).
Rogers, Cami. 1998. “State Guidelines: The Jobs Creation Tax Credit.” Journal of State Taxation, Vol.16,
Winter, pp. 44-63.
Rothstein, Jesse. 2011. “Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession.” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 143-213.
Scott, Christine. 2013. “The Work Opportunities Tax Credit (WOTC).” Washington, DC: Congressional
Research Service.
Sierra Group. n.d. Employment Incentives. Available at
http://www.employmentincentives.com/state_incentives/state_incentives_intro.htm.(viewedJune 12,
2012).
State Capital Group. 2010. Incentives for Businesses 50 State Handbook. Available at
http://www.statecapitalgroup.org/newspublications/businessincentives/BusinessIncentives2010_Final.pdf
(viewed June 16, 2012).
Wilson, Daniel. 2012. “Fiscal Spending Job Multipliers: Evidence from the 2009 American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 4, No. 3, November, pp. 251282.

Figure 1: Total Number of States with Hiring Credits at Any Time, 1969June, 2012

Figure 2: Number of New Hiring Credits Each Year

Table 1: Summary of State Hiring Credits, 1969-June, 2012
A. States
States analyzed
1 or more hiring credits
No hiring credit
B. Basic information
Total number of hiring credit programs
Creation date
1969-1979
1980-1989
1990-1999
2000-before Great Recession
During Great Recession
After Great Recession
Current as of June 2012
Duration of hiring credit programs
0-10 years
11-20 years
21-30 years
31+ years

50
45
5
147
6
16
58
37
9
21
121
73
53
13
8

Table 2: Definition and Coding of State Hiring Credits
Variable
Basis for providing benefits:a

Categories
New jobs

Basis for calculating the value of credits
to the firm.

New payroll
New investment
Other criteria

Tax treatment:

Equal to tax owed

Form in which the program limits the
economic benefits provided for each
taxable year.

Carry-forward

Refundable
Type of new jobs required:
The type of job the firm needs to create to
obtain the benefits of the program. The
type of job is defined by the minimum
number of hours of work performed per
week.
Industry targeting:

Targeting by type of business:

Not specified
Full-time
Full-time equivalent
Part-time
Not specified
Targeted
Manufacturing
Not targeted
Small business
Large business
Headquarters

Targeting by type of worker:a

Not targeted
Disabled

Unemployed

Welfare recipients
Not targeted

Description
Benefit is based on the number of net new
employees.
Benefit is based on new payroll (wages paid to
new employees, withholdings of new employees).
Benefit is based on new investment in machinery,
property, facilities, equipment or any growthrelated assets.
Benefit is based on other criteria(property tax,
sales tax, excise tax).
The maximum benefit that can be paid to a firm is
the firm’s tax liability.
If the value of the benefit exceeds the firm’s tax
liability (or a specific percentage of it) for the
taxable year, this excess may be carried forward
to succeeding years and be used as a credit
against the firm’s future tax liability.
The whole benefit is paid even if it is higher than
the value of the firm’s tax liability.
New employee works for 30 or more hours per
week.
One or more new employees work a number of
hours per week that add up to one full-time
employee’s hours requirement.
New employee works at least 10 hours per week.
Program applies to a cluster of industries.
Program applies to manufacturing facilities.
Program applies to all industries.
Program applies to firms with 50 employees or
fewer.b
Program applies to firms with a large number of
employees, or high job creation, payroll, and/or
investment broadly defined.
Program applies to those facilities where the
principal offices of an eligible business are
located.
Program applies to all types of businesses.
Program applies to disabled workers, i.e.,
individuals who are considered to have a physical
or mental disability which results in a substantial
handicap to employment. This disability may be
determined or certified by specific institutions such
as the Division of Rehabilitation Services.
Program applies to the unemployed, i.e.,
individuals who attest not to be working and who
have received unemployment compensation
benefits and/or have been classified as
unemployed by a competent office of employment.
Program applies to recipients of welfare aid, e.g.,
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families.
Program applies to all workers.

Variable
Recapture provisions:
Program has specific provisions (e.g.,
penalties) if the requirements to obtain the
credit were not met and/or maintained.
Wage requirements:
Firms must pay a wage at or above a
specified level to the new and/or retained
employees. The wage may be defined as a
specific level, or a percentage of the
minimum wage or some average wage
(e.g., county, state).
Geographic provisions:
Program provides different benefits based
on location within the state (e.g., specific
types of counties)
Temporary/permanent:

Categories
Yes

Description

No/not specified
Yes

No

Yes
No
Temporary

The program is originally enacted as
Permanent
temporary, permanent, or
undetermined/not determinable. The
classification is assumed to be a feature of Undetermined/not determinable
each program throughout its duration.
a
The classification for this variable is not mutually exclusive.
b
In Virginia, a small business is defined as a company with fewer than 250 employees.

Table 3: Characteristics of State Hiring Credits, 1969-June, 2012
Type of Credit
Count
Type of Credit
Basis for providing benefitsa
Targeting
New jobs
110
Non-targeted
New jobs only
48
Targeted
New payroll
66
Industry targeting
New payroll only
20
Manufacturing
New investment
29
Targeting by type of business
Other criteria
28
Large business
Small business
Tax treatmenta
Tax credit is equal to tax owed
21
Headquarters
Carry-forward is allowed
67
Targeting by type of workera
Refundable (the whole value of
17
Unemployed
the credit is paid even if it is
Disadvantaged
higher than the value of the tax
Welfare recipients
owed)
Recapture provisions
Not specified
43
Wage requirements
Type of new jobs required
Geographic provisions
Full-time jobs
90
General classification
Full-time equivalent jobs
24
Temporary
Part-time jobs
11
Permanent
Unspecified
22
Cannot be determined
a

The classification for this variable is not mutually exclusive.

Count
75
72
33
4
20
6
8
6
24
7
10
7
54
83
48
44
97
6

Table 4: Total Number of Changes States with Specific Types of Credits, 1990-2011
Year

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Any credit

0

2

0

3

4

8

3

2

2

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

Jobs

0

2

0

3

4

7

3

1

2

1

0

0

1

1

0

0

1

1

0

2

0

0

Payroll

0

0

1

1

2

5

3

2

2

1

0

0

0

1

1

1

2

1

0

3

1

2

Investment

0

2

1

0

0

3

4

2

0

0

1

0

1

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

0

Other

1

0

1

3

2

3

2

3

1

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

Full time

0

0

2

1

2

7

3

3

2

1

0

0

0

1

0

1

0

0

0

3

1

0

Full time equiv.

0

1

0

2

1

0

2

1

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

0

2

1

1

2

1

Part time

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

0

Not specified

0

1

0

0

2

1

0

2

1

1

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

0

0

Equal to tax owed

0

0

0

2

0

2

0

1

2

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

0

1

1

0

1

Carry-forward

0

0

0

1

1

6

2

1

3

2

0

0

2

0

0

0

1

0

0

3

0

0

Refundable

0

0

0

1

1

3

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

2

0

1

0

0

2

2

Not specified

0

2

2

0

4

1

3

2

0

0

1

0

1

1

0

2

1

0

1

3

2

2

Wage requirement
No wage
requirement

0

1

0

2

4

7

4

2

4

0

2

1

1

0

1

1

1

1

0

3

1

0

0

1

0

1

1

5

0

3

0

0

0

0

1

1

0

0

3

0

1

2

0

3

Recapture

0

1

1

3

3

6

4

2

2

0

0

0

1

0

0

2

0

1

0

1

2

0

No recapture

0

1

0

0

2

4

1

3

1

2

0

0

1

1

0

0

2

0

0

3

1

1

Industry

0

1

1

0

1

5

1

2

0

1

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

1

0

1

0

1

Manufacturing

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

No targeting

0

1

0

3

3

5

2

2

3

1

0

1

0

2

0

1

0

0

0

2

1

0

Unemployed

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

3

1

Welfare recipient

0

0

1

0

1

2

0

1

2

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Disabled

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

2

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

2

0

0

0

1

0

No targeting

0

2

1

3

4

8

3

2

2

0

0

0

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

2

0

0

Temporary

0

0

0

1

1

5

1

1

1

0

1

1

2

1

1

3

3

0

2

0

6

3

Permanent

0

2

1

3

3

7

4

2

2

0

0

0

1

2

0

1

1

0

0

2

0

2

Undeterminable

0

0

0

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

Table 5: Estimated Effects of State Hiring Credits on Employment, Credit Dummy Variables Specifications, First Differences, 1995-2011
Credit Variable(s) Contemp. +4 Lags +8 Lags +12 Lags Credit Variable(s)
Contemp. +4 Lags
+8 Lags +12 Lags
Credit
-0.0022
-0.0005 -0.0007
0.0001
Wage Requirement
-0.0008
-0.0004
-0.0002
0.0001
(0.0017) (0.0012) (0.0019) (0.0030)
(0.0012)
(0.0011) (0.0018)
(0.0025)
Jobs
-0.0024
-0.0019 -0.0026
-0.0016
No Wage Requirement
-0.0008
-0.0019
-0.0036
-0.0031
(0.0017) (0.0013) (0.0020) (0.0027)
(0.0007)
(0.0011) (0.0014)
(0.0027)
Payroll
-0.0009
0.0001
0.0008
0.0000
Recapture
-0.0001
0.0022
0.0034
0.0042
(0.0012) (0.0011) (0.0019) (0.0022)
(0.0018)
(0.0015) (0.0020)
(0.0030)
Investment
No Recapture
0.0017
0.0012
0.0006
0.0012
0.0004
-0.0005
-0.0012
0.0001
(0.0015) (0.0017) (0.0025) (0.0035)
(0.0010)
(0.0009) (0.0015)
(0.0019)
Others
-0.0002
0.0001
0.0000
-0.0010
Industry
0.0000
-0.0020
-0.0007
0.0002
(0.0013) (0.0017) (0.0024) (0.0036)
(0.0012)
(0.0017) (0.0026)
(0.0031)
Full Time
-0.0005
-0.0002 -0.0001
0.0001
Manufacturing
-0.0112
-0.0201
-0.0146
-0.0267
(0.0015) (0.0013) (0.0022) (0.0030)
(0.0008)
(0.0009) (0.0015)
(0.0019)
Full Time Equiv.
-0.0036
-0.0024 -0.0018
-0.0049
No Targeting
-0.0025
-0.0013
-0.0016
-0.0022
(0.0012) (0.0013) (0.0023) (0.0031)
(0.0018)
(0.0015) (0.0020)
(0.0034)
Part Time
-0.0020
-0.0029 -0.0039
-0.0052
Unemployed
0.0026
0.0044
0.0036
0.0028
(0.0016) (0.0012) (0.0022) (0.0045)
(0.0021)
(0.0017) (0.0022)
(0.0045)
Not Specified
-0.0014
-0.0017 -0.0031
-0.0057
Welfare recipient
0.0024
-0.0002
-0.0004
-0.0011
(0.0007) (0.0012) (0.0020) (0.0038)
(0.0020)
(0.0024) (0.0039)
(0.0050)
Equal to tax owed -0.0004
0.0013
0.0014
-0.0011
Disabled
-0.0022
-0.0011
0.0012
0.0010
(0.0020) (0.0032) (0.0039) (0.0066)
(0.0021)
(0.0016) (0.0028)
(0.0047)
Carry-forward
-0.0020
-0.0005 -0.0010
-0.0007
No Targeting
-0.0025
-0.0004
-0.0005
0.0004
(0.0016) (0.0013) (0.0019) (0.0027)
(0.0017)
(0.0013) (0.0020)
(0.0033)
Refundable
0.0017
0.0012
0.0039
0.0044
Temporary
-0.0008
-0.0012
-0.0003
-0.0008
(0.0015) (0.0018) (0.0021) (0.0025)
(0.0012)
(0.0010) (0.0013)
(0.0024)
Not Specified
0.0003
-0.0003 -0.0006
-0.0010
Permanent
-0.0007
0.0001
0.0009
0.0013
(0.0013) (0.0023) (0.0030) (0.0037)
(0.0009)
(0.0011) (0.0016)
(0.0025)

The dependent variable is the first difference of the log of QCEW employment. The specification includes the first difference of the job credit dummy or
dummies, and 12 lags of these first differences. In addition to the contemporaneous effect, the cumulative effects through 4, 8, and 12 lags are reported. Each
panel reports a different specification. The first just includes a single dummy variable for whether there is a credit, the second includes dummy variables for
whether there is a credit with each of the four possible bases for benefits, etc. The specification also includes: the contemporaneous value and 12 lags of the first
difference of the state-specific shock variable (in logs); interactions of the first difference of the shock variable interacted with state dummy variables; the
contemporaneous value and 12 lags of the first difference of the log of the minimum wage prevailing in the state; the contemporaneous value and 12 lags of the
first difference of the control for extended UI benefits; a dummy variable for the political party of the Governor (measured annually); dummy variables for each
month in the sample; and interactions between calendar month dummy variables and state dummy variables. The cyclical control is constructed using 1990 as
the baseline year. The data are monthly. There are 10,150 observations. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the state level.

Table 6: Estimated Effects of State Hiring Credits on Employment, Restricting Effects of Hiring
Credits to Quadratic Specification, First Differences, 1995-2011
Credit Variable(s)
Linear
Quadratic Credit Variable(s)
Linear
Quadratic
Credit
-0.0031
0.0033
Wage Requirement
-0.0014
0.0009
(0.0034)
(0.0030)
(0.0026)
(0.0022)
Jobs
-0.0060
0.0043
No Wage Requirement
-0.0069
0.0049
(0.0035)
(0.0029)
(0.0030)
(0.0034)
Payroll
-0.0006
0.0000
Recapture
0.0020
0.0006
(0.0029)
(0.0022)
(0.0032)
(0.0030)
Investment
No Recapture
0.0057
-0.0027
-0.0009
0.0024
(0.0043)
(0.0038)
(0.0035)
(0.0033)
Others
-0.0028
0.0021
Industry
-0.0027
0.0030
(0.0045)
(0.0047)
(0.0042)
(0.0038)
Full Time
-0.0014
0.0016
Manufacturing
-0.0484
0.0237
(0.0036)
(0.0026)
(0.0029)
(0.0023)
Full Time Equiv.
-0.0036
0.0015
No Targeting
-0.0043
0.0025
(0.0040)
(0.0045)
(0.0034)
(0.0028)
Part Time
-0.0071
0.0024
Unemployed
0.0141
-0.0164
(0.0035)
(0.0046)
(0.0059)
(0.0071)
Not Specified
-0.0020
0.0006
Welfare recipient
-0.0013
-0.0001
(0.0038)
(0.0041)
(0.0063)
(0.0044)
Equal to tax owed
0.0078
-0.0089
Disabled
-0.0039
0.0054
(0.0052)
(0.0048)
(0.0022)
(0.0027)
Carry-forward
-0.0035
0.0037
No Targeting
-0.0028
0.0032
(0.0028)
(0.0023)
(0.0035)
(0.0030)
Refundable
0.0048
-0.0031
Temporary
-0.0005
0.0002
(0.0033)
(0.0038)
(0.0025)
(0.0023)
Not Specified
0.0018
0.0003
Permanent
-0.0032
0.0029
(0.0055)
(0.0040)
(0.0031)
(0.0031)
Notes from Table 5 apply. However, rather than estimated unrestricted coefficients of the contemporaneous and
lagged hiring credit variables, the effects are restricted to lie along a quadratic function, as described in the text.

Table 7: Estimated Effects of State Hiring Credits on Employment, Credit Dummy Variables Specifications, First Differences, 1991-2011
Credit Variable(s) Contemp. +4 Lags +8 Lags +12 Lags Credit Variable(s)
Contemp. +4 Lags
+8 Lags +12 Lags
Credit
-0.0005
-0.0003 -0.0008
0.0006
Wage Requirement
-0.0003
-0.0007
-0.0007
0.0000
(0.0010) (0.0009) (0.0012) (0.0019)
(0.0010)
(0.0009) (0.0015)
(0.0020)
Jobs
-0.0006
-0.0011 -0.0023
-0.0006
No Wage Requirement
-0.0002
-0.0013
-0.0027
-0.0025
(0.0011) (0.0011) (0.0016) (0.0020)
(0.0007)
(0.0012) (0.0012)
(0.0025)
Payroll
-0.0004
0.0006
0.0015
0.0008
Recapture
0.0007
0.0010
0.0019
0.0028
(0.0010) (0.0009) (0.0017) (0.0018)
(0.0012)
(0.0012) (0.0014)
(0.0021)
Investment
No Recapture
0.0011
0.0006
0.0008
0.0009
0.0004
0.0000
-0.0001
0.0013
(0.0013) (0.0018) (0.0023) (0.0030)
(0.0009)
(0.0010) (0.0013)
(0.0017)
Others
-0.0003
-0.0006 -0.0007
-0.0011
Industry
0.0004
-0.0018
-0.0005
-0.0001
(0.0011) (0.0012) (0.0019) (0.0023)
(0.0010)
(0.0014) (0.0020)
(0.0025)
Full Time
-0.0001
0.0001
0.0006
0.0012
Manufacturing
-0.0026
-0.0100
-0.0037
-0.0088
(0.0011) (0.0010) (0.0016) (0.0021)
(0.0064)
(0.0081) (0.0054)
(0.0094)
Full Time Equiv.
-0.0018
-0.0028 -0.0030
-0.0048
No Targeting
-0.0012
-0.0007
-0.0014
-0.0008
(0.0010) (0.0013) (0.0023) (0.0029)
(0.0012)
(0.0010) (0.0014)
(0.0022)
Part Time
-0.0024
-0.0034 -0.0046
-0.0061
Unemployed
0.0019
0.0040
0.0029
0.0026
(0.0019) (0.0011) (0.0011) (0.0024)
(0.0021)
(0.0018) (0.0022)
(0.0038)
Not Specified
-0.0010
0.0003
0.0002
-0.0015
Welfare recipient
0.0005
0.0005
0.0012
0.0008
(0.0007) (0.0015) (0.0026) (0.0035)
(0.0017)
(0.0022) (0.0035)
(0.0045)
Equal to tax owed
0.0005
0.0003 -0.0013
-0.0024
Disabled
-0.0014
0.0000
0.0022
0.0025
(0.0017) (0.0026) (0.0034) (0.0050)
(0.0019)
(0.0016) (0.0029)
(0.0044)
Carry-forward
-0.0013
0.0006
0.0002
0.0001
No Targeting
-0.0007
-0.0005
-0.0009
0.0006
(0.0012) (0.0012) (0.0018) (0.0024)
(0.0010)
(0.0009) (0.0014)
(0.0021)
Refundable
0.0014
0.0013
0.0034
0.0041
Temporary
-0.0009
-0.0013
-0.0005
-0.0008
(0.0012) (0.0014) (0.0020) (0.0022)
(0.0011)
(0.0010) (0.0011)
(0.0021)
Not Specified
0.0005
-0.0008 0.0004
0.0007
Permanent
0.0004
-0.0001
0.0006
0.0014
(0.0010) (0.0017) (0.0020) (0.0025)
(0.0007)
(0.0009) (0.0014)
(0.0018)
The dependent variable is the first difference of the log of QCEW employment. The specification includes the first difference of the job credit dummy or
dummies, and 12 lags of this first difference. In addition to the contemporaneous effect, the cumulative effects through 4, 8, and 12 lags are reported. Each
panel reports a different specification. The first just includes a single dummy variable for whether there is a credit, the second includes dummy variables for
whether there is a credit with each of the four possible bases for benefits, etc. The specification also includes: the contemporaneous value and 12 lags of the
first difference of the state-specific shock variable (in logs); interactions of the first difference of the shock variable interacted with state dummy variables; the
contemporaneous value and 12 lags of the first difference of the log of the minimum wage prevailing in the state; dummy variable for the political party of the
Governor (measured annually); dummy variables for each month in the sample; and interactions between calendar month dummy variables and state dummy
variables. The UI benefits control is not included because the data do not extend back to the beginning of the sample period used in this table. The cyclical
control is constructed using 1990 as the baseline year. The data are monthly. There are 12,550 observations. Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are
clustered at the state level.

Table 8: Estimated Effects of State Hiring Credits on Employment, Credit Dummy Variables Specifications, First Differences, with
ARRA Spending and Housing Appreciation Controls, 2007-2011
Credit Variable(s) Contemp. +4 Lags +8 Lags
+12 Lags Credit Variable(s)
Contemp. +4 Lags
+8 Lags +12 Lags
ARRA variable
Contemp. +6 Lags +12 Lags +24 Lags
ARRA
-0.0017
0.0002
-0.0001
0.0017
(0.0014) (0.0023) (0.0029)
(0.0037)
Credit
0.0011
-0.0014 -0.0067
-0.0084
Wage Requirement
-0.0007
0.0023
0.0033
0.0026
(0.0015) (0.0023) (0.0040)
(0.0049)
(0.0010)
(0.0021) (0.0039)
(0.0040)
Jobs
0.0016
-0.0008 -0.0035
-0.0066
No Wage Requirement
-0.0008
-0.0050
-0.0082
-0.0135
(0.0014) (0.0025) (0.0046)
(0.0045)
(0.0024)
(0.0040) (0.0057)
(0.0104)
Payroll
-0.0009
0.0005
0.0008
-0.0004
Recapture
0.0033
0.0057
0.0064
0.0082
(0.0011) (0.0012) (0.0030)
(0.0024)
(0.0023)
(0.0018) (0.0031)
(0.0042)
Investment
No Recapture
0.0091
0.0060
0.0053
0.0044
0.0027
-0.0015
-0.0040
-0.0049
(0.0012) (0.0024) (0.0058)
(0.0043)
(0.0014)
(0.0020) (0.0028)
(0.0034)
Others
0.0007
-0.0034 -0.0059
-0.0076
Industry
0.0001
-0.0042
-0.0068
-0.0094
(0.0017) (0.0029) (0.0045)
(0.0062)
(0.0012)
(0.0020) (0.0029)
(0.0036)
Full Time
0.0014
0.0004
-0.0019
-0.0018
Manufacturing
-0.0011
-0.0090
-0.0091
-0.0132
(0.0015) (0.0025) (0.0038)
(0.0058)
(0.0012)
(0.0028) (0.0040)
(0.0049)
Full Time Equiv.
-0.0050
-0.0076 -0.0091
-0.0177
No Targeting
0.0019
0.0003
-0.0041
-0.0051
(0.0015) (0.0028) (0.0054)
(0.0070)
(0.0012)
(0.0023) (0.0034)
(0.0040)
Part Time
…
…
0.0006
0.0092
Unemployed
0.0061
0.0084
0.0082
0.0116
(0.0017)
(0.0034)
(0.0014)
(0.0021) (0.0033)
(0.0045)
Not Specified
0.0009
-0.0027 -0.0049
-0.0055
Welfare recipient
…
…
…
…
(0.0010) (0.0026) (0.0036)
(0.0050)
Equal to tax owed -0.0049
-0.0072 -0.0115
-0.0247
Disabled
-0.0094
0.0015
0.0034
0.0036
(0.0012) (0.0056) (0.0070)
(0.0137)
(0.0019)
(0.0033) (0.0024)
(0.0074)
Carry-forward
0.0012
-0.0009 -0.0049
-0.0051
No Targeting
0.0012
-0.0014
-0.0069
-0.0084
(0.0010) (0.0046) (0.0056)
(0.0086)
(0.0016)
(0.0023) (0.0041)
(0.0051)
Refundable
0.0012
0.0027
0.0055
0.0017
Temporary
-0.0010
-0.0032
-0.0032
-0.0049
(0.0030) (0.0037) (0.0042)
(0.0061)
(0.0020)
(0.0032) (0.0048)
(0.0080)
Not Specified
0.0028
0.0003
-0.0014
-0.0018
Permanent
0.0009
-0.0030
-0.0064
-0.0081
(0.0014) (0.0029) (0.0040)
(0.0048)
(0.0009)
(0.0019) (0.0026)
(0.0035)

The dependent variable is the first difference of the log of QCEW employment. The specification includes the first difference of the job credit dummy or
dummies, and 12 lags of this first difference. In addition to the contemporaneous effect, the cumulative effects through 4, 8, and 12 lags are reported. Each
panel reports a different specification. The first just includes a single dummy variable for whether there is a credit, the second includes dummy variables for
whether there is a credit with each of the four possible bases for benefits, etc. The specification also includes: the contemporaneous value and 12 lags of the
first difference of the state-specific shock variable (in logs); interactions of the first difference of the shock variable interacted with state dummy variables; the
contemporaneous value and 12 lags of the first difference of the log of the minimum wage prevailing in the state; the contemporaneous value and 12 lags of the
first difference of the control for extended UI benefits; dummy variable for the political party of the Governor (measured annually); dummy variables for each

month in the sample; and interactions between calendar month dummy variables and state dummy variables. We add contemporaneous ARRA obligated
spending, and 24 lags, in logs. Spending is entered in logs so zeros are replaced with ones in levels before taking logs. (Cumulative effects through six, 12, and
24 lags are reported.) We also add dummy variables for the quintiles of housing price appreciation for the 2000-2006 period interacted with calendar month
dummy variables. We report estimates of the coefficients of ARRA spending only for the first specification; results were similar for the other models. The
cyclical control is constructed using 2006 as the baseline year. The data are monthly. There are 2,950 observations. Standard errors, reported in parentheses,
are clustered at the state level.

Table 9: Estimated Effects of State Hiring Credits on Employment, with Interactions between
Hiring Credit Variables and Recession Indicators, 1991-2011
Credit Variable(s)
Contemp.
+4 Lags
+8 Lags
+12 Lags
Refundable: main effect
0.0005
-0.0001
0.0022
0.0025
(0.0012)
(0.0014)
(0.0023)
(0.0023)
Refundable: interaction
0.0124
0.0177
0.0158
0.0189
(0.0013)
(0.0022)
(0.0032)
(0.0032)
Refundable: main effect
0.0130
0.0176
0.0180
0.0214
+ interaction
(0.0004)
(0.0015)
(0.0015)
(0.0028)
Recapture: main effect
0.0000
0.0009
0.0021
0.0036
(0.0013)
(0.0011)
(0.0016)
(0.0020)
Recapture: interaction
0.0041
0.0010
-0.0005
-0.0040
(0.0023)
(0.0043)
(0.0036)
(0.0062)
Recapture: main effect
0.0042
0.0019
0.0016
-0.0004
+ interaction
(0.0019)
(0.0042)
(0.0033)
(0.0060)
Unemployed: main effect
0.0015
0.0012
0.0010
0.0004
(0.0028)
(0.0027)
(0.0024)
(0.0043)
Unemployed: interaction
0.0048
0.0111
0.0089
0.0097
(0.0056)
(0.0056)
(0.0073)
(0.0117)
Unemployed: main effect
0.0063
0.0123
0.0100
0.0101
+ interaction
(0.0049)
(0.0049)
(0.0071)
(0.0117)
Notes from Table 7 apply, and the specifications correspond to those in Table 7. However, we also add
interactions between the hiring credit variables and indicators for recessions. The indicators for recessions
are based on NBER dates, and a period one year from the end of each recession. The recession periods,
therefore, are July 1990-March 1992, March 2001-November 2002, and December 2007-June 2010. These
recession indicators are interacted with the contemporaneous value and all lags of the set of hiring credit
variables included in each specification (e.g., equal to tax owed, carry-forward, refundable, and not specified,
for the different credits based on tax treatment). For each specification reported, the contemporaneous and
the cumulative lags of these interactions are reported, for the three specific types of hiring credits listed.

Table 10: Estimated Effects of Lagged Employment Growth (and Political Control) on State Hiring Credits
Credit with refundable benefit
Credit with recapture provisions
Credit targeting the unemployed
+ 6 lags + 12 lags + 24 lags + 36 lags + 6 lags
+ 12 lags + 24 lags + 36 lags + 6 lags + 12 lags + 24 lags + 36 lags
Employment -0.2863
-0.4772
-0.1946
-0.4410
-0.0122
0.1892
-0.3422
-0.5737
-0.0676
-0.0199
-0.3924
-0.8104
growth
(0.1934) (0.3293)
(0.4013)
(0.8017) (0.2446) (0.4088)
(0.4818)
(0.8462) (0.1195) (0.1109) (0.2817)
(0.6484)
1995-2011
Party of
0.0005
-0.0005
0.0005
0.0008
0.0021
0.0007
-0.0009
0.0010
0.0006
-0.0005
0.0000
-0.0009
governor
(0.0015) (0.0011)
(0.0010)
(0.0008) (0.0013) (0.0032)
(0.0046)
(0.0012) (0.0011) (0.0010) (0.0009)
(0.0006)
Employment -0.0335
-0.0844
0.0623
-0.0460
-0.1286
0.2005
-0.5671
-0.9527
-0.1004
-0.0527
-0.3461
-0.7477
growth
(0.1923) (0.3283)
(0.3654)
(0.6710) (0.3526) (0.4959)
(0.6264)
(0.8685) (0.1192) (0.1227) (0.2219)
(0.4375)
1991-2011
Party of
0.0050
-0.0002
0.0003
0.0004
0.0049
-0.0064
-0.0101
0.0015
0.0003
0.0005
-0.0108
-0.0004
governor
(0.0036) (0.0010)
(0.0011)
(0.0011) (0.0053) (0.0157)
(0.0124)
(0.0016) (0.0007) (0.0014) (0.0109)
(0.0006)
Employment -0.3199
-0.4453
0.1659
-0.7279
1.3224
1.3817
0.7327
0.6478
0.7452
0.3961
0.9642
0.6111
2007-2011 +
growth
(0.7038) (0.6713)
(0.9462)
(1.3279) (1.3323) (1.1107)
(1.2408)
(1.0357) (0.8574) (0.8337) (0.9399)
(0.9973)
ARRA and
Party of
-0.0017
0.0356
0.0395
0.0071
0.0094
-0.0447
-0.0538
0.0039
0.0118
0.0291
0.0413
-0.0020
housing controls
governor
(0.0109) (0.0397)
(0.0396)
(0.0054) (0.0110) (0.0477)
(0.0517)
(0.0044) (0.0118) (0.0421) (0.0414)
(0.0027)
The dependent variable is the enactment of a credit of the type specified in the column headings. Linear probability model estimates are reported. The models includes 36 monthly
lags of the first difference of log employment, and the other controls listed in the notes to Table 5, except that the specifications for 1991-2011 do not include the UI benefits. Each
panel reports the cumulative effects through six, 12, 24 and 36 lags of the first difference of the log of employment. The data are monthly. Standard errors, reported in parentheses,
are clustered at the state level.

Table 11: Multiple Testing Results for Key Hiring Credit Findings
Credit with refundable benefit
Credit with recapture provisions
Credit targeting the unemployed
Contemp. +4 Lags +8 Lags +12 Lags Contemp. +4 Lags +8 Lags +12 Lags Contemp. +4 Lags +8 Lags +12 Lags
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Reject single test, p = 0.1
Reject multiple test, p=0.1
1995-2011
(Simes method)
Reject multiple test, p=0.1
(Sidak method)
Reject single test, p = 0.1
Yes
Yes
Reject multiple test, p=0.1
1991-2011
(Simes method)
Reject multiple test, p=0.1
(Sidak method)
Reject single test, p = 0.1
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2007-2011 +
Reject multiple test, p=0.1
ARRA and
(Simes method)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
housing
Reject
multiple
test,
p=0.1
controls
(Sidak method)
Yes
Yes
Reject single test, p = 0.05
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
2007-2011 +
Reject multiple test,
ARRA and
p=0.05 (Simes method)
Yes
Yes
Yes
housing
Reject
multiple
test,
controls
p=0.05 (Sidak method)
Yes
Yes
Calculations based on “multproc” code in Stata (Newson and The ALSPAC Study Team, 2003). We compute the corrected p-values based on the p-values for all of the estimated
effects reported in Tables 5 (100 estimates), 7 (100 estimates), and 8 (96 estimates).

Table 12: Estimated Effects of State Hiring Credits on Employment, Credit Dummy Variables Specifications, First Differences, 2007-2011, Quarterly
Workforce Indicators Data
Credit Variable(s)

Contemp.

+1 Lag

+2 Lags

Credit

0.0005
(0.0029)
0.0024
(0.0050)
-0.0041
(0.0058)
…

0.0008
(0.0053)
0.0036
(0.0080)
-0.0055
(0.0057)
-0.0097
(0.0049)
-0.0054
(0.0037)
-0.0015
(0.0039)
-0.0110
(0.0045)
…

-0.0031
(0.0059)
-0.0012
(0.0082)
-0.0034
(0.0065)
-0.0022
(0.0054)
-0.0089
(0.0056)
-0.0009
(0.0057)
-0.0126
(0.0050)
…

+3 Lags

+4 Lags

Credit Variable(s)

Contemp.

+1 Lag

+2 Lags

+3 Lags

+4 Lags

-0.0027
-0.0062
Wage Requirement
0.0019
0.0041
0.0042
0.0045
0.0014
(0.0072)
(0.0083)
(0.0023)
(0.0032)
(0.0035)
(0.0039)
(0.0053)
Jobs
-0.0006
-0.0007
No Wage Requirement
-0.0031
-0.0037
-0.0070
-0.0081
-0.0177
(0.0096)
(0.0125)
(0.0027)
(0.0047)
(0.0056)
(0.0070)
(0.0136)
Payroll
-0.0034
-0.0095
Recapture
0.0086
0.0067
0.0117
0.0158
0.0113
(0.0066)
(0.0088)
(0.0027)
(0.0052)
(0.0035)
(0.0069)
(0.0067)
Investment
-0.0111
-0.0087
No Recapture
0.0056
0.0004
-0.0007
-0.0020
-0.0037
(0.0073)
(0.0103)
(0.0034)
(0.0029)
(0.0035)
(0.0038)
(0.0045)
Others
0.0039
-0.0064
-0.0076
Industry
-0.0036
-0.0003
-0.0055
-0.0057
-0.0090
(0.0030)
(0.0074)
(0.0077)
(0.0064)
(0.0056)
(0.0050)
(0.0100)
(0.0089)
Full Time
-0.0012
0.0011
-0.0034
Manufacturing
0.0002
-0.0078
-0.0131
-0.0124
-0.0142
(0.0033)
(0.0093)
(0.0092)
(0.0026)
(0.0050)
(0.0053)
(0.0066)
(0.0075)
Full Time Equiv.
-0.0097
-0.0118
-0.0233
No Targeting
0.0029
0.0015
-0.0002
-0.0012
-0.0047
(0.0029)
(0.0057)
(0.0094)
(0.0028)
(0.0038)
(0.0046)
(0.0050)
(0.0052)
Part Time
…
0.0027
0.0009
Unemployed
0.0052
0.0032
0.0048
0.0096
0.0047
(0.0023)
(0.0039)
(0.0022)
(0.0024)
(0.0047)
(0.0064)
(0.0077)
Not Specified
0.0047
0.0061
0.0030
0.0044
0.0085
Welfare recipient
…
…
…
…
…
(0.0060)
(0.0041)
(0.0060)
(0.0058)
(0.0087)
Equal to tax owed
-0.0059
-0.0073
-0.0110
-0.0139
-0.0269
Disabled
-0.0137
-0.0068
-0.0012
-0.0005
-0.0045
(0.0018)
(0.0039)
(0.0054)
(0.0065)
(0.0191)
(0.0031)
(0.0029)
(0.0029)
(0.0037)
(0.0057)
Carry-forward
-0.0040
-0.0103
-0.0119
-0.0109
-0.0182
No Targeting
0.0004
0.0010
-0.0028
-0.0024
-0.0051
(0.0083)
(0.0150)
(0.0136)
(0.0097)
(0.0169)
(0.0029)
(0.0054)
(0.0061)
(0.0073)
(0.0085)
Refundable
-0.0012
-0.0013
-0.0021
-0.0004
-0.0063
Temporary
-0.0006
-0.0024
-0.0020
-0.0021
-0.0045
(0.0032)
(0.0031)
(0.0040)
(0.0070)
(0.0050)
(0.0032)
(0.0034)
(0.0052)
(0.0064)
(0.0104)
Not Specified
0.0045
0.0007
-0.0007
-0.0004
-0.0028
Permanent
-0.0005
-0.0006
-0.0044
-0.0038
-0.0075
(0.0027)
(0.0037)
(0.0048)
(0.0057)
(0.0068)
(0.0024)
(0.0031)
(0.0032)
(0.0044)
(0.0049)
The dependent variable is the first difference of the log of employment using QWI data. The QWI data are quarterly, rather than monthly. All data had to be collapsed to the
quarterly level. The hiring credit dummy variables are defined as 1 if the credit is in place for all three months of a quarter, 2/3 if it is in place for two months, 1/3 if it is in
place for one month, and zero otherwise. The notes from Table 8 apply (the control variables are the same), although with 12 monthly lags replaced with four quarterly lags
wherever appropriate. The contemporaneous effect and the cumulative effects through one through four quarters lags are reported. The data are quarterly. There are 390
observations. (Data are unavailable for Massachusetts, and are missing for the last quarter for Colorado.) Standard errors, reported in parentheses, are clustered at the state
level.

Table 13: Estimated Effects of State Hiring Credits on Hiring, Credit Dummy Variables Specifications, First Differences, 2007-2011, Quarterly
Workforce Indicators Data
Credit Variable(s)

Contemp.

+1 Lag

+2 Lags

Credit

-0.0033
(0.0250)
-0.0265
(0.0447)
0.0579
(0.0404)
…

-0.0557
(0.0302)
-0.0935
(0.0308)
0.0795
(0.0307)
0.0593
(0.0471)
0.1092
(0.0484)
0.0400
(0.0624)
0.0046
(0.0293)
…

-0.0717
(0.0617)
-0.1032
(0.0527)
0.0567
(0.0425)
0.0784
(0.0838)
0.0472
(0.0543)
0.0310
(0.0743)
-0.0081
(0.0271)
…

+3 Lags

+4 Lags

Credit Variable(s)
-0.0834
-0.0670
Wage Requirement
(0.0760)
(0.0837)
Jobs
-0.1272
-0.1128
No Wage Requirement
(0.0642)
(0.0700)
Payroll
0.0715
0.0851
Recapture
(0.0608)
(0.0680)
Investment
0.0303
0.0638
No Recapture
(0.0940)
(0.0992)
Others
0.0304
0.0589
0.1367
Industry
(0.0419)
(0.0304)
(0.0675)
Full Time
0.0763
-0.0226
0.0329
Manufacturing
(0.0660)
(0.0519)
(0.0694)
Full Time Equiv.
-0.0033
-0.0106
0.0386
No Targeting
(0.0300)
(0.0360)
(0.0495)
Part Time
…
-0.0252
0.0184
Unemployed
(0.0194)
(0.0230)
Not Specified
-0.1307
-0.0678
-0.1104
-0.1379
-0.2290
Welfare recipient
(0.0571)
(0.0698)
(0.0605)
(0.0710)
(0.0873)
Equal to tax owed
-0.0050
-0.0352
0.0014
-0.0162
0.0643
Disabled
(0.0290)
(0.0251)
(0.0291)
(0.0431)
(0.0453)
Carry-forward
-0.0752
0.0338
-0.0012
-0.0222
0.0015
No Targeting
(0.0279)
(0.0317)
(0.0443)
(0.0655)
(0.1105)
Refundable
0.0365
0.0530
-0.0006
0.0288
0.0710
Temporary
(0.0286)
(0.0458)
(0.0365)
(0.0454)
(0.0787)
Not Specified
0.0329
-0.0498
0.0146
-0.0219
-0.0103
Permanent
(0.0283)
(0.0403)
(0.0395)
(0.0315)
(0.0339)
The dependent variable is the first difference of the log of hiring using QWI data. Notes from Table 12 apply.

Contemp.
0.0224
(0.0214)
-0.0105
(0.0269)
0.1357
(0.0739)
0.0086
(0.0270)
-0.0117
(0.0367)
-0.0179
(0.0308)
0.0033
(0.0241)
0.0921
(0.0436)
…

+1 Lag
0.0576
(0.0322)
-0.0219
(0.0319)
0.1236
(0.0342)
-0.0307
(0.0270)
-0.0111
(0.0483)
-0.0399
(0.0410)
-0.0171
(0.0383)
0.0896
(0.0364)
…

+2 Lags
0.0135
(0.0309)
-0.0158
(0.0397)
0.1095
(0.0765)
-0.0253
(0.0396)
-0.0358
(0.0362)
0.0003
(0.0337)
-0.0206
(0.0529)
0.0785
(0.0496)
…

+3 Lags
-0.0108
(0.0306)
-0.0522
(0.0382)
-0.0013
(0.0348)
-0.0249
(0.0587)
0.0078
(0.0508)
-0.0254
(0.0457)
0.0040
(0.0788)
0.0876
(0.0309)
…

+4 Lags
0.0268
(0.0324)
-0.0174
(0.0562)
0.1214
(0.0557)
-0.0432
(0.0577)
-0.0283
(0.0564)
-0.0366
(0.0534)
-0.0065
(0.0654)
0.1154
(0.0549)
…

0.0828
(0.0270)
-0.0018
(0.0260)
0.0305
(0.0325)
-0.0103
(0.0196)

0.0279
(0.0409)
-0.0559
(0.0285)
0.0172
(0.0292)
-0.0291
(0.0277)

0.0569
(0.0295)
-0.0752
(0.0626)
0.0300
(0.0336)
-0.0303
(0.0484)

0.0586
(0.0424)
-0.0883
(0.0773)
-0.0054
(0.0273)
-0.0367
(0.0590)

0.0926
(0.0437)
-0.0617
(0.0838)
0.0259
(0.0386)
-0.0185
(0.0670)

Appendix Table A1: Alabama Income Tax Capital Credit, Expenditure
and Number of Jobs Created, as Reported by State
Year
Actual credit expenditures
Jobs created
1995
$0
0
1996
$11,823
417
1997
$2,399,482
1394
1998
$1,416,479
1980
1999
$1,315,505
2867
2000
$2,877,828
3748
2001
$6,284,852
4855
2002
$14,030,156
6331
2003
$20,423,672
2008
2004
$45,025,240
4286
2005
$34,324,981
4517
2006
$41,631,715
8665
2007
$124,443,097
4778
2008
$63,249,598
4647
2009
$47,599,172
4757
2010
$49,685,106
1169
2011
$43,882,657
1011
2012
$55,620,850
895
Source: Alabama Department of Revenue, Annual Report, various years.
Available at http://revenue.alabama.gov/anlrpt.cfm (viewed June 1, 2015).
References: Alabama Department of Revenue, Annual Report, various years.
Available at http://revenue.alabama.gov/anlrpt.cfm (viewed June 1, 2015).

