NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BOND MARKET CLIENTELES, THE YIELD CURVE, AND THE OPTIMAL MATURITY
STRUCTURE OF GOVERNMENT DEBT
Stéphane Guibaud
Yves Nosbusch
Dimitri Vayanos
Working Paper 18922
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18922

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013

We thank Marios Angeletos, Elisa Faraglia, Roger Farmer, Xavier Gabaix, Douglas Gale, Luciano
Greco, Robin Greenwood, Denis Gromb, Alessandro Missale, Herakles Polemarchakis, Ioanid Rosu,
Pietro Veronesi (the editor), an anonymous referee, seminar participants at Cambridge, HEC Paris,
LSE, LUISS Guido Carli, Oxford, Padova, Tilburg, UCLA, Warwick, and participants at the MTS
and Western Finance Association conferences for helpful comments. Financial support from the Paul
Woolley Centre at the LSE is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Stéphane Guibaud, Yves Nosbusch, and Dimitri Vayanos. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Bond Market Clienteles, the Yield Curve, and the Optimal Maturity Structure of Government
Debt
Stéphane Guibaud, Yves Nosbusch, and Dimitri Vayanos
NBER Working Paper No. 18922
March 2013
JEL No. E43,G11,G12,H21,H63
ABSTRACT
We propose a clientele-based model of the yield curve and optimal maturity structure of government
debt. Clienteles are generations of agents at different lifecycle stages in an overlapping-generations
economy. An optimal maturity structure exists in the absence of distortionary taxes and induces efficient
intergenerational risksharing. If agents are more risk-averse than log, then an increase in the long-horizon
clientele raises the price and optimal supply of long-term bonds—effects that we also confirm empirically
in a panel of OECD countries. Moreover, under the optimal maturity structure, catering to clienteles
is limited and long-term bonds earn negative expected excess returns.

Stéphane Guibaud
Department of Finance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
WC2A 2AE London
s.guibaud@lse.ac.uk
Yves Nosbusch
Department of Finance
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
WC2A 2AE London
and BGL BNP Paribas
y.nosbusch@lse.ac.uk

Dimitri Vayanos
Department of Finance, OLD 3.41
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
and CEPR
and also NBER
d.vayanos@lse.ac.uk

1

Introduction

The government-bond market involves many distinct investor clienteles. For example, pension
funds invest typically in long maturities as a way to hedge their long-term liabilities, while banks’
treasury departments hold shorter maturities. Clientele demands vary over time in response to
demographic or regulatory changes. This time-variation can have important effects both on the
yield curve and on the government’s debt-issuance policy.
The UK pension reform provides a stark illustration of clientele effects. The Pensions Act of
2004 required pension funds to maintain their asset-liability ratio above a threshold. Moreover,
liabilities had to be marked to market using the yields of long-term inflation-indexed bonds. To
minimize variation in their marked-to-market asset-liability ratio, pension funds bought large quantities of those bonds. This caused a steep decline in long rates. For example, in January 2006 the
inflation-indexed bond maturing in 2055 was yielding 0.48%, which was low relative to both the
historical average of long real rates and the short rates prevailing at that time.1 The steep decline
in long rates induced the UK Treasury to tilt debt issuance towards long maturities. For example,
bonds with maturities of fifteen years or longer constituted 58% of issuance during financial year
2006-7, compared to an average of 40% over the previous four years.2
While clientele considerations matter for the yield curve and the issuance of government debt,
they are largely absent from theoretical models. Indeed most models of bond-price determination
assume a representative agent, thus ruling out clienteles. Optimal issuance of government debt
is also studied mostly in representative-agent models, which overcome the Ricardian equivalence
result of Barro (1974) by assuming distortionary taxes.
In this paper we develop a model of the yield curve and optimal issuance of government debt
that emphasizes the role of clienteles. We focus on demographic rather than regulatory clienteles,
and model them as generations of agents at different stages of their life cycle in an overlappinggenerations economy. Assuming that agents are more risk-averse than log, we show that an increase
in the relative importance of the clientele with the longer investment horizon, i.e., the younger, has
two related effects: it renders long-term bonds more expensive, and it increases their optimal supply
by the government. Using a panel of OECD countries, we find empirical support for these links
between demographics, the slope of the yield curve, and the average maturity of government debt.
Our model delivers a number of additional results. We show that an optimal maturity structure
1
Dimson, Marsh and Staunton (2002) compute a historical average of 2.3% for long real rates in the UK over
the 20th century, based on a maturity of approximately 20 years. The inflation-indexed bond maturing in 2009 was
yielding 1.47% in January 2006.
2
The issuance numbers are from the website of the UK Debt Management Office. For a more detailed account
of the UK pension reform and its effects on yields and debt issuance, see Greenwood and Vayanos (2010). Another
illustration of clientele-driven issuance is the French Treasury’s first-time issuance of a 50-year bond in 2005, in
response to strong demand by pension funds.

1

of government debt exists even in the absence of distortionary taxes, and is the tool through
which the government induces efficient risksharing across generations. One consequence of efficient
risksharing is that the government caters to clientele demand, e.g., increases issuance in a segment
of the yield curve in response to increased clientele demand in that segment. Catering could
also be a consequence of maximizing revenue from bond issuance. We show, however, that a
welfare-maximizing government caters to clientele demand to a more limited extent than a revenuemaximizing one because catering affects the tax burden of future generations. A welfare-maximizing
government also limits issuance of long-term bonds to a level where these earn negative expected
excess returns relative to short-term bonds.3
Section 2 describes our overlapping-generations model, set in discrete time and infinite horizon.
Generations live for three periods, receive an endowment in the first period of their lives, consume in
the third period, and have CRRA preferences over consumption. They can invest their endowment
in a linear production technology and in non-contingent government bonds. The government can
levy non-distortionary taxes on agents’ endowments. In our baseline model, studied in Sections
2-4, the technology yields a riskless return and the one-period interest rate, which is equal to that
return because of no arbitrage, is stochastic only in one period. Without loss of generality, we take
that period to be period 2, which is the first period when three generations co-exist since the first
generation is born in period 0. We assume that the interest rate in period 2 can take two values, so
one- and two-period bonds complete the market from the perspective of agents trading in period 1.
We refer to one- and two-period bonds as short- and long-term, respectively. The assumptions of
a riskless technology and uncertainty only in one period simplify our analysis and deliver the main
insights. Section 5 relaxes these assumptions.
Section 3 examines how the term structure of interest rates in period 1 depends on clientele
demand and bond supply. An increase in the relative importance of the long-horizon clientele,
consisting of generation 1 born in period 1, relative to the short-horizon clientele, consisting of
generation 0 born in period 0, renders long-term bonds more expensive if agents are more riskaverse than log. Indeed, under these preferences, agents with a long horizon value more highly
assets whose returns increase when interest rates decrease, and long-term bonds have this property.
Risk aversion larger than log is necessary for the intuitive clientele effects that we derive: the effects
reverse if risk aversion is smaller than log and vanish for log agents.
Section 3 shows additionally that a lengthening of the maturity structure in period 1, defined
as an increase in the supply of long-term bonds holding total debt value constant, renders long-term
bonds cheaper. Ricardian equivalence thus does not hold in our model. This is because supply
3
Long-term nominal bonds earn positive expected excess returns relative to their short-term counterparts (e.g.,
Cochrane (1999)). Our model, however, is real so our results concern real bonds. We return to the implications of
our model for bond risk premia, and the link with the empirical evidence, after Proposition 4.6.

2

changes and the accompanying offsetting tax changes concern different generations: supply changes
must be absorbed by generations 0 and 1, who are the only ones that can trade in period 1, but
tax changes concern future generations.
Section 4 determines the optimal maturity structure of government debt in period 1. Maturity structure affects intergenerational risksharing. For example, if the government issues more
long-term bonds in period 1, it helps generation 1 insure against the risk of reinvesting at a low
interest rate in period 2. This insurance is provided by imposing more risk on future generations
through a more uncertain tax burden. The government’s optimal policy in period 1 is to issue
the quantity of long-term bonds that generations 0 and 1 would buy from future generations if
the latter were present in the market in period 1. Through this policy, the government induces
complete participation by all generations in period 1 and efficient risksharing.
If agents are more risk-averse than log, then an increase in the size of the long-horizon clientele
in period 1 (generation 1) increases the demand for insurance against a low interest rate in period
2. As a consequence, the optimal maturity structure involves more long-term debt. Note that in
lengthening maturity structure in response to an increase in the size of the long-horizon clientele,
the government is effectively catering to that clientele. Such catering, however, is limited, i.e., the
issuance of long-term bonds is smaller than the increased demand. This is because the insurance
provided to generation 1 imposes more risk on future generations. Note that when the interest
rate is low, fewer aggregate resources are available. Therefore, efficient risksharing requires that
generation 1 consumes less in that state. Since generation 1 is marginal in pricing bonds in period
1, long-term bonds earn negative expected excess returns relative to short-term bonds under the
optimal maturity structure.
Section 5 extends our baseline model to a stochastic interest rate in all periods, a risky production technology, and a risky endowment of each generation. When stochastic shocks are small,
the equilibrium can be characterized in closed form. Under a risky technology, clientele demand
and bond supply affect the short-term interest rate, and this can reverse their effect on the prices
of long-term bonds. The effect on expected excess returns remains the same, and so do the main
properties of optimal maturity structure.
Section 6 tests our basic predictions on how clientele demand affects the yield curve and the
maturity structure of government debt. We focus on OECD countries, for which data on the
maturity structure of government debt are available. Our main demographic variable is the median
age of the population: an increase in median age can be interpreted as a decrease in the relative
importance of the long-horizon clientele. Since in our model generations live for three periods,
we use 10- and 30-year government bonds as empirical proxies for the short- and long-term bond,
respectively. Consistent with our model’s predictions in the empirically plausible case where agents

3

are more risk-averse than log, we find that median age is positively related to the slope of the yield
curve, as measured by the 30-10 yield spread, and negatively related to the average maturity of
government debt.
This paper is related to the literature on optimal public debt policy. The benchmark in that
literature is the Ricardian equivalence result of Barro (1974): in a representative-agent model with
non-distortionary taxes, the level and composition of government debt are irrelevant. Ricardian
equivalence fails in the presence of distortionary taxes because debt can be used to smooth tax
rates across time and states of nature. Distortionary taxes imply an optimal time path for the
level of government debt, as shown in Barro (1979) and Aiyagari, Marcet, Sargent and Seppala
(2002), and an optimal composition of the government debt portfolio. Lucas and Stokey (1983)
derive the optimal portfolio in terms of Arrow-Debreu securities. Angeletos (2002) and Buera and
Nicolini (2004) show how the optimal outcome can be implemented with non-contingent bonds of
different maturities, provided that there are bonds of as many maturities as states of nature so that
markets are complete. Nosbusch (2008) derives the optimal maturity structure under incomplete
markets. Faraglia, Marcet and Scott (2010) extend the complete markets analysis of optimal
maturity structure to a framework with capital accumulation.4 Optimal maturity structure in our
model is determined by clienteles and intergenerational risksharing rather than distortionary taxes.
This yields insights that differ from and complement those of the distortionary-tax literature.
It is well known that Ricardian equivalence fails in models with overlapping generations. Government debt shifts taxes to future generations, as shown in Diamond (1965) and Blanchard (1985),
and this can be Pareto-improving when the economy is dynamically inefficient. Government debt
can also improve intergenerational risksharing, as shown in Fischer (1983) and Gale (1990). In
both papers generations live for two periods, and the introduction of one-period non-contingent
government bonds can be Pareto-improving. Gale shows additionally that two-period bonds can
yield even larger improvements.5 Our model differs because we allow for clienteles with different
investment horizons, study how changes in clientele demand affect bond prices and the optimal maturity structure, and characterize the latter in terms of an equilibrium with complete participation
by all generations.6
4
A separate strand of the literature considers optimal debt policy when debt contracts are nominal and the
government has control over inflation. The government can then use state-contingent inflation to smooth tax rates.
Prominent examples of this approach include Lucas and Stokey (1983), Bohn (1988), Calvo and Guidotti (1990,1992),
Barro (2002), Benigno and Woodford (2003), and Lustig, Sleet and Yeltekin (2008). Missale and Blanchard (1994)
show that with nominal debt contracts, the optimal maturity can be decreasing in the total size of the debt.
5
Blanchard and Weil (2001) provide general conditions under which the government can use bonds of different
maturities to achieve Pareto improvements in a dynamically efficient economy. Weiss (1980) and Bhattacharya
(1982) show that the government can use state-contingent inflation to improve intergenerational risksharing when
debt contracts are nominal.
6
Ball and Mankiw (2007) use the complete-participation equilibrium to characterize the optimal social security
system in a two-period overlapping-generations model. They show that an optimal social security system implements
the equilibrium that would prevail if all generations could trade risksharing contracts ex-ante. Social security and
debt maturity structure can be viewed as alternative mechanisms to improve intergenerational risksharing. We return

4

The role of clienteles is emphasized in an early term-structure literature. According to the
preferred-habitat hypothesis of Culbertson (1957) and Modigliani and Sutch (1966), there are
investor clienteles with preferences for specific maturities and with limited ability to substitute
across the yield curve. More recently, Vayanos and Vila (2009) develop a formal model of preferred
habitat in which each maturity has its own clientele and substitution across maturities is performed
by risk-averse arbitrageurs. Greenwood and Vayanos (2012) build on that model to explore how
changes in debt supply affect bond yields and returns, and find empirically that an increase in
maturity-weighted debt to GDP predicts high excess returns of long-term bonds. Unlike these
papers, we model clienteles through CRRA preferences, dispense with arbitrageurs, and perform a
normative analysis of maturity structure.
Finally, our paper is related to a recent literature studying how private firms make capitalstructure decisions to cater to investor clienteles or sentiment (e.g., Stein (1996), Baker and Wurgler
(2002), Greenwood, Hanson and Stein (2010)). The government in our model caters to clienteles,
but to a limited extent because it internalizes the effect on future generations. Moreover, the
government affects asset prices, while firms in the catering literature are price takers.

2

Model

Time t is discrete and goes from 0 to ∞. There is a single good. In each period a new generation
is born and lives for three periods. Generation t, born in period t, is young in that period, middleaged in period t + 1, and old in period t + 2. It receives an endowment αt of the good when young
and consumes ct+2 when old. Utility over consumption is CRRA

u(c) ≡

c1−γ
,
1−γ

(2.1)

and the coefficient of relative risk aversion γ is equal across generations. Each generation derives
its consumption by investing its net-of-tax endowment in a linear production technology and in
government bonds.
The technology yields a return that is riskless but can vary stochastically across periods. Because of no-arbitrage, this return is equal to the one-period interest rate, which can thus be stochastic. We mainly focus on the case where the one-period interest rate is stochastic only in one period.
This case is simple analytically and conceptually, and delivers the main insights. For simplicity we
also assume that the endowment of each generation is riskless. Section 5 extends our analysis to
a stochastic interest rate in all periods, a risky production technology, and a risky endowment of
to this issue in Section 4.2.

5

each generation.
The steady state of our model starts from period 2, which is the first period when three
generations coexist. We assume that the period when the interest rate is stochastic belongs to the
steady state, and without loss of generality we take it to be period 2. We set the gross one-period
interest rate in all other periods to R > 1, i.e., one unit invested in period t 6= 2 yields R units in
period t + 1. We denote the corresponding rate in period 2 by R2 , and assume that it takes the
values R2,h and R2,ℓ < R2,h with probabilities p and 1 − p, respectively. We use more generally the
subscript s = h, ℓ to denote the value of a variable in state s. The value of R2 is observed in period
2 but not in previous periods, and constitutes the only uncertainty in the model (until Section 5).
The endowment αt can depend on t. For simplicity we assume that αt is bounded above, but our
analysis can be extended to the case where αt grows at an asymptotic gross rate smaller than R.
The government issues non-contingent bonds and collects income taxes. Since only young
agents receive an income (endowment), taxes are only on them. For simplicity we set government
spending to zero; assuming positive spending would not affect our results. Bond issuance and
taxes can be negative, in which case they represent government investment in bonds and transfers
towards the agents, respectively.
We assume that only one-period bonds are available in periods t 6= 1, while one- and two-period
bonds are available in period 1. This entails no loss of generality relative to a more general maturity
structure. Indeed, in periods t 6= 1, agents face no uncertainty one period ahead. Therefore, bonds
of multiple maturities are redundant, and we can assume that only one-period bonds are available.
In period 1, the uncertainty one period ahead is described by two states. Therefore, two maturities
suffice to complete the market from the perspective of agents trading in period 1, and we take these
to be one and two periods.
We denote by τt the tax rate in period t and by bt the face value of one-period bonds available in
the same period. One-period bonds included in bt for t 6= 2 are only those issued by the government
in period t. One-period bonds included in b2 are both those issued by the government in period 2,
and two-period bonds issued in period 1 that become one-period in period 2. We denote by B1 the
face value of two-period bonds issued by the government in period 1 and by L1 the gross two-period
interest rate in the same period.
The choice of maturity structure concerns the mix (b1 , B1 ) of one- and two-period bonds issued
by the government in period 1. The generations investing in bonds in that period are 0 and 1, and
maturity structure affects how risk is shared between them and generations t ≥ 2. We hence study
the choice of maturity structure in conjunction with the taxes in periods t ≥ 2, which can be made
state-contingent and can concern only the endowments of generations t ≥ 2. We treat taxes on
generations t ≤ 1 as exogenous, and for simplicity set them to zero. Since these taxes are zero, the

6

face value b0 of one-period bonds issued by the government in period 0 is also zero.
The government’s budget constraint in period 1 is
b1 B1
+ 2 = 0.
R
L1

(2.2)

Government revenue is the sum of taxes on generation 1, which are zero, plus the revenue b1 /R
from issuing one-period bonds and B1 /L21 from issuing two-period bonds. It is equal to the cost b0
of repaying the one-period bonds issued in period 0, which is zero.
The government’s budget constraint in period 2 is

α2 τ2 +

b2 − B1
= b1 .
R2

(2.3)

Government revenue is the sum of taxes α2 τ2 on generation 2, plus the revenue (b2 − B1 )/R2 from
issuing one-period bonds. It is equal to the cost b1 of repaying the one-period bonds issued in
period 1. The government’s budget constraint in period t > 2 is similarly

αt τt +

bt
= bt−1 .
R

(2.4)

To eliminate Ponzi schemes by the government, we assume that debt must be bounded above, i.e.,
bt ≤ K

(2.5)

for a bound K and for all t.

3

Supply and Demand Effects

In this section we characterize equilibrium in period 1. We derive the equilibrium term structure
and examine how it depends on bond supply and clientele demand.

3.1

Equilibrium Term Structure

In period 1, only generations 0 and 1 can trade bonds. We denote by B1,0 and B1,1 , respectively,
the face values of two-period bonds that they hold. (Bond holdings are expressed in absolute terms

7

and not as fraction of endowment.) Generation 0’s consumption in period 2 is

c2 = R2 α0 +



L21
−R
R2



B1,0
.
L21

(3.1)

The first term in the right-hand side is the consumption achieved by investing the endowment α0
in the linear production technology or in one-period bonds between periods 0 and 2. The second
term is the additional return from investing in two-period bonds, which become available in period
1. It is equal to the excess return of two- relative to one-period bonds between periods 1 and 2,
times the market value of two-period bonds held by generation 0. Generation 0 chooses its holdings
B1,0 of two-period bonds to maximize expected utility E[u(c2 )] subject to (3.1). The first-order
condition is


′

E u (c2 )



1
R
− 2
R2 L1



= 0.

(3.2)

Since u′ (0) = ∞, (3.2) has a solution B1,0 for any two-period interest rate L1 satisfying no-arbitrage,
i.e., L21 ∈ (RR2,ℓ , RR2,h ). Moreover, the solution is unique since utility is strictly concave.
Generation 1’s consumption in period 3 is
c3 = RR2 α1 + L21 − RR2

 B1,1
L21

.

(3.3)

The first term in the right-hand side is the consumption achieved by investing the endowment α1 in
the linear production technology or in one-period bonds between periods 1 and 3. The second term
is the additional return from investing in two-period bonds. It is equal to the excess return of tworelative to one-period bonds between periods 1 and 3, times the market value of two-period bonds
held by generation 1. Note that the relevant excess return for generation 1 is over two periods
because this generation consumes one period later than generation 0. The first-order condition is



RR2
E u′ (c3 ) 1 − 2
= 0.
L1

(3.4)

The same argument as for (3.2) implies that (3.4) has a unique solution B1,1 .
The two-period interest rate L1 is determined from the market-clearing condition
B1,0 + B1,1 = B1 .

(3.5)

8

Proposition 3.1 shows that (3.5) has a unique solution L1 because the demand functions (B1,0 , B1,1 )
are increasing in L1 , converge to −∞ when L21 goes to RR2,ℓ , and converge to ∞ when L21 goes to
RR2,h .
Proposition 3.1. There exists a unique equilibrium two-period interest rate L1 in period 1.
The equilibrium term structure in period 1 consists of the one-period interest rate R and the
two-period interest rate L1 . Since supply and demand do not affect R, their effects on L1 , on the
slope of the term structure, and on the expected excess return of two- relative to one-period bonds
are all in the same direction.

3.2

Bond Supply

Bond supply in period 1 can be measured by the face values b1 and B1 of one- and two-period
bonds, respectively. We hold total supply constant in market value terms, and examine how a
shift towards two-period bonds, i.e., a lengthening of the maturity structure, affects the two-period
interest rate L1 . This amounts to increasing B1 holding b1 /R + B1 /L21 constant.
Proposition 3.2. A lengthening of the maturity structure in period 1 raises the two-period interest
rate L1 .
Intuitively, when B1 increases, generations 0 and 1 must absorb more two-period bonds, and
this gives them larger exposure to the risk that the one-period interest rate will increase in period
2. They are compensated for that risk through a decrease in the price of two-period bonds. The
two-period interest rate thus increases.
The effect of supply derived in Proposition 3.2 stands in contrast to the Ricardian equivalence
result of Barro (1974), derived in a representative-agent model with non-distortionary taxes. In
that model, supply changes can affect consumption and bond demand, but the effects are exactly
offset by those of the accompanying tax changes.7 In our model, however, supply and tax changes
concern different agents: supply changes must be absorbed by generations 0 and 1, who are the
only ones that can trade in period 1, but tax changes concern future generations.
7
Supply effects can arise in representative-agent models with distortionary taxes. The mechanism driving these
effects, however, is different than in our model, and the effects themselves are typically in the opposite direction. In
particular, an increase in the supply of two-period bonds can increase their price, holding the one-period interest rate
constant. Indeed, when supply increases, the government must collect more taxes in states where the interest rate is
low because more resources are required in these states to eventually repay the two-period bonds. Because taxes are
distortionary, consumption is reduced in the low-interest rate states. As a consequence, two-period bonds, which are
more valuable in these states, become more attractive to the representative agent and their price increases.

9

3.3

Clientele Demand

Clienteles in our model correspond to generations that are alive in any given period and differ in
their investment horizons. For example, the clienteles in period 1 are the young generation 1, with
a two-period investment horizon, and the middle-aged generation 0, with a one-period horizon. We
refer to them as the long- and short-horizon clientele, respectively. To examine how the mix of
these clienteles affects the term structure, we change the relative size of their endowments holding
the value of their aggregate endowment measured as of period 1 constant. Thus, an increase in the
size of the long-horizon clientele amounts to increasing α1 holding Rα0 + α1 constant.
Proposition 3.3. If γ > 1, then an increase in the size of the long-horizon clientele in period 1
lowers the two-period interest rate L1 . The result is reversed if γ < 1.
According to the preferred-habitat hypothesis of Culbertson (1957) and Modigliani and Sutch
(1966), short-term bonds are demanded mainly by short-horizon investors, while long-term bonds
are demanded by long-horizon investors. Therefore, when generation 1 commands more resources,
two-period bonds should be in higher demand and thus more expensive. Proposition 3.3 confirms
this intuition when agents’ coefficient of relative risk aversion γ is larger than one. When γ < 1,
however, the effect is reversed, and when γ = 1 (logarithmic utility) the clientele mix has no
effect. Intuitively, when utility is logarithmic, agents behave myopically and their portfolio choice
is independent of the time when they need to consume. When instead γ 6= 1, generation 1 has a
hedging demand which depends on assets’ covariance with the interest rate in period 2. In the case
γ > 1, the hedging demand favors assets whose returns increase when the interest rate decreases.
Two-period bonds have this property, and hence generation 1 invests a larger share of its wealth
in these bonds than generation 0. In summary, our model can generate intuitive clientele effects,
while also highlighting that such effects can arise only when γ > 1. Clientele effects do not arise,
in particular, under logarithmic utility, an assumption commonly used in term-structure models.

4

Optimal Maturity Structure

The properties derived in Section 3 concern a general maturity structure, i.e., hold for any quantities
of one- and two-period bonds that the government issues in period 1. In this section we show that
there exists an optimal maturity structure and derive its properties.

4.1

Complete Participation

To set the stage for our analysis, we start with the benchmark case where all generations are
available to trade one- and two-period bonds in period 1. We also remove the government, setting

10

bond supply and taxes to zero. This yields an equilibrium with complete participation and efficient
risksharing across generations. We then show that the government can use maturity structure and
taxes to induce this allocation when only generations 0 and 1 are available to trade in period 1.
The optimization problems of generations 0 and 1 are as in Section 3.1, so we only need to
consider those of generations t ≥ 2. Generation 2’s consumption in period 4 is
c4 = RR2 α2 + R L21 − RR2

 B1,2
L21

,

(4.1)

and generation t > 2’s consumption in period t + 2 is
ct+2 = R2 αt + Rt−1 L21 − RR2

 B1,t
L21

,

(4.2)

where B1,t denotes the face value of two-period bonds held by generation t ≥ 2. (As in Section
3.1, bond holdings are expressed in absolute terms and not as fraction of endowment.) The interpretation of (4.1) and (4.2) is analogous to that of (3.1) and (3.3): the first term in the right-hand
side is the consumption achieved by investing the endowment in the linear production technology
or in one-period bonds, and the second term is the additional return from investing in two-period
bonds. The excess return of two- relative to one-period bonds is computed between periods 1 and
3, and brought forward to period t at the rate R. The first-order condition of generation t ≥ 2 is




RR2
E u (ct+2 ) 1 − 2
L1
′



= 0.

(4.3)

The same argument as in Section 3.1 implies that (4.3) has a unique solution B1,t .
The two-period interest rate L1 under complete participation is determined by the marketclearing condition
∞
X

B1,t = 0.

(4.4)

t=0

Eq. (4.4) differs from its counterpart (3.5) in Section 3.1 because the summation is over all generations, and the supply of two-period bonds is zero. Proposition 4.1 shows that (4.4) has a solution
L1 .8
Proposition 4.1. Under complete participation, there exists an equilibrium two-period interest rate
8

We discuss uniqueness of the solution in Section 4.4.

11

L1 in period 1.
Combining the first-order conditions (3.2), (3.4) and (4.3), and noting that there are two states
(h, ℓ), we find
u′ (c2,h )
R2,h u′ (ct+2,h )
=
u′ (c2,ℓ )
R2,ℓ u′ (ct+2,ℓ )

(4.5)

for all t ≥ 1, where the subscript s = h, ℓ denotes consumption in state s. Eq. (4.5) characterizes
intergenerational risksharing under complete participation. Risk is shared optimally, and the condition for optimality is that the ratio across states of the marginal benefit from receiving the good
in period 2 is identical for all generations. Since generation 0 consumes in period 2, its marginal
benefit coincides with its marginal utility of consumption. The marginal benefit of generation t ≥ 1
is equal to the marginal utility of consumption times the return on investment from period 2 to
period t + 2, which is when that generation consumes. This return is Rt−1 R2 , and its ratio across
states h and ℓ is R2,h /R2,ℓ . Since this ratio is identical for all generations t ≥ 1, so is the ratio
across states of the marginal utility of consumption. Thus, if one of generations t ≥ 1 consumes
more in state h than in state ℓ, so do all of them.
Since the one-period interest rate is higher in state h than in state ℓ, more aggregate resources
are available in that state. As a consequence, the consumption of all generations t ≥ 1 is higher in
state h. The consumption of generation 0, however, can be lower. The reason why this is consistent
with efficient risksharing is that while the marginal utility of generations t ≥ 1 is lower in state
h, their return from investment is higher. As a consequence, their marginal benefit from receiving
the good in period 2 can be higher in state h, in which case efficient risksharing requires that the
marginal utility of consumption of generation 0 is also higher. Put differently, it can be socially
efficient that generation 0 foregoes consumption in state h since investment in that state has high
return for future generations.
Whether or not generation 0 consumes more in state h than in state ℓ depends on the coefficient
of relative risk aversion γ. If γ is high, then the marginal benefit of generations t ≥ 1 from receiving
the good in period 2 is driven more by their marginal utility of consumption than by their return
on investment. Since their marginal utility is lower in state h, so is that of generation 0, meaning
that generation 0 consumes more in state h. The comparison is reversed for lower values of γ.
Proposition 4.2. Under complete participation, generations t ≥ 1 consume more in state h than
in state ℓ. Generation 0 consumes more in state h than in state ℓ if γ exceeds a threshold γ̄ > 1,
but the comparison is reversed if γ ≤ 1.
Figure 1 plots the consumption of all generations in states h and ℓ. We consider both the case

12

of complete participation and that of autarky, where each generation invests all its endowment in
the linear production technology. We assume that endowments are constant (αt = 1 for all t),
the two states are equally likely (p = 0.5), and γ = 4. We interpret one period to last for 15
years and set the gross return R of the technology to (1 + 2.1%)15 . The annual rate 2.1% is the
historical average of the long real interest rate in the US in the 20th century (Dimson, Marsh, and
Staunton (2002)). We assume that the return of the technology is 10% above its mean in state
h and 10% below in state ℓ. We plot consumption normalized by its expected value, R2 . Under
autarky, only generations 1 and 2 are exposed to the return shock. Under complete participation,
by contrast, all generations share the risk. Consistent with Proposition 4.2, the consumption ct+2
of generations t ≥ 1 is higher in state h. Moreover, the parameter value γ = 4 is in the region
where the consumption c2 of generation 0 is also higher in state h.
We next determine equilibrium bond holdings. Under complete participation, generations 1
and 2 seek to hedge against the risk that their return on investment in period 2 will be low (state
ℓ). Generations t > 2, who have no exposure to that risk, provide them with insurance by selling
them two-period bonds. Since initial positions are zero, generations t > 2 short-sell two-period
bonds and use the proceeds to invest in one-period bonds. The investment in one-period bonds is
the reason why the consumption of these generations is low in state ℓ (Proposition 4.2).
Generation 0 could be an additional seller of two-period bonds because it has no exposure to
return risk. Generation 0, however, differs from generations 1 and 2 not only in risk exposure,
but also in investment horizon: that of generation 0 is one period, while that of generations 1 and
2 is two periods. If γ > 1, then a longer horizon implies larger investment in two-period bonds
(Proposition 3.3). Therefore, generation 0 invests less in two-period bonds than generations 1 and
2, which implies that generations 1 and 2 have to be buyers of these bonds. Generation 0 can be a
buyer or a short-seller; it is a short-seller if γ exceeds the threshold γ̄ > 1 since its consumption is
higher in state h than in state ℓ (Proposition 4.2). If instead γ ≤ 1, then a longer horizon implies
smaller investment in two-period bonds. Therefore, generation 0 invests more in two-period bonds
than generations 1 and 2, which implies that generation 0 has to be a buyer of these bonds and
consume more in state ℓ (Proposition 4.2). Generations 1 and 2 can be buyers or short-sellers of
two-period bonds.
Corollary 4.1. Under complete participation,
• Generations t > 2 short-sell two-period bonds.
• Generations 1 and 2 buy two-period bonds if γ ≥ 1.
• Generation 0 short-sells two-period bonds if γ ≥ γ̄, and buys them if γ ≤ 1.

13

4.2

Inducing Complete Participation through Debt Maturity Structure

We now return to the case where only generations 0 and 1 can trade in period 1. We show that
although generations t ≥ 2 cannot trade in that period, there exists a choice of maturity structure
and taxes that results in efficient risksharing between them and generations 0 and 1. Through this
choice, the government can effectively induce complete participation.
Suppose that the government issues the aggregate quantity B1∗ of two-period bonds that generations 0 and 1 buy under complete participation. Then, the two-period interest rate coincides with
that under complete participation. The same is true for the quantity of two-period bonds bought
by each of generations 0 and 1, and for these generations’ consumption. Generations t ≥ 2 can also
consume the same as under complete participation through a choice of state-contingent taxes that
meet the government’s budget constraint.
Proposition 4.3. Suppose that only generations 0 and 1 can trade in period 1. Then, the government can achieve the same outcome as under complete participation by issuing the aggregate
quantity B1∗ of two-period bonds that generations 0 and 1 buy under complete participation, and
levying appropriate state-contingent taxes {τt∗ }t≥2 on generations t ≥ 2.
Since the government issues the same quantity of two-period bonds as that sold by generations
t ≥ 2 under complete participation, it is effectively trading on behalf of these generations. Thus, the
government induces efficient risksharing by replicating the trades of private agents not present in
the market. Note that the government raises welfare by supplying the right quantity of two-period
bonds rather than by introducing these bonds into the market. Two-period bonds can exist even
in the government’s absence; the government’s role is to trade the right quantity of them.
To illustrate the government’s optimal policy, we return to the example used in Figure 1 of
Section 4.1. Under complete participation, generations 1 and 2 share their risk with generations 0
and t > 2 by buying two-period bonds from them. Moreover, generations 0 and 1 buy two-period
bonds in the aggregate, and the quantity bought is 0.7. Therefore, the government can induce
complete participation by issuing a quantity B1∗ = 0.7 of two-period bonds.
Figure 2 depicts government debt and taxes in states h and ℓ for t ≥ 2. In state h, the
government makes a capital gain on its bond portfolio since it has issued two-period bonds. It
also taxes generation 2 (τ2,h > 0), which buys two-period bonds under complete participation and
consumes less in state h than under autarky. The government then invests its trading profits and tax
proceeds in one-period bonds, rolls them over, and pays out the interest that it earns as a transfer
to generations t > 2. Thus, transfers to generations t > 2 are constant over time (τt,h ≡ τh < 0 for
t > 2). Constant transfers are optimal because generations t > 2 have the same initial endowment,
CRRA preferences and investment opportunity set, and hence the same consumption profile under

14

complete participation. Conversely, in state ℓ, the government makes a capital loss on its bond
portfolio, and makes a transfer to generation 2 (τ2,ℓ < 0). It then finances its trading losses and
transfer payments by issuing one-period bonds, rolls them over, and pays the interest by levying a
constant tax on generations t > 2 (τt,ℓ ≡ τℓ > 0 for t > 2).9

4.3

Uniqueness of Optimal Maturity Structure

Section 4.2 derives a maturity structure that induces complete participation and efficient risksharing. We next study more formally the optimization over maturity structures, and show that a
maturity structure is optimal if and only if it is as in Section 4.2.
A maturity structure is fully characterized by the quantity B1 of two-period bonds issued in
period 1; the quantity b1 of one-period bonds issued in that period is determined by the government’s
budget constraint (2.2). We study the choice of B1 in conjunction with the state-contingent taxes
{τt }t≥2 . The policy (B1 , {τt }t≥2 ) must satisfy the government’s budget constraints (2.2)-(2.4) and
the bound (2.5). We refer to such a policy as admissible.
We define optimality of a maturity structure by aggregating across agents gains and losses from
a policy change. To ensure that gains and losses are comparable across agents, we measure them in
monetary terms as of period 1. Consider a policy change from (B1 , {τt }t≥2 ) to (B̂1 , {τ̂t }t≥2 ), and
denote by ct+2 and ĉt+2 the consumption of generation t in the corresponding equilibria. Define
the gain Tt of generation t as the dollar amount that if invested in one-period bonds from period 1
to t + 2 and subtracted from ĉt+2 would leave generation t with the same expected utility as under
ct+2 . The gain of generation 0 is given by
Eu(c2 ) ≡ Eu(ĉ2 − RT0 )

(4.6)

since investing T0 in one-period bonds from period 1 to 2 yields RT0 . Similarly, the gain of
generation t ≥ 1 is given by
Eu(ct+2 ) ≡ Eu(ĉt+2 − Rt R2 Tt )

(4.7)

since investing Tt in one-period bonds from period 1 to t+2 yields Rt R2 Tt . The gain Tt is analogous
9
Proposition 4.3 shows that the government can achieve the complete-participation allocation through a combination of debt maturity structure in period 1 and taxes on future generations t ≥ 2. An alternative mechanism
that achieves the same allocation is a social security system, provided that taxes in period 2 can also be imposed on
generations 0 and 1. Since, however, taxes are only on income in our model, and agents receive income only in the
first period of their lives, generations 0 and 1 cannot be taxed in period 2. Even under more general tax schemes and
income profiles, debt maturity structure has the advantage over social security to not require taxes on generations
0 and 1: the revenue is raised instead through the capital losses that these generations realize on their investments
in government bonds. Taxes could have the drawback of being distortionary (a consideration which is outside our
model).

15

to the concept of compensating variation (e.g., Varian (1992)).
Definition 1. A maturity structure B1 is optimal if it is associated to an admissible policy (B1 , {τt }t≥2 )
P
such that the sum ∞
t=0 Tt of gains from switching to any other admissible policy (B̂1 , {τ̂t }t≥2 ) is
non-positive.

Optimality in definition 1 is a stronger version of Pareto optimality: the maturity structure B1
is not optimal if the allocation corresponding to (B1 , {τt }t≥2 ) is Pareto-dominated by the allocation
corresponding to (B̂1 , {τ̂t }t≥2 ) combined with a set of transfers. The policy (B1∗ , {τt∗ }t≥2 ) of Proposition 4.3 corresponds to a standard competitive equilibrium with complete participation, and hence
to a Pareto optimal allocation among all feasible allocations, i.e., those satisfying the aggregate resource constraint. Since the allocation corresponding to (B1∗ , {τt∗ }t≥2 ) is not Pareto-dominated by
any other allocation, B1∗ is optimal according to Definition 1. Proposition 4.4 shows that the converse is true as well, i.e., any optimal maturity structure must correspond to an equilibrium with
complete participation.
Proposition 4.4. A maturity structure is optimal if and only if it is equal to the aggregate quantity
B1∗ of two-period bonds that generations 0 and 1 buy in a complete-participation equilibrium.

4.4

Properties of Optimal Maturity Structure

We next derive two key properties of the optimal maturity structure in our model. The first
concerns the effect of changes in the clientele mix. The second concerns the expected excess return
of long- relative to short-term bonds.

4.4.1

Clientele Effects

We consider a change in the clientele mix in period 1. As in Proposition 3.3, we change the relative
size of clienteles’ endowments holding the value of their aggregate endowment measured as of period
1 constant. Thus, an increase in the size of the long-horizon clientele, generation 1, relative to the
short-horizon clientele, generation 0, amounts to increasing α1 holding Rα0 + α1 constant. We
make the following technical assumption:
Assumption 1. The demand functions of generations t > 2 for two-period bonds under complete
participation are increasing in the two-period interest rate L1 .
Assumption 1 ensures that the aggregate demand function for two-period bonds in the equilibrium with complete participation is a standard downward-sloping demand function: it is increasing

16

in L1 and hence is decreasing in the bond price. This is because the demand functions of generations 0, 1 and 2 for two-period bonds are increasing in L1 , as shown in Propositions 3.1 and 4.1.
A downward-sloping demand function ensures that the equilibrium with complete participation is
unique. Assumption 1 holds under the sufficient condition γ ≤ 1, and hence holds also for values
of γ larger than one.10
Proposition 4.5. Suppose that Assumption 1 holds. If γ > 1, then an increase in the size of the
long-horizon clientele in period 1:
• Raises the optimal supply B1∗ of two-period bonds.
• Lowers the equilibrium two-period interest rate L1 that prevails when two-period bonds are in
supply B1∗ .
The results are reversed if γ < 1.
Proposition 4.5 is closely related to Proposition 3.3, which examines how an increase in the
size of the long-horizon clientele affects the equilibrium two-period interest rate L1 . Proposition 3.3
takes the supply of two-period bonds as fixed, while Proposition 4.5 examines both how the optimal
supply changes and how the equilibrium two-period interest rate changes taking into account the
change in supply. The effects are closely related. For example, Proposition 3.3 shows that if γ > 1,
then an increase in the size of the long-horizon clientele raises the aggregate demand of generations
0 and 1 for two-period bonds. Due to the higher demand, these generations buy a larger quantity
of two-period bonds in the equilibrium with complete participation, and the two-period interest
rate in that equilibrium decreases. This, in turn, implies Proposition 4.5: the optimal supply B1∗
of two-period bonds in the equilibrium with incomplete participation increases, and the two-period
interest rate prevailing under B1∗ decreases.
Propositions 3.3 and 4.5 reveal a similarity between welfare maximization and revenue maximization. Suppose that γ > 1. Holding maturity structure constant, an increase in the size of
the long-horizon clientele lowers the two-period interest rate L1 (Proposition 3.3). This prompts
the government to change the maturity structure by increasing the supply B1∗ of two-period bonds
(Proposition 4.5). Hence, a welfare-maximizing government responds to demand shocks in a way
that appears consistent with maximizing revenue from bond issuance. The same is true when γ < 1
since the effects of demand shocks on L1 and B1∗ are both in the opposite direction than when γ > 1.
Revenue maximization, suitably extended to account for the variance of revenue in addition
to the mean, is viewed as a relevant objective by many practitioners (Bernaschi, Missale and
Vergni (2009)). Our analysis identifies a similarity between revenue maximization and welfare
10

The equilibrium with complete participation is unique in the example used in Figures 1 and 2, where γ = 4.

17

maximization, pointed out in the previous paragraph, but also an important difference. A revenuemaximizing government in our model would respond to an increase in the demand for two-period
bonds by increasing supply up to the point where the two-period interest rate remains unchanged.
This is because it equates the revenue from issuing two-period bonds to the expected revenue
from issuing one-period bonds and rolling over, and the latter does not depend on the demand
shock because the one-period interest rate is equal to the return of the production technology. By
contrast, a welfare-maximizing government lets the two-period interest rate decrease (Proposition
4.5). Thus, it does not fully accommodate the increase in demand, catering to clienteles to a
more limited extent than a revenue-maximizing government. This is because catering affects future
generations. Indeed, by increasing the supply of long-term bonds, the government helps the longhorizon clientele insure against the risk of reinvesting at a low interest rate. This insurance, however,
is provided by imposing more risk on future generations through a more uncertain tax burden: high
taxes when the interest rate is low and low taxes when it is high.

4.4.2

Expected Excess Returns of Long-Term Bonds

We consider the expected excess return of two- relative to one-period bonds in period 1 over both
a one- and a two-period horizon. The two-period return is determined by the first-order condition
(3.4) of generation 1, which is investing over two periods. Generation 1 consumes less in state ℓ
than in state h under complete participation (Proposition 4.2). This is because productivity and
the one-period interest rate are lower in state ℓ, and hence fewer aggregate resources are available in
that state. Since two-period bonds dominate one-period bonds in state ℓ, they are a valuable hedge
and offer negative expected excess return over two periods. The one-period return is determined
by the first-order condition (3.2) of generation 0, which is investing over one period. If γ exceeds
the threshold γ̄ > 1, then generation 0 consumes less in state ℓ than in state h under complete
participation, and two-period bonds offer negative expected excess return over one period as well.
Proposition 4.6. Under the optimal maturity structure, the expected excess return of two- relative
to one-period bonds in period 1 is negative over a two-period horizon. The corresponding return
over a one-period horizon is negative if γ ≥ γ̄, but positive if γ ≤ 1.
It has been well documented that long-term nominal bonds earn positive expected excess
returns relative to their short-term counterparts.11 Our model, however, is real so our results
concern real bonds. Ang, Bekaert and Wei (2008) find that long-term real bonds in the US offer no
significant excess returns. In Section 6 we provide evidence consistent with their results: we find
that the average slope of the real term structure across the UK and the US is slightly negative.
11
See, for example, Cochrane (1999). Campbell, Sunderam and Viceira (2013) find, however, that the expected
excess returns of nominal bonds have turned negative over the past 15 years.

18

Hence, the result of Proposition 4.6 that long-term bonds earn negative expected excess returns is
not at odds with the data.
Proposition 4.6 identifies a difference between welfare maximization and revenue maximization,
which is related to the one in Section 4.4.1. Since the expected return of two-period bonds over a
two-period horizon is lower than of one-period bonds, a government could raise expected revenue
by issuing more long-term bonds. This raises the tax burden of future generations when interest
rates are low, which is also when these generations’ consumption is low. A welfare-maximizing
government internalizes the risk imposed on future generations and limits the supply of long-term
bonds below the level where their expected returns are equalized to those of short-term bonds.

5

Extensions

Our analysis so far assumes that the return of the linear production technology is riskless and that
the one-period interest rate, to which this return is equal because of no-arbitrage, is stochastic only
in one period. In this section we relax both assumptions. We also allow the endowment of each
generation to be risky.

5.1

Stochastic Interest Rate in All Periods

We first maintain a riskless return and endowment, but allow the one-period interest rate to be
stochastic in all periods t ≥ 2, i.e., in the steady state when three generations coexist. We denote
by Rt the gross one-period interest rate in period t ≥ 2, and assume that it takes the values Rt,h
and Rt,ℓ < Rt,h with probabilities pt and 1 − pt , respectively, where Rt,ℓ exceeds a lower bound
R > 1. For simplicity, we take Rt to be independent across periods. We assume that the interest
rate in periods 0 and 1 is equal to R, and set R0 = R1 ≡ R.
Without loss of generality, we assume that only one-period bonds are available in period 0,
while one- and two-period bonds are available in periods t ≥ 1. We denote by τt the tax rate in
period t and by bt the face value of one-period bonds available in the same period. One-period
bonds included in bt+1 are both those issued by the government in period t + 1, and two-period
bonds issued in period t that become one-period in period t + 1. We denote by Bt the face value of
two-period bonds issued by the government in period t ≥ 1, and by Lt the gross two-period interest
rate in the same period. As in Section 2, we set τ0 = τ1 = 0, which imply b0 = 0.
The government’s budget constraint in period t ≥ 1 is

αt τt +

bt − Bt−1
Bt
+ 2 = bt−1 .
Rt
Lt

(5.1)

19

Government revenue is the sum of taxes αt τt on generation t, plus the revenue (bt − Bt−1 )/Rt from
issuing one-period bonds and Bt /L2t from issuing two-period bonds. It is equal to the cost bt−1 of
repaying the bonds that mature in period t − 1. We eliminate Ponzi schemes by the government
by assuming that debt must be bounded above, i.e.,
Bt
bt
+ 2 ≤K
Rt Lt

(5.2)

for a bound K and for all t.
As in Section 4, we can link optimal maturity structure to equilibrium with complete participation. Complete participation requires that in any given period t ≥ 1 all generations t′ ≥ t − 1
are available to trade one- and two-period bonds. This includes the unborn generations t′ > t, but
not the old generations t′ < t − 1 that consume in periods up to t and cannot share risk concerning
a later period. As in Section 4.2, the government can effectively induce complete participation
through a choice of maturity structure and taxes. In particular, the government should issue in
period t the aggregate quantity Bt∗ of bonds that generations t − 1 and t buy under complete
participation.
Proposition 5.1. Suppose that only generations t − 1 and t can trade in period t for all t ≥ 1.
Then, the government can achieve the same outcome as under complete participation by issuing for
t ≥ 1 the aggregate quantity Bt∗ of two-period bonds that generations t − 1 and t buy under complete
participation, and levying appropriate state-contingent taxes {τt∗ }t≥2 on generations t ≥ 2.
A maturity structure policy by the government is characterized by the quantity {Bt }t≥1 of
two-period bonds issued in periods t ≥ 1 and the state-contingent taxes {τt }t≥2 on generations
t ≥ 2. The policy ({Bt }t≥1 , {τt }t≥2 ) must satisfy the government’s budget constraint (5.1) and
the bound (5.2). We refer to such a policy as admissible. The definition of optimality generalizes
Definition 1 in Section 4.3. Proceeding as in that section, we can show that a maturity structure
{Bt∗ }t≥1 that induces complete participation is optimal.
Proposition 5.2. A maturity structure is optimal if and only if it equal to the aggregate quantity
{Bt∗ }t≥1 of two-period bonds that generations 0 and 1 buy in a complete-participation equilibrium.
Solving for the equilibrium when the interest rate is stochastic in all periods can only be done
numerically. We can, however, derive closed-form solutions when the stochastic variation is small.
We define the mean-zero random variable ηt by ηt ≡ Rt −E(Rt ), and denote its values (corresponding
to the two values of Rt ) by ηt,h and ηt,ℓ < ηt,h . We assume that {ηt,h , ηt,ℓ }t≥2 are proportional to a
parameter η̄ > 0. For small η̄, we can compute the equilibrium under both complete and incomplete

20

participation in closed-form, and show that the properties derived in Sections 3 and 4.4 continue
to hold.
Proposition 5.3. Suppose that interest-rate risk is small. Then, Propositions 3.2 and 3.3 (supply
and clientele effects under a general maturity structure) and Propositions 4.5 and 4.6 (clientele
effects and expected excess returns under an optimal maturity structure) hold.

5.2

Risky Production Technology and Demographic Uncertainty

We next relax the assumptions that the return of the linear production technology and the endowment of each generation are riskless. Since the endowment of a generation can be interpreted
as the generation’s size, a risky endowment corresponds to demographic uncertainty. We set
ζt ≡ αt − E(αt ), where αt is the endowment of generation t and ζt is a mean-zero random variable
observed in period t. We denote the gross return of the technology in period t by Rt , i.e., one unit
invested in the technology in period t yields Rt units in period t + 1, and use Rtf to denote the
gross one-period interest rate. We assume that Rt = E(Rt ) + ηt + θt+1 , where the random variables
ηt and θt+1 are mean-zero and observed in periods t and t + 1, respectively. Variables observed in
different periods are independent of each other, but variables observed in the same period can be
correlated. The expected return of the technology conditional on information available at the time
of investment is E(Rt ) + ηt . When {ζt , ηt , θt+1 }t≥1 are small, in the sense of Section 5.1, we can
solve for the equilibrium under incomplete participation in closed form.
Proposition 5.4. Suppose that endowment and productivity risk are small. Then, a lengthening
of the maturity structure in period t raises the expected excess return of two- relative to one-period
bonds, over both a one- and a two-period horizon. It raises the two-period interest rate Lt if

Var(ηt+1 ) +

E(Rt+1 )
Cov(ηt+1 , θt+1 ) > 0,
E(Rt )

(5.3)

and the one-period interest rate Rtf if
Cov(ηt+1 , θt+1 ) > 0.

(5.4)

A decrease in the size of the long-horizon clientele in period t has the same effects if γ > 1, and
the opposite effects if γ < 1.
A lengthening of the maturity structure in period t raises the expected excess return of tworelative to one-period bonds for the same reasons as in Proposition 3.2. The two-period interest rate,
however, does not always increase because there can be a countervailing decrease in the one-period

21

rate (an effect not present with a riskless technology, where no-arbitrage pins the one-period rate to
the technology’s return). The one-period rate decreases when the technology offers unexpectedly
low returns during times of high interest rates, i.e., θt+1 is negatively correlated with ηt+1 . Indeed,
two-period bonds then correlate positively with an investment in the technology, and an increase
in their supply exposes agents to more risk. This induces a greater preference to invest in riskless
one-period bonds than in the technology, causing the one-period interest rate to decrease.
If γ > 1, then a decrease in the size of the long-horizon clientele in period t has the same effects
as in the previous paragraph. The effect on the expected excess return of two- relative to one-period
bonds arises for the same reasons as in Proposition 3.3. The one-period interest rate decreases when
θt+1 is negatively correlated with ηt+1 because agents with a longer horizon are then less averse
to investing in the technology. A decrease in the relative size of these agents can thus result in a
greater aggregate preference to invest in riskless one-period bonds than in the technology.
With a risky production technology or demographic uncertainty, the link between optimal maturity structure and equilibrium with complete participation becomes more complicated. The government can generally achieve less intergenerational risksharing relative to a complete-participation
equilibrium in which all generations can invest at all times in the technology and can trade assets
that pay off contingent on endowment shocks. This is because the government’s risksharing tools
are limited, e.g., bonds are non-contingent. The optimal maturity structure can be characterized
through complete-participation equilibrium, as in Section 4, when the shock ηt+1 can only take two
values and is perfectly correlated with αt+1 and θt+1 . In that case, all uncertainty is spanned by
shocks to the one-period interest rate. When, in addition, stochastic shocks are small, the clientele
effects derived in Proposition 4.5 continue to hold for the optimal supply of two-period bonds and
their expected excess return.
A final extension of our analysis is to assume that assets can be issued not only by the government but also by private firms. Holding constant the asset side of the corporate sector’s balance
sheet, changes to the maturity structure of corporate debt, and to the mix of corporate liabilities
more generally, would not matter in our model because of the Modigliani-Miller theorem. Changes
to the mix of government liabilities matter, by contrast, because they are accompanied by changes
in taxes on future generations. Thus, only the maturity structure of government debt and not that
of corporate debt can be used to improve intergenerational risksharing.

6

Empirical Tests

In this section we test the basic predictions of our model. In the empirically plausible case where
the coefficient of relative risk aversion γ is larger than one, our model predicts that an increase

22

in the size of the long-horizon clientele lowers long rates relative to short rates. This is shown
in Proposition 3.3 under a general maturity structure and in Proposition 4.5 under the optimal
maturity structure. Our model also predicts that an increase in the size of the long-horizon clientele
induces a welfare-maximizing government to raise the average maturity of its debt structure, as
shown in Proposition 4.5. These results hold in our baseline model and in the extensions studied
in Section 5.
Clienteles in our model are defined by demographic characteristics, i.e., young agents are the
long-horizon clientele and old agents the short-horizon one. Hence, a natural way to test our basic
predictions is to run the following two regressions for a panel of countries:
Slopeit = a + bDemit + ui + eit ,
M aturityit = c + dDemit + vi + fit ,
where i indexes countries and t time periods, Slopeit is the slope of the yield curve, i.e., the difference in yields between long- and short-term government bonds, Demit is a demographic variable
capturing the relative size of the long- and short-horizon clienteles, M aturityit is a variable capturing the average maturity of government debt, and ui and vi are country effects. An appealing
feature of these regressions is that the demographic variable can plausibly be assumed exogenous.

6.1

Data Description

Our empirical analysis focuses on OECD countries, for which data on the maturity structure of
government debt are available. For a subset of these countries, we also observe yields on government
bonds. We sample the data annually because demographic variables are slow-moving.
We start with the sample of 30 countries that were members of the OECD at the beginning of
2010. We drop country-year observations where the country’s Standard and Poor’s credit rating is
below AA-. We do this to abstract from the credit component of bond yields, since our model is
not about sovereign default risk. Our filter eliminates the Czech Republic, Greece, Hungary, Korea,
Mexico, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Turkey from the sample. It also drops some country-year
observations for Iceland (2008-10), Ireland (2010), Italy (2006-10), and Portugal (2009-10).
Our main demographic variable is the median age of the population from the United Nations
Population Division for the period 1960-2010. Since in our model the young generation is the longhorizon clientele, an increase in the median age can be interpreted as a decrease in that clientele’s
relative importance. We also use OECD Health Data for life expectancy at age 40 to control for
differences in life expectancy.12
12

The importance of a generation in our model is measured by income, which is the product of population size

23

Our measure of the maturity structure of government debt comes from two sources. For the
period 1980-2010, we use the weighted average maturity of marketable government debt series from
the OECD Central Government Debt Statistical Yearbook. In order to obtain the longest possible
time series we merge these data with comparable data for the period 1960-1979 from Missale
(1999). Data on maturity structure are available for all countries in our reduced sample, except for
Switzerland and Portugal. This leaves us with 20 countries.
In our model generations live for three periods, and so a period should be thought of as quite
long. If working life starts at around age 25, it would be natural to think of a period as lasting
around 15 to 20 years.13 Our empirical proxy for the long-term bond is the 30-year benchmark
government bond, and for the short-term bond is the 10-year benchmark government bond. We
thus measure slope using the 30-10 bond yield spread. The specific maturity choices are driven by
data availability: 30-year bonds is the longest maturity for which there are relatively consistent
data across OECD countries, and the benchmark status of the 10-year bond ensures more and
better price data than for the 15-year bond. We use data on nominal government bond yields from
Global Financial Data. Out of the sample of all OECD countries, only 10 countries have data on
30-year yields. In the case of the UK, we substitute the 30-year yield with the consol yield which
is available for a much longer time period. (Our results do not depend on this choice.)
Table 1 provides summary statistics for the entire sample, and Table 2 breaks them down by
countries. In both tables, Panel A refers to the sample of 10 countries used in the regression of
slope on median age, and Panel B to the sample of 20 countries used in the regression of maturity
on median age. Table 1 shows that there is substantial variation in our variables when we consider
the entire sample. Table 2 shows that there is also substantial cross-country variation.
While our model is real, our empirical measure of slope is constructed using nominal yields.
This choice is driven by data availability: only two countries in our sample, the UK and the US,
have direct measures of long-term real bond yields, and even for these countries the measures are
available only for recent years.
As a check for the validity of using nominal slope as a proxy for real slope, we examine the
period 1998-2010 for the UK and the US. This is the longest period for which both nominal and
real long-term yields are available. For the UK we use nominal and real spot rates published by
the Bank of England. The longest available maturity is 25 years, and we calculate nominal and
times income per capita. Our median-age measure is based on population size, and it would be desirable to also
account for income per capita. Unfortunately data on how wealth differs across generational cohorts are not available
for most OECD countries. Lack of data availability is also the reason why we do not include additional measures of
bond demand, such as foreign holdings, and measures of bond supply in our regressions.
13
In our model only the young generation receives an income (endowment), while the evidence is that income
peaks at middle age, around age 50. We assume this income profile to draw a sharp distinction between the role of
debt maturity structure and social security in improving intergenerational risksharing. Introducing income for the
middle-aged generation would blur this distinction. We expect, however, that the main predictions of our model
would carry through provided that there is a cost of raising taxes (e.g., distortions). See Footnote 9.

24

real slope using the 10- and 25-year maturities. For the US we use the 10-year and 30-year nominal
and real bond yields from Global Financial Data.
The correlation coefficient between nominal and real slope is 0.68. Excluding the crisis year
2008, which appears to be an outlier for the UK, the coefficient rises to 0.89. Figure 3 shows the
high correlation. A univariate regression of real slope on nominal slope produces a coefficient of 0.53
(t-statistic of 4.45), an intercept of -0.19 (t-statistic of -2.99), and an R-squared of 0.46. Excluding
2008, the respective numbers are 0.60 (8.81), -0.17 (-4.64), and 0.79. The high correlation between
nominal and real slope suggests that nominal slope is a good proxy for real slope.14
The average real slope across the UK and the US, i.e., the average y-coordinate of the points in
Figure 3, is -0.06%. The average nominal slope, i.e., the average x-coordinate, is 0.25%. Inflation
risk premia could be the reason why the average nominal slope is positive despite the average real
slope being negative.

6.2

Results

Our regression results are in Table 3, Panels A and B. The first column in each panel reports
results from a pooled OLS regression; the second column from a between regression, in which the
data for each country are averaged over time and regressed across countries; the third column from
a fixed-effects regression, derived by including country dummy variables; and the fourth column
from a random-effects regression. Standard errors in the OLS, fixed-effects, and random-effects
regressions are clustered by country.
Consider first Panel A, in which the slope of the yield curve is regressed on median age. Since
an increase in median age corresponds to a decrease in the relative importance of the long-horizon
clientele (the young generation), our model implies a positive regression coefficient. The coefficient
is indeed positive for all four regressions. It is significant at the 1% level for OLS and random
effects, and at the 5% level for the between regression. Figure 4 plots the country means of slope
and median age, and confirms visually the statistical significance of the between regression.
The fixed- and random-effects regressions produce coefficients of similar magnitude. This suggests that the country-specific component of the error term is uncorrelated with the independent
variable, as assumed in the random-effects model. A Hausman specification test yields a p-value of
42.3%, confirming this impression and supporting random effects.
In addition to being statistically significant, our results are economically significant. Using,
for example, the point estimate from the random-effects regression, we find that a one-standard14
A high correlation between nominal and real slope is also consistent with many of the leading inflation forecasting
models, e.g., the unobserved components model with stochastic volatility in Stock and Watson (2007), which generate
nearly identical inflation forecasts at the 10- and 30-year horizons. Thus, changes in inflation expectations should
have a small influence on the nominal 30-10 slope.

25

deviation increase in median age is associated with an increase in slope of 19 basis points. This
corresponds to approximately one-third of the in-sample standard deviation of the slope variable.
Consider next Panel B, in which the average maturity of government debt is regressed on
median age. Since an increase in median age corresponds to a decrease in the relative importance
of the long-horizon clientele, our model implies a negative regression coefficient. The coefficient is
indeed negative in all four regressions. It is significant at the 5% level for OLS, fixed effects and
random effects, but insignificant for the between regression (p-value of 24%). Figure 5 plots the
country means of maturity and median age, and shows that the lack of statistical significance of
the between regression is driven by the UK. The results in Panel B are not affected if we restrict
the analysis to the sub-sample of countries used in Panel A.
The fixed- and random effects regressions produce coefficients of similar magnitude. A Hausman specification test yields a p-value of 85%, supporting the random-effects model. Using the
point estimate from the random-effects regression, we find that a one-standard-deviation increase
in median age is associated with an increase in maturity of 0.59 years. This corresponds to approximately one-fourth of the in-sample standard deviation of the maturity variable. The results are
thus economically significant.
One possible concern with using median age as a measure of the relative size of the short-horizon
clientele is that differences in median age could partly reflect differences in life expectancy. That
is, high life expectancy could cause median age to be high without lowering the relative size of the
long-horizon clientele. As a robustness check, we replace median age in our regressions by median
age divided by life expectancy at age 40. The coefficients in Table 3 maintain their predicted sign,
with somewhat lower statistical significance.

7

Conclusion

We propose a clientele-based model of the yield curve and optimal maturity structure of government
debt. Clienteles are generations of agents at different stages of their lifecycle in an overlappinggenerations economy. An optimal maturity structure exists in the absence of distortionary taxes
and induces efficient intergenerational risksharing. If agents are more risk-averse than log, then
an increase in the long-horizon clientele raises the price and optimal supply of long-term bonds—
effects that we also confirm empirically in a panel of OECD countries. Moreover, under the optimal
maturity structure catering to clienteles is limited and long-term bonds earn negative expected
excess returns.
Our model emphasizes a new and empirically relevant determinant of maturity structure:
changes in demand in different segments of the yield curve, generated by clienteles. The literature

26

has emphasized that an additional important determinant is the government’s desire to manage its
balance-sheet risk and smooth tax rates. Combining the two determinants, by introducing distortionary taxes in our model, could yield a richer theory of optimal maturity structure and be an
interesting extension of our work. It could also be interesting to develop a calibrated version of
our model and give precise quantitative prescriptions on how maturity structure should respond to
changes in clientele demand. This might require extending the lives of generations to more than
three periods. Finally, while our model concerns demographic clienteles, it could be interesting to
also study regulatory clienteles. This would require modeling financial institutions, such as pension
funds, and the agency problems that give rise to regulation.

27

APPENDIX
Proof of Proposition 3.1: We first show that the demand functions (B1,0 , B1,1 ) are increasing
in L1 . Setting (ω1 , y2 , y2,h , y2,ℓ ) ≡ (R/L21 , 1/R2 , 1/R2,h , 1/R2,ℓ ) and using (3.1), we can write (3.2)
as
 

E u′ R2 α0 + (y2 − ω1 )B1,0 (y2 − ω1 ) = 0


−γ

−γ
⇔ p R2 α0 + (y2,h − ω1 )B1,0
(y2,h − ω1 ) + (1 − p) R2 α0 + (y2,ℓ − ω1 )B1,0
(y2,ℓ − ω1 ) = 0,
(A.1)

where the second step follows because utility is CRRA. Solving (A.1), we find

B1,0 = R2 α0

1−Y
,
Y (y2,ℓ − ω1 ) + ω1 − y2,h

(A.2)

where


p(ω1 − y2,h )
Y ≡
(1 − p)(y2,ℓ − ω1 )

1

γ

.

Differentiating (A.2) with respect to ω1 , we find
∂Y
(y2,h − y2,ℓ ) ∂ω
− (1 − Y )2
∂B1,0
2
1
= R α0
.
∂ω1
[Y (y2,ℓ − ω1 ) + ω1 − y2,h ]2

(A.3)

Since ∂Y /∂ω1 > 0, (A.3) implies that ∂B1,0 /∂ω1 < 0. Therefore, B1,0 is increasing in L1 . When L21
converges to RR2,ℓ , and so ω1 converges to y2,ℓ , (A.2) implies that B1,0 converges to −∞. When
L21 converges to RR2,h , and so ω1 converges to y2,h , (A.2) implies that B1,0 converges to ∞.
Using (3.3) and (3.4) we can similarly compute B1,1 :

B1,1 = Rα1

R2,h − ZR2,ℓ
,
Z(1 − ω1 R2,ℓ ) + ω1 R2,h − 1

(A.4)

where


p(ω1 R2,h − 1)
Z≡
(1 − p)(1 − ω1 R2,ℓ )

1
γ

.

28

Differentiating (A.4) with respect to ω1 , we find
∂Z
(R2,ℓ − R2,h ) ∂ω
− (R2,h − ZR2,ℓ )2
∂B1,1
1
= Rα1
.
∂ω1
[Z(1 − ω1 R2,ℓ ) + ω1 R2,h − 1]2

(A.5)

Since ∂Z/∂ω1 > 0, (A.5) implies that ∂B1,1 /∂ω1 < 0. Therefore, B1,1 is increasing in L1 . When
L21 converges to RR2,ℓ , and so ω1 R2,ℓ converges to one, (A.4) implies that B1,1 converges to −∞.
When L21 converges to RR2,h , and so ω1 R2,h converges to one, (A.4) implies that B1,1 converges
to ∞. Since B1,0 + B1,1 is increasing in L1 , and takes values from −∞ to ∞, (3.5) has a unique
solution L1 .
Proof of Proposition 3.2: An increase in B1 holding b1 /R + B1 /L21 constant has no effect on
tax rates. Therefore, (3.1)-(3.4) imply that the only effect on (B1,0 , B1,1 ) is through L1 . Since
B1,0 + B1,1 is increasing in L1 , (3.5) implies that L1 is increasing in B1 .
Proof of Proposition 3.3: We first show that an increase in the size of the long-horizon clientele,
i.e., an increase in α1 holding Rα0 + α1 constant, raises the aggregate demand for two-period bonds
B1,0 + B1,1 if γ > 1, and lowers it if γ < 1. Because of CRRA utility, the quantities
φ1,0 ≡

B1,0 /L21
,
Rα0

φ1,1 ≡

B1,1 /L21
,
α1

characterizing the fraction of wealth that generations 0 and 1 invest in two-period bonds in period
1, are independent of α0 and α1 . Therefore, an increase in α1 holding Rα0 + α1 constant raises
B1,0 + B1,1 if and only if φ1,1 > φ1,0 . To compare φ1,1 and φ1,0 , we substitute (3.1) and (3.3) into
(4.5), written for t = 1. (Eq. (4.5) holds for generations 0 and 1 in Section 3, and for all generations
in Section 4.1.) Because of CRRA utility,
L2

1 + φ1,0 ( RR12,h − 1)
L2

1 + φ1,0 ( RR12,ℓ − 1)

=



R2,h
R2,ℓ

1− 1 1 + φ ( L21 − 1)
γ
1,1 RR2,h
L2

.

1 + φ1,1 ( RR12,ℓ − 1)

Therefore, the quantity
L2

L2

L2

L2

1 + φ1,0 ( RR12,h − 1) 1 + φ1,1 ( RR12,ℓ − 1)
1 + φ1,0 ( RR12,ℓ − 1) 1 + φ1,1 ( RR12,h − 1)

−1 = h

29

(φ1,1 − φ1,0 )



L21
RR2,ℓ

−

L21
RR2,h



ih
i
L2
L2
1 + φ1,0 ( RR12,ℓ − 1) 1 + φ1,1 ( RR12,h − 1)

has the same sign as


R2,h
R2,ℓ

1− 1
γ

− 1.

Since R2,h > R2,ℓ , the sign of φ1,1 − φ1,0 is the same as of γ − 1. Since B1,0 + B1,1 is increasing in
L1 , (3.5) implies that an increase in α1 holding Rα0 + α1 constant lowers L1 if and only if it raises
B1,0 + B1,1 , i.e., if and only if γ > 1.
Proof of Proposition 4.1: Eqs. (3.3), (3.4), (4.1), (4.3) for t = 2, and CRRA utility imply that
B1,1
B1,2
=
.
α2
Rα1

(A.6)

Therefore, B1,2 has the properties of B1,1 shown in the proof of Proposition 3.1: it is increasing in
L1 , converges to −∞ when L21 converges to RR2,ℓ , and to ∞ when L21 converges to RR2,h . Using
(4.2) and (4.3), and proceeding as in the proof of Proposition 3.1, we can compute B1,t for t > 2:
B1,t = R−(t−3) αt

1−Z
,
Z(1 − ω1 R2,ℓ ) + ω1 R2,h − 1

(A.7)

where Z is defined in the proof of Proposition 3.1. The demand function B1,t is not always increasing
in L1 , but converges to −∞ when L21 converges to RR2,ℓ , and to ∞ when L21 converges to RR2,h .
P
Since ∞
t=0 Bt takes values from −∞ to ∞, (4.4) has a solution L1 .
Proof of Proposition 4.2: Since utility is CRRA, we can write (4.5) as

c2,h
=
c2,ℓ



R2,h
R2,ℓ

− 1

γ

ct+2,h
.
ct+2,ℓ

(A.8)

Eq. (3.1) implies that
R2 α0 +



1
R2,h

−

c2,h

=
c2,ℓ
R2 α0 + R12,ℓ −

R
L21
R
L21





B1,0

.

(A.9)

B1,0

30

Moreover,
P∞ ct+2,h
ct+2,h
Rt−3
= Pt=1
∞ ct+2,ℓ
ct+2,ℓ
t=1 Rt−3
=

RR2,h α1 + R2,h α2 +
RR2,ℓ α1 + R2,ℓ α2 +

where the first step follows because

P∞

αt
t=3 Rt−1

P∞

αt
t=3 Rt−1

ct+2,h
ct+2,ℓ



RR
− 1 − L22,h B1,0
1


,
RR2,ℓ
− 1 − L2 B1,0

(A.10)

1

is identical for all t ≥ 1, and the second from (3.3), (4.1),

(4.2) and (4.4).
If B1,0 ≥ 0, then (A.10) implies that
c2,h
c2,ℓ

> 1, and hence (A.8) implies that
Since

ct+2,h
ct+2,ℓ

ct+2,h
ct+2,ℓ

ct+2,h
ct+2,ℓ

> 1 for t ≥ 1. If B1,0 < 0, then (A.9) implies that

> 1 for t ≥ 1.
c2,h
c2,ℓ

> 1 for t ≥ 1, (A.8) implies that

> 1 for γ exceeding a threshold γ̄ > 1.

Suppose next that γ ≤ 1. If B1,0 > 0, then (A.9) implies that

c2,h
c2,ℓ

< 1. If B1,0 ≤ 0, then we can

use (A.10) to write the right-hand side of (A.8) as



R2,h
R2,ℓ

1− 1
γ

ct+2,h
R2,h
ct+2,ℓ
R2,ℓ

=



R2,h
R2,ℓ

1− 1 Rα + α +
1
2
γ

Rα1 + α2 +

Since this is smaller than one, (A.8) implies that

1
R2,h
1
R2,ℓ

c2,h
c2,ℓ

P∞

αt
t=3 Rt−1

P∞

αt
t=3 Rt−1

−
−




1
R2,h
1
R2,ℓ

−
−

R
L21
R
L21





B1,0

.

B1,0

< 1.

Proof of Corollary 4.1: Eqs. (4.2) and ct+2,h > ct+2,ℓ imply that B1,t < 0 for t > 2. If γ ≥ γ̄,
then (3.1) and c2,h > c2,ℓ imply that B1,0 < 0. If γ ≤ 1, then (3.1) and c2,h < c2,ℓ imply that
B1,0 > 0. Suppose finally that γ ≥ 1 and one of (B1,1 , B1,2 ) is non-positive. Eq. (A.6) implies
that both of (B1,1 , B1,2 ) are non-positive. Since γ ≥ 1, generation 0 invests a smaller fraction of its
wealth in two-period bonds than generation 1 (proof of Proposition 3.3), and hence B1,0 ≤ 0. The
non-positivity of (B1,0 , B1,1 , B1,2 ), together with the negativity of B1,t for all t > 2 is inconsistent
with (4.4), a contradiction. Therefore, both of (B1,1 , B1,2 ) are positive.
Proof of Proposition 4.3: Suppose that the government issues a quantity B1∗ of two-period bonds.
Since the demand functions of generations 0 and 1 are the same as under complete participation,
the two-period interest rate is also the same. As a consequence, each of generations 0 and 1 has the
same investment in two-period bonds and the same consumption as under complete participation.
Generations t ≥ 2 can also have the same consumption as under complete participation through an
appropriate choice of state-contingent taxes that we denote by {τt∗ }t≥2 . Since the budget constraint

31

of generation 2 under incomplete participation is
c4 = RR2 α2 (1 − τ2 ),

(A.11)

(4.1) implies that the taxes that leave that generation with the same consumption as under complete
participation are given by
RR2 α2 + R L21 − RR2
⇔

α2 τ2∗

=



R
1
−
2
L1 R2

 B1,2



L21

= RR2 α2 (1 − τ2∗ )

B1,2 .

(A.12)

Likewise, since the budget constraint of generation t > 2 under incomplete participation is
ct+2 = R2 αt (1 − τt ),

(A.13)

(4.2) implies that the taxes that leave that generation with the same consumption as under complete
participation are given by
R2 αt + Rt−1 L21 − RR2
⇔

αt τt∗

=R

t−3

R2



 B1,t

= R2 αt (1 − τt∗ )

L21

1
R
−
2
L1 R2



B1,t .

(A.14)

To determine whether the policy (B1∗ , {τt∗ }t≥2 ) satisfies (2.5), we compute bt using the government’s
budget constraints (2.2)-(2.4) and the initial condition b0 = 0. For t ≥ 2,

bt = R

Using

t−2



P∞

t′ =2 B1,t′

bt = −R

t−2

RR2
1− 2
L1



B1∗

−R

t−2

R2 α2 τ2∗

−

t
X

= −R

(A.15)

t′ =3

= −B1∗ , we can write (A.15) as

 ∞
t
X
RR2 X
′
1− 2
B1,t′ − Rt−2 R2 α2 τ2∗ −
Rt+1−t αt′ τt∗′
L1
′
′
t =2

t−2

′

Rt+1−t αt′ τt∗′ .

t =3


 X
∞
RR2
1− 2
B1,t′
L1
′
t =t+1



RR2
=− 1− 2
L1



∞
X
1−Z
αt′
,
t
Z(1 − ω1 R2,ℓ ) + ω1 R2,h − 1 ′
R ′ −t−1
t =t+1

32

(A.16)

where the second step follows from (A.12) and (A.14), and the third from (A.7). Eq. (A.16) implies
that bt is bounded.
Proof of Proposition 4.4: We first derive an intertemporal budget constraint for the government
and a resource constraint. Writing (A.15) for an admissible policy (B1 , {τt }t≥2 ) and dividing by
Rt−2 R2 , we find
bt
Rt−2 R2

=



1
R
− 2
R2 L1



B1 − α2 τ2 −

t
1 X αt′ τt′
.
R2 ′ Rt′ −3

(A.17)

t =3

Summing (3.1), (3.3) divided by R2 , (A.11) divided by RR2 , and (A.13) divided by Rt+1 R2 for all
t′ = 3, .., t, we find


t
t
1 X ct′ +2
1 X αt′ (1 − τt′ )
1
R
2
c2 +
= R α0 +Rα1 +α2 (1−τ2 )+
+
−
(B1,0 +B1,1 ). (A.18)
R2 ′ Rt′ −1
R2 ′
Rt′ −3
R2 L21
t =1

t =3

Combining (A.17) and (A.18), and using (3.5), we find
t
t
1 X ct′ +2
1 X αt′
bt
2
c2 +
.
′ −1 = R α0 + Rα1 + α2 +
′ −3 +
t
t
t−2
R2 ′ R
R2 t=3 R
R R2

(A.19)

t =1

Taking the limit when t → ∞, and noting that the limit of the last term in the right-hand side is
non-positive because of (2.5), yields the resource constraint
∞
∞
1 X ct+2
1 X αt
2
c2 +
≤ R α0 + Rα1 + α2 +
.
R2
Rt−1
R2
Rt−3
t=1

(A.20)

t=3

Taking the limit when t → ∞ in (A.17) yields likewise the government’s intertemporal budget
constraint


∞
1 X αt τt
1
R
α2 τ2 +
−
−
B1 ≥ 0.
R2 t=3 Rt−3
R2 L21

(A.21)

We next show that B1∗ is an optimal maturity structure. We proceed by contradiction, and
suppose that there exists an admissible policy (B̂1 , {τ̂t }t≥2 ) to which a switch from (B1∗ , {τt∗ }t≥2 )
P
∗
generates a positive sum ∞
t=0 Tt of gains. Denote by ĉt+2 and ct+2 the consumption of generation

33

t in the corresponding equilibria. The allocation {čt+2 }t≥0 defined by
č2 ≡ ĉ2 + R

∞
X

Tt ,

(A.22)

t=1

čt+2 ≡ ĉt+2 − Rt R2 Tt

for

t ≥ 1,

(A.23)

yields the same utility as {c∗t+2 }t≥0 for generations t ≥ 1 because of (4.7), and higher utility for
P
∗
generation 0 because of (4.6) and ∞
t=0 Tt > 0. This is a contradiction because {ct+2 }t≥0 is Pareto
optimal among all feasible allocations. To show Pareto optimality and the contradiction, we denote
the risk-neutral probabilities for states s = h, ℓ under complete participation by

π1,h ≡

L21
R2,ℓ
L21
R2,ℓ

−R

−

L21
R2,h

,

π1,ℓ ≡ 1 − π1,h ,
respectively. We also use (3.1), (3.3), (4.1) and (4.2) to write the optimization problem of generation
t ≥ 0 under complete participation as maximizing utility within the budget set Bt , where

B0 ≡ c2 : π1,h c2,h + π1,ℓ c2,ℓ ≤ R2 α0 ,



c3,h
c3,ℓ
B1 ≡ c3 : π1,h
+ π1,ℓ
≤ Rα1 ,
R2,h
R2,ℓ


c4,h
c4,ℓ
B2 ≡ c4 : π1,h
+ π1,ℓ
≤ α2 ,
RR2,h
RR2,ℓ



ct+2,h
ct+2,ℓ
π1,h
π1,ℓ
Bt ≡ ct+2 : π1,h 2
+ π1,ℓ 2
≤ αt
+
R R2,h
R R2,ℓ
R2,h R2,ℓ

for t > 2.

Since c∗2 maximizes the utility of generation 0 within B0 , č2 , which yields higher utility, is outside
B0 . Likewise, since c∗t+2 maximizes the expected utility of generation t ≥ 1 within Bt , čt+2 , which
yields the same utility, is weakly outside Bt . Combining the corresponding inequalities, we find

X

s=h,ℓ

π1,s

∞
1 X čt+2,s
č2,s +
R2,s t=1 Rt−1

!

>

X

π1,s

s=h,ℓ

∞
1 X αt
R2 α0 + Rα1 + α2 +
R2,s t=3 Rt−3

!

.

(A.24)

Eq. (A.24) contradicts the resource constraint (A.20). Indeed, (A.20) holds for {ĉt+2 }t≥0 , since
this allocation corresponds to the admissible policy (B̂1 , {τ̂t }t≥2 ). Moreover, because of (A.22) and

34

(A.23), (A.20) holds also for {čt+2 }t≥0 .
We finally show that an optimal maturity structure must equal B1∗ . Consider an optimal
maturity structure B1 and an associated admissible policy (B1 , {τt }t≥2 ). The ratio across states
of marginal utilities must be equal across all generations t ≥ 2; otherwise, it would be possible
to generate a positive sum of gains by reallocating taxes across two generations so that one is
kept equally well off and the other becomes better off. Moreover, the government’s intertemporal
budget constraint (A.21) holds with equality; otherwise the government would be accumulating a
growing surplus that it could instead distribute to the agents and raise their utility, contradicting the
optimality of B1 . Consider next an infinitesimal change (dB1 , {dτt }t≥2 ) that preserves admissibility
and the equality in (A.21). Eqs. (4.6) and (4.7) imply that
dT0 =

E [u′ (c2 )dc2 ]
,
REu′ (c2 )

dTt =

E [u′ (ct+2 )dct+2 ]
Rt E[u′ (ct+2 )R2 ]

(A.25)
for

t ≥ 1.

(A.26)

Using (3.1) and (A.25), and recalling the definition ω1 ≡ R/L21 , we find

dT0 =

h
n

io
E u′ (c2 ) R12 − ω1 dB1,0 − dω1 B1,0
REu′ (c2 )

=−

dω1 B1,0
,
R

(A.27)

where the second step follows from (3.2). Using (3.3) and (A.26) for t = 1, we find

dT1 =

E {u′ (c3 ) [(1 − ω1 R2 ) dB1,1 − dω1 R2 B1,1 ]}
dω1 B1,1
=−
,
′
RE[u (c3 )R2 ]
R

(A.28)

where the second step follows from (3.4). Using (A.11) and (A.26) for t = 2, we find

dT2 = −

E [u′ (c4 )α2 R2 dτ2 ]
,
RE[u′ (c4 )R2 ]

(A.29)

and using (A.13) and (A.26) for t > j, we find

dTt = −

E [u′ (ct+2 )αt dτt ]
.
Rt−2 E[u′ (ct+2 )R2 ]

(A.30)

Since B1 is an optimal maturity structure, the sum

35

P∞

t=0 dTt

should be zero; if it were negative,

the opposite infinitesimal change would make it positive. Therefore, (A.27)-(A.30) imply that
∞

dω1 (B1,0 + B1,1 ) E [u′ (c4 )α2 R2 dτ2 ] X E [u′ (ct+2 )αt dτt ]
−
−
−
=0
R
RE[u′ (c4 )R2 ]
Rt−2 E[u′ (ct+2 )R2 ]
t=3

⇔−

dω1 B1
−
R

h

h

E u′ (ct+2 )R2 α2 dτ2 +

1
R2

P∞

αt dτt
t=3 Rt−3

RE[u′ (ct+2 )R2 ]

ii

= 0,

(A.31)

for all t ≥ 2, where the second step follows from (3.5) and because the ratio across states of marginal
utilities is equal across all generations t ≥ 2. Differentiating (A.21), we find


∞
1 X αt dτt
1
α2 dτ2 +
=
− ω1 dB1 − ω1 dB1 .
R2
Rt−3
R2

(A.32)

t=3

Substituting (A.32) into (A.31), we find


E u′ (ct+2 )(1 − ω1 R2 ) = 0

(A.33)

for all t ≥ 2. Eq. (A.33) can be interpreted as a first-order condition for generations t ≥ 2 under
complete participation. To make this interpretation precise, we consider a representative agent who
has CRRA utility with coefficient of relative risk aversion γ, and consumes in period 4 the present
value of the consumption stream of generations t ≥ 2:
∞
X ct+2
1 X αt
C=
=
RR
α
+
2
2
Rt−2
R2 t=3 Rt−3
t≥2

!

− R(1 − ω1 R2 )B1 ,

(A.34)

where the second step in (A.34) follows from (A.11), (A.13) and (A.21). Because of CRRA utility,
the common ratio across states of marginal utilities of generations t ≥ 2 is equal to the ratio of
marginal utilities of the representative agent. Therefore, the first-order condition (A.33) holds for
the representative agent as


E u′ (C)(1 − ω1 R2 ) = 0,
and implies that if the representative agent were to invest in one- and two-period bonds in period
1 subject to the budget constraint

C = RR2

∞
1 X αt
α2 +
R2 t=3 Rt−3

!

+ R(1 − ω1 R2 )B̂1 ,

36

(A.35)

then he would choose a quantity B̂1 = −B1 of two-period bonds. As a consequence, the twoperiod interest rate L1 clears the market with complete participation by all generations, i.e., in the
equilibrium of Section 4.1. Indeed, (4.3) implies (A.33), and (4.1) and (4.2) imply that (A.34) holds
P
with ∞
t=2 B1,t instead of −B1 . Since the representative agent’s demand for two-period bonds is
P
∗
uniquely determined, ∞
t=2 B1,t = −B1 ≡ −(B1,0 + B1,1 ). Therefore, (4.4) is met, and B1 = B1 .

Proof of Proposition 4.5: We consider a change from α1 to α1 + ǫ holding Rα0 + α1 constant.
Differentiating (4.4) with respect to ǫ and treating L1 as a function of ǫ, we find
∞
∂
dL1 ∂ X
(B1,0 + B1,1 ) +
B1,t = 0
∂ǫ
dǫ ∂L1 t=0

⇒

∂
(B1,0 + B1,1 )
dL1
,
= − ∂ǫ∂ P∞
dǫ
t=0 B1,t
∂L

(A.36)

1

where the first step follows because ǫ does not affect B1,t for t ≥ 2. The numerator in (A.36) has
the same sign as γ − 1, as shown in the proof of Proposition 3.3. The denominator is positive
because the demand functions B1,t for t ≥ 0 are increasing in L1 : for t ∈ {0, 1} this is shown in
the proof of Proposition 3.1, for t = 2 it is shown in the proof of Proposition 4.1, and for t > 2 it
follows from Assumption 1. Therefore,

dL1
dǫ

has the same sign as 1 − γ.

Differentiating B1,0 + B1,1 with respect to ǫ and treating L1 as a function of ǫ, we find
d
∂
dL1 ∂
(B1,0 + B1,1 ) = (B1,0 + B1,1 ) +
(B1,0 + B1,1 )
dǫ
∂ǫ
dǫ ∂L1
∂ P∞
∂
t=2 B1,t
∂L1
= (B1,0 + B1,1 ) ∂ P∞
,
∂ǫ
t=0 B1,t
∂L1

(A.37)

where the second step follows from (A.36). The numerator and denominator in (A.37) are positive
because the demand functions Bt for t ≥ 0 are increasing in L1 . Therefore,
same sign as

∂
∂ǫ (B1,0

d
dǫ (B1,0

+ B1,1 ) has the

+ B1,1 ) and hence as γ − 1. The comparative statics in the proposition follow

from B1∗ = B1,0 + B1,1 , and because the equilibrium two-period interest rate L1 under incomplete
participation and B1∗ coincides with that under complete participation.
Proof of Proposition 4.6: Eqs. (3.4) and c3,h > c3,ℓ , which follows from Proposition 4.2 for
the complete-participation equilibrium and from Propositions 4.3 and 4.4 for the optimal maturity
 2
L
structure, imply that L21 < RE(R2 ). If γ ≥ γ̄, then (3.2) and c2,h > c2,ℓ imply that E R12 < R. If
 2
L
γ ≤ 1, then (3.2) and c2,h < c2,ℓ imply that E R12 > R.

37

Proof of Proposition 5.1: To determine the consumption of generation t in period t + 2 under
complete participation, we denote by wt′ ,t generation t’s wealth in period t′ = 0, .., t + 2 and by Bt′ ,t
the face value of two-period bonds held by generation t in period t′ = 1, .., t + 1. The dynamics of
wt′ ,t are

wt′ ,t = αt 1{t′ =t} + Rt′ −1 wt′ −1,t +

L2t′ −1
− Rt′ −1
Rt′

!

Bt′ −1,t
,
L2t′ −1

(A.38)

where t′ = 0, .., t + 2, w−1,t = B−1,t = B0,t ≡ 0, and 1S is equal to one if condition S is satisfied
and zero otherwise. Solving (A.38) between 0 and t + 2, we find

ct+2 = wt+2,t = Rt Rt+1 αt +

t
X

t′ =1

t+1
Y

Rt′′

t′′ =t′ +2

!

Rt′ Rt′ +1
1−
L2t′



Bt′ ,t +



1
Rt+2

Rt+1
− 2
Lt+1



Bt+1,t .
(A.39)

The first-order condition of generation t with respect to Bt′ ,t is
"

t+1
Y

′

Et′ u (ct+2 )

t′′ =t′ +2

Rt′′

!

Rt′ Rt′ +1
1−
L2t′

#

=0

(A.40)

for t′ = 1, .., t, and


′

Et+1 u (ct+2 )



1
Rt+2

Rt+1
− 2
Lt+1



=0

(A.41)

for t′ = t + 1, where Et′ denotes expectation conditional on information available in period t′ .
A complete-participation equilibrium consists of two-period interest rates {Lt }t≥1 and holdings
{Bt′ ,t }t′ =1,..,t+1 of two-period bonds for each generation t ≥ 0 such that the market for two-period
bonds clears in each period, i.e.,
∞
X

Bt′ ,t = 0

(A.42)

t=t′ −1

for all t′ ≥ 1.
Suppose next that participation is incomplete, i.e., only generations t − 1 and t can trade in
period t for all t ≥ 1. Suppose that the government issues a quantity Bt∗ of two-period bonds in

38

period t ≥ 1 and levies a tax
αt τt∗ = αt − wt,t

(A.43)

on generation t ≥ 2. The tax (A.43) leaves generation t with wealth
αt − αt τt∗ = wt,t ,
in period t, which is the same as under complete participation. Hence, the demand function of
generation t for two-period bonds is also the same. Since the supply of two-period bonds in period t
is the same as the quantity that generations t − 1 and t buy under complete participation, the twoperiod interest rate is also the same. As a consequence, each generation has the same investment
in two-period bonds and the same consumption as under complete participation.
To determine whether the policy ({Bt∗ }t≥1 , {τt∗ }t≥2 ) satisfies (5.2), we compute bt using the
government’s budget constraint (5.1) and the initial condition b0 = 0. For t ≥ 2,
t−1
X
Rt Bt∗
bt +
=
L2t
′

t =1

Using

P∞

u=t′ +1 Bt′ ,u

t
Y

Rt′′

t′′ =t′ +2

!

Rt′ Rt′ +1
1−
L2t′



Bt∗′ −

t
X

t
Y

Rt′′

Bt′ ,u −

t
X

t′ =2

t′′ =t′

!

αt′ τt∗′ .

(A.44)

= −Bt∗′ , we can write (A.15) as
t−1

X
Rt Bt∗
bt +
=
−
L2t
′

t =1

=−

!

∞ min{t−1,u−1}
X
X
t′ =1

t X
u−1
X

u=2 t′ =1

−

Rt′′

t′′ =t′ +2

u=2

=−

t
Y

∞ X
t−1
X

u=t+1 t′ =1

t
Y

t
Y

Rt′′

t′′ =t′ +2

Rt′′

t′′ =t′ +2
t
Y

Rt′ Rt′ +1
1−
L2t′

t′′ =t′ +2

!

Rt′′

!

 X
∞

u=t′ +1

Rt′ Rt′ +1
1−
L2t′

Rt′ Rt′ +1
1−
L2t′

!



Rt′ Rt′ +1
1−
L2t′

39

t′ =2



Bt′ ,u −

t
X

Bt′ ,u .

Rt′′

t′′ =t′

Bt′ ,u −

t′ =2



t
Y

t
X

t′ =2
t
Y

t′′ =t′

Rt′′

!

t
Y

αt′ τt∗′

Rt′′

t′′ =t′

!

!

αt′ τt∗′

αt′ τt∗′

(A.45)

Replacing t in (A.38) by u, and solving between 0 and u, we find

wu,u = αu +

u−2
X

u−1
Y

t′ =1

Rt′′

t′′ =t′ +2
u
Y

u−1
1 X
= αu +
Ru ′

t =1

!
Rt′′

t′′ =t′ +2

Rt′ Rt′ +1
1−
L2t′

!



Bt′ ,u +

Rt′ Rt′ +1
1−
L2t′





1
Ru−1
− 2
Ru
Lu−1



Bu−1,u

Bt′ ,u .

(A.46)

Eqs. (A.43) and (A.46) imply that
u−1
1 X
αu τu∗ = −
Ru ′

u
Y

t =1

Rt′′

t′′ =t′ +2

!

Rt′ Rt′ +1
1−
L2t′



Bt′ ,u .

(A.47)

Eq. (A.47) implies that for u = 2, .., t,

−

u−1
X

t′ =1

t
Y

Rt′′

t′′ =t′ +2

!

Rt′ Rt′ +1
1−
L2t′



Bt′ ,u = −

=

u−1
X

u
Y

Rt′′

t′ =1

t′′ =t′ +2

t
Y

!

Rt′′

t′′ =u

t
Y

t′′ =u+1

αu τu∗ .

Rt′′

!

1−

Rt′ Rt′ +1
L2t′



Bt′ ,u

(A.48)

Eq. (A.47) also implies that for u > t,
EQ
t

"

αu τu∗
Qu−1

t′′ =t+1 Rt′′

#

=−

t−1
X

t′ =1

−

EQ
t

"

t
Y

Rt′′

t′′ =t′ +2

1
Qt′

!

Rt′ Rt′ +1
1−
L2t′

u−1
X

t′′ =t+1 Rt′′ t′ =t

1
Rt′ +1



Rt′
− 2
Lt′

Bt′ ,u


#

Bt′ ,u ,

(A.49)

where EQ denotes expectation under the risk-neutral probabilities under complete participation.
(As in the proof of Proposition 4.3, the risk-neutral probabilities conditional on information available in period t for states s = h, ℓ in period t + 1 are

πt,h ≡

L2t
Rt+1,ℓ
L2t
Rt+1,ℓ

− Rt

−

L2t

,

Rt+1,h

πt,ℓ ≡ 1 − πt,h ,

40

respectively.) Noting that

EQ
t

"

1
Qt′

u−1 
X

t′′ =t+1 Rt′′ t′ =t

1
Rt′ +1

Rt′
− 2
Lt′



#

Bt′ ,u =

EQ
t

"

u−1 
X

1
Qt′

t′′ =t+1 Rt′′ t′ =t

EQ
t′



1
Rt′ +1

Rt′
− 2
Lt′



#

Bt′ ,u = 0

and using (A.48) and (A.49), we can write (A.45) as
"
#
∞
∗
X
Rt Bt∗
α
τ
u
bt +
=
EQ
.
Qu−1 u
t
L2t
′′
t =t+1 Rt′′
u=t+1

(A.50)

Because of CRRA utility, consumption must be non-negative, and hence wt,t is also non-negative.
Therefore, (A.43) implies that αt τt∗ ≤ αt and (A.50) implies that
"
#
∞
X
Rt Bt∗
αu
Q
bt +
≤
Et Qu−1
.
L2t
t′′ =t+1 Rt′′
u=t+1

(A.51)

The right-hand side of (A.51) is bounded because αt is bounded and Rt exceeds a lower bound
larger than one. Therefore, (5.2) holds.
Proof of Proposition 5.2: We first derive a resource constraint analogous to (A.20). Writing
Q
(A.44) for an admissible policy ({Bt }t≥1 , {τt }t≥2 ) and dividing by tt′′ =0 Rt′′ , we find
bt +
Qt

Rt Bt
L2t

t′′ =0 Rt′′

=

t−1
X

t′ =1

1
Qt′ +1

t′′ =0 Rt′′



Rt′ Rt′ +1
1−
L2t′



Bt′ −

t
X

αt′ τt′
.
Qt′ −1
′′ =0 Rt′′
′
t
t =2

(A.52)

The consumption of generation t in the equilibrium with incomplete participation is

ct+2



Rt Rt+1
= Rt Rt+1 αt (1 − τt ) + 1 −
L2t



Bt,t +



1
Rt+2

Rt+1
− 2
Lt+1



Bt+1,t .

(A.53)

(Eq. (A.53) can be derived from (A.39) by setting Bt′ ,t = 0 for all t′ < t and replacing αt by
Q
′
αt (1 − τt ).) Dividing (A.53) by t+1
t′′ =0 Rt′′ , summing over t = 0, .., t, and using Bt = Bt,t−1 + Bt,t

41

for t ≥ 1 (market clearing for two-period bonds) and B0,0 = 0, we find
t
X

t′ =0

ct′ +2
Qt′ +1

t′′ =0 Rt′′

=

t
X
αt′ (1 − τt′ )
Qt′ −1
t′′ =0 Rt′′
t′ =0

+

t
X

1

Qt′

t′′ =0 Rt′′

t′ =1

!

1
Rt′ +1

Rt′
− 2
Lt′



1

Bt′ + Qt+1

t′′ =0 Rt′′



1
Rt+2

Rt+1
− 2
Lt+1



Bt+1,t .

(A.54)

Writing (A.52) for t + 2 instead of t, subtracting it from (A.54), and using τ0 = τ1 = 0, we find
t
X

t′ =0

ct′ +2
Qt′ +1

t′′ =0 Rt′′

=

t
X

t′ =0

αt′
Qt′ −1

t′′ =0 Rt′′

1

− Qt+1

t′′ =0 Rt′′

+



t+2
X

αt′ τt′
Qt′ −1
t′′ =0 Rt′′
t′ =t+1
1

Rt+2

Rt+1
− 2
Lt+1



Bt+2
bt+2 + Rt+2
L2t+2
.
Bt+1,t+1 + Qt+2
t′′ =0 Rt′′

(A.55)

We next take the limit of (A.55) when t → ∞. Because of CRRA utility, consumption must be
non-negative, and hence αt τt ≤ αt . Therefore, the limit of the second term in the right-hand side
of (A.55) is non-positive. Moreover, the term


1
Rt+2

Rt+1
− 2
Lt+1



Bt+1,t+1

which is the capital gain of generation t + 1 on its investment in two-period bonds in period t + 1
must be bounded below, otherwise the generation’s consumption would be negative. Therefore, the
limit of the third term in the right-hand side of (A.55) is non-positive. Since, in addition, the limit
of the fourth term is non-positive because of (5.2), we find the resource constraint
∞
X
t=0

∞

X
ct+2
αt
≤
.
Qt+1
Qt−1
t′ =0 Rt′
t′ =0 Rt′
t=0

(A.56)

We next show that {Bt∗ }t≥1 is an optimal maturity structure. Our definition of optimality
generalizes Definition 1 by replacing (B1 , B̂1 ) by ({Bt }t≥1 , {B̂t }t≥1 ) and computing the gain Tt as

Eu(ct+2 ) ≡ Eu ĉt+2 −

t+1
Y

t′ =1

Rt′ Tt

!

.

(A.57)

42

To show that {Bt∗ }t≥1 is optimal, we proceed by contradiction, and suppose that there exists an
admissible policy ({B̂t }t≥1 , {τ̂t }t≥2 ) to which a switch from ({Bt∗ }t≥1 , {τt∗ }t≥2 ) generates a positive
P
∗
sum ∞
t=0 Tt of gains. Denote by ĉt+2 and ct+2 the consumption of generation t in the corresponding
equilibria. The allocation {čt+2 }t≥0 defined by
č2 ≡ ĉ2 + R1

∞
X

Tt ,

(A.58)

t=1

čt+2 ≡ ĉt+2 −

t+1
Y

Rt′

t′ =1

!

Tt

for

t ≥ 1,

(A.59)

yields the same utility as {c∗t+2 }t≥0 for generations t ≥ 1 because of (A.57), and higher utility for
P
∗
generation 0 because of (A.57) and ∞
t=0 Tt > 0. This is a contradiction because {ct+2 }t≥0 is Pareto

optimal among all feasible allocations. To show Pareto optimality and the contradiction, we write
the optimization problem of generation t under complete participation as maximizing utility within
the budget set Bt , where

Bt ≡

(

ct+2 : EQ

ct+2
Qt+1

t′ =0

Rt′

!

αt+2

≤ EQ

Qt−1

t′ =0 Rt′

!)

.

Since c∗2 maximizes the utility of generation 0 within B0 , č2 , which yields higher utility, is outside
B0 . Likewise, since c∗t+2 maximizes the expected utility of generation t ≥ 1 within Bt , čt+2 , which
yields the same utility, is weakly outside Bt . Combining the corresponding inequalities, we find

E

Q

∞
X
t=0

čt+2
Qt+1
t′ =0 Rt′

!

>E

Q

∞
X
t=0

αt
Qt−1

t′ =0

Rt′

!

.

(A.60)

Eq. (A.60) contradicts the resource constraint (A.56). Indeed, (A.56) holds for {ĉt+2 }t≥0 , since
this allocation corresponds to the admissible policy (B̂1 , {τ̂t }t≥2 ). Moreover, because of (A.58) and
(A.59), (A.56) holds also for {čt+2 }t≥0 .
Proof of Proposition 5.3: We first study the equilibrium under incomplete participation. We
look for an equilibrium in which the two-period interest rate in period t ≥ 1 is given by
L2t = Rt E(Rt+1 ) + µt η̄ 2 + o(η̄ 2 ),

(A.61)

where µt is a deterministic function of t, and o(ǫ) denotes small relative to ǫ. Using (A.61) and the

43

definition of ηt , we find
1−

Rt Rt+1
Rt [E(Rt+1 ) + ηt+1 ]
=1−
+ o(η̄ 2 )
2
Rt E(Rt+1 ) + µt η̄ 2
Lt
=−

µt η̄ 2
ηt+1
+
+ o(η̄ 2 ),
E(Rt+1 ) E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )

(A.62)

and
1
Rt+2

−

Rt+1
1
Rt+1
=
−
+ o(η̄ 2 )
2
E(Rt+2 ) + ηt+2 Rt+1 E(Rt+2 ) + µt+1 η̄ 2
Lt+1


2
ηt+2
1
ηt+2
1
=
1−
+
−
2
E(Rt+2 )
E(Rt+2 ) [E(Rt+2 )]
E(Rt+2 ) +
=−

µt+1 η̄2
Rt+1

+ o(η̄ 2 )

2
ηt+2
ηt+2
µt+1 η̄ 2
+
+
+ o(η̄ 2 ).
[E(Rt+2 )]2 [E(Rt+2 )]3 E(Rt+1 ) [E(Rt+2 )]2

(A.63)

Substituting (A.62) and (A.63) into (A.53), and using the definition of ηt , we find


ηt+1
µt η̄ 2
ct+2 =Rt [E(Rt+1 ) + ηt+1 ] αt (1 − τt ) + −
+
Bt,t
E(Rt+1 ) E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )


2
ηt+2
ηt+2
µt+1 η̄ 2
+ −
+
+
Bt+1,t + o(η̄ 2 ).
[E(Rt+2 )]2 [E(Rt+2 )]3 E(Rt+1 ) [E(Rt+2 )]2

(A.64)

Using (A.64) and the fact that (ηt+1 , ηt+2 ) are mean-zero, independent of each other, and independent of information available in period t, we find
E [u(ct+2 )]

=u(c0t+2 ) +

′

u

(c0t+2 )






µt η̄ 2 Bt,t
Var(ηt+2 )
µt+1 η̄ 2
+
+
Bt+1,t
E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )
[E(Rt+2 )]3 E(Rt+1 ) [E(Rt+2 )]2

(
1 ′′ 0
+ u (ct+2 ) Var[Rt (1 − τt )] [E(Rt+1 )]2 α2t
2


Bt,t
+Var(ηt+1 )
− E[Rt (1 − τt )]αt
E(Rt+1 )

2

+

2
Var(ηt+2 )Bt+1,t

[E(Rt+2 )]4

)

+ o(η̄ 2 ), (A.65)

where
c0t+2 ≡ E[Rt (1 − τt )]E(Rt+1 )αt .
Maximizing the objective (A.65) with respect to (Bt,t , Bt+1,t ), and using the fact that utility is

44

CRRA, we find the first-order conditions


µt η̄ 2
γVar(ηt+1 )
Bt,t
=
− E(Rt )αt E(1 − τt ) + o(η̄ 2 ),
2
E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )
E(R
)
E(Rt ) [E(Rt+1 )] αt E(1 − τt )
t+1
(A.66)
γVar(ηt+2 )Bt+1,t
Var(ηt+2 )
µt+1 η̄ 2
+
+ o(η̄ 2 ).
3
2 =
[E(Rt+2 )]
E(Rt+1 ) [E(Rt+2 )]
E(Rt )E(Rt+1 ) [E(Rt+2 )]4 αt E(1 − τt )

(A.67)

Eqs. (A.66) and (A.67) yield bond demands, which we can substitute into the market-clearing
condition Bt = Bt,t−1 + Bt,t and solve for µt . The demand Bt,t can be computed from (A.66), and
the demand Bt,t−1 from (A.67) written for t − 1 instead of t. We find that

µt =

n
h
io
E(1−τt−1 )
γVar(ηt+1 ) Bt − E(Rt )E(Rt+1 ) E(Rt−1 )αt−1
+
α
E(1
−
τ
)
t
t
γ
η̄ 2 [E(Rt+1 )]2 [E(Rt−1 )αt−1 E(1 − τt−1 ) + αt E(1 − τt )]

+ o(1).

(A.68)

Propositions 3.2 and 3.3 follow from (A.68). To show Proposition 3.2, we note that an increase in Bt
holding bt /Rt +Bt /L2t constant (so that there is no effect on τt ) raises µt and Lt because of (A.61) and
(A.68). To show Proposition 3.3, we note that an increase in αt holding Rt−1 αt−1 (1−τt−1 )+αt (1−τt )
constant, which in order zero amounts to holding E(Rt−1 )αt−1 E(1 − τt−1 ) + αt E(1 − τt ) constant,
lowers the numerator in (A.68) if γ > 1 and raises it if γ < 1. Therefore, (A.61) and (A.68) imply
that µt and Lt decrease if γ > 1 and increase if γ < 1.
We next study the equilibrium under complete participation. Using (A.39) and the fact that the
sequence {ηt }t≥2 is independent and mean-zero, and proceeding as in the incomplete-participation
case, we find
E [u(ct+2 )] = u(c0t+2 )
′

+u

(c0t+2 )

(

t
X

t′ =1

t =1



!

)


µt′ η̄ 2 Bt′ ,t
Var(ηt+2 )
µt+1 η̄ 2
+
+
Bt+1,t
E(Rt′ )E(Rt′ +1 )
[E(Rt+2 )]3 E(Rt+1 ) [E(Rt+2 )]2

E(Rt′′ )

t′′ =t′ +2


t−2
X

1
+ u′′ (c0t+2 )
′
2

t+1
Y

t+1
Y

!2

E(R )
t′′

t′′ =t′ +2

Bt,t
+Var(ηt+1 )
− E(Rt )αt
E(Rt+1 )

2

+

Var(ηt′ +1 )Bt2′ ,t
[E(Rt′ +1 )]2

E(Rt+1 )Bt−1,t
+ Var(ηt )
− E(Rt+1 )αt
E(Rt )

2
Var(ηt+2 )Bt+1,t

[E(Rt+2 )]

45

4



)

+ o(η̄ 2 ),

2

(A.69)

where
c0t+2 ≡ E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )αt .
Maximizing the objective (A.65) with respect to {Bt′ ,t }t′ =1,..,t+1 , and using the fact that utility is
CRRA, we find the first-order conditions
Q



t+1
t′′ =t′ +2 E(Rt′′ )

µt′ η̄ 2

E(Rt′ )E(Rt′ +1 )

γ
=

2

Q
t+1

t′′ =t′ +2 E(Rt′′ )

Var(ηt′ +1 )Bt′ ,t
2

E(Rt )E(Rt+1 ) [E(Rt′ +1 )] αt

+ o(η̄ 2 )

(A.70)

for t′ = 1, .., t − 2, and


E(Rt+1 )µt−1 η̄ 2
γVar(ηt ) E(Rt+1 )Bt−1,t
=
− E(Rt+1 )αt + o(η̄ 2 ),
E(Rt−1 )E(Rt )
E(Rt )
[E(Rt )]2 αt


Bt,t
µt η̄ 2
γVar(ηt+1 )
=
− E(Rt )αt + o(η̄ 2 ),
E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )
E(Rt ) [E(Rt+1 )]2 αt E(Rt+1 )
γVar(ηt+2 )Bt+1,t
Var(ηt+2 )
µt+1 η̄ 2
+
+ o(η̄ 2 ),
3
2 =
[E(Rt+2 )]
E(Rt+1 ) [E(Rt+2 )]
E(Rt )E(Rt+1 ) [E(Rt+2 )]4 αt

(A.71)

(A.72)

(A.73)

Eqs. (A.70)-(A.73) yield bond demands. We can substitute these demands into the market-clearing
condition (A.42), which we can write as
∞
X

Bt,t′ = 0

(A.74)

t′ =t−1

by inverting t and t′ , and solve for µt . The demand Bt,t can be computed from (A.72), the demand
Bt,t−1 from (A.73) written for t − 1 instead of t, and the demand Bt,t′ for t′ > t from (A.70) and
(A.71) after inverting t and t′ = 1, .., t − 1. We find
h
i
αt+1
γVar(ηt+1 )E(Rt ) E(Rt−1γ )αt−1 + αt + E(R
t)

µt = −
P
αt′
η̄ 2 E(Rt+1 ) E(Rt−1 )αt−1 + αt + ∞
t′ =t+1 Qt′ −1
t′′ =t

46

E(Rt′′ )

 + o(1).

(A.75)

Propositions 4.5 and 4.6 follow from (A.75). To show Proposition 4.5, we note that
Bt∗ =Bt,t−1 + Bt,t


µt η̄ 2 [E(Rt+1 )]2 [E(Rt−1 )αt−1 + αt ]
E(Rt−1 )αt−1
=
+ E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )
+ αt + o(1)
γVar(ηt+1 )
γ

E(Rt−1 )αt−1
αt+1
+ αt + E(R
γ
t)
P
=E(Rt )E(Rt+1 ) −
[E(Rt−1 )αt−1 + αt ]
αt′
E(Rt−1 )αt−1 + αt + ∞
Q
′
t =t+1 t′ −1
t′′ =t

E(Rt′′ )


E(Rt−1 )αt−1
+
+ αt + o(1)
γ

h
iP
E(Rt−1 )αt−1
αt+1
∞
E(Rt )E(Rt+1 ) − E(R
[E(R
)α
+
α
]
+
+
α
t−1
t−1
t
t
t′ =t+1
γ
t)
P
=
αt′
E(Rt−1 )αt−1 + αt + ∞
t′ =t+1 Qt′ −1

αt′

Qt′ −1

t′′ =t

E(Rt′′ )



+ o(1),

E(Rt′′ )
t′′ =t

(A.76)

where the second step follows from using (A.72) and (A.73), and the third from (A.75). The first
statement of Proposition 4.5 follows from (A.76) and the second from (A.75).
To show Proposition 4.6, we note that (A.61) implies that the expected return of two- relative
to one-period bonds over a two-period horizon is
L2t − Rt E(Rt+1 ) = µt η̄ 2 + o(η̄ 2 ),

(A.77)

and over a one-period horizon is





L2t
Rt E(Rt+1 ) + µt η̄ 2
1
Var(ηt+1 )Rt
2
2
E
− Rt = E
− Rt + o(η̄ ) =
µt η̄ +
+ o(η̄ 2 ).
Rt+1
E(Rt+1 ) + ηt+1
E(Rt+1 )
E(Rt+1 )


(A.78)

47

Eq. (A.75) implies that µt < 0 and
h
i
E(Rt−1 )αt−1
αt+1
γVar(η
)E(R
)
+
α
+
t+1
t
t
γ
E(Rt )
Var(ηt+1 )Rt

µt η̄ 2 +
=−
P
E(Rt+1 )
αt′
E(Rt+1 ) E(Rt−1 )αt−1 + αt + ∞
t′ =t+1 Qt′ −1
t′′ =t

=

=



γ

h

E(Rt−1 )αt−1
γ

Var(ηt+1 )E(Rt ) 
−
E(Rt+1 )
E(Rt−1 )αt−1 + αt +


h

αt+1
E(Rt )

i

E(Rt′′ )

+ αt +
P∞

+

αt+1
E(Rt )

i

Var(ηt+1 )Rt
+ o(1)
E(Rt+1 )

αt′
t′ =t+1 Qt′ −1 E(R
t′′ =t

αt′

P∞

t′′ )





+ 1 + o(1)

Var(ηt+1 )E(Rt ) (1 − γ) αt +
+ t′ =t+1 Qt′ −1
E(Rt′′ )
t′′ =t


+ o(1).
P∞
αt′
E(Rt+1 ) E(Rt−1 )αt−1 + αt + t′ =t+1 Qt′ −1
t′′ =t

E(Rt′′ )

Therefore, the sign of expected excess returns over a one- and a two-period horizon is as in Proposition 4.6.
Proof of Proposition 5.4: We assume that the values of {ζt , θt }t≥1 are proportional to η̄, as
are those of {ηt }t≥1 . We denote the investment of generation t in the technology in period t′ by
xt′ ,t . Generalizing (A.53), we find that the consumption of generation t in the equilibrium with
incomplete participation is
f
f
f
αt (1 − τt ) + (Rt − Rtf )Rt+1
xt,t + (Rt+1 − Rt+1
)xt+1,t
ct+2 =Rtf Rt+1

+

Rf Rf
1 − t 2t+1
Lt

!

Bt,t +

1
f
Rt+2

Rf
− 2t+1
Lt+1

!

Bt+1,t .

(A.79)

We look for an equilibrium in which the one- and two-period interest rates in period t ≥ 1 are given
by
Rtf = E(Rt ) + ηt − ξt η̄ 2 + o(η̄ 2 ),

(A.80)

f
L2t = Rtf E(Rt+1
) + µt η̄ 2 + o(η̄ 2 ),

(A.81)

where (ξt , µt ) are deterministic functions of t. Using Rt = E(Rt ) + ηt + θt+1 , (A.62), (A.63), (A.79)(A.81), the fact that (ηt+1 , θt+1 ) are independent of (ηt+2 , θt+2 ), and the fact that (ηt+1 , θt+1 , ηt+2 , θt+2 )

48

are mean-zero and independent of information available in period t, we find
E [u(ct+2 )]

=u(c0t+2 ) +

′

u

(c0t+2 )





µt η̄ 2 Bt,t
E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )



ξt η̄ 2 E(Rt+1 ) + Cov(ηt+1 , θt+1 ) xt,t +


Var(ηt+2 )
µt+1 η̄ 2
ξt+1 η̄ xt+1,t +
+
Bt+1,t
[E(Rt+2 )]3 E(Rt+1 ) [E(Rt+2 )]2
(
h
i2
1 ′′ 0
f
+ u (ct+2 ) Var[Rtf αt (1 − τt )] E(Rt+1
) + Var(θt+1 ) [E(Rt+1 )]2 x2t,t
2


2




Bt,t
− 2Cov(ηt+1 , θt+1 )
− E[Rt αt (1 − τt )] E(Rt+1 )xt,t
E(Rt+1 )
2
Bt,t
+ Var(ηt+1 )
− E[Rt αt (1 − τt )]
E(Rt+1 )


+Var(θt+2 )x2t+1,t − 2Cov(ηt+2 , θt+2 )

xt+1,t Bt+1,t
[E(Rt+2 )]2

+

2
Var(ηt+2 )Bt+1,t

[E(Rt+2 )]4

)

+ o(η̄ 2 ),
(A.82)

where
f
).
c0t+2 ≡ E[Rtf αt (1 − τt )]E(Rt+1

Maximizing the objective (A.82) with respect to (xt,t , Bt,t , xt+1,t , Bt+1,t ), and using the fact that
utility is CRRA, we find the first-order conditions
γ
E(Rt )E(αt )E(1 − τt )



Bt,t
× Var(θt+1 )E(Rt+1 )xt,t − Cov(ηt+1 , θt+1 )
− E(Rt )E(αt )E(1 − τt )
+ o(η̄ 2 ),
E(Rt+1 )

ξt η̄ 2 E(Rt+1 ) + Cov(ηt+1 , θt+1 ) =

(A.83)

µt η̄ 2
γ
=
E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )
E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )E(αt )E(1 − τt )



Bt,t
Var(ηt+1 )
× −Cov(ηt+1 , θt+1 )xt,t +
− E(Rt )E(αt )E(1 − τt ) + o(η̄ 2 ),
E(Rt+1 ) E(Rt+1 )

49

(A.84)

γ
ξt+1 η̄ =
E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )E(αt )E(1 − τt )
2



Var(θt+2 )xt+1,t − Cov(ηt+2 , θt+2 )

Bt+1,t
[E(Rt+2 )]2



+ o(η̄ 2 ),
(A.85)

µt+1 η̄ 2
γ
Var(ηt+2 )
+
3
2 =
[E(Rt+2 )]
E(Rt+1 ) [E(Rt+2 )]
E(Rt )E(Rt+1 ) [E(Rt+2 )]2 E(αt )E(1 − τt )


Var(ηt+2 )Bt+1,t
× −Cov(ηt+2 , θt+2 )xt+1,t +
+ o(η̄ 2 ).
2
[E(Rt+2 )]

(A.86)

The market-clearing conditions are Bt = Bt,t−1 + Bt,t for two-period bonds and bt = bt,t−1 + bt,t
for one-period bonds, where bt,t′ denotes the face value of one-period bonds held by generation t′
in period t. The latter face values are given by
αt (1 − τt ) = xt,t +

bt,t
Rtf

+

Bt,t
,
L2t

(A.87)

f
f
αt−1 (1 − τt−1 )Rt−1
+ xt−1,t−1 (Rt−1 − Rt−1
) + Bt−1,t−1

f
Rt−1
−
L2t
Rtf

1

!

= xt,t−1 +

bt,t−1
Rtf

+

Bt,t−1
,
L2t

(A.88)
where the left-hand side of (A.87) and (A.88) is the income that generation t and t − 1, respectively,
enter period t with, and the right-hand side represents how this income is divided into an investment
in the technology and in one- and two-period bonds. Using (A.80), (A.81), (A.87) and (A.88), we
can write the market-clearing condition for one-period bonds as



Bt,t + Bt,t−1
bt = E(Rt ) E(αt )E(1 − τt ) + E(Rt−1 )E(αt−1 )E(1 − τt−1 ) − (xt,t + xt,t−1 ) −
+o(1).
E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )
Substituting (xt,t , Bt,t , xt,t−1 , Bt,t−1 ) from (A.83)-(A.86) into the market-clearing conditions for oneand two-period bonds, we find

ξt = γ

Var(θt+1 )Z1,t −

Cov(ηt+1 ,θt+1 )
[E(Rt+1 )]2

h

Z2,t +

E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )
E(αt )E(1
γ

i
− τt )

,
(A.89)
η̄ 2 E(Rt ) [E(Rt−1 )E(αt−1 )E(1 − τt−1 ) + E(αt )E(1 − τt )]
h
i
Var(ηt+1 )
E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )
Z
−
E(R
)E(α
)E(1
−
τ
)
− Cov(ηt+1 , θt+1 )Z1,t
2,t
t−1
t−1
t−1
2
γ
[E(Rt+1 )]
µt = γ
,
η̄ 2 [E(Rt−1 )E(αt−1 )E(1 − τt−1 ) + E(αt )E(1 − τt )]
(A.90)

50

where
Z1,t ≡ E(Rt−1 )E(αt−1 )E(1 − τt−1 ) + E(αt )E(1 − τt ) −

bt
Bt
−
,
E(Rt ) E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )

Z2,t ≡ Bt − E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )E(αt )E(1 − τt ).
Consider next the effect of increasing Bt holding bt /Rtf + Bt /L2t constant, which in order zero
amounts to holding bt /E(Rt ) + Bt /(E(Rt )E(Rt+1 )) constant. Consider also the effect of increasing
αt holding Rt−1 αt−1 (1 − τt−1 ) + αt E(1 − τt ) constant, which in order zero amounts to increasing
E(αt ) holding E(Rt−1 )E(αt−1 )E(1 − τt−1 ) + E(αt )E(1 − τt ) constant. Eqs. (A.77) and (A.78) imply
that the effects on expected excess returns, over both a one- and a two-period horizon, are identical
to those on µt . Eqs. (A.80) and (A.81) imply that the effects on the two-period interest rate Lt
are identical to those on −ξt E(Rt+1 ) + µt . Eq. (A.80) implies that the effects on the one-period
interest rate Rtf are identical to those on −ξt . Eqs. (A.89) and (A.90) imply that these effects are
as in the proposition.

51

References
Aiyagari, R., A. Marcet, T. Sargent and J. Seppala, 2002, “Optimal Taxation without StateContingent Debt,” Journal of Political Economy, 110, 1220-1254.
Ang, A., G. Bekaert and M. Wei, 2008, “The Term Structure of Real Rates and Expected
Inflation,” Journal of Finance, 63, 797-849.
Angeletos, M., 2002, “Fiscal Policy With Noncontingent Debt and the Optimal Maturity Structure,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1105-1131.
Baker, M. and J. Wurgler, 2002, “Market Timing and Capital Structure,” Journal of Finance,
57, 1-32.
Ball, L. and G. Mankiw, 2007, “Intergenerational Risk Sharing in the Spirit of Arrow, Debreu
and Rawls, with Applications to Social Security Design,” Journal of Political Economy, 115,
523-547.
Barro, R., 1974, “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?” Journal of Political Economy, 82, 10951117.
Barro, R., 1979, “On the Determination of the Public Debt,” Journal of Political Economy, 87,
940-971.
Barro, R., 2002, “Optimal Management of Indexed and Nominal Debt,” in F. Lefort and K.
Schmidt-Hebbel (Eds.), Indexation, Inflation and Monetary Policy, Central Bank of Chile.
Benigno, P. and M. Woodford, 2003, “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy: A Linear-Quadratic
Approach,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 18.
Bernaschi, M., A. Missale and D. Vergni, 2009, “Should Governments Minimize Debt Service Cost and Risk? A Closer Look at the Debt Strategy Simulation Approach,” working
paper, Universita degli Studi di Milano.
Bhattacharya, S., 1982, “Aspects of Monetary and Banking Theory and Moral Hazard,” Journal
of Finance, 37, 371-384.
Blanchard, O., 1985, “Debt, Deficits and Finite Horizons,” Journal of Political Economy, 93,
223-247.
Blanchard, O. and P. Weil, 2001, “Dynamic Efficiency, the Riskless Rate and Debt Ponzi Games
under Uncertainty,” Advances in Macroeconomics, 1, 5-27.

52

Bohn, H., 1988, “Why Do We Have Nominal Government Debt?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 21, 127-140.
Buera, F. and J. Nicolini, 2004, “Optimal Maturity of Government Debt without State-Contingent
Bonds,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 51, 531-554.
Calvo, G. and P. Guidotti, 1990, “Indexation and Maturity of Government Bonds: An Exploratory Model,” in R. Dornbusch and M. Draghi (Eds.), Public Debt Management: Theory
and History, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Calvo, G. and P. Guidotti, 1992, “Optimal Maturity of Nominal Government Debt: An InfiniteHorizon Model,” International Economic Review, 33, 895-919.
Campbell, J., A. Sunderam and L. Viceira, 2013, “Inflation Bets or Deflation Hedges? The
Changing Risks of Nominal Bonds,” working paper, Harvard University.
Cochrane, J., 1999, “New Facts in Finance,” Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, 23, 36-58.
Culbertson, J., 1957, “The Term Structure of Interest Rates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
71, 485-517.
Diamond, P., 1965, “National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,” American Economic Review, 55, 1126-1150.
Dimson, E., P. Marsh and M. Staunton, 2002, Triumph of the Optimists: 101 Years of Global
Investment Returns, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Faraglia, E., A. Marcet and A. Scott, 2010, “In Search of a Theory of Debt Management,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 57, 821-836.
Fischer, S., 1983, “Welfare Aspects of Government Issue of Indexed Bonds,” in R. Dornbusch
and M. Simonsen (Eds.), Inflation, Debt and Indexation, MIT Press, Cambridge.
Gale, D., 1990, “The Efficient Design of Public Debt,” in R. Dornbusch and M. Draghi (Eds.),
Public Debt Management: Theory and History, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Greenwood, R., S. Hanson and J. Stein, 2010, “A Gap-Filling Theory of Corporate Debt
Maturity Choice,” Journal of Finance, 65, 993-1028.
Greenwood, R. and D. Vayanos, 2010, “Price Pressure in the Government Bond Market,”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 585-590.

53

Greenwood, R. and D. Vayanos, 2012, “Bond Supply and Excess Bond Returns,” working paper, Harvard Business School.
Lucas, R. and N. Stokey, 1983, “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an Economy without
Capital,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 55-93.
Lustig, H., C. Sleet and S. Yeltekin, 2008, “Fiscal Hedging with Nominal Assets,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 55, 710-727.
Missale, A., 1999, Public Debt Management, Oxford University Press.
Missale, A. and O. Blanchard, 1994, “The Debt Burden and Debt Maturity,” American Economic Review, 84, 309-319.
Modigliani, F. and R. Sutch, 1966, “Innovations in Interest-Rate Policy,” American Economic
Review, 56, 178-197.
Nosbusch, Y., 2008, “Interest Costs and the Optimal Maturity Structure of Government Debt,”
Economic Journal, 118, 477-498.
Stein, J., 1996, “Rational Capital Budgeting in an Irrational World,” Journal of Business, 69,
429-455.
Stock, J. and M. Watson, 2007, “Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?” Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking, 39, 4-33.
Varian, H., 1992, Microeconomic Analysis, 3rd Edition, Norton, New York.
Vayanos, D. and J.-L. Vila, 2009, “A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rates,” NBER Working Paper 15487.
Weiss, L., 1980, “The Effects of Money Supply on Economic Welfare in the Steady State,” Econometrica, 48, 565-576.

54

Table 1: Summary statistics
Slope refers to the difference in nominal yields between 30-year and 10-year benchmark government
bonds. Median age refers to the median age of the population. Maturity refers to the average maturity
of government debt.
Panel A: Slope regression sample
Slope (%) Median age (years)

Panel B: Maturity regression sample
Maturity (years)
Median age (years)

Mean
Median
St. Dev.

0.29
0.35
0.59

36.5
37.2
4.1

6.0
5.5
2.6

34.6
35.1
4.0

Min
p5
p95
Max

-2.01
-0.83
1.04
2.42

27.8
28.6
42.5
44.7

0.0
2.5
11.4
14.5

25.5
27.6
40.6
44.1

Number of observations: 235

Number of observations: 642

55

Table 2: Summary statistics by country
Panel A: Slope regression sample
Country

Country code

Number of
observations

Slope in %
(mean)

Slope in %
(st.dev.)

Median age
(mean)

Median age
(st.dev.)

BEL
CAN
FRA
DEU
ITA
JPN
ESP
CHE
GBR
USA

13
35
13
23
13
12
11
13
51
51

0.48
0.35
0.51
0.38
0.45
0.85
0.54
0.83
-0.13
0.17

0.21
0.24
0.24
0.39
0.26
0.18
0.30
0.58
0.88
0.45

40.0
34.0
38.7
40.2
39.9
42.9
38.3
40.0
36.0
31.8

0.9
3.8
0.9
2.2
1.2
1.2
0.9
1.2
1.8
2.9

Country code

Number of
observations

Maturity
(mean)

Maturity
(st.dev.)

Median age
(mean)

Median age
(st.dev.)

AUS
AUT
BEL
CAN
DNK
FIN
FRA
DEU
ISL
IRL
ITA
JPN
LUX
NLD
NZL
NOR
ESP
SWE
GBR
USA

36
29
20
50
32
19
20
43
15
48
46
11
11
50
18
24
48
24
48
50

5.3
6.2
3.4
6.9
4.5
3.7
6.3
5.1
4.2
8.3
5.2
5.4
3.1
7.0
4.3
4.8
5.7
4.0
11.3
4.6

1.3
0.9
1.1
2.0
1.2
0.4
0.4
0.8
0.6
2.2
2.7
0.4
2.8
1.5
0.3
1.6
3.4
1.4
1.4
0.9

32.7
37.3
35.4
31.4
37.4
38.3
37.5
37.9
32.8
29.2
35.8
42.4
37.7
33.2
34.3
36.3
33.4
38.0
35.9
31.7

3.0
2.1
1.2
4.8
1.9
2.5
1.5
2.7
1.2
2.6
3.1
1.1
0.6
4.0
1.5
1.5
3.4
1.5
1.7
2.9

Belgium
Canada
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Spain
Switzerland
United Kingdom
USA
Number of countries: 10

Panel B: Maturity regression sample
Country

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Luxembourg
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom
USA
Number of countries: 20

56

Table 3: Regression results
Panel A reports results from panel regressions of the slope of the government bond yield curve (measured as the difference between the
30-year and 10-year yields) on the median age of the population (in years). Panel B reports results from panel regressions of the
average maturity of government debt (in years) on the median age of the population. Groups refer to individual countries.

Panel A: Regressions of slope on median age
(OLS)
Median age
0.0469***
(3.94)
Constant
-1.421**
(2.95)
Number of observations
Number of groups
R-squared
Hausman test: prob>chi2

(Between)
0.0611**
(2.80)
-1.890*
(2.26)

235
10.7%

10
49.5%

(Random effects)
0.0456***
(2.64)
-1.316*
(1.93)

235

235

26.5%
42.3%

Panel B: Regressions of debt maturity on median age
(OLS)
(Between)
-0.167**
-0.172
Median age
(2.08)
(1.23)
11.74***
11.55**
Constant
(4.29)
(2.32)
Number of observations
Number of groups
R-squared
Hausman test: prob>chi2

(Fixed effects)
0.0389
(1.63)
-1.129
(1.29)

642
20
7.7%

6.4%

(Fixed effects)
-0.146**
(2.48)
11.02***
(5.39)

(Random effects)
-0.147**
(2.51)
10.68***
(4.98)

642

642

59.6%
85.0%

Absolute value of t- or z-statistics, computed with clustered standard errors, in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

57

ct,h (autarky)
ct,ℓ (autarky)
ct,h (complete participation)
ct,ℓ (complete participation)

1.1

Consumption

1.05

1

0.95

0.9

0.85
2

3

4
Time period (t)

5

6

Figure 1: Complete participation vs. autarky. The figure is drawn for constant endowments (αt = 1 for all
t), equally likely states (p = 0.5), coefficient of relative risk aversion γ = 4, average gross return
of the linear production technology R = (1 + 2.1%)15 , and realized return 10% above R in state
h and 10% below in state ℓ. Consumption is normalized by its expected value, R2 .

58

0.4
bt,h
bt,ℓ
τt,h
τt,ℓ

Taxes and supply of one−period bonds

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
2

3

Time period (t)

4

Figure 2: Taxes and supply of one-period bonds. The figure is drawn for the same parameter values as
Figure 1.

59

1.25
1
Slope of the real yield curve
-.5 -.25 0
.25 .5 .75

US10
US09
US02
US08

US04
US03

US07
GB98

GB03

GB02
US99

US06
US05

GB04

GB10

US00
US01
US98
GB09

GB05
GB01

GB00

GB07

-.75

GB06

GB08

-.75

-.5

-.25

0
.25
.5
.75
Slope of the nominal yield curve

1

1.25

Figure 3: Real and nominal yield curve slopes. This graph plots country-year observations for the slope
of the real yield curve for the United Kingdom (GB, from the Bank of England) and the United
States (US, from Global Financial Data) against the slope of the nominal yield curve. The sample
period is 1998-2010. The graph also includes a fitted regression line.

60

Slope 30-year v. 10-year in % (country mean)
0
.5
1

CHE

ESP
FRA
CAN

JPN

BEL
ITA
DEU

USA

-.5

GBR

30

35
40
Median age in years (country mean)

45

Figure 4: Slope of the yield curve and median age. This graph plots the sample means of the difference
between 30-year and 10-year government bond yields for each country (from Global Financial
Data) against the sample means of the median age for each country (from the United Nations
Population Division).

61

Maturity of government debt in years (country mean)
2
4
6
8
10
12

GBR

IRL

CAN

NLD
FRA
ESP
AUS

USA

AUT
ITA
NOR

NZL

ISL

BEL

25

DEU

JPN

DNK
SWE
FIN
LUX

30
35
40
Median age in years (country mean)

45

Figure 5: Maturity of government debt and median age. This graph plots the sample means of the maturity
of government debt for each country (from the OECD and Missale (1999)) against the sample
means of the median age for each country (from the United Nations Population Division).

62

