NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN MARGINAL RATES OF SUBSTITUTION BE INFERRED FROM HAPPINESS
DATA? EVIDENCE FROM RESIDENCY CHOICES
Daniel J. Benjamin
Ori Heffetz
Miles S. Kimball
Alex Rees-Jones
Working Paper 18927
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18927
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2013
We thank Al Roth for valuable early suggestions, and Matthew Adler, Greg Besharov, Aaron BodohCreed, Angus Deaton, Jan-Emmanuel De Neve, Dan Gilbert, Sean Nicholson, Ted O’Donoghue, Andrew
Oswald, and Richard Thaler for valuable comments. We are grateful to participants at the Cornell
Behavioral Economics Research Group, Cornell Behavioral/Experimental Lab Meetings, UCLA/UCSB
Conference on Field Experiments, Michigan Retirement Research Center Annual Meeting, Stanford
Institute for Theoretical Economics, AEA Annual Meeting, Duke Law School New Scholarship on
Happiness Conference, FMSH Workshop on Well-Being and Preferences, Whitebox Advisors Graduate
Student Conference, and NBER Summer Institute, as well as seminar audiences at Chicago Booth,
Cornell, Hebrew University, Ben-Gurion University, and Princeton for helpful comments. We thank
Allison Ettinger, Matt Hoffman, and Andrew Sung for outstanding research assistance. Thoughtful
suggestions by the editor and anonymous referees substantially improved the paper. We are grateful
to NIH/NIA grants R01-AG040787 and R01-AG020717-07 to the University of Michigan and T32-AG00186
to the NBER, and to the S. C. Johnson Graduate School of Management, for financial support. This
project was approved by the Cornell University IRB. The authors declare that they have no relevant
or material financial interests that relate to the research described in this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Daniel J. Benjamin, Ori Heffetz, Miles S. Kimball, and Alex Rees-Jones. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Can Marginal Rates of Substitution Be Inferred from Happiness Data? Evidence from Residency
Choices
Daniel J. Benjamin, Ori Heffetz, Miles S. Kimball, and Alex Rees-Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 18927
March 2013, Revised February 2014
JEL No. C81,D03,D69
ABSTRACT
We survey 561 students from U.S. medical schools shortly after they submit choice rankings over
residencies to the National Resident Matching Program. We elicit (a) these choice rankings, (b) anticipated
subjective well-being (SWB) rankings, and (c) expected features of the residencies (such as prestige).
We find substantial differences between choice and anticipated-SWB rankings in the implied tradeoffs
between residency features. In our data, evaluative SWB measures (life satisfaction and Cantril’s ladder)
imply tradeoffs closer to choice than does affective happiness (even time-integrated), and as close
as do multi-measure SWB indices. We discuss implications for using SWB data in applied work.
Daniel J. Benjamin
Economics Department
Cornell University
480 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
daniel.benjamin@gmail.com

Miles S. Kimball
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
mkimball@umich.edu

Alex Rees-Jones
Ori Heffetz
Economics Department
S.C. Johnson Graduate School of Management Cornell University
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
324 Sage Hall
arr34@cornell.edu
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
oh33@cornell.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18927

The marginal rate of substitution (MRS) is the magnitude that characterizes preferences:
as (minus) the slope of an individual’s indifference curve, it quantifies the tradeoffs that
individuals are willing to make. Traditionally, MRSs are estimated from choice data. Economists
must resort to alternatives, however, in settings where the relevant choices are not observed (as is
often the case when externalities, non-market goods, and certain government policies are
involved) or where individuals’ choices are likely to reflect mistakes. An increasingly-used
alternative source of data is survey responses to subjective well-being (SWB) questions—most
commonly, questions about respondents’ happiness, life satisfaction, or life’s ranking on a
ladder. In a typical application, a measure of SWB is regressed on respondents’ quantities of a
bundle of non-market goods, and the ratio of the coefficients on two goods yields an estimate of
the goods’ rate of tradeoff that would leave SWB unchanged. SWB data have been used in this
way, for example, to estimate the tradeoffs between inflation and unemployment (Di Tella,
MacCulloch, and Oswald, 2001); between own and others’ income (for a recent review, see
Clark, Frijters, and Shields, 2008); and between money and a relative’s life (by comparing the
coefficient on losing a family member with the coefficient on income; Oswald and Powdthavee,
2008, and Deaton, Fortson, and Tortora, 2010).1
The purpose of this paper is to explore empirically the extent to which such SWB-based
tradeoffs reflect preference-based MRSs, where by “preferences” we mean what would be
inferred from well-informed, deliberated choice data were the relevant choices observed. To that
end, we elicit: (a) choice rankings over a set of options, in a setting where choice is arguably
deliberated and well-informed; (b) the anticipated SWB consequences of the different choice
options; and (c) the expected quantities of the (non-market) goods that comprise the relevant
consumption bundle under each choice option. We estimate the tradeoffs between the goods
implied by choice and those implied by different SWB measures, and we investigate the
differences between them. We do not take a stand on which, if any, of such tradeoff estimates
should be normatively privileged; we merely study measures that are already widely used in
applied work.

1

SWB data have been similarly used to price, among other things, noise (van Praag and Baarsma, 2005),
informal care (van den Berg and Ferrer-i-Carbonell, 2007), the risk of floods (Luechinger and Raschky,
2009), air quality (Levinson, 2012), and benefits of the Moving to Opportunity project (Ludwig et al.,
2012).
2

While the literature estimates the tradeoffs implied by experienced SWB, it is crucial for
our purposes to compare choice tradeoffs with anticipated-SWB tradeoffs in order to hold
constant the conditions (including information and beliefs) under which the choice is made.
Divergences between choice and experienced-SWB tradeoffs have been well documented and
are often assumed to be fully explained by mispredictions of SWB at the time of choice (e.g.,
Loewenstein, O’Donoghue, and Rabin, 2003; Gilbert, 2006). In contrast, comparing choice and
anticipated-SWB tradeoffs permits assessing the individual’s intentions at the time of choice:
divergences can then be attributed to SWB not fully capturing the relative importance of the
individual’s goals. The presence of such divergences would imply that (the much discussed)
SWB misprediction is not the whole story for explaining divergences between choice and
experienced-SWB tradeoffs (for an alternative view, see e.g., Kahneman and Snell, 1992; Hsee,
Hastie, and Chen, 2008). In the conclusion of this paper, we discuss how our results on choice
tradeoffs vs. anticipated-SWB tradeoffs may carry over to comparisons of choice tradeoffs vs.
experienced-SWB tradeoffs, when our results are combined with findings from the existing
literature on anticipated-SWB tradeoffs vs. experienced-SWB tradeoffs.
In section I we describe the setting we study: graduating U.S. medical students’
preference rankings over residency programs. These preference rankings submitted by students
to the National Resident Matching Program (NRMP), combined with the preference rankings
over students submitted by the residency programs, determine which students are matched to
which programs. This setting has a number of attractive features for our purposes: the matching
mechanism is designed to be incentive-compatible; the choice is a deliberated, well-informed,
and important career decision; the choice set is well-defined and straightforward to elicit; and
due to a submission deadline, there is an identifiable moment in time when the decision is
irreversibly made. We conduct a survey among a sample of 561 students from 23 U.S. medical
schools shortly after they submit their residency preferences to the NRMP, so that our survey is
conducted under information and beliefs as close as possible to those held during the actual
choice.
Section II describes our sample and survey design. We ask about each student’s four
most-preferred residency programs. In addition to eliciting each student’s preference ranking
over the four residencies as submitted to the NRMP, we also elicit her anticipated SWB rankings
over the residencies, both during the residency and for the rest of her life. We focus on three
3

commonly-used SWB measures: happiness, life satisfaction, and a Cantril-ladder measure.2 We
also ask each student to rate each of the four residencies on each of nine features that we
expected to be the most important determinants of program choice (based on our past research in
settings other than residency choice as well as on conversations with medical school officials and
with past and present students).3 These include the desirability of residency location, residency
prestige-and-status, expected stress level, and future career prospects.
Section III reports our analyses and results. We model residencies as bundles of
attributes, and we use the choice- and SWB-rankings as alternative dependent variables in
regressions where the independent variables are students’ beliefs about these attributes. In our
main analysis we compare the coefficients and coefficient ratios across regressions. Because our
survey elicits anticipated SWB soon after it elicits choice, coefficient similarities across the
regressions may be overstated in our data and may hence be thought of as upper bounds, while
coefficient differences may be understated and may hence be interpreted as lower bounds.
While the coefficients of the attributes do not reverse sign and are reasonably highly
correlated across the choice and SWB regressions, we find large and significant differences in
the implied tradeoffs. For example, relative to the choice-based estimates, all anticipated-SWB
estimates underweight residency prestige-and-status and residency desirability for the
respondent’s significant other, while overweighting social life and life seeming worthwhile
during the residency. We also find that our evaluative SWB measures—life satisfaction and
Cantril’s ladder—generally yield results closer to the choice-based estimates than our more
affective happiness measure. The choice-SWB differences we find are robust to plausible forms

2

Examples of each of these three measures include: the National Survey of Families and Households
question “Taking things all together, how would you say things are these days?” whose seven-point
response scale ranges from “very unhappy” to “very happy” (used by, e.g., Luttmer, 2005); the Eurobarometer survey question “On the whole, are you very satisfied, fairly satisfied, not very satisfied or not
at all satisfied with the life you lead?” (e.g., Di Tella, MacCulloch and Oswald, 2001); and the Gallup
World Poll question “Please imagine a ladder with steps numbered from zero at the bottom to 10 at the
top. The top of the ladder represents the best possible life for you and the bottom of the ladder represents
the worst possible life for you. On which step of the ladder would you say you personally feel you stand
at this time?” (e.g., Deaton, Fortson, and Tortora, 2010).
3
Indeed, as we report when analyzing the data, the residency attribute ratings that we elicited explain
much of the within-respondent variation in residency choice rankings. In contrast, in our attempts to
forecast residency choices in our data with objective, external measures such as characteristics of the city
of residency and information from the Best Hospitals U.S. News Rankings, we find these measures to
explain virtually none of the variation in choice (for one specification, see Web Appendix Table A11).
4

of measurement error and biases in survey response and hold across empirical specifications and
across subsets of our respondents.
We also explore whether multi-question SWB indices more accurately reflect revealedpreference tradeoffs. We consider three such indices: the first, a “3-SWB-measure” index, is a
weighted sum of our three SWB questions; the second, a “4-period-happiness” index, consists of
happiness predictions for four time intervals that together cover the rest of a respondent’s life;
the third index combines the other two. While such indices have not been commonly used to
estimate tradeoffs, we are motivated by the ideas, respectively, that well-being is
multidimensional (e.g., Stiglitz, Sen, and Fitoussi, 2009) and that well-being consists of
instantaneous affect integrated over time (Kahneman, Wakker, and Sarin, 1997), as well as by
the empirical observation that different SWB measures could imply dramatically different
tradeoffs (e.g., Kahneman and Deaton, 2010; Deaton, Fortson, and Tortora, 2010). We estimate
the optimal weights of the indices as best linear predictors of choice in our data; our indices are
hence constructed to perform better than those likely to be used in realistic applications, where
choice data are not available (an additional reason for a lower-bound interpretation of any
choice-SWB differences found in our data). We find that while some tradeoffs based on these
multi-question indices are closer to our choice-based MRSs than the tradeoffs based on the
indices’ underlying questions, overall the indices do not reflect the MRSs more reliably than the
single evaluative-SWB questions.
In section IV, we explore an alternative use of SWB data: assessing which of two
concrete choice options is preferred. We find that despite the differences in implied tradeoffs
between choice and SWB in our data, the two often coincide in pairwise comparisons. We
present a simple model that illustrates the relationship between pairwise predictions and
tradeoffs, and we discuss the conditions under which SWB data may correctly predict choice
even when the implied tradeoffs differ.
We conclude in section V.
Our work builds upon and differs from past attempts to study the relationship between
choice and SWB measures in several important ways. First, while almost all existing work
(Tversky and Griffin, 1991; Hsee, 1999; Hsee, Zhang, Yu, and Xi, 2003; Benjamin, Heffetz,
Kimball, and Rees-Jones, 2012) compares anticipated-SWB rankings with choices that are either
hypothetical or involve very small stakes, we present evidence on real, deliberated choices in a
5

high-stakes field environment—the sort of choices one would like to observe for reliably
estimating MRSs. Second, while the earlier studies document cases where choices between pairs
of options do not maximize anticipated SWB, we focus on the implications for estimating MRSs.
Third, our evidence is from a setting where ordinal preferences over a well-defined and
observable choice set are directly elicited. While preferences can sometimes be inferred
indirectly—for example, as in Dolan and Metcalfe (2008), who, for pricing the welfare effects of
an urban regeneration project, compare estimates based on contingent-valuation and hedonicpricing methods with those based on SWB—such indirect approaches necessarily hinge on many
maintained assumptions. Moreover, unlike existing work, our paper studies a field setting that
allows the direct elicitation not only of preference orderings but also of anticipated-SWB
rankings of the options in the choice set—an ideal setting for studying choice-SWB alignment.
Fourth, while prior work considers only single SWB questions, we also consider indices that
include multiple SWB measures and multi-period affective happiness. Finally, drawing on
theoretical considerations as well as on empirical results from this and previous papers, we offer
guidance regarding the interpretation and use of SWB data, vis-à-vis choice data, in applied
research. For example, while our findings suggest that SWB data are inadequate for precise
inference regarding (preference-based) MRSs, in binary welfare comparisons they may in some
settings yield conclusions that line up with preferences—although their use is still subject to
assumptions and caveats not studied in this paper (see, e.g., Adler, 2013).
I. Choice Setting: The National Resident Matching Program (NRMP)
I.A. Background
After graduating from a U.S. medical school, most students enroll in a residency
program. The residency is a three- to seven-year period of training in a specialty such as
anesthesiology, emergency medicine, family medicine, general surgery, internal medicine,
pediatrics, or psychiatry. Students apply to programs at the beginning of their fourth (and final)
year. In late fall programs invite selected students to visit and be interviewed. Students
subsequently submit to the NRMP their preferences over the programs where they interviewed,
while programs submit their preferences over students. The NRMP determines the final
allocation of students to residencies. In 2012, students were allowed to submit their preference
ordering through the NRMP website between January 15 and February 22, and the resulting
6

match was announced on March 16; among students graduating from non-homeopathic U.S.
medical schools, 16,875 submitted their preferences, and 15,712 (93%) ended up getting
matched (NRMP, 2012).
The matching algorithm, described in detail in Roth and Peranson (1999), was designed
to incentivize truthful preference reporting from students and to generate stable matches (in
which no student and program prefer to be matched to one another over their current matches). It
is based on the student-proposing deferred acceptance algorithm of Gale and Shapley (1962),
which is guaranteed to produce a stable match, and where truthful reporting is a weakly
dominant strategy for students. The original, simple algorithm, however, could not accommodate
certain requirements of the medical matching market (such as the requirement for couples to
match to residencies in the same city). The modifications to the algorithm complicate the
strategic incentives and allow the possibility that no stable match exists, but simulations in Roth
and Peranson (1999) suggest that effectively all students remain incentivized to truthfully reveal
their preferences.
I.B. Key Features for Our Study
For our purposes, medical residency choices are an especially useful context for the
following reasons:
Choice versus preferences: While choice in our setting is observed, preferences—defined
as would-be choices under certain idealized conditions—are never directly observable. The
NRMP setup, however, may be as close as one can get to a setting where choice reveals
preferences.4 Residency choice is arguably one of the most important career-related decisions a
medical student makes, with short- and long-term consequences for career path, geographic
location, friendships, and family. Like many of the most important life decisions, it is only made
once, but because of its importance, students deliberate over their decision for months and have a
great deal of information and advising available to assist them in becoming well informed. Their
4

Strictly speaking, what we refer to as our choice data are survey respondents’ reports on choices; we do
not directly observe the actual preference ranking submitted by students to the NRMP. However, these
reports seem very reliable. Among the 131 respondents who completed both our original and repeat
surveys (see section II below), only 2 (1.5%) reported conflicting choice data. (Of the remaining 129
respondents, 5 had cross-survey differences in missing choice data but no conflicts; 2 seemed to have
made easily-correctible data-entry mistakes in either survey; and 122 reported the exact same choices
across the two surveys.)
7

submitted ranking is not visible to peers or residency programs, and hence, relative to many
other decisions, the scope for strategic or signaling concerns is reduced. Finally and crucially,
students are incentivized by the matching mechanism to report their true preference ranking.
Identifiable moment of choice: Unlike many other important life decisions, the NRMP
submission has an identifiable moment when the decision is irreversibly committed. By
surveying students shortly after they submit their preference ranking to the NRMP (and before
they learn the match outcome), we elicit their SWB predictions under essentially the same
information set and beliefs as at the moment of making the choice.
Identifiable choice set and ranking: In most economic settings, observable choice data
consist of only the one chosen option, often leaving the econometrician uncertain as to the exact
choice set from which that option was chosen. In our setting, choice data consist of a ranking
over a set of residencies, making the choice set effectively observable, and enabling us to elicit
anticipated SWB and residency features over that same set of options. Also, observing a choice
ranking over multiple options confers more statistical power than observing only which option
was chosen from a set.
Intertemporal tradeoff: A residency is expected to be a period of hard work, long hours,
and intensive training, the benefits of which will be realized once the student becomes a
practicing doctor. The investment aspect of the decision allows us to distinguish instantaneous
utility from lifetime utility (the expected present discounted value of instantaneous utility),
where lifetime utility is a representation of (choice-revealed) preferences. Hence we can explore
the extent to which our affective SWB question—anticipated happiness during the residency—is
related both to expected instantaneous utility and to expected lifetime utility. That distinction,
which we consider and discuss in section III.C, is crucial for exploring the intertemporal aspects
of the relationship between SWB tradeoffs and choice MRSs.
Heterogeneity in attribute evaluations: Residency choice offers rich variation in
individuals’ evaluations of programs’ attributes: students’ assessments of fit, locational
preferences, and social considerations are all reasonably idiosyncratic. This heterogeneity,
together with differences in choice sets (i.e., the sets of programs where different students had
interviewed), is the source of variation identifying our regression coefficients.

8

One limitation of residency choice for our purposes is that it is not well suited for
studying tradeoffs with money—the typical numeraire used in the literature. Our original
intention was to use expected income for each residency to price the other residency attributes.
However, in the process of designing the survey we learned—by being explicitly told by
representatives of medical schools and by medical students we consulted—that expected income
is largely unrelated to this decision. The primary determinant of expected income for medical
students is their choice of specialty, a decision typically made years before choosing a residency.
Indeed, most NRMP participants apply to residencies for a single specialty and hence should not
expect their future income to vary meaningfully across their top choices. While pricing residency
attributes in dollars would have been convenient, it is by no means crucial for our purposes; we
instead focus on comparing MRSs and tradeoffs between the attributes directly. We elicited
expected income in our survey anyway but do not use it in this paper.5
II. Sample and Survey Design
II.A. Sample
From September 2011 to January 2012, we contacted virtually all 122 U.S. medical
schools with full accreditation from the Liaison Committee on Medical Education by sending an
email to a school representative (typically an Associate Dean of Student Affairs) and asking for
permission to survey graduating medical students. We followed up with phone calls, further
emails, and/or face-to-face meetings at the Association of American Medical Colleges Annual
Meeting. As a result, 23 schools (19% of our initial list) agreed to participate in our study. These
23 represent a wide range of class sizes (from 60 to 299 students in 2011) and locations, and they
graduated a total of 3,224 students in 2011. Our survey appendix reproduces the initial email sent
to schools, lists the participating schools, their class sizes, and the numbers of their students
starting vs. completing our survey. It also shows the geographic distribution of participating and
non-participating schools, and, using US News data, compares participating and non5

Indeed, responses to our expected-income questions are of limited usefulness. Only 40% of respondents
expect any income variation across the residencies in our two expected-income questions—compared
with a range of 79–96% of respondents expecting variation in the nine expected-attribute questions.
Moreover, looking at the correlations between responses to a given question by a given respondent across
our two survey waves, responses to the expected-income questions are among the noisiest, having withinsubject correlations of 0.00 and 0.24—compared with correlations in the range 0.24–0.81 in the nine
expected-attribute questions.
9

participating schools on six school characteristics (relating to size, quality, grades, and gender
composition). We find essentially no evidence of selection on these characteristics. (A common
reason schools gave us for not participating was that their students are already asked to
participate in “too many” surveys.)
Between February 22 at 9pm EST (the deadline for submitting residency preferences) and
March 3, students in participating schools received an email from their school’s dean, student
council representative, or registrar, inviting them to respond to our web survey by clicking on a
link. The email is reproduced in the survey appendix. It explained, among other things, that
“…The results of this study will provide better information on how medical students select
residency programs, and can assist in the advising and preparation of future generations of
students”; that the survey is estimated to take 15 minutes to complete; and that we offer
participants at least a 1/50 chance to win an iPod.6 Reminder emails were sent near the March 3
deadline. When the survey closed, at 11:59pm EST that day, we had received 579 complete
responses (approximately 18% of the roughly 3,224 students contacted).7 Our analysis is based
on the 561 who entered name and specialty information for at least two programs (540 of whom
entered information for all four programs). While we find little evidence of selection on
observables (see survey appendix), our sample is unlikely to be representative of U.S. medical
students due to potential selection on unobservables. Nonetheless, if MRSs could in general be
inferred from SWB data, then we would expect the same to hold in our sample.
428 of our respondents agreed, when asked at the end of the survey, to be re-contacted.
They received, on a randomly-drawn date between March 7 and 9, another email inviting them to
participate in a repeat survey, with a March 11 deadline. The repeat survey consisted of the same
questions as the original survey, with a few new questions added at the end. Comparing
responses across these two waves allows us to assess the reliability of our measures, as we do
below. 133 respondents completed the repeat survey, and 131 of them (23% of our main sample)
provided information for at least two programs. The median time between completion of the
original and the repeat surveys was 13 days. As reported in the survey appendix, female
6

At the end of the survey, participants were thanked for their participation; were reminded that they have
a 1/50 chance to win an iPod; and were asked to encourage their classmates to also participate. As an
incentive for the latter, they were informed that we would increase the individual chance to win an iPod to
3/50 in schools with response rate of 70% or higher (which no school reached).
7
In addition to the 579 complete responses, our survey had another 680 visits that did not result in a
complete response. Of these, 284 (42%) exited before proceeding beyond the first page.
10

respondents were slightly less likely to respond to the repeat survey (for summary statistics by
survey, see Web Appendix Table A1).
II.B. Survey Design
Our survey appendix provides screenshots of our survey. Here we briefly summarize
important survey details. Following an introductory screen, respondents are asked: “Please enter
the top four programs from the preference ordering you submitted to the NRMP.” Respondents
separately enter program (e.g., “Massachusetts General Hospital”) and specialty (e.g.,
“Anesthesiology”). While “the top four” is not the entire preference ordering, it is likely to be the
relevant portion of the list for our respondents: in 2012, 83.6% of NRMP participants graduating
from U.S. medical schools were matched to one of their top four choices (first choice: 54.1%;
second: 14.9%; third: 9.1%; fourth: 5.5%; NRMP, 2012).
Respondents are then asked: “On what date did you submit your rank order list to the
NRMP?” Figure 1 reports the distributions of submission dates (lighter bars) and survey
response dates (gray bars) among our 561 main-sample respondents. The median number of days
between choice submission and response to our survey is 11. The figure also shows the
subsequent distribution of response dates for the 131 main-sample respondents who participated
in our repeat survey (darker bars).
On the next screen, respondents are asked about their relationship status and whether they
are registered with the NRMP for a “dual match.”8 Their answer to the relationship question
determines whether the question “On a scale from 1 to 100, how desirable is this residency for
your spouse or significant other?” will be included as a residency attribute on a later screen.
Next, the following instructions appear on the screen:
For the following section, you will be asked to individually consider the top four programs you
ranked. For each of these possibilities, you will be asked to report your predictions on how
attending that residency program will affect a variety of aspects of your life. Please answer as
carefully and truthfully as possible.

8

The dual match is an option for couples trying to match to residencies simultaneously. The two submit a
single list ranking pairs of programs. While 64% of our respondents indicate that they are either married
or in a long-term relationship, only 7% are dual-match participants. As discussed in section III.B, our
main results are robust to excluding them.
11

For some questions you will be asked to rate aspects on a 1-100 scale. Let 100 represent the
absolute best possible outcome, 1 represent the absolute worst possible outcome, and 50
represent the midpoint.

The ranked residencies are then looped through in random order, and two screens appear
for each residency. The first screen elicits respondents’ rating of the residency, using the 1–100
scale, on the main three anticipated-SWB questions and on the nine residency attributes. The
second screen includes questions about expected income that we do not use in this paper.
Table 1 reproduces the three anticipated-SWB questions and the nine attribute questions
as they appear on the first screen below the instruction: “Thinking about how your life would be
if you matriculate into the residency program in [specialty] at [program], please answer the
questions below.” The SWB and attribute questions are purposefully designed to resemble each
other as much as possible in terms of language and structure, and they appear on the screen
mixed together as twelve questions in random order. As a practical matter of survey design, this
symmetric treatment allows us (in section IV below) to compare the twelve questions on how
useful each one is as a single predictor of choice, without confounds due to question language or
order. Moreover, on a conceptual level it could be argued that the classification of questions as
“SWB” versus “attribute” is in some cases arbitrary and has little basis in theory (a point that we
return to in section V). Nonetheless, when planning our empirical strategy and prior to data
collection, we set apart the three SWB questions to be compared with choice as dependent
variables in regressions on the attributes (see section III below), because in the happiness
literature these are the questions that are routinely used as alternatives to choice data.
Mixed together and arranged here roughly by the time interval they refer to, the twelve
SWB and attribute questions include: three affective measures that refer to a typical day during
the residency (in Table 1 these are labeled happiness, anxiety, and stress during residency); three
evaluative/eudaimonic measures that refer more generally to the time during the residency (life
satisfaction, social life, and worthwhile life during residency); one measure that refers implicitly
to the time during the residency (desirability of location); one measure that refers implicitly to
the time after the residency (future career prospects); one measure that simply refers to one’s
“life” (ladder); and three measures that come with no specification of period (residency prestige
and status, control over life, and—for respondents in a relationship—desirable for significant
other).
12

Next, the top three residencies (rather than four, to keep the survey from becoming too
long and repetitive) are cycled through again, in a new random order. For each residency we
elicit anticipated happiness at different future time intervals (we provide more details when
analyzing the resulting data, in section III.C below).
The survey concludes with a sequence of screens that include four questions regarding
the relationship between a respondent’s submitted NRMP ranking and her or his “true”
preferences; a question regarding experiences with residency-program representatives’ attempts
at manipulating the match; and questions about gender, age, college GPA, MCAT score, and
Medical Licensing Examination scores (for summary statistics, see Web Appendix Table A1).
We explore these data in section III.B below. On the last screen, respondents are thanked for
their participation and asked for permission to be contacted for the follow-up survey.
As a brief overview of our data, Figure 2 presents kernel density estimates of the
distribution of our primary variables by residency rank (for means and standard deviations, see
Web Appendix Table A2; for a version of Figure 2 demeaned at the respondent level, see Web
Appendix Figure A1). As is visually clear, all have substantial variation across respondents, and
many have clear differences in distribution across program ranks. For example, looking at the
three primary SWB measures (top row), it is clear that higher-ranked programs have higher mean
anticipated SWB. Web Appendix Table A3 presents the test-retest correlations of these variables,
as calculated with the repeat survey. We view the relatively high correlations of responses across
waves as evidence that our survey measures elicit meaningful information.
III. Main Analysis and Results
III.A. Single SWB Measures
As a first step in constructing choice-based and SWB-based tradeoff estimates, we
estimate the associations of residency attributes with the choice-based and SWB-based residency
rankings. The first four columns of Table 2 report four separate regressions of, respectively,
choice, anticipated happiness, anticipated life satisfaction, and anticipated ladder questions on
the nine residency attributes. Each column estimates a rank-ordered logit model (Beggs, Cardell,
and Hausman, 1981), which generalizes the standard binary-choice logit model to more than two
ranked options. To avoid confusion, we emphasize that rank-ordered logit is different from
ordered logit, an econometric technique commonly used in the happiness literature. When using
13

rank-ordered logit, we assume that each individual i’s ordinal ranking of residencies, denoted by
their rank

{

}, is rationalized by a random latent index,

parameters of the latent index,
log-likelihoods that

. The

, are estimated by maximizing the sum of the individual-level
, the condition necessary for generating the

observed ordering of residencies. The unobserved error term is assumed to follow a type I
extreme-value distribution, yielding a closed-form solution to the maximum-likelihood problem.
We construct the regressors by dividing the attribute variables by 100 (so the regressors range
from 0.01 to 1). The coefficients can be interpreted analogously to standard logit coefficients: for
any pair of residencies A and B, all else equal, a one-unit increase in the difference in regressor j,
, is associated with a

increase in the log odds ratio of choosing A over B. We

report a within-subject modification of McKelvey and Zavoina’s R2, a statistic that measures the
fraction of within-subject variation of the latent index explained by the fitted model.9
Consider Table 2’s two leftmost columns (“Choice” and “Happiness during residency”).
The first row indicates that the coefficient on residency prestige and status is 2.5 in the choice
regression and 0.0 in the happiness regression. This difference is highly statistically significant
(Wald test p-value = 0.000). To interpret these coefficients, consider their implication for the
ranking of two residency programs that are identical in all measured dimensions except for a 20point difference in their prestige and status on the survey’s 100-point scale. The choice
coefficient implies that the probability of choosing the more prestigious program would be
= 62%. The happiness coefficient implies that the probability of ranking the more
prestigious program higher on anticipated happiness would be 50%. Of course, our coefficient
estimates (and hence our tradeoff estimates below) may be subject to omitted-variable bias.
However, if choice-based MRSs were identical to SWB tradeoffs, any resulting bias would
equally affect the choice-based and SWB-based estimates. The same is true more generally
regarding any concern that is related to only the independent variables—a point we return to in

9

We modify the R2 measure of McKelvey and Zavoina (1975) by demeaning the predicted index value
̂ at the respondent level:
̂ ̂
̅

̂ (̂
̅)
This ratio is the fraction of within-respondent variance in the latent index contributed by the estimated,
deterministic component. The resulting measure of fit is intuitively similar to standard R2.
14

our robustness analysis in the next subsection. Our discussion below is therefore focused less on
the point estimates themselves and more on whether they differ across choice and SWB.
Our estimate of the relationship between a residency’s ranking and the residency’s
perceived prestige and status hence strongly depends on whether we use the choice ranking or an
anticipated-happiness ranking. Examining the rest of the coefficient pairs across the choice and
happiness columns reveals that, within a pair, while there are no sign reversals, there are many
significant differences in coefficient magnitudes. With the exception of control over life, they are
all statistically significant at the 10% level. Five of the differences are significant at the 1% level:
like residency prestige and status, also desirability of location, future career prospects, and
desirability for significant other are associated significantly more with choice than with
anticipated-happiness, while the reverse is true for social life during the residency. As reported in
the table’s bottom row, joint equality of coefficients between the two columns is strongly
rejected.
Examining the next two columns (“Life satisfaction during residency” and “Ladder”)
reveals that with few exceptions, these two measures’ coefficients lie between those of choice
and those of happiness. These two evaluative measures seem on some attributes closer to
happiness, an affective measure, and on other attributes closer to choice. For example, while on
social life during the residency, the two are virtually indistinguishable from happiness, all with
coefficients larger than that on choice, on desirability of location the two are indistinguishable
from choice, with coefficients much larger than that on happiness. Across the rows, most of the
ladder estimates appear closer to the choice estimates than the life satisfaction estimates;
statistically, however, we cannot distinguish the two evaluative measures from each other.
Indeed, Wald tests of the joint equality of coefficients between any pair among the four columns
strongly reject the null of equality (p = 0.000) for all pairs except the life satisfaction and ladder
pair (p = 0.52).
To what extent do these differences in coefficient estimates translate to differences in
estimated tradeoffs? To answer this question regarding a given tradeoff—for example, between
prestige and social life—one can compare, across Table 2’s columns, the within-column ratio of
the two relevant coefficients. To answer this question regarding a given attribute—for example,
“How large are the cross-column differences in estimated tradeoffs between prestige-and-status
and the other eight attributes?”—we could use that attribute as a numeraire and report nine tables
15

(one per numeraire), each with relatively noisy ratio estimates. Instead, we report Table 3, a
single table that summarizes each attribute’s eight relevant within-column ratios using a single,
less noisy measure that can be compared across columns. Table 3 reports the ratio of each
coefficient from Table 2 to the average absolute value of coefficients in its Table 2 column. With
this normalization, each of Table 3’s entries can be interpreted as an average weight in tradeoffs.
For example, a higher normalized coefficient on an attribute in the choice column relative to the
happiness column would mean that on average, the MRS between another attribute and this one
is lower in the choice column than the corresponding tradeoff estimate in the happiness column.
Standard errors are calculated using the delta method.
Examining Table 3’s first row and comparing column 1 with columns 2–4 reveals that
residency prestige and status’s regression coefficient in the choice column is 1.4 times the
average of the nine attributes’ regression coefficients; with any of the three anticipated-SWB
measures, however, prestige and status’s regression coefficients are below average, ranging from
0.0 to 0.4 times the average. This difference in implied tradeoffs is rather dramatic: the estimate
in the choice column is more than three times larger than the largest SWB estimate.
To examine the statistical significance of this and other differences, Web Appendix Table
A4 replaces each estimate in columns 2–7 of Table 3 with its difference from the corresponding
estimate in Table 3’s column 1 (the choice column). Table A4 also reports the p-value of each
difference. Relative to the choice-based estimates, all three SWB measures underweight
residency prestige-and-status and desirability for significant other, and overweight the
importance of social life and life seeming worthwhile during the residency. Other attributes also
show significant differences, but they appear to be less systematic. As reported in Table 3’s
bottom row, we again easily reject joint equality—in this table, of normalized coefficients—
between any of the three SWB measures and choice.
Comparing across Table 3’s SWB columns, the life satisfaction and ladder columns
appear similar to each other (as in Table 2), with virtually all estimates in between the choice
estimates and the (always equally signed) happiness estimates. Considered jointly, the
coefficients in both the life satisfaction and ladder columns are again statistically different from
the happiness column (p = 0.000) but are not distinguishable from each other (p = 0.63).
Since comparing the choice and SWB columns of Table 3 is one of the central aims of
our paper, Figure 3 provides a visual rendering of the table. Each of the figure’s six graphs is
16

based on Table 3’s column 1 and one other column (from among columns 2–7). Within each
graph, each of the nine points represents an attribute. Each attribute’s x- and y-coordinates
correspond, respectively, with its choice and SWB estimates from Table 3, with their 95%
confidence intervals represented by the horizontal and vertical capped bars. Points in the
northeast or southwest quadrants hence represent cases where choice and SWB estimates have
the same sign; on the solid 45-degree line, the estimates are equal. To assist in visually assessing
how far a point is from the 45-degree line, the dashed lines demarcate the boundaries outside of
which estimates differ by more than a factor of two.
Focusing on the top three graphs, it is visually apparent that almost all points fall in the
same-sign quadrants and that, additionally, there is substantial positive correlation between the
choice and SWB estimates (correlations are reported in each graph). However, there are also
substantial differences between the estimates, often by a factor of two or more. To quantify these
differences, we define a prediction-error measure of SWB-based estimates relative to the choicebased benchmarks: |

|, where the s represent an attribute’s estimates in Table 3, and

the superscript SWB represents one of the SWB columns. An error of 60%, for example,
corresponds to cases where the SWB estimate is either 40% or 160% of the choice estimate.
Each graph reports the minimum, median, and maximum error among the nine attributes. The
median ranges from 63% for the ladder measure to 99% for the happiness-during-residency
measure. While such margins of error may be tolerable for some applications that use SWB as a
proxy for choice utility—for example, applications that focus only on the sign of an effect—they
are a serious limitation to the interpretation of these measures as precise MRS estimates.
III.B. Robustness
In this subsection, we probe the robustness of our main results to several possible sources
of bias.
Biases in survey response: Due to a halo effect, respondents’ overall assessments of
residencies might leak into their subjective assessments of either anticipated SWB or residency
attributes (or both). Similarly, cognitive dissonance might lead respondents to modify their
subjective assessments to rationalize the choice order they reported earlier in the survey. To the
extent that the ratings of the residency attributes are affected, the coefficients in our regressions
are biased upward. Such a bias, however, could not by itself explain the differences in
17

coefficients across columns. Moreover, to the extent that the ratings of anticipated SWB
measures are affected, the concordance between the SWB-based rankings and the choice ranking
would increase, biasing downward any choice-SWB differences across the columns. Therefore,
the differences we do observe should be viewed as a lower bound on the actual divergence—and
the similarities we observe, as an upper bound on the actual concordance—between anticipatedSWB and choice rankings.
Econometric specification: The estimates in Tables 2 and 3 are based on a rank-ordered
logit model, which is designed for analyses where the dependent variable is—like our choice
data—a rank ordering. Using this same specification for our SWB data makes our estimates
comparable across columns and allows us to avoid making assumptions regarding similar use of
the SWB rating scales across respondents. In contrast, typical happiness regressions in the
literature use OLS or ordered logit/probit, where dependent-variable scale use is assumed to be
identical across respondents (or identical up to differences in means, in fixed-effects
regressions). To examine the sensitivity of our findings to specification, we conduct side-by-side
comparisons of the SWB columns from Table 3 with analogous estimates using OLS with
respondent fixed effects (Web Appendix Table A5) and ordered logit (Table A6). These
alternative specifications yield estimates similar to the rank-ordered logit regressions and do not
change our conclusions from the previous subsection.
Measurement error: Our respondents’ attribute and SWB assessments are likely subject
to measurement error. To the extent that the attribute ratings are affected, the coefficients in our
regressions are biased. As with the survey-response biases above, however, this bias could not
explain the differences in coefficients across columns. Of greater potential concern is the
possibility that anticipated SWB is affected: while classical measurement error in the dependent
variable would not bias coefficient estimates in OLS, it would bias our rank-ordered logit
estimates. Consequently, if anticipated SWB is a noisy measure of choice utility, then
measurement error could generate differences in coefficients across the choice and SWB
columns. That the coefficients from the fixed-effects OLS specification mentioned above (Web
Appendix Table A5) do not meaningfully differ from those in Table 2 suggests, however, that
such measurement error cannot drive our results.
Heterogeneity in response-scale use: Our analysis above assumes that respondents are
identical in their use of the attributes’ 1–100 response scales. While heterogeneity in attribute
18

scale use could not explain the choice-SWB differences we find, we verify that our conclusions
are unchanged when we re-estimate Table 3 after first normalizing the response scales at the
respondent level (Web Appendix Table A7; each attribute is demeaned at the respondent level,
and then divided by the respondent-specific standard deviation, prior to entering the regressions).
Heterogeneity in tradeoffs: Our analysis above imposes identical coefficients across
respondents. Heterogeneity in coefficients could not by itself explain the choice-SWB
differences we find. However, it is possible that our results are driven by a particular
subpopulation, and that for many or most in the sample, the tradeoffs represented by their
anticipated SWB are more similar to those implied by their choices. To assess this possibility, we
cut the sample along various respondent characteristics. For each sample cut, we re-estimate
Table 3 (web appendix, pp. 19–34). Our main findings continue to hold across these sample cuts,
suggesting that they are pervasive across subgroups within our sample. For example, comparing
the choice column with each of the SWB columns, we reject at the 1% level the null hypothesis
of jointly identical tradeoffs in each of these cross-column comparisons when cutting the sample
by: gender, above and below median MCAT scores, above and below median age, above and
below median survey-completion time (as a proxy for respondent effort), whether or not the
respondent agreed to be re-contacted for the follow-up survey (76% of our respondents agreed),
and whether or not the respondent completed the follow-up survey (23%); and when excluding
dual-match participants (7%). When cutting the sample three ways by relationship status (single,
in a long-term relationship, and married), we reject the null of jointly identical tradeoffs at the
5% level in all nine cross-column comparisons and at the 1% level in eight.
Choice versus preferences: As discussed in section I.B, an important advantage of the
NRMP setting is that the mechanism incentivizes students to truthfully submit their preference
ranking. However, some students may deviate from truthful reporting—for example, due to
misunderstanding the mechanism. To assess this possibility, we re-estimate Table 3 three more
times: excluding respondents who report manipulation attempts by schools (3% of our sample);
excluding respondents who report that their NRMP submission did not represent their “true
preference order” (17%);10 and including only these 17% of respondents, but as dependent
10

Given the incentive compatibility of the mechanism, this 17% figure may seem surprisingly high. Only
5% of our sample, however, indicate that they chose their list “strategically,” and less than 1% indicate
that they felt they made a mistake. The remaining 11% indicate another reason and are free to explain in a
free-response textbox. Most such explanations point to constraints based on family preferences or
19

variable in the choice column replacing their submitted NRMP ranking with what they report as
their “true preference order” (web appendix, pp. 35–37). As above, our conclusions do not
change, and we continue to reject joint equality across the choice and SWB columns at the 1%
level.
III.C. Multi-Question SWB Indices
Our results thus far suggest that none of our single-question anticipated-SWB measures
generates tradeoff estimates that reliably reflect choice tradeoffs. However, two distinct
hypotheses separately imply that combinations of questions may better capture choice utility and
hence may yield more similar tradeoffs. We now explore these two hypotheses.
Happiness as instantaneous utility: When a survey respondent reports feeling happy, to
what extent is her report related either to her instantaneous utility or to her lifetime utility?
(Recall that by “lifetime utility,” we mean a representation of (choice-revealed) preferences as
the expected present discounted value of instantaneous utility.) Our evidence above suggests that
happiness-during-residency tradeoffs do not reflect expected-lifetime-utility MRSs. Do they
reflect expected-instantaneous-utility MRSs?
To explore this possibility—the SWB-as-instantaneous-utility hypothesis—we examine
whether anticipated happiness would better reflect choice if it integrated happiness predictions
over the full expected horizon of life, rather than over only the residency years. For that purpose,
we elicit additional happiness predictions in our survey. As mentioned in section II.B above,
after responding to questions about each of the top four residencies, the respondents cycle again
through the top three, in a new random order. They are instructed as follows:
For the following section, you will again be asked to individually consider the top three programs
you ranked. For each of these possibilities, you will be asked to report your predictions on how
attending that residency program will affect your happiness during different periods of your life.
Please answer as carefully and truthfully as possible.

For each residency, respondents see a screen with questions. The three primary questions read:
“On a scale from 1 to 100, how happy do you think you would be on average [during the first ten

location, perhaps suggesting that the preferences we estimate for these respondents are best understood as
those of their households, as opposed to themselves as individuals.
20

years of your career]/[for the remainder of your career before retirement]/[after retirement]?”
Each is followed by questions assessing the uncertainty of the forecast.
Aggregating such questions into a present-discounted-value-of-happiness index requires
weighting them by appropriate discount factors (taking into account the different lengths of their
respective intervals). In a field setting where choice data are not available, the researcher would
have to choose weights based on her beliefs regarding the discount factor. Since we have choice
data, we instead conduct a rank-ordered logit regression predicting choice with our four
anticipated happiness questions and use the estimated latent-index coefficients as our weights.
Under the logit model assumptions, this is the best linear index that could be constructed for
predicting choice in our data and hence represents a best-case scenario (by this choice-prediction
criterion) for a present-discounted-value-of-happiness measure that might be used in a realistic
application.
The regression for constructing the index is reported in column 1 of Table 4. The
coefficients on the happiness variables are roughly declining over time, in spite of the increase in
time-interval length, consistent with steep discounting.11 However, the McKelvey and Zavoina
R2 of 0.17 indicates relatively low goodness-of-fit, suggesting that the index still omits
significant amounts of choice-relevant information.
Returning to Tables 2 and 3, in column 5 we use the ordering implied by this multiperiod anticipated-happiness index as the dependent variable (“4-period-happiness index”).12 In
Table 3, on most of the attributes column 5 is slightly closer to column 1 (choice) than column 2
(happiness during residency) is, but on some of the attributes column 5 is slightly farther.
11

While we do not know the exact length of three of the time intervals, we can calculate them roughly.
The during-the-residency happiness measure would typically cover five years starting from the present.
By definition, we know that the first-ten-years-of-career measure covers the ten years that follow. Since
the average age in our sample is 27, the rest-of-career measure is expected to cover roughly another 23
years until retirement (= 65–27–5–10). With life expectancy roughly 80 years at that age, the afterretirement measure would cover on average another 15 years. Entering these time intervals into a standard
∑
discounting model,
and treating the elicitations of future happiness as measures of
the fixed level of within each window, allow us to express the coefficients in column 1 as functions of
the annual discount factor . A discount factor of 0.91 (bootstrapped standard error = 0.03) minimizes the
sum of squared differences between the estimated coefficients and those predicted by the model,
suggesting steep discounting of future happiness.
12
Since the three beyond-residency anticipated-happiness questions are elicited for only the top three
residency choices, the estimates in column 5 in Tables 2 and 3 are based on a subset of the data used in
columns 1–4. When we restrict the two tables to the 1591 observations used in column 5 (Web Appendix
Tables A12 and A13), our conclusions below are unchanged.
21

Overall, the 4-period-happiness tradeoff estimates still exhibit substantial differences from the
estimates in column 1 (joint significance of differences p = 0.000 between columns 1 and 5; p =
0.08 between columns 2 and 5). Moreover, columns 3 and 4—life satisfaction and ladder—seem
in general closer to column 1 than column 5 is (both columns 3 and 4 are statistically different
from column 5, with p = 0.01 or less). Indeed, while Figure 3 reports that the median error for
the 4-period-happiness index is smaller than for happiness during residency, it is larger than for
life satisfaction and ladder.
In summary, we find limited support for the SWB-as-instantaneous-utility hypothesis;
our four-time-period anticipated-happiness index is far from matching the choice-based MRS
estimates.
Multidimensional SWB: Although much of the economics literature treats different SWB
questions as interchangeable, several recent papers mentioned in the introduction find that
different questions have different correlates and argue that they capture distinct components of
well-being. To the extent that well-being is multidimensional, a multi-question SWB index might
yield tradeoff estimates that are closer to our choice-based MRS estimates than those yielded by
any single measure.
To explore this possibility, we construct a “3-SWB-measure” index from our main three
SWB questions, and a “6-SWB-question” index by also including the three beyond-residency
happiness questions (from the 4-period-happiness index above). To maximize the predictive
power of the indices for choice, we again use as weights the coefficients estimated in first-stage
rank-ordered logit regressions of choice on the components of each index.
Columns 2 and 3 of Table 4 report our first-stage regressions. In both regressions the
coefficient on happiness during the residency is indistinguishable from zero, and is substantially
smaller than the corresponding coefficient in column 1 as well as smaller than the coefficients on
the two evaluative measures in columns 2 and 3 (life satisfaction during the residency and
ladder). In other words, once the two evaluative measures are controlled for, happiness during
the residency contributes significantly less to predicting choice. The fit of the indices in columns
2 and 3, as measured by the McKelvey and Zavoina R2, is substantially better than in column 1.
Returning to Tables 2 and 3, their columns 6 and 7 use, respectively, the orderings
implied by each of the two SWB indices as the dependent variable in the regression. We easily
reject, in both tables, joint equality of coefficients between each of the two multi-SWB
22

regressions and: choice (p = 0.000; see each table’s bottom row), happiness (p = 0.000), and, less
strongly, the 4-period-happiness index (p = 0.06 or less). Nonetheless, we cannot distinguish the
two from each other or from either life satisfaction or ladder (p-values range from 0.15 to 0.97);
indeed, in Figure 3 the four relevant graphs appear rather similar.
To summarize, we find no support for the multidimensional-SWB-as-(choice)-utility
hypothesis; our indices that incorporate multiple SWB measures not only fail to match the
choice-based MRS estimates, but also fail to do significantly better than our single-question
evaluative SWB measures. Of course, the SWB measures we include in these indices are far
from exhausting every conceivable measurable dimension (and time period) of the inputs into
preferences, and hence we cannot rule out the possibility that an index based on a sufficiently
rich set of questions might yield reliable MRS estimates—indeed, an index that captured all the
aspects that our respondents consider when making decisions should, in principle, match choice
quite closely. Nonetheless, since the SWB measures we use in this paper are modeled after those
most common in existing social surveys and applied research, our results suggest that a
straightforward extension of current practices—using a linear combination of a few commonlyused SWB measures—would not be a substantial improvement for estimating MRSs.
IV. From Slopes to Orderings: Predicting Choice Ranking from Anticipated-SWB Ranking
While our finding of substantial differences between the tradeoffs implied by widelyused SWB measures and those revealed by choices warns against using SWB data for estimating
MRSs, it leaves open the possibility of using SWB data for assessing which among a set of
options is most preferred. We begin this section by exploring the usefulness of our anticipatedSWB data in predicting pairwise choices.
Table 5 examines all possible within-respondent pairwise comparisons of residency
programs. Each row corresponds to a single SWB or attribute question (top two panels) or a
multi-question index (bottom panel). Columns 1, 2, and 3, respectively, report the percent of
cases where the program that is ranked higher in choice is ranked higher, the same, or lower than
the other program by the row’s measure. We assess each measure’s usefulness in predicting
choice with two yardsticks: the “correct-prediction rate” (another way to think of column 1) and
the “conditional correct-prediction rate” (column 4). The latter equals column 1 divided by the

23

difference between 100% and column 2; it is the share of cases where choice and a row’s
measure yield the same ranking, conditional on the measure ranking one option above the other.
As can be seen in the top panel of the table, the ladder question has the highest correctprediction rate (65%) among our three SWB and nine residency attribute questions. It also has
the highest conditional correct-prediction rate [80%]. Among the 64% of respondents in a
relationship, the next-best predictor is desirability to one’s partner (correct-prediction rate
65%)[conditional correct-prediction rate 77%]. In decreasing order of correct-prediction rate, the
other questions are: desirability of location (61%)[71%]; life satisfaction during residency
(59%)[77%]; residency prestige and status (56%)[67%]; happiness during residency
(52%)[71%]; social life during residency (52%)[65%]; future career prospects (49%)[70%];
worthwhile life during residency (44%)[73%]; stress during residency (40%)[54%]; control over
life (40%)[57%]; and anxiety during residency (38%)[53%]. Due to potential biases in survey
response such as the halo effect and cognitive dissonance discussed above (in section III.B), we
interpret these rates as upper bounds and caution against focusing on their absolute magnitudes.
However, under the assumption that such biases affect each of the twelve SWB and attribute
questions roughly equally, comparing the rates across questions is informative. While our survey
design—the similar framing and random ordering of the twelve questions (see section II.B)—is
meant to increase comparability, this assumption should be borne in mind when interpreting such
comparisons.
Regardless of whether we assess usefulness by the conditional or unconditional correctprediction rate, we find in Table 5’s top panel that the evaluative SWB questions—ladder and
life satisfaction—as well as desirability to one’s significant other, are among the single-question
measures that match choice most closely. Comparing the three SWB measures with each other,
in both columns 1 and 4 the ladder does statistically significantly better than life satisfaction,
which in turn does better than happiness (treating each pairwise program comparison as an
observation, Fisher’s exact p < 0.02 in all tests; treating each respondent’s prediction rate as an
observation, paired-t-test p < 0.06 in all tests). At the other extreme, anticipated negative
feelings—anxiety and stress during the residency—do not predict choice well (with a conditional
correct-prediction rate only slightly better than a 50-50 guess).
The middle panel of Table 5 analyzes the three beyond-residency happiness questions.
While for happiness in the first ten years of one’s career, the conditional correct-prediction rate is
24

nearly the same as for happiness during the residency [72% vs. 71%], the unconditional rate is
much lower (34% vs. 52%), reflecting many ties (column 2). For happiness measures further in
the future, both rates are lower. Therefore, these measures are of relatively limited usefulness in
our data as single-question predictors of pairwise choices.
Finally, for comparison with these single-question measures, the bottom panel of the
table examines our three multi-question indices (discussed in III.C) and two additional indices
that incorporate the nine attribute questions into the multidimensional SWB indices. The weights
in these two additional indices are estimated from regressions analogous to those in Table 4
(Web Appendix Table A8). The 4-period-happiness index’s conditional correct-prediction rate is
slightly below that of the happiness-during-the-residency question [69% vs. 71%], but, with far
fewer ties (column 2), the index’s unconditional rate is much higher (62% vs. 52%). The rest of
the indices, which are based on increasing numbers of questions (3, 6, 12, and 15), have
relatively high (and increasing) conditional correct-prediction rates [77%, 78%, 81%, and 82%,
respectively]. As including more questions in an index yields fewer ties, the indices’
unconditional rates are similar to their conditional rates and are much higher than that of any
single question (75%, 76%, 81%, and 82%, respectively).
It may seem puzzling that the evaluative SWB questions and, to an even larger extent, the
3- and 6-question indices correctly predict choice at relatively high rates, in light of our finding
that the tradeoffs they imply are so different from the MRSs implied by choice. Figure 4 presents
a simple model with two attributes that illustrates the relationship between pairwise predictions
and tradeoffs. We orient the attributes so that both are “goods”: preferences are monotonically
increasing in each. We assume that anticipated-SWB is also monotonically increasing in each
good. (This assumption is consistent with our no-sign-reversals finding in the previous section—
however, recall our caveat that that finding may be overstated.) The solid line represents an
individual’s (choice-revealed) iso-utility curve, while the dashed line represents her anticipated
iso-SWB curve; we assume these curves satisfy standard regularity conditions. The respective
slopes at choice option A differ: the SWB tradeoff does not coincide with the MRS. Indeed,
while option A is preferred to option C, SWB is higher at C than at A. In contrast, despite the
difference in slopes, option B ranks higher than option A in both choice and SWB. More
generally, SWB-based comparison of option A with any option in the unshaded areas—the
“discordance region”—would conflict with choice-based comparison; while SWB-based
25

comparison of A with an option in any of the shaded areas—the “concordance region”—would
agree with choice-based comparison. Locally, the discordance region is larger the greater is the
difference in slopes. Globally, it is always strictly limited to the northwest and southeast
quadrants—the quadrants where an alternative to A involves sacrificing one good for the other,
i.e., where neither option vector-dominates the other.
More generally, with any number of goods, the “closer” one choice option is to vectordominating the other, the more likely it is that the alternative to A lies in the concordance region.
In our data, weak vector dominance (i.e., weak inequality component by component) occurs in
16% of binary comparisons—a high percentage relative to what might be expected with nine
independently and symmetrically distributed attributes (

, assuming no ties). Indeed, with

the exception of stress and anxiety during residency, within-respondent attribute ratings are
generally moderately positively correlated across residencies (Web Appendix Table A9). These
positive correlations may help explain why we find reasonably high rates of concordance in spite
of large differences in tradeoffs (i.e., in slopes).13
The empirical settings where SWB comparisons would be most useful for drawing
inferences about the preference ranking of options, however, are settings that involve sacrificing
some goods for others. For example, Gruber and Mullainathan (2005) conduct SWB
comparisons among smokers who face higher versus lower cigarette taxes—a setting that
involves an inherent tradeoff between health and wealth, and where SWB data could be
particularly attractive because, in the presence of self-control problems, choices may not reveal
preferences. In such no-vector-dominance settings, the model above does not make a clear
prediction on whether preference and SWB would yield the same ranking. To answer this
question, setting-specific empirical evidence of the sort we collect in this paper would be needed.
Due to the inherent difficulty of observing choice and anticipated SWB in many of the
situations where SWB data might be useful, Benjamin, Heffetz, Kimball, and Rees-Jones (2012)
13

Another implication of this model is that, under reasonable assumptions regarding the distribution from
which the alternative to A is drawn, when the alternative lies on a more distant (i.e., much higher or much
lower) iso-utility curve, it is more likely to lie in the concordance region. In Web Appendix Tables A14–
A16 we report three additional versions of Table 5, restricting the underlying data to three respective
subsets of pairwise program comparisons: only first- versus second-, only first- versus third-, and only
first- versus fourth-ranked programs. We find, as expected, that virtually all of our measures are better
predictors of choice as the ranking difference increases. For example, ladder’s conditional correctprediction rate increases from 78% to 87% to 90%.
26

study hypothetical choices and anticipated SWB in thirteen settings designed to have no vector
dominance. They find an overall correct-prediction rate of 83%, with wide variation across
choice settings, and they identify features of the settings that are associated with higher rates.
Evidence from more settings is needed before we would be confident in drawing generalizations
regarding the concordance rate between anticipated-SWB rankings and choice rankings.
V. Discussion and Concluding Remarks
Scholars and lay people alike have long been fascinated by happiness and its correlates.
By regressing subjective well-being (SWB) measures on bundles of non-market goods and
examining coefficient ratios, researchers have been able to compare in common units the
associations between SWB measures and a wide variety of goods. Such comparisons have
generated a large and growing number of interesting findings. To what extent do these
coefficient ratios line up with economists’ notion of revealed-preference marginal rates of
substitution?
Our main finding is that, among the medical students in our sample, the MRSs of
residency program attributes implied by their preference rankings are far from equal to the
tradeoffs implied by their anticipated-SWB responses—regardless of whether we use (1)
a happiness measure, (2) a life satisfaction measure, (3) a ladder measure, (4) a simple
combination of such measures, or (5) a simple combination of anticipated happiness over the
near and distant future. At the same time (and perhaps, at least partially, due to our survey
design), we find no sign reversals between choice and our SWB measures in their association
with any of the nine attributes; we find relatively high correlations across the nine attributes
between their choice-regression and SWB-regression coefficients; and we find relatively high
choice-SWB concordance rates in binary residency comparisons.
Our evidence relates choice to anticipated SWB, not to the realized SWB that individuals
will end up experiencing. Anticipated SWB is directly relevant for assessing to what extent SWB
measures accurately summarize the goals people aim to achieve when making choices. Yet for
assessing how well MRSs are aligned with coefficient ratios from happiness regressions, it is
experienced-SWB tradeoffs that are relevant. It is logically possible that the differences between
experienced-SWB and choice tradeoffs are smaller than the differences we find between
anticipated-SWB and choice tradeoffs. However, this possibility would require that while
27

individuals deliberately deviate, at the moment of making the choice, from choosing what they
believe would maximize their SWB, their experienced SWB systematically differs from their
anticipated SWB in a way that happens to partially (or fully) cancel out those deviations. We
have assumed away this possibility because we find it hard to think of a plausible theory that
would generate such behavior. Moreover, available evidence on systematic anticipated-vs.experienced-SWB differences suggests that far from canceling out the choice-vs.-anticipatedSWB deviations we find, they may in fact exacerbate the deviations: for example, while we find
that anticipated quality of social life is more strongly associated with anticipated happiness than
with choice, Dunn, Wilson, and Gilbert (2003) find that quality of social life is more strongly
associated with experienced happiness than with anticipated happiness.
While we focus on the question of how SWB tradeoffs relate to choice tradeoffs, our
findings could also be viewed as informative regarding another question of broad interest to
users of SWB data, namely, how survey respondents interpret SWB questions. This latter
question can be viewed as a “dual” to the former if one imagines an idealized (or a yet-unfound)
anticipated-SWB-type measure eliciting responses that coincided with a utility function
representing preferences. The differences we find between anticipated-SWB and choice could
then be viewed as revealing differences between widely used SWB measures and such an
idealized SWB measure. From this perspective, relative to the idealized benchmark, the widely
used SWB measures we study seem to be interpreted by our respondents as placing more weight
on the importance of social life and life seeming worthwhile during the residency, and less
weight on residency prestige-and-status and desirability for significant other.
Of course, our sample of medical students is a convenience sample, our evidence is
limited to the specific context of residency choice, and the nine residency attributes that
constitute our bundle of goods are far from exhaustive. Nonetheless, we view our real-choice
field evidence as an important advance over and complement to existing evidence from prior
work. When we consider them together, some common themes emerge across the findings in this
paper and those in previous work that studies hypothetical choices in a range of realistic
scenarios (Benjamin, Heffetz, Kimball, and Rees-Jones, 2012; henceforth BHKR) and abstract
scenarios (Benjamin, Heffetz, Kimball, and Szembrot, forthcoming; henceforth BHKS). We
highlight four such themes, emphasizing evidence that bears on the question of their
generalizability.
28

First, our main conclusion that anticipated-SWB tradeoffs differ from choice MRSs is
consistent with results from the earlier papers: attributes of the options help to predict
hypothetical choices, controlling for anticipated SWB. In BHKR, this result is especially strong
in scenarios designed to be representative of typical important decisions facing a sample of
undergraduate students—scenarios that may have parallels with the important-life-decision
setting in the present paper—and is weak in a scenario about consuming an apple vs. an
orange—the type of minor decision that possibly comprises most decisions in life.
Second, as mentioned above, our finding of high concordance rates between choice and
anticipated-SWB in binary comparisons is similar to BHKR’s finding. Moreover, in BHKR the
high concordance rates are not easily explained by the survey having elicited both choice and
anticipated SWB: BHKR explore this issue with a between-subjects version of the survey, where
half the sample is asked only about choice and the other half is asked only about anticipated
SWB.
Third, all three papers conclude that evaluative SWB measures are on average closer to
choice than affective happiness measures. In BHKR, this result holds in some scenarios more
than in others, but further evidence is needed before we feel comfortable drawing general
conclusions by type of setting. (Also notice that anticipated affective measures may feel more
evaluative than their experienced counterparts due to the cognitive process involved in
prediction; while this may make all of our anticipated SWB measures more alike, we still find
differences between anticipated affective and anticipated evaluative measures.) Comparing
across evaluative measures, in the present paper we cannot statistically distinguish the tradeoffs
implied by the ladder from those implied by life satisfaction during residency (Table 3), but the
ladder does better in the pairwise predictions of choice (Table 5).14
Finally, all three papers find that measures of family well-being—family happiness (in
the previous work) and residency desirability to one’s spouse or significant other (in the present
paper)—are among the strongest predictors of choice. However, in BHKR this result varies
substantially across scenarios: it is strong in human-capital-investment scenarios with parallels to
14

However, BHKS find that, in contrast to other evaluative measures, the ladder question predicts
hypothetical choice less well than many other measures they study, in regressions that control for other
measures. The potential discrepancy between that finding and the finding reported here makes us
reluctant to draw a strong conclusion regarding the ladder question per se. (BHKR examine life
satisfaction and, to a lesser extent, happiness with life as a whole as their evaluative measures and do not
study the ladder measure.)
29

the present paper’s setting (for example, choosing between attending a more fun and social
college vs. a highly selective one, and between an interesting summer internship vs. a boring but
career-advancing one), and it disappears in personal consumption decisions (for example,
choosing between attending a birthday vs. a concert, and between consuming an apple vs. an
orange).
To the extent that it generalizes to a particular setting of interest, each of these findings
has practical implications for empirical researchers. We list four such implications, in respective
order paralleling the four themes above. First, SWB tradeoffs should not be interpreted as MRSs,
and vice versa. Second, binary SWB rankings may in some settings be highly predictive of
choice rankings—even when SWB tradeoffs are far from MRSs. This of course also means that
high choice-SWB concordance in pairwise comparisons should not be interpreted as implying
that SWB data and choice data would yield the same tradeoffs. Third, evaluative SWB measures
may more reliably align with choice than affective happiness measures—even when happiness is
integrated over several time periods. Finally, measures of family SWB may in some settings
align with choice at least as reliably as evaluative measures of own SWB. Such family-SWB
measures are not commonly used in empirical applications but warrant exploration. Indeed, in
their exploration of novel question wordings, BHKS find that measures of “the happiness of your
family” and “the overall well-being of you and your family” may align with hypothetical choice
more closely than widely-used evaluative measures.
While we hope that researchers find these practical implications useful, we also caution
that using SWB data in empirical work typically requires additional assumptions, often strong
ones—for example, about interpersonal comparability of SWB survey responses (see, e.g.,
Adler, 2013)—that we do not evaluate in this paper.
From a theoretical perspective, if different choice consequences are all viewed as inputs
into (choice-revealed) preferences, then it could be argued that the specific consequences
captured by traditional SWB measures should not be treated differently a priori from other
choice consequences. From this point of view, rather than regressing SWB on other goods,
estimating preferences requires regressing choice on a bundle that includes SWB measures
together with those other goods. As mentioned above, we run such regressions in Web Appendix
Table A8; BHKR and BHKS run them with hypothetical choice. From this theoretical
perspective, the findings from this and those papers would suggest that while the well-being
30

aspects captured by traditional SWB measures are among the most important inputs into
preferences, they are not the only important inputs.
If tradeoffs estimated from SWB data differ from MRSs, how should they be interpreted
from a preference point of view? In one possible interpretation, SWB tradeoffs may be viewed as
technical rates of substitution (TRSs) that characterize the production function for SWB (as in
Kimball and Willis, 2006, and Becker and Rayo, 2008). Just as it is valuable for economists and
policymakers to estimate TRSs for other important preference inputs such as health, estimates of
TRSs for subjective well-being have generated and will likely continue to generate valuable
insights into the production of subjective well-being.
References
Adler, Matthew D. 2013. “Happiness Surveys and Public Policy: What’s the Use?” Duke Law
Journal, 62: 1509–1601.
Becker, Gary S., and Luis Rayo. 2008. “Comment on ‘Economic growth and subjective wellbeing: Reassessing the Easterlin Paradox’ by Betsey Stevenson and Justin Wolfers.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring: 88-95.
Beggs, S., S. Cardell, and J. Hausman. 1981. “Assessing the Potential Demand for Electric
Cars.” Journal of Econometrics, 16: 1–19.
Benjamin, Daniel J., Ori Heffetz, Miles S. Kimball, and Alex Rees-Jones. 2012. “What Do
You Think Would Make You Happier? What Do You Think You Would Choose?”
American Economic Review, 102(5): 2083–2110.
Benjamin, Daniel J., Ori Heffetz, Miles S. Kimball, and Nichole Szembrot. Forthcoming.
“Beyond Happiness and Satisfaction: Toward Well-Being Indices Based on Stated
Preference.” American Economic Review.
Clark, Andrew, Paul Fritters and Michael Shields. 2008. “Relative Income, Happiness and
Utility: An Explanation for the Easterlin Paradox and Other Puzzles.” Journal of
Economic Literature, 46(1): 95–144.
Dunn, Elizabeth W., Timothy D. Wilson and Daniel T. Gilbert. 2003. “Location, Location,
Location: The Misprediction of Satisfaction in Housing Lotteries.” Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(11): 1421–1432.
31

Deaton, Angus, Jane Fortson, and Robert Tortora. 2010. “Life (Evaluation), HIV/AIDS, and
Death in Africa.” In International Differences in Well-Being, edited by Ed Diener, John
Helliwell, and Daniel Kahneman, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 105–136.
Di Tella, Rafael, Robert J. MacCulloch, and Andrew J. Oswald. 2001. “Preferences over
Inflation and Unemployment: Evidence from Surveys of Happiness.” American
Economic Review, 91(1): 335–341.
Dolan, Paul, and Robert Metcalfe. 2008. “Comparing Willingness-To-Pay and Subjective
Well-Being in the Context of Non-Market Goods.” CEP Discussion Paper No 890.
Gale, David, and Lloyd Shapley. 1962. “College Admissions and the Stability of Marriage.”
American Mathematical Monthly, 69: 9–15.
Gilbert, Daniel. 2006. Stumbling on Happiness. New York: Knopf.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2005. “Do Cigarette Taxes Make Smokers
Happier?” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 5(1).
Hsee, Christopher K. 1999. “Value-Seeking and Prediction-Decision Inconsistency: Why Don’t
People Take What They Predict They’ll Like the Most?” Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 6(4): 555–561.
Hsee, Christopher K., Reid Hastie, and Jingqiu Chen. 2008. “Hedonomics: Bridging
Decision Research With Happiness Research.” Perspectives on Psychological Science,
3(3): 224–243.
Hsee, Christopher K., Jiao Zhang, Fang Yu, and Yiheng Xi. 2003. “Lay Rationalism and
Inconsistency Between Predicted Experience and Decision.” Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 16: 257–272.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Angus S. Deaton. 2010. “High Income Improves Evaluation of Life
but not Emotional Well-Being.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
107(38): 16489–16493.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Jackie Snell. 1992. “Predict a Changing Taste: Do People Know What
They Will Like?” Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 5: 187–200.
Kahneman, Daniel, Peter P. Wakker, and Rakesh K. Sarin. 1997. “Back to Bentham?
Explorations of Experienced Utility.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2): 375-405.
Kimball, Miles, and Robert Willis. 2006. “Utility and Happiness.” Unpublished, University of
Michigan.
32

Levinson, Arik. 2012. “Valuing Public Goods Using Happiness Data: The Case of Air Quality.”
Journal of Public Economics, 96: 869–880.
Loewenstein, George, Ted O’Donoghue, and Matthew Rabin. 2003. “Projection Bias in
Predicting Future Utility.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4): 1209–48.
Ludwig, Jens, Greg J. Duncan, Lisa A. Gennetian, Lawrence F. Katz, Ronald C. Kessler,
Jeffrey R. Kling, and Lisa Sonbonmatsu. 2012. “Neighborhood Effects on the LongTerm Well-Being of Low-Income Adults.” Science, 337: 1505–1510.
Luechinger, Simon, and Paul A. Raschky. 2009. “Valuing Flood Disasters Using the Life
Satisfaction Approach.” Journal of Public Economics, 93: 620–633.
Luttmer, Erzo. 2005. “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-being.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 120(3): 963–1002.
McKelvey, Richard, and William Zavoina. 1975. “A Statistical Model for the Analysis of
Ordinal Level Dependent Variables.” Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 4: 103–120.
National Resident Matching Program. 2012. “National Resident Matching Program, Results
and Data: 2012 Main Residency Match℠.” National Resident Matching Program,
Washington, DC.
Oswald, Andrew, and Nattavudh Powdthavee. 2008. “Death, Happiness, and the Calculation
of Compensatory Damages,” Journal of Legal Studies, 37(S2): S217-S252.
Roth, Alvin, and Elliot Peranson. 1999. “The Redesign of the Matching Market for American
Physicians: Some Engineering Aspects of Economic Design.” American Economic
Review, 89(4): 748-780.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., Amartya Sen, and Jean-Paul Fitoussi. 2009. Report by the Commission on
the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress. www.stiglitz-senfitoussi.fr
Tversky, Amos, and Dale Griffin. 1991. “Endowments and Contrast in Judgments of WellBeing.” In Strategy and Choice, ed. Richard J. Zeckhauser. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Reprinted in Choices, Values, and Frames, ed. Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Van den Berg, Barnard, and Ada Ferrer-i-Carbonell. 2007. “Monetary Valuation of Informal
Care: The Well-Being Valuation Method.” Health Economics, 16: 1227–1244.
Van Praag, Bernard, and Barbara Baarsma. 2005. “Using Happiness Surveys to Value
33

Intangibles: The Case of Airport Noise.” Economic Journal, 115(500): 224–246.

34

Table 1: Main SWB and Residency Attribute Survey Questions
Variable label

Question prompt
(beginning “On a scale from 1 to 100, …”)

Happiness during residency

…how happy do you think you would feel on a
typical day during this residency?

Life satisfaction during residency

…how satisfied do you think you would be with
your life as a whole while attending this residency?

Ladder

…where 1 is “worst possible life for you” and 100
is “best possible life for you” where do you think
the residency would put you?

Residency prestige and status

…how would you rate the prestige and status
associated with this residency?

Social life during residency

…what would you expect the quality of your social
life to be during this residency?

Desirability of location

…taking into account city quality and access to
family and friends, how desirable do you find the
location of this residency?

Anxiety during residency

…how anxious do you think you would feel on a
typical day during this residency?

Worthwhile life during residency

…to what extent do you think your life would
seem worthwhile during this residency?

Stress during residency

…how stressed do you think you would feel on a
typical day during this residency?

Future career prospects

…how would you rate your future career prospects
and future employment opportunities if you get
matched with this residency?

Control over life

…how do you expect this residency to affect your
control over your life?

Desirable for significant other

…how desirable is this residency for your spouse
or significant other?

35

Table 2: Rank-Ordered Logit Estimates: Choice vs. Anticipated SWB
(1)
Choice

(2)
Happiness
during
residency

(3)
Life
satisfaction
during
residency

(4)
Ladder

(5)
4-periodhappiness
index

(6)
3-SWBmeasure
index

(7)
6-SWBquestion
index

Residency
prestige and status

2.5***
(0.3)

0.0
(0.3)

0.7*
(0.3)

0.9**
(0.4)

0.3
(0.4)

0.8**
(0.3)

1.1**
(0.4)

Social life during
residency

1.6***
(0.3)

3.3***
(0.4)

2.7***
(0.4)

3.2***
(0.4)

2.6***
(0.4)

3.6***
(0.3)

3.5***
(0.5)

Desirability of
location

1.7***
(0.2)

0.4*
(0.2)

1.7***
(0.3)

1.9***
(0.3)

0.5*
(0.3)

1.9***
(0.2)

1.6***
(0.3)

Anxiety during
residency

-0.3
(0.3)

-1.3***
(0.3)

-0.5
(0.4)

-0.8**
(0.3)

-1.8***
(0.4)

-0.9***
(0.3)

-1.4***
(0.4)

4.4***
(0.5)

6.3***
(0.6)

7.0***
(0.6)

6.4***
(0.6)

5.9***
(0.7)

6.5***
(0.6)

6.9***
(0.8)

Stress during
residency

-0.1
(0.3)

-1.0***
(0.4)

-0.7**
(0.4)

-0.6*
(0.3)

0.5
(0.4)

-0.7**
(0.3)

0.0
(0.4)

Future career
prospects

3.2***
(0.5)

0.9*
(0.5)

1.8***
(0.5)

3.0***
(0.5)

1.2**
(0.6)

2.6***
(0.5)

2.8***
(0.7)

Control over life

0.4
(0.3)

0.9**
(0.3)

0.4
(0.3)

0.4
(0.3)

1.0**
(0.4)

0.4
(0.3)

1.5***
(0.4)

Desirable for
significant other
# Observations

2.6***
(0.3)
2169

0.5*
(0.3)
2167

0.7***
(0.3)
2169

1.0***
(0.3)
2168

0.3
(0.3)
1591

1.2***
(0.2)
2166

0.9***
(0.3)
1590

# Students

557

557

557

557

540

557

540

McKelvey &
Zavoina R2,
within variance
only

0.46

0.34

0.42

0.46

0.25

0.48

0.42

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

Worthwhile life
during residency

Joint significance
of differences
with choice
coefficients

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Rank-ordered logit regressions of either choice (column 1) or a SWB measure (columns 2–7)
on residency attributes. Only ordinal information on the dependent variables is used. Columns 2–4 use the ordinal rankings implied by
the main three SWB measures. Columns 5–7 use the ordinal rankings implied by an optimal linear utility index, created by a firststage rank-ordered logit regression of choice on the index components (reported in Table 4). All attribute ratings are divided by 100
before being included in the regression. For the 35% of students who report being single, “Desirable for significant other” is set to a
constant (since identification is within-subject, its value is irrelevant). Joint significance of the differences with choice coefficients
(bottom row): p-value from a Wald test of the joint equality of all coefficients in the column with all coefficients in the choice column.
* p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01

36

Table 3: Tradeoff Estimates: Choice vs. Anticipated SWB
(1)
Choice

(2)
Happiness
during
residency

(3)
Life
satisfaction
during
residency

(4)
Ladder

(5)
4-periodhappiness
index

(6)
3-SWBmeasure
index

(7)
6-SWBquestion
index

Residency
prestige and status

1.4***
(0.2)

0.0
(0.2)

0.4*
(0.2)

0.4**
(0.2)

0.2
(0.3)

0.4**
(0.2)

0.5**
(0.2)

Social life during
residency

0.8***
(0.2)

2.0***
(0.2)

1.5***
(0.2)

1.6***
(0.2)

1.7***
(0.3)

1.7***
(0.2)

1.6***
(0.2)

Desirability of
location

0.9***
(0.1)

0.3*
(0.2)

1.0***
(0.1)

0.9***
(0.1)

0.3*
(0.2)

0.9***
(0.1)

0.7***
(0.1)

Anxiety during
residency

-0.1
(0.2)

-0.8***
(0.2)

-0.3
(0.2)

-0.4**
(0.2)

-1.1***
(0.2)

-0.4***
(0.2)

-0.6***
(0.2)

2.4***
(0.2)

3.9***
(0.3)

3.9***
(0.3)

3.2***
(0.3)

3.7***
(0.4)

3.1***
(0.2)

3.2***
(0.3)

Stress during
residency

-0.1
(0.2)

-0.6***
(0.2)

-0.4**
(0.2)

-0.3*
(0.2)

0.3
(0.3)

-0.3**
(0.2)

0.0
(0.2)

Future career
prospects

1.7***
(0.3)

0.5*
(0.3)

1.0***
(0.3)

1.5***
(0.3)

0.8**
(0.4)

1.3***
(0.2)

1.3***
(0.3)

Control over life

0.2
(0.2)

0.5***
(0.2)

0.2
(0.2)

0.2
(0.2)

0.6**
(0.3)

0.2
(0.1)

0.7***
(0.2)

Desirable for
significant other
# Observations

1.4***
(0.1)
2169

0.3*
(0.2)
2167

0.4***
(0.1)
2169

0.5***
(0.1)
2168

0.2
(0.2)
1591

0.6***
(0.1)
2166

0.4***
(0.1)
1590

557

557

557

557

540

557

540

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

Worthwhile life
during residency

# Students
Joint significance
of differences
with choice
coefficients

Notes: Delta-method standard errors in parentheses. Entries are coefficients from Table 2, normalized by taking their ratio
to the average absolute value of the nine coefficients in their Table 2 column. Joint significance of the differences with
choice entries (bottom row): p-value from a Wald test of the joint equality of all entries in the column with all entries in
the choice column. * p < .1, ** p < .05, *** p < .01

37

Table 4: Weight Estimates for Multi-Question Indices

Happiness during residency

(1)
Choice
4.5***
(0.5)

(2)
Choice
0.6
(0.4)

(3)
Choice
0.9
(0.6)

Happiness in first 10 years

4.6***
(0.8)

3.5***
(0.9)

Happiness in rest of career

2.1**
(0.9)

2.4***
(0.9)

Happiness after retirement

1.2
(0.8)

2.0**
(0.9)

Life satisfaction during residency

4.4***
(0.5)

3.9***
(0.7)

Ladder
1609

5.5***
(0.4)
2192

5.4***
(0.6)
1607

544

561

544

0.17

0.37

0.37

# Observations
# Students
2

McKelvey & Zavoina R , within variance only

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Rank-ordered logit regressions of choice on SWB measures. All aspect ratings are
divided by 100 prior to inclusion in the regressions. Since future happiness measures are only elicited for three of the four
ranked residencies, less data are available for conducting these regressions relative to those with only the primary SWB
questions. However, restricting all three regressions to the same sample of 1607 observations has only minor impact on
the coefficient estimates (although column 2’s R2 decreases to 0.32); see Web Appendix Table A10. * p < .1, ** p < .05,
*** p < .01

38

Table 5: Predicting Binary Choice from Anticipated-SWB and Attribute Questions
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Preferred

The two

Preferred

Conditional correct-

# Pairwise

program rates

programs have

program rates

prediction rate

program

higher

same rating

lower

) comparisons

(

(Correctprediction rate)
Happiness during residency

52%

27%

21%

71%

3240

Life satisfaction during residency

59%

23%

18%

77%

3244

Ladder

65%

18%

17%

80%

3245

Residency prestige and status

56%

16%

28%

67%

3244

Social life during residency

52%

20%

28%

65%

3247

Desirability of location

61%

14%

25%

71%

3241

Anxiety during residency

38%

29%

33%

53%

3236

Worthwhile life during residency

44%

40%

16%

73%

3235

Stress during residency

40%

26%

34%

54%

3236

Future career prospects

49%

30%

21%

70%

3247

Control over life

40%

30%

30%

57%

3235

Desirable for significant other

65%

16%

19%

77%

2087

Average happiness in first 10 years

34%

53%

13%

72%

1603

Average happiness in rest of career

28%

56%

16%

64%

1603

Average happiness after retirement

22%

64%

14%

62%

1605

4-period-happiness index

62%

10%

28%

69%

1592

3-SWB-measure index

75%

3%

22%

77%

3233

6-SWB-question index

76%

2%

22%

78%

1588

81%

0%

19%

81%

3179

82%

0%

18%

82%

1566

12-question index
(3 SWB + 9 attribute)
15-question index
(6 SWB + 9 attribute)

Notes: Based on only the ordinal ranking of the variable in each row. All six binary comparisons among the top four
programs are considered. Columns 1–3 sum to 100% in each row. Column 4 reports the correct prediction rate in cases
where a prediction is made; that is, excluding cases of indifference (column 2). Column 5 reports sample size.

39

Figure 1: Survey Response Timeline

Notes: Frequency distribution of survey responses by date. Each bar corresponds to one day. NRMP
submission and 1st-wave data are for the 561 respondents in our main sample (with the exception that five
respondents did not report their date of NRMP submission, and two reported invalid dates). 2nd-wave data
are for the 131 respondents in the main sample who completed the repeat survey. The 1st-wave responses
entered on February 22nd occurred after 9pm EST, the deadline for NRMP submission. On that date,
where bars overlap, they are not stacked, and the longer bar continues behind the shorter bar.

40

Figure 2: Distributions of Variables by Program Rank

Notes: Kernel density plots of residency attributes by preference order. (Epanechnikov; Bandwidth 5.)
Based on the 561 respondents in the main sample.
41

Figure 3: Tradeoff Estimates: Choice vs. Anticipated SWB

Notes: Based on Table 3 estimates. Each graph presents a comparison of one SWB measure (columns 2–
7 of Table 3) to choice (column 1 of Table 3). Each point represents one of the nine attributes included in
the regressions, and its x- and y-coordinates correspond to the normalized choice and SWB coefficients,
respectively. 95% confidence intervals are represented by the horizontal and vertical capped bars. The
dashed lines demarcate the boundaries outside of which the normalized choice and SWB coefficients
differ by more than a factor of two. See section III.A for discussion of the prediction-error metrics.

42

Figure 4: Implications of Iso-Utility and Iso-SWB Curves for Ordinal Prediction

Notes: This figure illustrates the implications of different tradeoffs in choice-utility and anticipated SWB
for binary comparisons. The solid line represents an individual’s iso-utility curve, while the dashed line
represents her iso-SWB curve. Comparing option A to options in any of the shaded areas (for example,
option B), the iso-utility and iso-SWB curves imply the same binary ordering. Comparing option A to
options in the unshaded areas, the curves imply different orderings (option C, for example, has higher
SWB but is less preferred).

43

