NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PAY-FOR-PERFORMANCE INCENTIVES IN LOW- AND MIDDLE-INCOME COUNTRY
HEALTH PROGRAMS
Grant Miller
Kimberly Singer Babiarz
Working Paper 18932
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18932
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013

We are grateful to the National Institutes of Health/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Grant
Number R01HL106023 for support. This paper is forthcoming in the Elsevier Encyclopedia of Health
Economics. We thank Sebastian Bauhoff, Katherine Donato, April Harding, Jerry La Forgia, Manoj
Mohanan, Sean Sylvia, and Marcos Vera-Hernández for helpful discussions and comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Grant Miller and Kimberly Singer Babiarz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Pay-for-Performance Incentives in Low- and Middle-Income Country Health Programs
Grant Miller and Kimberly Singer Babiarz
NBER Working Paper No. 18932
April 2013, Revised April 2013
JEL No. H51,I12,O12,O17,Z18
ABSTRACT
This chapter surveys experience with performance pay in developing country health programs. In
doing so, it focuses on four key conceptual issues: (1) What to reward, (2) Who to reward, (3) How
to reward, and (4) What unintended consequences might performance incentives create. We highlight
that the use of performance pay has outpaced growth in corresponding empirical evidence. Moreover,
very little research on performance incentives focuses on the underlying conceptual issues that we
outline. We consider these to be important constraints to the design of better performance incentives
in low- and middle-income country health programs.
Grant Miller
CHP/PCOR
Stanford University
117 Encina Commons
Stanford, CA 94305-6019
and NBER
ngmiller@stanford.edu
Kimberly Singer Babiarz
CHP/PCOR
117 Encina Commons
Stanford, CA 94305
babiarz@stanford.edu

1. Introduction
Poor performance of health care providers plagues the delivery of health services in many
low- and middle-income countries (Banerjee, Deaton, and Duflo 2004; Das, Hammer, and
Leonard 2008; Berendes et al. 2011). The underlying reasons are complex and incompletely
understood, but poor performance is not simply due to inadequate training or deficiencies in
provider knowledge.
Instead, a growing body of evidence documents substantial deficits in provider effort.
One striking example is the high absenteeism rates (as high as 75%) among health professionals
documented in a number of studies (Chaudhury and Hammer 2003; Chaudhury et al. 2006;
Lewis 2006). When providers are present, a sizeable “know-do” gap (or failure to do in practice
what a provider knows to do in principle) also contributes to low quality medical care (Das and
Hammer 2004; Alcazar et al. 2006; Chaudhury et al. 2006; Das and Hammer 2007; Das et al.
2012). Provider effort may also not focus directly on improving health – for example, health
professionals may provide unnecessary services that are not medically appropriate (intravenous
glucose drips to create the illusion of therapeutic effectiveness, for example) (Phadke 1998;
Kremer 2002; Blumenthal and Hsiao 2005; Bloom et al. 2006). Moreover, even when providers
exert appropriate effort during a clinical encounter, they may do little to promote the health of
their patients outside of the encounter (through prevention and outreach activities, for example)
(Eichler and Levine 2009).
One might expect that given weaker market incentives, these problems would be more
prevalent in public sector health service delivery. However, sub-optimal provider effort can be
sustained in equilibrium in all sectors, including private practice, due to well-known market
failures. For example, a well-established literature demonstrates that asymmetric information

2

limits the ability of patients and the lay-public to observe provider effort or judge medical care
quality (Arrow 1963; Holmstrom and Hart 1987; McGuire 2000). As a result, patients are
unable to penalize under-performing providers through their choices. These problems are
compounded by market conditions and rigidities common in low- and middle-income countries,
including inadequate regulatory processes (World Health Organization 2003) and a relatively
large government role in financing and delivering health services (given more prevalent
infectious diseases and larger positive externalities in service delivery, for example).
To better align provider incentives with patient and population welfare (or health – one
argument of welfare), “pay-for-performance” schemes have become increasingly common in
developing country health service delivery.1 In principle, the idea is straightforward: drawing on
the logic of performance pay in human resource management (Lazear 1995; Hall and Liebman
1998; Lazear 2000), this approach rewards providers directly for achieving pre-specified
performance targets related to health. Use of performance incentives in wealthy countries began
in earnest during the 1990s with programs that rewarded both process indicators and measures of
clinical quality (Rosenthal et al. 2004). Examples of performance targets include immunization
rates (Fairbrother et al. 1999; Fairbrother et al. 2001); disease screening (Rosenthal et al. 2005);
adherence to clinical guidelines (Roski et al. 2003); and the adoption of case management
processes, physician reminder systems, and disease registry systems. The UK went further with
the National Health Service’s Quality and Outcomes Framework, tying physician practice
bonuses to a comprehensive range of quality indicators (Roland 2004; Gravelle, Sutton, and Ma

1

A variety of terms have been used interchangeably for pay-for-performance (P4P) incentives, including
performance-based incentives (PBI), performance-based pay (PBP), and performance pay (PP). Beyond aligning
provider incentives with patient and population health, there are other rationales for performance pay, including
reducing the regulatory resources and effort otherwise required for provider monitoring (Lewis and Gunilla 2009).

3

2007). Performance pay in low- and middle-income country health programs emerged in the late
1990s (Franco, Bennett, and Kanfer 2002), and its use has grown rapidly since then.
In practice, pay-for-performance contracts are complex and fraught both with difficult
trade-offs and with the possibility of ‘multitasking’ and other unintended consequences
(Holmstrom and Milgrom 1991; Petersen et al. 2006; Rosenthal and Frank 2006; Mannion and
Davies 2008). This chapter outlines key conceptual issues in the design of pay-for-performance
contracts and summarizes existing empirical evidence related to each. In doing so, it focuses on
four key conceptual issues: (1) What to reward, (2) Who to reward, (3) How to reward, and (4)
What perverse incentives might performance rewards create. We conclude by highlighting
important areas for future research and by noting the overall lack of evidence on many key
aspects of incentive design in the health sector.

2. What to Reward
If “you get what you pay for,” then it presumably follows that one should pay for what
one ultimately wants (Cutler 2005). If a health program’s primary objective is good patient or
population health outcomes, it would seem natural for performance incentives to reward good
health or health improvement directly rather than the use of health services or other health inputs.
Rewarding health outcomes rather than health input use not only creates strong incentives for
providers to exert effort, but it can also create incentives for providers to innovate in developing
new, context-appropriate delivery strategies. Put differently, rather than tying rewards to
prescriptive algorithms for service provision (often developed by those unfamiliar with local
conditions), rewarding good health outcomes encourages providers to use their local knowledge
creatively in designing new delivery approaches to maximize contracted health outcomes.

4

In practice, however, very few pay-for-performance schemes have rewarded good health.
At the time of writing this review, we are aware of only two: performance incentives for primary
school principals in rural China to reduce student anemia (Miller et al. 2012) and incentives for
Indian day care workers in urban slums to improve anthropometric indicators of malnutrition
among enrolled children (Singh 2011).2 In the Chinese study, researchers measured student
hemoglobin concentrations at the beginning of an academic year, issued incentive contracts
rewarding anemia reduction to principals shortly afterwards, and measured student hemoglobin
concentrations again at the end of the school year. School principals responded creatively,
persuading parents to change their children’s diets at home as well as providing micronutrient
supplementation at school, and anemia prevalence fell by roughly 25%. In the Indian study,
researchers measured child anthropometrics at day care facilities, issued incentive contracts
rewarding providers for each child with an improved malnutrition score, and repeated
anthropometric measurement three months later. In response, day care workers visited mothers’
homes and promoted the use of nutritious recipe booklets; malnutrition indicators declined by
about 6%.
The fact that so few pay-for-performance programs reward health outcomes may reflect
important limitations to doing so that arise in practice. Instead, performance incentives generally
reward the use of pre-specified health inputs. In the following sections, we discuss shortcomings
and trade-offs inherent in incentive contracts that reward health outcomes.
Share of Variation in Contracted Outcome under Provider Control
One drawback to rewarding good health is that even when exerting optimal effort, a
relatively small amount of variation in health outcomes may be under the control of providers.
2

Leonard (2003) studies traditional healers who voluntarily offer payment contracts to patients contingent on health
outcomes in Cameroon, Tanzania, and Ethiopia is a related example.

5

For illustration, consider the case of neonatal survival. Maternal health behaviors during
pregnancy are key determinants of birth weight, and low birth weight is a leading risk factor for
neonatal death (McCormick 1985). Although rewarding maternity care providers for neonatal
survival could in theory motivate them to engage expectant mothers from an early stage of their
pregnancy, providers may be unlikely to succeed or may believe a priori that they will be unable
to change maternal health behaviors. Patients or community members may also respond to
changes in provider behavior caused by performance incentives; in some cases, these responses
may undermine provider actions. For example if educators or health providers take direct action
to improve nutrition because of performance incentives, parents may respond by reducing
children's dietary quality at home. In both cases, if providers do not believe that their effort will
ultimately be rewarded, they may simply not respond to the performance incentive.
A clear (and common) alternative is to reward the use of health services and inputs,
particularly those that are relatively sensitive to provider effort.3 Providers generally have
greater influence on service use than health outcomes, and even more so on quality of clinical
care. In several rigorous studies of pay-for-performance incentives in Rwanda, providers were
rewarded for prenatal care visits, immunizations among children and pregnant women,
institutional deliveries, HIV testing, and a wide range of service quality indicators. Incentive
payments were offered for each service provided and were weighted using overall quality scores.
This set of incentives motivated providers both to increase delivery of contracted services and to
raise overall quality of care. Researchers found that the program increased institutional delivery
rates by 23% and preventive service use among children under age 4 by 25-50%, and it also

3

Beyond trade-offs in rewarding health input use vs. health outputs, optimal contract design more generally requires
information about the cost of provider effort, the productivity of provider effort, and the utility functions of both
providers and the contracting ‘principal’ (Laffont and Tirole 1993; Salanie 2005).

6

reduced the “know-do” gap by 20% (Basinga et al. 2011; Gertler and Vermeersch 2012) .
Although not directly contracted, infant weight-for-age and child (2-4 year old) height-for-age
rose by roughly 0.5 and .25 standard deviations, respectively. The incentives also led to a 15%
increase in the rate of HIV testing and counseling among couples, and an 18% increase in the
probability that both partners in HIV discordant households had been tested for HIV at least once
(de Walque et al. 2013).
Interactions with Provider Skill/Human Capital Base
A second limitation to rewarding good health outcomes is that providers may not possess
adequate ability to innovate if they lack the necessary skills and human capital. These skills can
be both technical and inter-personal. Loevinsohn and Harding (2005) suggest that providers may
be unsuccessful in responding to performance incentives when success requires changing patient
behavior (which requires skills beyond clinical ability). In the Rwandan program, providers
were unsuccessful in increasing contraception use and in persuading patients to complete the
contracted sequence of four prenatal care visits in part because of local patient preferences
(superstitions about acknowledging pregnancies at an early stage) (Basinga et al. 2011; Gertler
and Vermeersch 2012). To address this shortcoming, one program in the Democratic Republic
of Congo paired performance incentives with consulting services for community outreach and
business planning. Health facility managers were encouraged to submit quarterly business plans
detailing their strategies to achieve incentivized targets, and consultants provided them with
custom-tailored advice (Soeters et al. 2011; Bishai 2012).
Measurement of Contracted Outcomes
A third obstacle to rewarding good health is that health outcomes can be more difficult
and expensive to measure than health service or input use, particularly when physiological health

7

indicators must be measured directly. For example, all else equal, the expense of measuring
hemoglobin concentrations would potentially be an important barrier to scaling up the China
performance pay program described above (Miller et al. 2012).4 Alternatively, incentives tied to
service and input use have successfully relied on combinations of self-reporting and random
audits to measure contracted outcomes on a larger scale (see Regalia and Castro 2009 and
Gertler and Vermeersch 2012, for example). Examples of contracted health inputs measured this
way include well-baby visits (Basinga et al. 2011) and adherence to clinical protocols during
medical visits (Soeters et al. 2011). Finally, measurement of contracted outcomes (either health
input use or health outcomes) among patients in clinical settings may pose fewer measurement
challenges than in community-wide settings (Section 5 considers trade-offs between rewards for
outcomes among patients vs. population members).

3. Who to Reward
Another important issue in designing performance incentives is deciding who to reward.
Which agents at what organizational level will be most efficient and effective in improving on
contracted outcomes? In this section we describe conceptual issues in contracting at the macro
(or organizational) and micro (individual) level.
Macro-level Incentives: Organizations and Local Government
At the macro-level, central governments in low- and middle-income countries often
contract with private organizations or transfer resources to local government to deliver health
services – and performance incentives are increasingly being included in these schemes.5

4

A cost-effectiveness analysis of this program has not yet been conducted.
Although beyond the scope of this chapter, a growing number of international donors also use pay-for-performance
incentives under the umbrella of “results based financing” – for example, the Global Alliance for Vaccines and

5

8

Because performance pay shifts risk to incentivized agents, the more risk averse the agent, the
greater the expected compensation must be (all else equal). One advantage of organizationallevel incentives is that collectively, organizational agents may effectively be less risk averse than
individual employees. This is because idiosyncratic risk that effort will not result in good
performance – and thus not be rewarded – is pooled across individuals within organizations. As a
result, overall program costs may be lower when contracting at the organizational level (all else
equal). However, contracted organizations must then solve their own internal principal-agent
problems, and they may pass the costs of doing so on to the principals contracting with them.
There are many circumstances under which central governments “contract-out” health
service delivery to private organizations (typically NGOs). One is settings in which public
sector facilities are largely absent – for example, regions of post-conflict Afghanistan (Palmer et
al. 2006; Sondorp et al. 2009) and Haiti (Eichler et al. 2009). Under these conditions,
governments and international organizations have contracted with NGOs to open facilities,
recruit and train providers, and manage all aspects of service delivery. In the context of
Afghanistan and Haiti, achieving performance targets was rewarded with operating budget
transfers of up to 10% of the base contract amounts (paid by the World Bank and USAID,
respectively). In Afghanistan, studies found that these contracting strategies were associated
with improvements in service availability (measured as the ratio of facilities to population, which
increased by about 30%, and the share of facilities providing antenatal care, which rose by 45%
to 75%) and institutional delivery rates (which roughly doubled) (Eichler and Levine 2009). In
Haiti, research suggested that performance pay was associated with 13-24 percentage point
Immunization (GAVI) provides recipient countries with an initial unconditional payment followed by additional
financial rewards based on quality of vaccination data and improvements in immunization coverage. The
Millennium Challenge Corporation also uses a performance-based model for determining ongoing eligibility for aid
among recipient countries (MCC 2012).

9

increases in full childhood immunization coverage and 17-27 percentage point increases in
institutional delivery rates (Eichler and Levine 2009).
Contracting-out also occurs when public sector facilities exist but perform poorly. For
example, in 1999, the Cambodian government began contracting with NGOs to manage health
service delivery in five randomly-selected districts (8 districts were chosen for contracting, but
not all districts had suitable quality proposals from NGOs). Contracts rewarded eight explicit
performance indicators (immunization rates, vitamin A supplementation, antenatal care use,
medical supervision of deliveries, institutional delivery rates, contraceptive use, and use of
public vs. private sector health facilities). Researchers found that after five years, performancebased contracting led to a 32 percentage point increase in antenatal care use, a 16 percentage
point increase in completion of recommended childhood immunizations, and a 17 percentage
point increase in vitamin A supplementation. Cambodia’s contracting strategy also improved
general facility operations (24 hour service availability, staff attendance, managerial supervision,
and equipment availability) (Bloom et al. 2006).
Macro-level performance incentives have also become increasingly common in the public
sector. In the 1980s, central governments in many low- and middle-income countries began
transferring funds for service provision to local governments, decentralizing authority over
policy design and management (Manor 1999). One of the rationales for decentralization is that
local governments have superior information about local preferences and are therefore better able
to satisfy them (Rondinelli 1980; Conyers 1983; Mills et al. 1990; Maccini 2006). However,
even if local governments have superior information about local preferences, they do not
necessarily have strong incentives to satisfy them. Decentralization can therefore include
performance-based incentives. For example, a recent initiative in Indonesia gave block grants to

10

village leaders to provide maternal and child health services and to run schools. In a randomly
selected subset of villages, the size of subsequent block grants was tied to performance according
to 12 performance measures (8 maternal and child health indicators and both enrollment and
attendance in primary and secondary schools). With performance incentives, midwives in
treatment villages worked longer hours, increasing the availability of health services – and
prenatal care visits rose by 37 percentage points. Local administrators in incentivized districts
also used central government funds more efficiently, negotiating savings in education (without
any apparent decline in school attendance) and re-allocating the savings to the health sector
(Olken, Onishi, and Wong 2012).
Under all of these circumstances, organizational autonomy may be critical for the success
of incentive programs. The Cambodian program experimented explicitly with the degree of
independence given to contracting NGOs, using both more restrictive “contracting-in” and more
autonomous “contracting-out” arrangements. Management and facility indicators improved more in
contracting-out districts, and there is suggestion that health indicators did as well (Bloom et al. 2006).
Other cases illustrate the breadth of responses to performance incentives enabled by autonomy. For
example, hospitals in Sao Paulo, Brazil with municipal health delivery contracts that rewarded hospital
efficiency, patient volume, and service quality developed creative organizational strategies tailored to
their own hospital settings (Jack 2003). Hospital spending fell and efficiency indicators rose without
measurable declines in service quality. La Forgia and Couttolenc (2008) and La Forgia and Harding (2009)
estimate that to produce comparable changes in patient discharges absent performance incentives,
hospitals would need to increase spending by about 60%.

An important limitation of macro-level incentives is that they may not translate into
private rewards for organizational leaders. Although performance incentives could in principle
be structured this way, to date they have generally been designed as operating budget transfers

11

and eligibility for future contracts (we discuss rewards paid as budget transfers vs. private
income in more detail in Section 4 on “How to Reward”). A related drawback is the possibility
that organizational policies and regulations limit organizational or local government ability to
solve their own internal principle-agent problems (if managers are not permitted to use budget
transfers for employee bonuses, for example). In Cambodia, contracting NGOs increased the use
of many (presumably productive) health inputs, but actual health outcomes (the infant mortality
rate and diarrhea incidence among children under five) did not improve (Bloom et al. 2006).
NGOs managing hospitals in Afghanistan (Sondorp et al. 2009) and Costa Rica (under similar
programs) (Garcia-Prado and Chawla 2006) made improvements in facility management and
service provision, but there were no measurable gains in health input use (immunizations, for
example).
Micro-level Incentives
At the micro-level, organizations often use performance incentives to solve principalagent problems with individual employees. These incentives can target upper-level managers
and/or rank-and-file providers that they supervise.
An important virtue of rewarding managers for good performance is that they possess
greater flexibility for innovation in service delivery. In contrast, lower-level health workers
often must follow detailed, highly prescriptive protocols from which they are not allowed to
deviate. For example, a recent study shows that Chinese primary school principals (who manage
schools) offered performance rewards for reducing student anemia (Miller et al. (2012) see
Section 2) not only supplemented school meals with vitamins, but they also took the initiative to
discuss nutrition with parents, persuading them to increase their children’s consumption of ironrich foods at home. As a result, anemia prevalence among participating children fell by roughly

12

25% (Miller et al. 2012). In Nicaragua, health facility managers were given performance
incentives for offering and providing both prenatal care and well-child services to a large share
(90%) of local CCT program beneficiaries. In response, managers took the initiative to partner
with community organizers (promotoras), school teachers, and the local media to conduct
community outreach campaigns encouraging mothers to bring their children for check-ups.
These managerial efforts were reportedly successful: nearly all providers were judged to have
achieved the performance targets, preventive care use increased by 16 percentage points, and
vaccination rates rose by 30 percentage points (Regalia and Castro 2009).
In practice, many pay-for-performance schemes to date have rewarded individual
providers rather than their managers for good performance. Although rank-and-file health
workers may have less flexibility to innovate in service delivery, their effort may ultimately
matter most for organizational performance. Additionally, because they have the most direct
contact with target populations, individual providers may also have better knowledge about local
conditions. For example, day care workers in the Indian program rewarding reductions in
malnutrition (Singh 2011) made more frequent home visits in addition to providing more
nutritious meals at day care facilities. Through these home visits, they encouraged mothers to
use nutritious recipe booklets, and malnutrition among children at their day care centers declined
by 4.2% over a 3 month period (Singh 2011). In Rwanda, individual public sector providers
responded to incentives for higher prenatal care and institutional delivery rates by partnering
with midwives to identify and refer pregnant women for services. The associated increase in
institutional deliveries was 10-25 percentage points (Rusa et al. 2009; Basinga et al. 2011;
Gertler and Vermeersch 2012).

13

In addition to lacking flexibility to innovate in service delivery, there can be other
limitations to incentivizing individual health workers as well. A potentially important one is that
rewarding health workers for their own individual performance may create disincentives for
teamwork or cooperation. Alternatively, rewarding providers for group performance (see
Peabody et al. 2011, for example) creates incentives for free-riding because individual health
workers do not bear the full cost of shirking – and may be rewarded for good performance
among co-workers.

4. How to Reward
Using performance incentives to increase provider effort necessarily requires
assumptions about what motivates providers. It is reasonable to assume the providers care about
both financial compensation (Ellis and McGuire 1986; Ellis and McGuire 1993) and patient
welfare (Delfgaauw 2007) to varying degrees. But human motives are complex, and other factors
undoubtedly play a role too – professional recognition and the esteem of colleagues, pride in
one’s work, opportunities for professional advancement (career concerns), working conditions,
and amenities where one lives, for example. From the standpoint of policy or program design,
many of these other factors cannot be translated into performance rewards as easily as financial
incentives. However, these other motives can interact with financial incentives in important
ways.
In this section, we discuss general conceptual issues in the structure of performance
incentive contracts.
Balancing Fixed vs. Variable Compensation

14

As discussed in the literature outside of health (on executive compensation, for example),
performance pay should optimally balance fixed (unconditional) and variable (performancebased) pay. On one hand, performance bonuses must be sufficiently large to influence provider
behavior. Aligning executive effort with firm interests may require that a large share of total
compensation be tied to firm performance through performance pay (Hall and Liebman 1998).
Several studies suggest that in health care, performance incentives may be ineffective if they are
too small (Grady et al. 1997; Hillman et al. 1998; Petersen et al. 2006; Rosenthal and Frank
2006).
On the other hand, increasing variable pay as a share of total compensation increases the
financial risk borne by providers (Ellis and McGuire 1990). Because providers are generally
risk-averse (to varying degrees), they must be compensated for bearing additional risk inherent in
pay-for-performance contracts. Negotiations over a health service delivery contract in Haiti
between a NGO (Management Sciences for Health) and USAID illustrates this point (Eichler and
Levine 2009). When re-negotiating its contract, Management Sciences for Health was only
willing to accept the additional risk imposed by performance pay if USAID would increase the
total amount that could be earned to exceed contractual payments under the alternative
unconditional contract (under the performance pay contract, fixed payments were set to 95% of
the unconditional contract amount, and an additional 10% was made conditional on good
performance (Eichler et al. 2009)).
The Functional Form of Provider Rewards
A second issue in the structure of performance pay contracts is the functional form
mapping incentive payments onto performance indicators. Absent knowing what the contract
theory literature suggests is needed for optimal incentive contract design, a simple approach is to

15

offer rewards that are linear in contracted outcomes. Examples include constant incremental
rewards per child reduction in malnutrition (Singh 2011), per child reduction in anemia (Miller et
al. 2012), or per infant delivery supervised by a skilled birth attendant (Basinga et al. 2011).
Other programs have adopted a step-function approach, offering bonuses for surpassing
one or more bright-line performance thresholds. Depending on its specific form, this approach
can have theoretical grounding6 and may also be appropriate when thresholds have clinical
significance (vaccination rates at levels that confer herd immunity, for example (Anderson
1992). However, a drawback to the step-function approach can be greater risk that provider
effort will not be rewarded. Specifically, it creates strong incentives in the neighborhood of a
threshold, but it may also be a poor motivator for health workers far below (or above) a
threshold.7
Salary vs. Operating Budget Rewards
Structuring performance rewards as private income or operational budget revenue also
requires assumptions about what motivates providers. In one extreme, if providers were purely
motivated by private financial considerations, offering rewards as private income would
presumably induce them to exert greater effort. In the other extreme, if providers were purely
philanthropic, incentive payments made as operational revenue could be more effective. Given
that preferences are mixed in reality (and also include other things such as professional esteem,

6

Contract theory suggests that optimal incentive contracts are likely to be non-linear in contracted outcomes
(Laffont and Tirole 1993; Salanie 2005), and step-functions could provide a reasonable approximation of these nonlinearities. However, the information required for optimal contract design (including the cost of provider effort, the
health productivity of provider effort, and the utility functions of both providers and the contracting principal) is
unlikely to be available in practice.
7
Alternatively, Toonen and co-authors argue that setting bright-line aspirational goals could change institutional
culture to be more results- or goal-oriented (Toonen et al. 2009). Although there is little evidence among studies of
performance pay, bright-line performance incentive targets may also help to focus attention on contracted outcomes
when provider attention is scarce (DellaVigna 2007; Shah, Mullainathan, and Shafir 2012).

16

pride in one’s work, career aspirations, etc.), predictions about the relative effectiveness of
different types of financial incentives are ambiguous and may be context-specific. One study
suggests that NGO employees providing health services in Afghanistan responded positively to
performance incentives even though bonuses accrued to facilities and did not result in personal
financial gain. In principle, combinations of the two are possible, although we are unaware of
schemes that mixed the two. In practice, macro-level rewards are often paid as operational
revenue, while micro-level rewards are typically offered as private income.
Non-Financial Incentives
While pay-for-performance contracts strengthen extrinsic incentives, intrinsic motivation
is commonly thought to be an important determinant of provider effort as well (Bokhour et al.
2006).8 Although not focused specifically on health care provider behavior, research on intrinsic
motivation in psychology suggests that more altruistic individuals work harder to achieve
organizational goals (Franco, Bennett, and Kanfer 2002). In the health sector, altruistic
individuals are more likely to work for health delivery organizations with explicit charity
mandates (Serra, Serneels, and Barr 2011), suggesting that intrinsic motivation may be
heterogeneous across types of health facilities. Health care providers with greater intrinsic
motivation may also be more responsive to professional recognition among community members
or peers (Franco, Bennett, and Kanfer 2002; Benabou and Tirole 2003). In such cases, nonfinancial rewards and other psychological tools9 may be close substitutes for (or may even be
more effective than) financial incentives.
8

Intrinsic motivation refers to rewards that are internal and related to deriving enjoyment or satisfaction from the
very act of completing a task. By contrast, extrinsic motivation refers to incentives or pressures that originate from
the outside (the offer of financial rewards, for example).
9
For a discussion of behavior modification strategies that do not rely on extrinsic incentives (including the use of
framing, priming, and cognitive dissonance), see Kamenica (2012). We discuss the possibility that financial rewards
undermine intrinsic motivation in Section 5.

17

Qualitative and anecdotal evidence from field studies support the hypothesis that health
care providers are intrinsically motivated. Health workers employed by NGOs in post-conflict
Afghanistan reportedly felt a great sense of pride and accomplishment after meeting contracted
performance targets (Palmer et al. 2006). A program (not formally evaluated) in Myanmar
offered new scales for measuring patient weight to providers who met Tuberculosis (TB) case
identification and registration goals. In townships with these (essentially) non-financial
incentives, identification of TB cases rose by 30 percentage points relative to informal
comparison townships (Maung, Kluge, and Aye 2006). Anecdotal reports suggest that Zambian
health workers participating in an incentive program (rewarding malaria treatment, infant and
maternal care, and childhood immunizations) responded more favorably to trophies than to cash
incentives (USAID 2006). Finally, case studies suggest that health providers rewarded for good
performance with t-shirts (Speizer, Trambashe, and Tegang 2001), badges and certificates
(Amare 2011), and recognition photographs (Bhattacharyya et al. 2001) may have been
successful.
One rigorous quantitative study concurs with this qualitative and anecdotal evidence. In
studying Zambian hair stylists with financial and non-financial incentives to sell condoms to
salon clients, Ashraf, Bandiera, and Jack (2012) find that public recognition out-performs
monetary incentives. These results are heterogeneous across stylists and are largely due to
strong behavioral responses among stylists believed to be more committed to the cause of HIV
prevention.

5. Perverse Incentives and Unintended Consequences

18

The use of incentives to improve health program performance is fraught with the
possibility of unintended and potentially perverse consequences. In this section, we discuss
some of these concerns and describe the empirical literature related to each.10
Non-Contracted Outcomes
One type of unintended behavioral response to performance incentives has been studied
in the theoretical literature on “multitasking.” When agents are responsible for multiple tasks or
multidimensional tasks (some of which are unobservable or non-contractible), rewarding
performance on a subset of contractible tasks or outcomes can lead to a reduction in effort
devoted to non-contracted outcomes (Holmstrom and Milgrom 1991). The degree to which this
occurs may depend in part on the extent to which non-contracted outcomes share inputs with
contracted outcomes (Mullen, Frank, and Rosenthal 2010; Sherry, Bauhoff, and Mohanan 2013).
Empirically, some studies of performance incentives have found evidence of such
behavioral distortions. A Kenyan school meal program rewarding improved pupil malnutrition
rates found that subsidized meal preparation crowded out teaching time by 15% (Vermeersch
and Kremer 2005). Similarly, providing incentives to Chinese primary school principals for
reductions in student anemia may also have displaced teaching effort, leading to lower test scores
in some cases (Sylvia et al. 2012). Findings across empirical studies of performance incentives
are heterogeneous, however. Several rigorous studies also report no clear evidence of
distortionary or detrimental reallocation of effort or other resources in response to performance

10

This section discusses costly behavioral distortions that performance incentives may induce. We do not include
misrepresentation of contracted outcomes (lying about them, for example) in our discussion because fraud/deception
do not generally represent costly behavioral distortions (although fraudulent reporting that leads to undeserved
incentive payments has a true resource cost).

19

incentives (Bloom et al. 2006; Mullen, Frank and Rosenthal 2010; Olken, Onishi, and Wong
2012, for example).11
Beyond the standard multitasking framework, performance incentives may lead to other
closely related behavioral distortions. For example, although not studied empirically (to the best
of our knowledge), performance incentives could lead to reallocation across multiple substitute
activities related to the same disease or health outcome – or even the purposeful neglect of one to
earn higher rewards for another (rewarding the successful treatment of a disease would
undermine incentives to prevent it). Given growing emphasis on “impact evaluation,”12 another
related example would be distortionary reallocation of effort and resources towards an
evaluation’s primary outcomes (and away from outcomes not emphasized by the evaluation).
Because demonstrating “impact” can lead to new or continued funding, the evaluation process
itself may therefore create important behavioral distortions (depending on the beliefs of the
evaluated organization).
Heterogeneity in the Return to Effort across Contracted Outcomes
Among contracted outcomes, providers may also allocate effort to those that yield the
largest (net) marginal return (Mullen, Frank, and Rosenthal 2010; Gertler and Vermeersch 2012;
Sherry, Bauhoff, and Mohanan 2013). In Rwanda, researchers found that rewards for good
performance were most effective in improving outcomes that appear to have the highest marginal
return or require the least effort. For example, performance incentives were more effective in
increasing institutional delivery rates among pregnant women already in contact with community
health workers (a relatively easy task because new patient relationships did not have to be
11

Olken, Onishi and Wong (2012) find technical efficiency gains in education and re-allocation of resulting savings
from education to health spending. However, measured education outcomes did not decline.
12
For example, see the Systematic Reviews series published by the International Initiative for Impact Evaluation
(3IE) available at http://www.3ieimpact.org/en/publications/

20

created) than they were in initiating the use of early prenatal care (which the authors suggest to
be a relatively difficult task because doing so requires early identification of pregnant women not
yet in contact with the health care system). Moreover, the incremental payment for institutional
deliveries was relatively high (US $4.59), while the incremental payment for completion of
quarterly prenatal care visits was relatively low (US $0.09) (Gertler and Vermeersch 2012).
Ultimately, institutional delivery rates rose by more than 20 percentage points, but there were no
increases in the share of women completing all quarterly prenatal care visits.
Patient/Sub-Population Selection
In addition to altering how providers choose among tasks, performance incentives may
also influence how providers allocate effort among patients or community members. Although
not the focus of our review, incentives for patient selection are a ubiquitous concern with the use
of high-powered incentives that emphasize cost containment (capitated contracts under managed
care in wealthy countries, for example) (Frank, Glazer, and McGuire 2000). With performance
incentives for good patient outcomes, selection against the sickest or most remote patients
(‘cherry picking’) may occur if producing contracted outcomes among them is relatively difficult
or costly (Shen 2003; Oxman and Fretheim 2008).
Performance could alternatively be linked to population rather than patient outcomes, but
providers could then be discouraged from providing services to individuals outside of the predefined population. Similarly, they may simply focus on the easiest to treat sub-populations
within their defined service area. Some pay-for-performance schemes have tried to limit
perverse incentives like these by offering larger rewards for services provided in more difficult
or remote areas (Meessen, Soucat, and Sekabaraga 2011). Although such design features may

21

reduce incentives for selection, eliminating them is a nearly impossible task (as the literature on
risk adjustment suggests (van de Ven and Ellis 2000)).
Erosion of Intrinsic Motivation
Finally, pay-for-performance incentives may have unintended consequences for the
intrinsic motivation of individual providers and for the institutional culture of health care
organizations. Benabou and Tirole (2005) develop a model in which effort in the presence of
rewards is a function of intrinsic motivation (operationalized as altruism, but which could also
include pride in one’s work, etc.), extrinsic motivation (material self-interest), and ‘reputational’
motivation (related to social- or self-image). In the model, monetary rewards undermine
‘reputational’ motivation and can therefore crowd-out effort by changing the perceived meaning
of one’s actions (an ‘image-spoiling’ effect). Both laboratory and field evidence lend some
empirical support to this prediction. In one experiment asking students to perform an altruistic
task (collecting charitable donations), Gneezy and Rustichini (2000) show that the net effect of
small monetary incentives on pro-social effort is negative – students put more effort into the task
when they were not compensated than they did when offered a small incentive. A set of
experiments conducted by Hayman and Ariely (2004) also suggest that financial rewards may
frame a task as a ‘money-market’ rather than a ‘social-market’ task, potentially leading to
reduced effort.
In low- and middle-income countries, there is similar concern that the use of financial
incentives may lead to demoralization (due to perceptions of ‘bureaucratization’) (Oxman and
Fretheim 2008), reductions in intrinsic motivation (McDonald et al. 2007; Ashraf, Bandiera, and
Jack 2012), and less trust between patients and providers (Ellingsen and Johannesson 2008).
Over time, the quality of individuals entering the public health workforce could also decline if

22

the use of financial incentives selects against intrinsically motivated health care workers (Witter
et al. 2012).
Even if extrinsic incentives appear to work in the short-run, the errosion of intrinsic
motivation can still be a longer-run concern. Psychology experiments reviewed by Deci,
Koestner, and Ryan (1999) and Kamenika (2012) suggest that individuals offered monetary
incentives to perform an otherwise intrinisically rewarding task put substantially less effort into
the task (compared to control groups) when the incentives were removed. Social psychologists
attribute this to the effect of extrinsic rewards on individuals’ perception of themselves, on the
value of the rewarded task (Gneezy, Meier, and Rey-Biel 2011), and on social perceptions of the
task (Gneezy and Rustichini 2000).13 Although not yet studied in low- and middle-income
country health programs, one study of performance pay in the U.S. (at Kaiser Permanente
hospitals) supports these findings (Lester, Schmittdiel, and Selby 2010).

6. Conclusion
This chapter summarizes important conceptual issues in the design of pay-forperformance incentive schemes. These include choice of contracted outcomes, the
organizational level at which to offer incentives, the structure of incentive contracts, and what
the unintended consequences of performance pay might be. In doing so, we have also surveyed
existing peer-reviewed evidence related (in varying degrees) to each. We highlight that despite
the growing body of research on performance incentives, very little of it has studied the

13

Murayama and coauthors (2010) study a neural basis for this effect, measuring neurobiological changes when
extrinsic rewards are introduced for otherwise intrinsically rewarding tasks. Although subjects offered financial
rewards outperformed control subjects, researchers showed that the magnitude of the neural response to extrinsic
rewards was negatively correlated with subsequent voluntary participation in the same activity after the rewards
were withdrawn.

23

underlying conceptual issues that we outline;14 we consider these to be important areas for future
research. We also note that evaluation has not kept pace with growth in the use of performance
pay: Table 1 lists programs that have not been studied (or studied rigorously) to the best of our
knowledge. Strategically selected empirical research on these unstudied programs may provide a
low-cost way of strengthening the body of evidence on foundational issues inherent in the design
of performance incentives. In concluding, we also raise additional issues for further research not
discussed in the body of our review.
The first is that there is substantial heterogeneity in responses to performance pay both
across and within programs. We therefore caution against direct comparison of pay-forperformance schemes across different organizational, social, and institutional environments.
However, we also note that understanding the underlying sources of this heterogeneity may
provide insight into the circumstances under which performance pay is more or less effective (or
socially desirable) too. For example, lack of autonomy among providers or health care
organizations may be a critical obstacle to the effective use of performance pay in the public
sector (because it restricts the range of behavioral responses that are possible) (Jack 2003).
Performance incentives may also interact with pre-existing incentives and social norms in
important ways. In one study, the impact of performance pay varied across incentivized agents
by a factor of three or more (and the underlying source of heterogeneity was not strongly
correlated with demographic and socio-economic characteristics) (Miller et al. 2012). Another
found that provider responses to performance pay varied significantly by baseline provider
quality indicators (Sherry, Bauhoff, and Mohanan 2013). More generally, adequate bureaucratic
capacity to enforce contracts, collect data, and verify performance is presumably necessary for
14

See Christianson, Leatherman and Sutherland (2008), Mullen, Frank and Rosenthal (2010), and Eijkenaar (2012)
on related work in high-income countries.

24

pay-for-performance schemes to succeed (Banerjee, Duflo and Glennerster 2008). Analysis of
heterogeneous responses to performance incentives is an important area for future research.
Second, pay-for-performance schemes may have important equity implications (Yujing
Shen 2003; Mannion and Davies 2008; Bierman and Clark 2007). Given that the net return to
provider effort will undoubtedly vary across activities and sub-populations, performance pay
may lead providers to focus on individuals with varying socio-economic or health characteristics.
Pay-for-performance contracts offered to village governments in Indonesia attempted to address
this concern by allocating equal performance pay budgets across geographic regions with
varying socio-economic characteristics (to prevent some regions from benefitting
disproportionately from the performance scheme) (Olken, Onishi, and Wong 2012).
Competition among villages for performance rewards therefore occurred within, but not across,
regions.
Finally, there has been surprisingly little rigorous empirical evaluation of the full welfare
consequences of performance pay. The necessary building blocks for a cost-benefit analysis
include a full understanding of the behavioral responses to performance pay and their
magnitudes (including unintended ones) and a method for valuing each in common (typically
monetary) units. Such evaluations are critical for understanding the ultimate social desirability
of pay-for-performance schemes.

25

References
Alcazar, L., Rogers, F., Chaudhury, N., Hammer, J., Kremer, M., and Muralidharan, K. 2006.
Are teachers absent? Probing service delivery in Peruvian primary schools. International
Journal of Educational Research, 45(3): 117-136.
Amare, Y. (2011). Non-financial incentives for voluntary community health workers: A
Qualitative Study. L10K Working Paper No 2. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia: The Last Ten
Kilometers Project, JSI Research & Training Institute.
Anderson, R. M. (1992). The concept of herd immunity and the design of community-based
immunization programmes. Vaccine, 10(13), 928–935.
Arrow, K. (1963). Uncertainty and the welfare economics of medical care. American Economic
Review, 53, 941–973.
Ashraf, N., Bandiera, O., & Jack, K. (2012). No margin, no mission? A field experiment on
incentives for pro-social tasks. Working paper.
Banerjee, A., Deaton, A., & Duflo, E. (2004). Health, health care, and economic development:
wealth, health, and health services in rural Rajasthan. American Economic Review, 94(2),
326–330.
Banerjee, A., Duflo, E., & Glennerster, R. (2008). Putting a Band‐Aid on a corpse: Incentives for
nurses in the Indian public health care system. Journal of the European Economic
Association, 6(2‐3), 487-500.
Banerjee, A., Kothari, D., & Duflo, E. (2010). Improving immunization coverage in rural India:
clustered randomised controlled evaluation of immunization campaigns with and without
incentives. BMJ, 340:c2220
Basinga, P., Gertler, P. J., Binagwaho, A., Soucat, A. L. B., Sturdy, J., & Vermeersch, C. M. J.
(2011). Effect on maternal and child health services in Rwanda of payment to primary
health-care providers for performance: an impact evaluation. Lancet, 377(9775), 1421–1428.
Bhattacharyya, K., LeBan, K., Winch, P., Tien, M. (2001). Community Health Worker Incentives
and Disincentives: How They Affect motivation, Retention, and Sustainability. Washington
DC: US Agency for International Development, Basic Support for Institutionalizing Child
Survival Project (BASICS II).
Benabou, R., & Tirole, J. (2003). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. The Review of Economic
Studies, 70(3), 489-520.
Benabou, R., & Triole, J. (2006). Incentives and prosocial behavior. The American economic
review, 96(5), 1652-1678.
26

Berendes, S., Heywood, P., Oliver, S., & Garner, P. (2011). Quality of private and public
ambulatory health care in low and middle income countries: systematic review of
comparative studies. PLoS medicine.
Bierman, A. S., & Clark, J. P. (2007). Performance measurement and equity. BMJ, 334(7608),
1333-1334.
Bloom, E., Bhushan, I., Clingingsmith, D., Hong, R., King, E., Kremer, M., Loevinsohn, B., &
Schwartz, J. B. (2006). Contracting for Health: Evidence from Cambodia. Harvard
University Cambridge, 34.
Bokhour, B. G., Burgress, J. F., Hook, J. M. White, B. Berlowitz, D. & Gulden, M. R. (2006)
Incentive Implementation in physician practices: A qualitative Study of Practice Executive
Perspectives on Pay for Performance. Medical Care Research and Review, 63, 73S-95S.
Blumenthal, D., & Hsiao, W. (2005). Privatization and Its Discontents — The Evolving Chinese
Health Care System. the New England Journal of Medicine, 353, 1165–1170.
Camerer, C. F. (2010). Removing financial incentives demotivates the brain. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 107(49), 20849-20850.
Chaudhury, N., & Hammer, J. S. (2004). Ghost doctors: absenteeism in rural Bangladeshi health
facilities. The World Bank Economic Review, 18(3), 423-441.
Chaudhury, N., Hammer, J., Kremer, M., Muralidharan, K., & Rogers, F. H. (2006). Missing in
action: teacher and health worker absence in developing countries. The Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 20(1), 91-116.
Christianson, J. B., Leatherman, S., & Sutherland, K. (2008). Lessons from evaluations of
purchaser pay-for-performance programs a review of the evidence. Medical Care Research
and Review, 65(6 suppl), 5S-35S.
Conyers, D. (1983). Decentralization: the latest fashion in development administration? Public
Administration and Development, 3, 97–109.
Cutler, D. 2005 Your Money or Your Life: Strong Medicine for America’s Health Care System.
USA: Oxford University Press.
Das, J., & Hammer, J. (2004). Strained Mercy: The Quality of Medical Care in Delhi. Economic
And Political Weekly, 3228(39), 951–965.
Das, J., & Hammer, J. (2007). Money for nothing: The dire straits of medical practice in Delhi,
India. Journal of Development Economics, 83(1), 1–36.

27

Das, J., Hammer, J., & Leonard, K. (2008). The quality of medical advice in low-income
countries. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(2), 93-114
Das, J., Holla, A., Das, V., Mohanan, M., Chan, B., & Tabak, D. (2013). The Quality of Medical
Care in India: Evidence from a Standardized Patient Study in Two States. Health Affairs,
Forthcoming.
Deci, E. L., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. M. (1999). A meta-analytic review of experiments
examining the effects of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation. Psychological bulletin,
125(6), 627.
Delfgaauw, J. (2007). Dedicated doctors: Public and private provision of health care with
altruistic physicians. Amsterdam: Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper
DellaVigna, S. (2007). Psychology and economics: Evidence from the field. National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper, w13420.
De Walque, D., Gertler, P., Bautista-Arredondo, S., Kwan, A., Vermeersch, C., de Dieu
Bizimana, J., Binagwaho, A., Condo, J. (2013). Using Provider Performance Rewards to
Increase HIV testing and Cousnseling services in Rwanda. World Bank Policy Research
Workng Paper No. 6364, Impact Evaluation Series No. 84. Washington, DC: The World
Bank.
Eichler, R., Auxila, P., Antoine, U., & Desmangles, B. (2009). Haiti: Going to scale with a
performance incentive model. In R. Eichler & R. Levine (Eds.), Performance incentives for
global health: potential and pitfalls. Washington DC: Center for Global Development.
Eichler, R., & Levine, R. (Eds.). (2009). Performance Incentives for Global Health: Potential
and Pitfalls. Washington DC: Center for Global Development.
Eijkenaar, F. (2012). Pay for performance in health care: an international overview of initiatives.
Medical Care Research and Review, 69(3), 251–76.
Ellingsen, T., & Johannesson, M. (2008). Pride and prejudice: The human side of incentive
theory. The American Economic Review, 98(3), 990–1008.
Ellis, R. P., & McGuire, T. G. (1986). Provider behavior under prospective reimbursement.
Journal of Health Economics, 5(2), 129–151.
Ellis, R. P., & McGuire, T. G. (1990). Optimal payment systems for health services. Journal of
Health Economics, 9(4), 375–396.
Ellis, R. P., & McGuire, T. G. (1993). Supply-side and demand-side cost sharing in health care.
The journal of economic perspectives, 135–151.

28

Fairbrother, G., Hanson, K. L., Friedman, S., & Butts, G. C. (1999). The impact of physician
bonuses, enhanced fees, and feedback on childhood immunization coverage rates. American
Journal of Public Health, 89(2), 171–175.
Fairbrother, G., Siegel, M. J., Friedman, S., Kory, P. D., & Butts, G. C. (2001). Impact of
financial incentives on documented immunization rates in the inner city: results of a
randomized controlled trial. Ambulatory Pediatrics, (1), 206–212.
Franco, L. M., Bennett, S., & Kanfer, R. (2002). Health sector reform and public sector health
worker motivation: a conceptual framework. Social Science & Medicine, 54(8), 1255–1266.
Frank, R. G., Glazer, J., & McGuire, T. G. (2000). Measuring adverse selection in managed
health care. Journal of Health Economics, 19(6), 829 – 854.
García-Prado, A., & Chawla, M. (2006). The impact of hospital management reforms on
absenteeism in Costa Rica. Health Policy and Planning, 21(2), 91-100.
Gertler, P., & Vermeersch, C. (2012). Using Performance Incentives to Improve Health
Outcomes. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 6100, Impact Evaluation Series
No. 60. Washington DC, The World Bank.
Gneezy, U., & Rustichini, A. (2000). Pay enough or don't pay at all. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115(3), 791-810.
Gneezy, U., Meier, S., & Rey-Biel, P. (2011). When and why incentives (don't) work to modify
behavior. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(4), 191-209.
Grady, K. E., Lemkau, J. P., Lee, N. R., & Caddell, C. (1997). Enhancing mammography referral
in primary care. Preventive medicine, 26(6), 791–800.
Gravelle, H., Sutton, M., & Ma, A. (2007). Doctor Behaviour under a pay for performance
contract: evidence from the quality and outcomes framework. CHE Research Paper No 28.
York: University of York.
Hall, B. J., & Liebman, J. B. (1998). Are CEOS Really Paid Like Bureaucrats? Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 113(3), 653–691.
Heyman, J., & Ariely, D. (2004). Effort for payment a tale of two markets. Psychological
Science, 15(11), 787-793.
Hillman, A. L., Ripley, K., Goldfarb, N., Nuamah, I., Weiner, J., & Lusk, E. (1998). Physician
financial incentives and feedback: failure to increase cancer screening in Medicaid managed
care. American Journal of Public Health, 88(11), 1699-1701.

29

Holmstrom, B., & Milgrom, P. (1991). Multitask principal-agent analyses: Incentive contracts,
asset ownership, and job design. Journal of Law, Economics & Organization, 7, 24-52.
Holmstrom, B., & Hart, O. (1987). The theory of contracts. In T. Bewley (Ed.), Advances in
Economic Theory, Fifth World Congress. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Jack, W. (2003). Contracting for health services: an evaluation of recent reforms in Nicaragua.
Health Policy and Planning, 18(2), 195-204.
Kamenica, E. (2012). Behavioral Economics and Psychology of Incentives. Annual Review of
Economics.
Kremer, M. (2002). Pharmaceuticals and the Developing World. The journal of economic
perspectives, 16(4), 67–90.
La Forgia, G. M., & Couttolenc, B. (2008). Hospital performance in Brazil: the search for
excellence. Washington DC: World Bank Publications.
La Forgia, G., & Harding, A. (2009). Public-Private Partnerships and Public Hospital
Performance in Sao Paulo, Brazil. Health Affairs, 28(4), 1114–1126.
Laffont, J.-J., & Tirole, J. (1993). A Theory of Incentives In Procurement and Regulation.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Lazear, E. P. (1995). Personnel Economics. In R. Gibbons & D. J. Roberts, Eds. Handbook of
Organizational Economics, Vol. 21, 170.
Lazear, E. P. (2000). The power of incentives. American Economic Review, 90(2), 410–414.
Leonard, K. L. (2003). African traditional healers and outcome-contingent contracts in health
care. Journal of Development Economics, 71(1), 1–22.
Lester, H., Schmittdiel, J., Selby, J., Fireman, B., Campbell, S., Lee, J., ... & Madvig, P. (2010).
The impact of removing financial incentives from clinical quality indicators: longitudinal
analysis of four Kaiser Permanente indicators. BMJ, 34:c1898.
Lewis, M. (2006). Governance and Corruption in Public Health Care Systems. Center for Global
Development Working Paper.
Loevinsohn, B., & Harding, A. (2005). Buying results? Contracting for health service delivery in
developing countries. Lancet, 366(9486), 676–681.
Maccini, S. (2006). Do Local Government Resources Affect Child Health? Evidence from the
Philippine Fiscal Devolution. University of Michigan Working Paper.
30

Mannion, R., & Davies, H. T. (2008). Payment for performance in health care. BMJ, 336(7639),
306.
Manor, J. (1999). The political economy of democratic decentralization. Washington DC: The
World Bank.
Maung, M., Kluge, H., Aye, T., Maung, W., Noe, P., Zaw, M., ... & Lonnroth, K. (2006). Private
GPs contribute to TB control in Myanmar: evaluation of a PPM initiative in Mandalay
Division. The International Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 10(9), 982-987.
MCC. (2012). Report on the Criteria and Methodology for Determining the Eligibility of
Candidate Countries for Millenium Challenge Account Assistance in 2013. Washington DC.
McCormick, M. C. (1985). The contribution of low birth weight to infant mortality and
childhood morbidity. The New England Journal of Medicine. 312(2), 82-90.
McDonald, R., Harrison, S., Checkland, K., Campbell, S. M., & Roland, M. (2007). Impact of
financial incentives on clinical autonomy and internal motivation in primary care:
ethnographic study. BMJ, 334(7608), 1357.
McGuire, T. G. (2000). Physician agency. In A. J. Culyer & J. P. Newhouse (Eds.), Handbook of
Health Economics, 1(1A), 461–536.
Meessen, B., Soucat, A., & Sekabaraga, C. (2011). Performance-based financing: just a donor
fad or a catalyst towards comprehensive health-care reform? Bulletin of the World Health
Organization, 89, 153–156.
Miller, G., Luo, R., Zhang, L., Sylvia, S., Shi, Y., Foo, P., Zhao, Q., et al. (2012). Effectiveness
of provider incentives for anaemia reduction in rural China: a cluster randomised trial. BMJ,
345, e4809.
Mills, A., Vaughan, J. P., Smith, D. L., & Tabibzadeh, I. (Eds.). (1990). Health System
Decentralization: Concepts, Issues and Country Experience. Geneva: The World Health
Organization.
Mullen, K. J., Frank, R. G., & Rosenthal, M. B. (2010). Can you get what you pay for? Pay-forperformance and the quality of healthcare providers. The Rand journal of economics, 41(1),
64–91.
Olken, B. A., Onishi, J., & Wong, S. (2012). Should Aid Reward Performance? Evidence from a
field experiment on health and education in Indonesia. National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper, w17892.
Oxman, A.D., & Fretheim, A. (2008) An overview of research on the effects of results-based
financing. Report from Norwegian Knowledge Centre for the Health Services, Systematic
31

Reviews, nr 16 –2008.
Palmer, N., Strong, L., Wali, A., & Sondorp, E. (2006). Contracting out health services in fragile
states. BMJ, 332(7543), 718-721.
Peabody, J., Shimkhada, R., Quimbo, S., Florentino, J., Bacate, M., McCulloch, C. E., & Solon,
O. (2011). Financial incentives and measurement improved physicians’ quality of care in
the Philippines. Health Affairs, 30(4), 773–781.
Petersen, L. A., Woodard, L. D., Urech, T., Daw, C., & Sookanan, S. (2006). Does pay-forperformance improve the quality of health care? Annals of internal medicine, 145(4), 265–
72.
Phadke, A. (1998). Drug Supply and Use: Toward a Rational Policy in India. New Delhi: Sage
Publications.
Regalia, F., & Castro, L. (2009). Nicaragua: Combining Demand-and Supply-Side Incentives. In
R. Eichler & R. Levine (Eds.), Performance incentives for global health: potential and
pitfalls. Washington DC: Center for Global Development.
Roland, M. (2004). Linking Physicians’ Pay to the Quality of Care — A Major Experiment in
the United Kingdom. The New England Journal of Medicine, 351(14), 1448–1454.
Rondinelli, D. A. (1980). Government Decentralization in Comparative Perspective: Theory and
Practice in Developing Countries. International Review of Administrative Sciences, 47,
133–145.
Rosenthal, M. B., Fernandopulle, R., Song, H. R., & Landon, B. (2004). Paying For Quality:
Providers’ Incentives For Quality Improvement. Health Affairs, 23(2), 127–
Rosenthal, M. B., & Frank, R. G. (2006). What is the empirical basis for paying for quality in
health care? Medical Care Research and Review, 63(2), 135–57.
Rosenthal, Meredith B, Frank, R. G., Li, Z., & Epstein, A. M. (2005). Early experience with payfor-performance: from concept to practice. JAMA : the journal of the American Medical
Association, 294(14), 1788–93.
Roski, J., Jeddeloh, R., An, L., Lando, H., Hannan, P., Hall, C., & Zhu, S.-H. (2003). The impact
of financial incentives and a patient registry on preventive care quality: increasing provider
adherence to evidence-based smoking cessation practice guidelines. Preventive Medicine,
36(3), 291–299.
Rusa, L., Schneidman, M., Fritsche, G., & Musango, L. (2009). Rwanda: Performance-based
financing in the public sector. In R. Eichler & R. Levine (Eds.), Performance incentives for
global health: potential and pitfalls. Washington DC: Center for Global Development.

32

Salanie, B. (2005). The Economics of Contracts. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Serra, D., Serneels, P., & Barr, A. (2011). Intrinsic motivations and the non-profit health sector:
Evidence from Ethiopia. Personality and Individual Differences, 51(3), 309-314.
Shah, A. K., Mullainathan, S., & Shafir, E. (2012). Some Consequences of Having Too Little.
Science, 338(6107), 682–685.
Shen, Y. (2003). Selection Incentives in a Performance-Based Contracting System. Health
Services Research, 38(2), 535–552.
Sherry, T., Bauhoff, S., & Mohanan, M. (2013). Paying for performance when health care
production is multi-dimensional: the impact of Rwanda’s national program on rewarded
services, multitasking and health outcomes. Working paper.
Singh, P. (2011). Performance Pay and Information: Reducing Child Malnutrition in Urban
Slums. MPRA Working Paper.
Soeters, R., Peerenboom, P. B., Mushagalusa, P., & Kimanuka, C. (2011). Performance-based
financing experiment improved health care in the democratic republic of congo. Health
Affairs, 30(8), 1518–1527.
Sondorp, E., Palmer, N., Strong, L., & Wali, A. (2009). Afghanistan: Paying NGOs for
performance in a post conflict setting. In R. Eichler & R. Levine (Eds.), Performance
incentives for global health: potential and pitfalls. Washington DC: Center for Global
Development.
Speizer, I. S., Tambashe, B. O., & Tegang, S. P. (2001). An Evaluation of the “Entre Nous
Jeunes” Peer—educator Program for Adolescents in Cameroon. Studies in Family Planning,
32(4), 339-351.
Sylvia, S., Renfu, L., Zhang, L., Shi, Y., Medina, A., Rozelle, S. (2012) Do you get what you
pay for with school-based health programs? Evidence from a child nutrition experiment in
rural China. Stanford University Working paper.
The World Health Organization. (2003). Quality and Accreditation in Health Care Services, A
Global Review. Geneva.
Toonen, J., Canavan, A., Vergeer, P., & Elovainio, R. (2009). Learning lessons on implementing
performance based financing, from a multi-country evaluation. Amsterdam.
USAID. (2006) Zambia Pilot Study of Performance-Based Incentives. Quality Assurance
Project, Operations Research Results. Washington DC: US Agency for International
Development.
33

Van de Ven, W. P., & Ellis, R. P. (2000). Risk adjustment in competitive health paln markets.
Handbook of Health Economics, Vol 1 (pp. 755–845).
Vermeersch, C., & Kremer, M. (2005). School meals, educational achievement, and school
competition: evidence from a randomized evaluation. Washington DC: World Bank
Publications.
Werner, R. M., Kolstad, J. T., Stuart, E. A., & Polsky, D. (2011). The effect of pay-forperformance in hospitals: lessons for quality improvement. Health Affairs, 30(4), 690–8.
Witter, S., Fretheim, A., Kessy, F. L., & Lindahl, A. K. (2012). Paying for performance to
improve the delivery of health interventions in low-and middle-income countries. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews, 2.

34

Table 1: Partial list of pay-for-performance programs that have not been formally evaluated
Country
Latin America
Argentina

Year

Belize

2001

Public andprivate facilities

Costa Rica

1994

Public hospitals

Who to Reward

How to Reward
60% of per-enrollee funding is fixed, 40% linked to
performance on 10 targets.

14

30% of total capitated service payments are paid
monthly with deductions for failure to meet efficiency,
quality and administrative process indicators.

21

Budgetary bonuses

8

Private hospitals

Clinical performance (low delvery complications,
low reinfection rates)
Health input quality indicators

Payment for each indicator given according to the
extent to which the indicator is met (70% performance
on a target translates to 70% funding for that indicator)

14

Provincial governments

Honduas

What to Reward
Volume of poor women and children enrolled in
health insurance; performance on 10 health
indicators

Europe/Asia
Armenia

2008

Primary care providers

Unclear

Unclear

15

Bangladesh

2010

Primary care facilities

2007

Village governing bodies

Nepal

2005

Health workers in public health
facilities

Attended deliveries (home or institutional)

Unclear if institutional bonuses or provider-level
bonuses
20% of annual block grants determined by village
performance on each of 12 contracted indicators
$4.70 for each delivery attended

11

Indonesia

Infant and maternal care use, postpartum
contraception
12 Health and education indicators

Africa
Benin

2012

Maternal and infant health, malaria service use

Salary bonuses

4

Burundi

2006

Public and private non-profit health
facilities
Public health centers and hospitals

24 specific services

Payment for each contracted service provided;
payments weighted (up to 25% additional) for quality;
payments up to 80% higher in poor and remote areas

3

Central African Republic

2012

Private providers

20

Egypt

2006

Ethiopia

2009

Quarterly payments to facilities directly, used partly for
worker bonuses and general operating budget
Salary supplements to public and private service
providers (up to 275% of base salary)
non-financial incentives and recognition
Varies across NGO provider

6

9

12

Cameroon

Ghana

early-mid 2000s

Maternal and child health services, technical and
capacity building indicators
Public and private service providers in Family planning, immunization,
District Provider Organizations
Commuity health workers
Peer and community based health education and
outreach
NGO sector health workers
Varies across NGO provider

35

5

1

Liberia

2008

NGO health systems managers

Malawi

2012

Primary care facilities

Mali

2012

Primary care providers

Mozambique

2011

Community health workers

Senegal

2012

Public sector hospitals, health
management teams, and health centers

Somaliland

2009

Nurses and traditional birth attendants Institutional Deliveries

South Sudan

2009

NGO health systems managers

Tanzania

2011

Uganda

2004

Public health centers, non-profit
hospitals and dispensaries
Private non-profit health facilities

Zambia

2004

Public providers

Zimbabwe

2011

Provincial and district health
executives, district hospitals and rural
health centers

1
2

3
4
5
6

7

8

4

6 administrative and managerial indicators and 12
targeted services
Quality as measured by a standards-based
management and recognition tool
Essential obstetric and newborn care service use

Operating budget bonuses

Unclear

17

Institutional deliveries, vaccination completion
rates, combination of input and output based
indicators
Increased care use and quality indicators

Unclear

18

Unclear

16

Vaccination rates, Vitamin A supplimentation,
insecticide treated bednet use, underweight
children, staffing, sufficient drug supply, clinical
vignette performance
Unspecified indicators contracted (set of indicators
specified for each type of facility)
Increased patient volume, prenatal care visits,
attended deliveries, immunization rates,
contraception use, malaria treatment
Malaria and sexually transmitted infection
incidence; prenatal care, attended deliveries,
postnatal care, patient satisfaction, immunization
rates
Infant and maternal health indicators

2

10
Nurses received bonuses for each attended delivery;
Traditional midwives received an incentive for each
referral
Below 80% of targets yields 95% contract payment; 80- 10
99% leads to 100% payment; 100% of targets leads to
106% of contract payents

Operating budget bonuses

4

Operating budget bonuses

7

Salary bonuses or non-financial awards (trophies)

13

Service payments for each service provided; payments 19
weighted by score on quality indicator tool; payments upweighted for delivery of services in remote areas

Amare, Y. (2011). Non-Financial Incentives for Voluntary Community Health Workers: A Qualitative Study. L10K Working Paper No 2. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia: The Last Ten Kilometers Project, JSI
The Broadbranch Initiative. (2012). Improving Maternal and Neonatal Health in Malawi.
http://broadbranch.org/BBA/Partners_Projects/Entries/2011/5/19_Improving_Maternal_and_Neonatal_Health_in_Malawi.html
Busogoro, J.F. & Beith, A. (2010). Pay for Performance for Improved Health In Burundi. Washington DC: US Agency for International Development.
Ergo, A., & Paina, L. (2012). Verification in Performance Based Incentive Schemes. Washington DC: US Agency for International Development.
Huntington, D., Zaky, H. H. M., Shawky, S., & Fattah, F. A. (2009). Impact of provider incentive payments on reproductive health services in Egypt. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Lievens, T., Serneels, P, Garabino, S., Quartey, P., Appiah, E., Herbst, C., Lemiere, C., Soucat, A., Rose, L., & Saleh, K. (2011). Creating Incentives to Work in Ghana: Results from a Qualitative Health
Worker Study. Health, Nutrition and Population Discussion Paper. Washington DC: The World Bank.
Lundberg, M. (2008). Client satisfaction and the perceived quality of primary health care in Uganda. In S. Amin (Ed.). Are You Being Served? New Tools For Measuring Service Delivery . Washington
Dc: World Bank Publications.
McNamara, P. (2005). Quality-based payment: six case examples. International Journal for Quality in Health Care , 17 (4), 357-362.

9

Morgan, L., Brinkerhoff, D., & Najib, M. (2012). Community Engagement and Performance-Based Incentives: The View from Indonesia. Washington DC: US Agency for International Development.
10

Morgan, L., & Eichler, R. (2011). Performance-Based Incentives in Africa: Experiences, Challengse and Lessons. Washington DC: US Agency for International Development.

36

11
12
13
14
15
16
17

18
19
20
21

Population Council. (2010). Pay for Performance (P4P) Operations Research Study. New York: Population Council.
Powell-Jackson, T., & Hanson, K. (2012). Financial incentives for maternal health: Impact of a national programme in Nepal. Journal of Health Economics , 31 , 271–284.
The US Agency for International Development. (2006). Zambia Pilot Study of Performacne-Based Incentives. Quality Assurance Project, Operations Research Results. Washington DC: US Agency for
The US Agency for International Development. (2010). Performance Based Incentives Primer for USAID Missions. Washington DC: US Agency for International Development.
The US Agency for International Development. (2010). Armenia Primary Health Care Reform Project. Washington DC: US Agency for International Development.
The US Agency for International Development. (2012). Better Health Systems: Strategies that Work. Washington DC: US Agency for International Development.
The US Agency for International Development. (2012). Performance-based Incentives and Quality of Maternal-Newborn Health Care in Low-resource Settings: Opportuities and Challenges for
Performance Measurement Reesarch. Meeting Report.
The US Global Health Initiative. (2011). Mozambique Strategy 2011-2015. http://www.ghi.gov/documents/organization/175133.pdf
The World Bank. (2012). Project Information Document, Appraisal Stage: Zimbabwe Health Results Based Financing. Report No.: AB6635. Washington DC: The World Bank.
The World Bank. (2012). Results-Based Financing for Health. http://www.rbfhealth.org/rbfhealth/content/central-african-republic-car
Vanzie M., Hsi, N., Beith, A., & Eichler, R. (2010). Using Supply-side Pay for Performance to Strengthen Health Prevention Activities and Improve Efficiency: The Case of Belize. Washington DC: US
Agency for International Development.

37

