                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      GROWTH IN REGIONS

                                          Nicola Gennaioli
                                          Rafael La Porta
                                     Florencio Lopez de Silanes
                                           Andrei Shleifer

                                        Working Paper 18937
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18937


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2013




We are grateful to Jan Luksic for outstanding research assistance, to Antonio Spilimbergo for sharing
the structural reform data set, and to Robert Barro, Peter Ganong, and Simon Jaeger for extremely
helpful comments. Shleifer acknowledges financial support from the Kauffman Foundation. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Nicola Gennaioli, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Growth in Regions
Nicola Gennaioli, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 18937
April 2013
JEL No. O43,O47,R11

                                             ABSTRACT

We use a newly assembled sample of 1,503 regions from 82 countries to compare the speed of per
capita income convergence within and across countries. Regional growth is shaped by similar factors
as national growth, such as geography and human capital. Regional convergence is about 2.5% per
year, not more than 1% per year faster than convergence between countries. Regional convergence
is faster in richer countries, and countries with better capital markets. A calibration of a neoclassical
growth model suggests that significant barriers to factor mobility within countries are needed to account
for the evidence.


Nicola Gennaioli                                    Florencio Lopez de Silanes
Department of Finance                               EDHEC Business School
Università Bocconi                                  393, Promenade des Anglais BP 3116
Via Roentgen 1                                      06202 Nice Cedex 3, France
20136 Milan, Italy                                  and NBER
ngennaioli@crei.cat                                 Florencio.lopezdesilanes@edhec.edu

Rafael La Porta                                     Andrei Shleifer
Dartmouth College                                   Department of Economics
Tuck School                                         Harvard University
210 Tuck Hall                                       Littauer Center M-9
Hanover, NH 03755                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                            and NBER
rafael.laporta@dartmouth.edu                        ashleifer@harvard.edu
1. Introduction

       Since the fundamental work of Barro (1991), the question of convergence of income levels between

countries has received enormous attention (Barro, Mankiw, and Sala-i-Martin 1995, Caselli, Esquivel and

Lefort 1996, Aghion, Howitt, and Mayer-Foulkes 2005, Barro 2012). Several papers also analyze convergence

between regions of the same country, as in the case of Japanese prefectures, Canadian provinces, Australian

regions, Russian regions, or U.S. states (Barro and Sala-i-Martin 1991, 1992, 1995, Blanchard and Katz 1992,

Cashin 1995, Coulombe and Lee 1995, Sala-i-Martin 1996, Ganong and Shoag 2012, Guriev and Vakulenko

2012, Spilimbergo and Che 2012), but data availability has limited this kind of exercises. In this paper, we

systematically study regional convergence by using a large sample of sub-national regions. To this end, we

expand the dataset from Gennaioli et al. (2013) by collecting time-series data on regional GDP. We end up

with data on 1,503 regions in 82 countries. We then analyze the patterns of convergence among regions

and compare them to convergence across countries.

       There is substantial inequality among regions of the same country that needs to be understood. In

Brazil, which is typical in terms of regional inequality, the mean (median) region has per capita income in

2009 of about US $ 6,400 (US $5,000), and the standard deviation of regional GDP per capita is $3,000. In

the average country in our dataset, the richest region is 5.2 times richer than the poorest one (roughly the

difference between the US and the Dominican Republic), but sometimes differences are more extreme. For

example, GDP per capita in the richest Mexican state, Campeche, is 16.4 times higher than that in the

poorest, Chiapas, a difference that is roughly similar to that between US and Pakistan in 2010. If we avoid

extremely poor regions, which typically have small populations, and extremely rich regions, which typically

have natural resources, inequality within countries is lower but still substantial. Moreover, poor countries

display greater dispersion of regional GDP levels than rich countries. The average standard deviation of (log)

per capita income in the 20 poorest countries is 1.74 times larger than the average dispersion of per capita

income in the 20 richest countries (40% vs 24%).

       Because these income differences summarize past growth trajectories, understanding the speed of

regional convergence can shed light on the persistence of regional inequality. Going back to the example of


                                                          2
Brazil, if a region one standard deviation below the median catches up at Barro’s “iron law” rate of 2% per

year, it will need almost half a century to catch up with the median. In the meantime, inequality will persist.

So, what is the speed of regional convergence? How does it compare to the speed of convergence between

countries? What factors determine it? Is it consistent with patterns of regional inequality? Our data allows

us to systematically address these four questions.

        The focus on regional convergence also allows us to better assess the explanatory power of the

neoclassical growth model. The estimates of cross-country convergence rates are potentially subject to

severe omitted variable problems, owing to large heterogeneity between countries. This problem may be

less severe in the case of subnational regions, which are more homogeneous than countries in terms of

productivity, institutions, and access to technology.

        To organize the discussion, we present a neoclassical model of regional growth related to the earlier

work of Barro, Mankiw, and Sala-i-Martin (1995), Braun (1993), and Ganong and Shoag (2012). To account

for persistent disparities in regional incomes, we incorporate into the model a stylized process of mobility of

human and physical capital from regions where it is abundant to regions where it is scarce subject to an

exogenous mobility friction. This model generates a modified growth equation, which predicts that the

speed of regional convergence decreases in the severity of that mobility friction. The model also predicts

that a region’s per capita income growth should rise with country-level income to an extent that increases in

factor mobility. Indeed, a region can attract more capital, and thus grow faster, if it is integrated into a

richer country. Both of these predictions of the model are new and empirically testable.

        When we estimate the growth equation derived from the model, we find that doubling country-level

income increases regional growth by about 1.5%. We estimate regional convergence to be about 2.5% per

year, slightly higher than the “iron law” rate of 2% advocated by Barro (2012). This estimate is not

substantially affected by country fixed effects. This finding is somewhat puzzling. Barriers to the mobility of

human and physical capital are arguably important across countries (Lucas 1990), but their role would a

priori seem to be smaller within countries. This would imply, contrary to what we find, a much faster

convergence rate within than between countries. To better interpret our regional findings, we directly


                                                          3
estimate cross country convergence in our sample. We find that the speed of national GDP per capita

convergence is slightly faster than 1%. On the one hand, this is significantly slower, by about 1.5 percentage

points, than the regional convergence rate, consistent with the basic prediction that barriers to factor

mobility are higher between than within countries. On the other hand, the difference is not that big.

        To compare our findings to Barro’s (2012) directly, we also estimate our equation for regional

growth using instrumental variables, with lagged GDP serving as an instrument for current GDP, which might

be measured with error. The estimated regional convergence rate falls to 1.7%, but due to decline in sample

size, not the use of IV. Nor can the finding that regional convergence is broadly comparable to national

convergence be due to the omitted variables problem, which is surely less severe at the regional than at the

national level. Omitted variables should if anything cause a relative overstatement of regional convergence.

Contrary to the view that factors are significantly more mobile within than across countries, this evidence

suggests that mobility (and thus convergence) often limited in both cases. Indeed, when we map our

estimated coefficients into the parameters of our model, they point to rather slow mobility of capital in

response to within-country return differentials. The five-year elasticity of migration to regional return

differentials implied by our model is about 2. With nearly perfect mobility, our model predicts a much

higher elasticity.

        Motivated by this evidence, we focus empirically on limited within country resource mobility and try

to assess whether it can indeed account for regional growth patterns. To measure limited mobility, one

would ideally look at regional differences in goods prices and factor returns. These differences would

capture both the intrinsic non-tradeability of some factors or goods, such as land and housing, and the

presence of man-made barriers to mobility.2 Unfortunately, the scarcity of data on regional prices prevents

us from looking at price differentials. A feasible alternative is to directly look at the barriers to regional

mobility of resources caused by non-integrated markets at the national level. To implement this approach,


2
 Different limits to mobility have important consequences for welfare. In the case of non-tradeability of certain locally
produced goods, such as housing, perfect mobility of labor would suffice to equalize the living standards of workers
across regions (as differences in price levels would offset nominal income differences). Barriers to mobility of labor
would in contrast entail differences in the living standards of workers across regions. In our analysis, we try to directly
measure potential regulatory barriers to mobility and look at migration of productive factors.

                                                                 4
we run regional convergence regressions by interacting regional GDP with proxies for national market

institutions as well as government transfers. This allows us to analyze country-level correlates of the speed

of regional convergence. Regional convergence is faster in richer countries, consistent with the latter having

lower regional inequality. Regional convergence is also faster in countries with better-regulated capital

markets. However, even the statistically significant determinants of the speed of convergence do not move

the convergence rate much beyond Barro’s “iron law”.

        We also collect direct evidence – for a small subsample of countries – on the share of employees, as

well as of skilled employees, that are recent migrants. We show that these shares are on average rather

small, consistent with limited mobility of human capital. However, in-migration is also faster into richer

regions and in countries with better-regulated capital markets, consistent with our model.

        As a final robustness check, we consider fixed effects estimates of growth regressions. From cross

country studies, it is well known that fixed effect estimation boosts the speed of convergence.          In our

sample of countries, the introduction of country fixed effects in cross-country regressions increases national

convergence rates by roughly 2 percentage points. If we include regional fixed effects in our regional growth

regressions, the speed of convergence rises substantially, by anywhere from 2 to 9 percentage points. These

differences notwithstanding, it is still the case that substantial within-country mobility barriers are required

to make sense of the data. We concur with Barro (2012) that fixed effects estimates likely lead to a large

Hurwicz bias, particularly at the sub-national level, where the omitted variable problem is much less severe.

We therefore rely on OLS estimates.

        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 lays out a model of regional convergence and migration.

Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 estimates the model’s equations governing regional convergence,

and its dependence on country-level factors. Section 5 interprets the model in light of the empirical findings.

Section 6 concludes.




                                                           5
2. The Model

        We present a model of convergence across regions that explicitly takes into account barriers to

factor mobility. Time is discrete              . A country consists of a measure one of regions, indexed by

    [   ] and characterized by regional total factor productivity (TFP)           and an initial per capita capital

endowment ̂ . Capital here is a broad construct, combining human and physical inputs (we do not have

data on regional physical capital). We distinguish a region’s time t capital endowment ̂         from the amount

of capital       employed at time in the same region. The two will tend to differ owing to capital mobility.

        If at time      region   employs an amount           of capital per-capita, its output per capita        is

determined by a diminishing returns Cobb-Douglas technology:



        Regions with higher       are more productive, owing for instance to better geography or institutions.

The competitive remuneration of capital is then equal to                           . Under perfect mobility, this

remuneration is equalized across regions, which implies:

                                                             ̂


where ̂                captures region ’s relative TFP and           ∫̂      is the aggregate human capital in the
             ∫


country. Intuitively, return equalization occurs when relatively more productive regions employ more

capital than less productive ones. In general, however, capital mobility costs prevent return equalization.



2.1 Migration and Human Capital Accumulation

        To close the model, we must specify how human capital evolves over time, both in the aggregate

and across regions. To obtain closed form solutions, in our main specification we assume that human capital

depreciates fully in one period and that population growth is zero. When we interpret our estimates, we

also consider a model with capital depreciation and population growth, which we analyze in Appendix 2. In

the spirit of the Solow model, we assume that at time region invests an exogenous share               of income in

education. The human capital endowment of region i at time                is then equal to:

                                                                 6
                                                 ̂

The aggregate human capital endowment at time                       is then ∫ ̂                         ∫           .

        The link between the initial capital endowment ̂                     and employment             depends on migration.

Migration occurs after new capital is created but before production. If mobility costs are infinite, each region

employs its endowment, so that                       ̂     . If mobility is perfect, the remuneration of human capital is

equalized across regions and, by Equation (2),                      ̂            . To capture in a tractable way intermediate

degrees of mobility, we assume that the human capital employed in region at time                            is given by:

                                                               (̂       ) (̂            )

where      [    ] and                                    is a normalization factor common to all regions.
                               ∫( ̂     )    ̂


        In equation (4), parameter proxies for mobility costs 3. At                         , these costs are so high that there

is no mobility at all. At             , these costs are absent and the allocation of capital adjusts so that its

remuneration is equalized across regions. In less extreme cases, there is an intermediate degree of mobility

(and thus of convergence in returns). Equation (4) is admittedly ad-hoc, but it allows us to tractably account

for the costs of capital mobility in the regressions.



2.2 Steady State and Growth Regressions

        We can now explore the dynamics of our economy to derive the implications for growth regressions.

Equation (1) implies that the growth rate of region                 between times t and               is given by

(           )   Per capita income growth is pinned down by per capita human capital employment growth

(i.e., post migration). From Equations (3) and (4), we can derive per capita capital growth:


                                                                            (̂      ∫           )


The growth rate of capital employment in region increases in: i) the savings rate , ii) the region’s TFP, iii)

aggregate investment       ∫                . This growth rate decreases, due to diminishing returns, in the initial


3
 In this one-good model, there is no trade in goods across regions, but in a multi-goods model of Hecksher-Ohlin type,
imperfect capital mobility would be isomorphic to imperfect trade in goods.

                                                                        7
capital stock        . The dynamics of the economy are identified by the evolution of the regions’ capital

endowment and migration patterns. These in turn determine the evolution of the aggregate human capital

endowment          and output         ∫          . The appendix proves the following result:


Proposition 1 There is a unique steady state characterized by (non-zero) regional per capita incomes

and aggregate per capita income              ∫       . In this steady state, there is no migration. Starting from non-

zero income, each region converges to this steady state according to the difference equation:

                                                               ̂



           According to Proposition 1, per-capita income growth is temporary because diminishing returns

cause regional incomes to eventually converge to their steady state values. In Appendix 2, we extend

Equation (6) to the case of positive population growth and finite depreciation, which reduces per capita

growth as in the standard Solow model.

           By taking logs and relabeling terms, we can rewrite (6) as:


                              (       )


where           is a random shock hitting region at time               .4 This is our main estimating equation.

           The constant     in Equation (7) captures region specific productivity: more productive regions should

ceteris paribus grow faster. Indeed, according to the model,                      [                      ]        , which

increases in the region’s TFP. This implies that, unless all determinants of productivity are controlled for,

OLS estimation of (7) is subject to an omitted variables problem that creates a downward bias in the

estimated convergence rate. This problem is severe in the context of cross country growth regressions,

owing to large cross country differences in institutions, culture, etc. To overcome this difficulty, researchers

have tried to use fixed effects estimates. It is however well known that this strategy creates a potentially

severe opposite Hurwicz (1950) bias (especially in short time series), overstating the rate of convergence.

Because of this bias, Barro (2012) and others prefer estimating cross country growth regression without


4
    We view this random shock as stemming from a transitory (multiplicative) shock to regional productivity   .

                                                                   8
country fixed effects. In the sub-national context, the case for not using regional fixed effects is much

stronger than in cross country regressions (after country fixed effects are controlled for). Indeed, differences

in institutions or culture are arguably small within countries and in any event much smaller than between

countries. Accordingly, the bias from using fixed effects is much larger at the regional level.              As a

consequence, our preferred estimates for Equation (7) use OLS with country fixed effects. We however

show how the results change when we use regional fixed effects.

        According to equation (7), holding regional productivity constant, economic growth decreases in the

initial level of income (recall that       ). This is the standard convergence result of neoclassical models,

due to diminishing returns. The novel twist is that the speed of convergence                      decreases with

mobility costs (i.e. decreases in ). Mobility of capital to poorer regions accelerates convergence. Finally,

holding regional income constant, regional growth increases in aggregate per capita income          . This is also

an implication of mobility: higher national income increases investment and thus the amount of capital

available for employment in the region. The strength             of this effect falls in . In Section 5, we discuss

how the interpretation of coefficients changes with conventional population growth and depreciation rates.

        These effects are absent in conventional cross country studies because mobility costs are assumed to

be prohibitive (      ). Of course, the quantitative relevance of capital mobility costs in a regional context is

an empirical question, and the estimation of Equation (7) can shed light on these barriers to capital mobility.

        The mobility parameter         may vary across countries, owing to differences in factor market

development and government transfers. We thus estimate Equation (7) by also allowing               to vary across

countries c = 1,…,C according to the formula                    , where      is a proxy capturing the extent of

factor market development or government transfers in country c and             is a parameter linking that proxy

to the effective mobility cost. This leads to the interactive equation:


               (       )


        To assess the role of market development or government transfers in affecting regional

convergence, we pick several empirical proxies       for each of these factors and then estimate Equation (8)



                                                            9
to back out parameters       and . We can then link the speed of convergence to the inequality of regions

within a country. By equation (8), and assuming that all regions (in all countries) are subject to the same

variance      of the random shock and that productivity differences induce a variance of region-specific

constants equal to , we can calculate that long run inequality across regions within a country c obeys:


                                            (     )

Regional inequality is lower in countries with lower barriers to regional factor mobility (i.e. with higher   ).

          Finally, we conclude the theoretical analysis by mapping our mobility parameter       into the elasticity

of migration to return differentials. To do so, suppose that the economy is in a steady state with return

and region experiences a drop in its wage level to             . This situation represents a developed economy

that has already converged but faces an adverse shock in one region. Starting from an initial factor

endowment         , out migration adjusts the actual resources stock to   , to satisfy:


                                   (    )                 (        )              (       )


Equation (10) characterizes the percentage outmigration flow from region              as a function of the return

differential. The coefficient      has the intuitive interpretation of “elasticity of outmigration” to the return

difference         . For given , elasticity increases in : when returns are less diminishing, under perfect

mobility capital is allocated more unequally. This boosts mobility in Equation (4) and thus the elasticity of

migration in Equation (10). Our regional regressions provide values for the parameters          and   that can be

used to obtain a reference value for the elasticity in (10). This reference value can be compared to direct

estimates obtained from developed economies to evaluate whether our regressions are consistent with

higher mobility frictions in developing countries.



3. Data

          Our analysis is based on measures of regional GDP, years of schooling, and geography in up to 1,503

regions in 82 countries for which we found regional GDP data. We begin by gathering GDP data at the most

disaggregated administrative division available (typically states or provinces), or, when such data does not

                                                              10
exist, at the most disaggregated statistical division level (e.g. the Eurostat NUTS in Europe) for which such

data is available. During our sample period (see below), the number of regions with GDP data increased in

35 of the countries in our sample. For example, GDP data for the three Northwest Territories of Canada (i.e.

Nova Scotia, Nunavut, and Yukon) was reported as an aggregate before 1998 and broken down for each of

the 3 territories after that. To make the data comparable across time, we compute all of our statistics for

the regions that existed during the period when GDP first became available (see the online Appendix 1 for a

list of the regions in our dataset and how they map into existing administrative and statistical divisions).

Figure 1 shows that our sample coverage is extensive outside of Africa.

        We collect as much yearly data on regional GDP as possible. Table 1 lists the years for which we

have been able to find regional GDP data and shows that typically there are gaps in the data. For example,

regional GDP for Brazilian states is available for 1950-1966, 1970, 1975, 1980, and 1985-2009. The average

country in our sample has regional GDP data for 19.2 time points spanning 32.3 years. We first convert all

regional GDP data into (current purchasing power) USD values by multiplying national GDP in PPP terms by

the share of each region in national GDP and then use regional population to compute per capita GDP in

each region. Regional price deflators are generally unavailable. We then follow the standard practice and

compute the 5-year growth rate of per capita GDP for each region (e.g., Barro 2012).

       Next we gather data on the highest educational attainment of the population 15 years and older,

primarily from population censuses (see online Appendix 2 for a list of sources). We estimate the number of

years of schooling associated with each level of educational attainment. Specifically, we use UNESCO data

on the duration of primary and secondary school in each country and assume: (a) zero years of school for the

pre-primary level, (b) 4 additional years of school for tertiary education, and (c) zero additional years of

school for post-graduate degrees. We do not use data on incomplete levels because it is only available for

about half of the countries in the sample. For example, we assume zero years of additional school for the

lower secondary level. For each region, we compute average years of schooling as the weighted sum of the

years of school required to achieve each educational level, where the weights are the fraction of the

population aged 15 and older that has completed each level of education.


                                                         11
        Table 1 lists the years for which we have data on educational attainment.            Data on years of

schooling is typically available at ten year intervals. In some cases, data on educational attainment starts

after regional GDP data. For example, data on regional educational attainment for Argentinian provinces

starts in 1970 while regional GDP data is available for 1953. In our empirical work, we use interpolated data

on years of schooling matching 80% (25,383/31,705) of the region-year observations with regional GDP.

        Finally we collect data on geography, natural resources, and the disease environment as proxies for

unobserved differences in productivity. The Appendix describes the variables in detail, here we summarize

them briefly. We use three measures of geography computed directly from GIS maps. They include the area

of each region, the latitude for the centroid of each region, and the (inverse) average distance between cells

in a region and the nearest coastline. We use data from the USGS World Petroleum Assessment Data to

estimate per capita cumulative oil and gas production. We measure the disease environment using GIS data

on the dominant vector species of mosquitoes from Kisezewski et al. (2004) to capture the component of

malaria variation that is exogenous to human intervention.        Lastly, we keep track of the region of the

country’s capital city.

        Table 2 presents a full list of the 82 countries in the sample, with the most recent year for which we

have regional data. The countries are listed in the order from poorest to richest. Table 2 also reports per

capita regional income in the poorest, 25th percentile, 50th percentile, 75th percentile, and the richest region

in each country, as well as the ratio of richest to poorest, and 75th to 25th percentile regions. Several points

come out in the data. First, if we look across countries, inequality is immense. The 2010 GDP per capita of

Norway, the richest country in our sample, is 55 times higher than that of Mozambique, the poorest. Even in

the middle of the distribution there is substantial inequality among countries. The 2010 GDP per capita in

Spain, at the 75th percentile, is 6.3 times higher than that of Paraguay, at the 25th percentile. Second,

inequality is smaller but still substantial within countries. At the extreme, in Venezuela, the 1990 GDP per

capita in Falcón is 46 times higher than that in Trujillo ($21,422 vs $466). To put this difference in

perspective, Trujillo is not much richer than Liberia, the poorest African country at that time, and Falcón is

similar to Mississippi, the poorest US state. Similar patterns of inequality show up in Russia, Mexico, and


                                                          12
other countries with extremely wealthy mining and exploration regions. Using the Theil index to measure

inequality, it is possible to compare the extent of regional inequality to country-level inequality. The Theil

population-weighted index of inequality of GDP per capita is .54, of which .45 can be attributed to between

country inequality, and .09 to within-country regional inequality. Put differently, within-country regional

inequality explains roughly 10% of total world income inequality. Although country-level inequality takes the

lion’s share, regional inequality is substantial even from the vantage point of world income inequality.

        Third, inequality within countries is much lower if we compare 75th and 25th percentile regions. In

Venezuela, the ratio of incomes in 75th and 25th percentile regions is only 2.8; it is 1.7 in Russia and 1.6 in

Mexico. Clearly, enormous within-country inequality is driven to a substantial extent by natural resources.

Fourth, even ignoring the extremes, regional inequality within countries is substantial and appears to decline

with development. The ratio of incomes of 75th to 25th percentile regions is 1.68 in the poorest countries,

but declines to 1.44 in the richest ones. The standard deviation of (log) GDP per capita is 39% in the poorest

20 countries, but declines to 23% in the richest 20 countries.

        To understand these patterns of inequality within countries, we try to see how they evolve over

time. To this end, we use our model to assess the speed of convergence and its determinants.



4. Estimation Results

        We now present our basic empirical results across both regions and countries. The estimation of

Equation (7) with OLS implicitly assumes that regional income        is uncorrelated with the error term. The

problem is that regional productivity differences, in this case absorbed by the error term, would create a

positive correlation between regional income and growth, giving the misleading impression of little (or no)

convergence. Various studies have dealt with this problem in a variety of ways, none perfect, ranging from

including many controls for productivity differences to fixed effects estimation.               Following the

recommendation of Barro (2012), our basic results do not include country fixed effects in cross-country

regressions and region fixed effects in cross-region regressions. As we show in the robustness section, such

fixed effects estimates lead to much faster convergence rates, but probably for spurious econometric


                                                          13
reasons (Hurwicz 1950, Nickell 1981). Barro (2012) also uses lagged per capita GDP as an instrument for

current per capita GDP to address an errors-in-variables concern.        For comparability purposes, we also

present results using instrumental variables, which make little difference for parameter estimates but

sharply cut sample size.

        To begin, Table 3 presents the basic regional regressions, using all the data we have. Following Barro

(2012), we estimate panel regressions with 5-year growth rates of real per capita regional GDP as dependent

variables. To get at convergence, we control for beginning of period levels of per capita income. To get at

spillovers from national income, which are implied by our model, we also control for national per capita GDP

at the beginning of the period. To take into account the fact that different regions might have different

steady states, we use the usual geographic controls, such as latitude, inverse distance to coast, malaria

ecology, log of the cumulative oil and gas production, log of population density, and a dummy for whether

the national capital is in the region. In some specifications, we also control for the beginning of each 5-year

period years of education in the region.

        In the first three columns of Table 3, we present results with no fixed effects at all. In the next three

columns, we control for country fixed effects. Because it is customary to insert in growth equations time

controls accounting for variation of growth rates over time (again, see Barro 2012), in column (7) we also

include year fixed effects. Finally, we present the IV specification in column (9), and the OLS specification for

the same (smaller) sample in column (8).

        The results on control variables in Table 3 confirm some well-known findings. Without country fixed

effects, latitude, inverse distance to coast, natural resource endowments, and population density all

influence regional growth rates in expected ways. The economic significance of these four variables on per

capita GDP growth ranges from .5 percentage points for a one-standard deviation increase in latitude to .15

percentage points for a one-standard deviation increase in oil. These results are much weaker, or disappear,

when country fixed effects are controlled for. There is also a strong result, even with country fixed effects,

that regions that include a national capital have grown about .8% faster during this period.




                                                           14
        The main result of OLS specifications in Table 3 is the confirmation of the “iron law” convergence

rate of about 2.5% - 3% per year in this regional sample. Without country fixed effect, we also find that

doubling the country’s per capita income raises the region’s growth rate by about 1.7%, consistent with our

model. Interestingly, the inclusion of country fixed effects leaves the convergence coefficient almost

unaffected, while rendering regional controls such as geography insignificant. This suggests that the regional

information contained in the controls is accounted for by country fixed effects, but the latter in turn contain

little additional information relative to the controls themselves. Consistent with our priors, the omitted

variable bias does not appear to be very large at the regional level once country effects are controlled for.

        Years of education also enter significantly in the regional growth regressions, with the usual sign.

Increasing average education by 5 years (a big change) raises the annual growth rate by between 1%

(without country fixed effects) and 3% (with country fixed effects), depending on the specification. This

effect of education on regional growth is consistent with the standard findings in a cross-section of countries

(Barro 1991, Mankiw, Romer, and Weil 1992), but also with the cross-sectional evidence that differences in

education explain by far the largest share of differences in per capita incomes across regions within

countries (Gennaioli et al. 2013).

        Column (8) presents the OLS results with country and year fixed effects on the smaller sample for

which we can instrument GDP with lagged GDP. The estimated convergence rate drops to 1.8% per year for

this smaller sample. Column (9) presents an IV regression similar to Barro (2012), but for regions. The use of

instrumental variables for regional data does not materially affect the convergence rate, now estimated at

1.9%. Since IV has a minor impact on convergence, we emphasize the OLS estimates for a larger sample.

        The estimates of the average convergence rate hide substantial heterogeneity among countries.

Some of the most rapidly growing countries in the sample, such as India, China, and Chile, actually exhibit

regional divergence. Later in the paper, we investigate national determinants of convergence rates.

        The results obtained from the estimation of Equation (7) are quite surprising. Even a regional

convergence rate of 3% is not much higher than the cross country convergence rate documented by Barro

(2012). In principle, one might think that mobility of human and physical capital should be much higher


                                                           15
within than across countries, leading to much faster convergence across region than across countries. To see

whether this finding is not an artifact of our sample, and thus to better compare regional and national

convergence, Table 4 presents the basic cross-country results for the 89 countries in our sample that have

per capita GDP data going back to at least the year 1965. Columns (1)-(4) include no fixed effects, whereas

in column (5) we include year fixed effects. Column (6) shows the results where income is instrumented

with past income. We take data from the standard period over which these results are usually considered,

1960-2010. We use 5-year economic growth rates as independent variables. We use beginning-of-the-

period national income to get at convergence.      We use the same geographic controls as in Table 3 and,

consistent with the earlier literature, find several statistically significant effects, especially for inverse

distance to coast. In the context of national growth, we cannot identify the spillover effect predicted by

Equation (7), and so we exclude world income in specifications with year fixed effects.

        In specifications including only geographic controls, the estimated convergence rate between

countries is only .3% to .4%. However, as we add additional controls, especially life expectancy, investment-

to-GDP, and fertility (which of course are correlated with initial per capita income), we can raise estimated

convergence rates to about 1.7% per year in OLS specifications. An instrumental variable specification in

column (6) yields a very similar 1.7%, showing that, again, IV does not matter. These are somewhat slower

than regional convergence rates, but comparable to Barro’s estimated “iron law” rate of 2%. We also find

that greater human capital is associated with faster growth when we control for geography but not when we

add additional controls such as life expectancy, investment-to-GDP, and fertility.

        We draw two tentative conclusions from these specifications. First, a comparison of estimated

convergence rates in Tables 3 and 4 points to higher estimates within countries than between countries, by

about 1% per year, in OLS specifications. This result is supportive of the model because: i) resources such as

human and physical capital are more mobile within than between countries, and ii) productivity differences

between regions of a country are likely to be smaller than those between countries, which implies that the

downward bias of the estimated convergence rate is likely smaller in within-country estimates. Both

considerations imply that convergence should be faster at the regional than at the national level. The


                                                          16
second message emerging from our estimates is that, although higher, the rate of convergence between

regions is puzzlingly close to that estimated between countries. In this sense, the OLS difference in these

convergence rates of about 1% can be viewed as an upper bound on the role of regional mobility.5

        To evaluate the role of mobility more precisely, we can use the results of Table 3 to infer the

structural parameters of the model, and in particular assess the mobility frictions entailed by our estimates.

Recall that this table uses both cross-regional variation in initial incomes, and some residual cross-country

variation, to estimate convergence. The (negative of the) coefficient on beginning-of-period income is an

estimate of the “convergence” rate               in Equation (7), while the coefficient on national income is an

estimate of “aggregate externality”              in Equation (7).    In effect, we have two equations with two

unknowns. These estimates suggest, roughly, that α = .99 and τ = .98. In other words, the data suggests a

model in which broadly defined human and physical capital captures the lion’s share of national income and

there are significant barriers to capital mobility. The high value of α is in the ballpark of standard estimates

for the income share remunerating physical and human capital. The most puzzling finding is instead the high

within-country mobility cost implied by τ = .98. We later come back to these parameter values to discuss

their implications for the elasticity of migration in Equation (10). For now, we just note that, even within

countries, the approximate model in which every sub-national region converges at its own speed seems to

be a good approximation. In Section 5, we show that these results are robust to accounting for population

growth and depreciation of capital.

        In light of these puzzling findings, several questions arise. First, can we directly measure the limits to

within- country mobility? Second, can these limits shed light on the slow regional convergence documented

in Table 3? Third, is the directly measured factor mobility within countries slow and particularly so in

countries with high measured barriers to mobility? In the remainder of our empirical analysis, we address

these questions.




5
 A 1% difference in convergence rates has a substantial impact on the length of time to converge. For example, per
capita GDP in the poorest region in the median country in our sample is 40% below the country mean. Closing that gap
would take 25 years at a 2% convergence rate but only 17 years at a 3% convergence rate.

                                                             17
        Theoretically, there are two broad sources of limited factor mobility (and thus of slow convergence

among regions). One is the presence of non-tradable sectors, such as housing and services. Another is the

presence of artificial barriers to factor mobility across regions. Because in both cases there is a departure

from the law of one price, one could use regional differences in goods or factor prices to measure limits to

mobility. However, since we do not have data on regional prices, we cannot measure mobility barriers in

this way. Of course, price differences across regions also imply that real income differences between regions

are smaller than what we measure without using regional price deflators.6

        An alternative strategy to measure limits to mobility is to try to find direct proxies for legal and

regulatory barriers to factor mobility across regions. At first sight, this seems counterintuitive, since we

typically think of human and physical capital as being highly mobile within countries. Lucas (1990) has

famously asked why physical capital does not move across international borders. Reasons include the lack of

proper institutions and of complementary factors of production, such as human capital, in poor countries. In

the regional context, the latter explanation itself relies on lack of mobility of human capital. Although

institutional differences are minimal within countries (and do not explain differences in regional

development, Gennaioli et al. 2013), limited mobility may be the consequence of a country’s overall market

infrastructure, such as the extent of regulation of financial, labor and goods markets. Inappropriate country-

wide regulations can create barriers to factor mobility and can be measured directly.

        To get at this issue, we proxy for the barriers to factor mobility using the following measures of a

country’s market infrastructure: an index of the regulation of domestic financial markets from Abiad,

Detragiache and Tressel (2008), an index of international trade tariffs from Spilimbergo and Che (2012), an

index of labor regulations from Aleksynska and Schindler (2011). We also use a dummy equal to 1 if the

country’s laws are of English Legal Origin. According to La Porta et al. (2008), English Legal Origin is a broad

indicator of a market-supporting regulatory stance. To assess whether the public sector has a direct effect

on regional convergence, we also proxy for determinants of mobility using two measures of redistribution: a


6
 In particular, if labor and capital are perfectly mobile, their real remuneration would be equalized across regions.
Although accounting for regional price differences is crucial to assess living standards, it is less important for our main
goal, which is to analyze productivity differences across regions.

                                                                18
measure of government transfers and subsidies as a fraction of total government spending, and the ratio of

government spending to GDP. Finally, we check Lucas’s hypothesis by investigating the role of regional

human capital in affecting mobility and thus the region’s speed of convergence.

         To evaluate the role of different mobility barriers in shaping the speed of regional convergence, we

estimate Equation (8) by interacting the (log) level of regional GDP by using the previously described

institutional variables as proxies for        in Equation (8). Lucas’ hypothesis is tested by replacing              with a

region specific interactive variable: the region’s human capital as proxied by its average level of schooling.

As first step, we check how the rate of regional convergence depends on the (log) level of GDP in the country

(formally, this is akin to setting              ). All regressions include country fixed effects to capture time-

invariant determinants of productivity.7

         The results of this exercise are reported in Table 5. All regressions include our standard geography

controls, regional per capita GDP, country fixed effects, and proxies for               entered separately. In Panel A,

the regressions also include the interaction between each proxy and regional GDP per capita. In Panel B, we

add to the previous specification the level of GDP per capita as well as the interaction between regional and

national GDP per capita. The regressions omit the interaction between national GDP per capita and proxies

for   , because national and regional GDP per capita are highly correlated.8

         Begin with Panel A. We find that higher (log) GDP per capita is associated with faster regional

convergence (see Column 1, Panel A). To interpret the economic magnitude of the coefficients, consider a

region with GDP per capita of $800 in a country with a GDP per capita of $1,000 (roughly the level of

Tanzania). Our estimates suggest that boosting national GDP per capita by 20% while keeping regional per

capita GDP constant at $800 adds .53 percentage points to the hypothetical region’s growth rate. Columns 2

to 8 in Panel A introduce one at the time the interactions with proxies for national market infrastructure and


7
  We also tried: (1) an index of the regulation of capital flows from Abiad, et al. (2008), (2) an index of the regulation of
the banking from Abiad, et al. (2008), (3) an index of capital controls from Schindler (2009), and (4) the number of
months of severance payments for a worker with 9 years of tenure on the job from Aleksynska et al. (2011).
8
 Formally, the regressions in Panel A of Table 5 do not include the term                     appearing in Equation (8). The
reason is that national and regional incomes are strongly correlated. As a result, having a set of interactions between
national income and country-level determinants of the speed of convergence creates multicolinearity problems.
Nevertheless, the results on interactions are qualitatively similar if we add national income as a control (Table 5B).

                                                                 19
government transfers.         These regressions indicate that more liberalized financial markets, lower

international trade tariff rates, and higher government transfers all increase the speed of convergence. To

quantify these effects, consider again a hypothetical region with GDP per capita of $800. Our estimates then

suggest that this hypothetical region grows 3.02 percentage points faster when the domestic finance

(de)regulation index is two standard deviations higher than the sample average, 2.66 percentage points

faster when tariffs are two standard deviations below their sample average, and 5.76 percentage points

faster when government transfers are two standard deviations higher than the sample average.9 The results

generally support the model’s prediction that frictions slow the convergence rate. The exception is the

effect of common law since it implies that – despite having more favorable market infrastructure --- the

convergence rate is 1.31 percentage points lower in common law countries than in civil law ones.

        Because the interaction term is typically negative, the economic magnitudes of these effects tend to

decline sharply with GDP per capita (the effect of English Legal Origin is the exception). For example, a

region with per capita GDP of $8,000 grows .91 (vs 3.02) percentage points faster when the domestic finance

(de)regulation index is two standard deviations higher than the sample average, .76 (vs 2.66) percentage

points faster when tariffs are two standard deviations below their sample average, and 1.44 (vs 5.76)

percentage points faster when government transfers are two standard deviations higher than the sample

average. In contrast, there is no evidence that the speed of convergence is associated with labor regulation

or government expenditure. Although the effect of English Legal Origin remains puzzling, these results

suggest that economic and financial development, international trade, and government transfers may,

ceteris paribus, reduce regional inequality.

        Because the quality of market infrastructure and government redistribution may be products of

economic development, in Panel B we include these proxies while controlling for the interaction between

regional and national per capita GDP as well as the level of (log) per capita GDP. Neither trade tariffs nor

government transfers play a role here. The coefficient of the interaction between regional GDP and both


9
  Results are qualitatively similar for the index of capital controls (i.e. 9.13 percentage points faster growth when the
index of capital controls is two standard deviations above its average) and the index of banking regulation (i.e. 12.67
percentage point faster growth when the index of banking regulation is two standard deviations above its average).

                                                               20
the domestic financial regulation index and English Legal Origin are roughly unchanged and remain

statistically significant, while the interactions between regional GDP and both trade and government

transfers lose statistical significance. Financial market infrastructure emerges as a robust predictor of faster

regional convergence.

        Next, we investigate the role of regional human capital in promoting regional convergence. We find

no evidence that the rate of convergence (as opposed to regional growth rate per se) varies with regional

education. The results in the last column of Panel A show that while regional education has a large impact

on the growth rate of GDP per capita, the interaction term between regional education and GDP per capita is

insignificant (and remains insignificant in Panel B).

        Having documented that proxies for mobility barriers are indeed correlated with slower regional

convergence, we now directly look at the role factor movements: is regional factor mobility particularly slow

in countries having stronger market barriers? To get a rough estimate of the magnitude of human capital

mobility between regions, we use census data for 26 countries. These data enable us to calculate the share

of each region’s population over the age of 15 that has arrived in the previous 5 years from a different

region. They also enable us to calculate the share of college-educated workers who have recently arrived in

the total number of college-educated.

         Table 6 presents these results. Panel 6A reports the raw data, showing that, in an average region

in this sample, only 3.8% of the adults are recent migrants, although in Mongolia in particular, this share is

much higher. The average share of recent college-educated migrants is a much higher but still modest 8.1%,

and high not only in Mongolia but also in Spain, South Africa, and France.

        Panel 6B presents the simple regressions of the determinants of in-migration into each region. In-

migration is lower into densely populated regions, which might reflect housing costs. Total in-migration in a

region also increases with the region’s relative income, although not for the subset of college educated

workers. Critically, though, the responsiveness of total in-migration to relative per capita GDP is fairly

muted: in-migration adds 1.2 percentage points to the population of a region that doubles its per capita

GDP relative to the national level.    In Panel 6C we run a finer test, considering how total in-migration is


                                                          21
related to the previously used measures of a country’s market infrastructure. In-migration is higher in

countries having less regulated financial and goods markets, consistent with the idea that better market

infrastructure fosters human capital mobility. Consistent with Lucas’s hypothesis, in-migration increases

with the level of education of the region. These preliminary results are consistent with our finding of slow

convergence: human capital at least does not move too fast. Of course, we have no data on the movement

of physical capital, which might be faster.

        In sum, the results in this section indicate – quite surprisingly -- that the speed of regional

convergence is not substantially faster than that of national convergence. In part, this seemingly puzzling

phenomenon may be due to differences in standards of living across regions, which we cannot measure in

our dataset. Our analysis, however, points to a complementary possibility, namely the presence of sub-

national barriers to the mobility of human and physical capital across regions. In particular, the data point to

the importance of poorly developed financial markets as one of the factors slowing down mobility.

        Before interpreting these findings in light of our model, we briefly discuss their robustness with

respect to the inclusion of regional fixed effects. In a regional context, this is akin to introducing a region-

specific constants   , consistent with Equation (7). Barro (2012) urges against the use of such estimates

because of the strong bias toward faster estimated convergence in short panels (see Nickell 1981). As

previously noted, we agree with Barro, but show the results for completeness.

        Table 7 presents the results. The estimated regional convergence rates jump to the neighborhood of

11% (see columns 2-4 in Table 7A) while the estimated national convergence rates now range from 3% to

4.6% (see columns 2-4 in Table 7B). Our regional convergence results are of the same order of magnitude as

the 10% annual cross-country convergence rate estimated by Caselli et al. (1996) for growth using

instrumental variables, but in all likelihood overestimate the speed of convergence. The coefficient on

national income also rises sharply (see Panel A), indicating large spillovers from national income to regional

growth. Interestingly, even these much higher, and likely biased, parameter estimates imply relatively low

rates of mobility of full capital. The estimates suggested by column (2) of Panel A, for example, imply

          and           . At the substantive level, even with no bias for omitted productivity differences


                                                          22
between regions, the data suggest relatively low factor mobility at least with respect to the frictionless

benchmark of           – a result substantially at odds with the proposition that broad capital is freely mobile

within countries.

        Although the finding of low factor mobility within countries is surprising, the convergence rates

suggested by fixed effects regressions are implausibly high, and inconsistent with the evidence of persistent

regional inequality. At 11% annual convergence rates, the regional disparities that we observe in the data

would quickly become small (assuming of course, that productivity differences across regions are modest).

In the next section, we summarize the implications of our findings for the parameters of the model and

patterns of regional inequality.



5. Taking Stock

        Our estimation results – summarized by the estimates in Table 3 – imply values for the structural

parameters     and    that point to significant limits to regional mobility. While the value of          is reasonable,

placed in a narrow range between 0.95 (in columns 6 and 7) and 0.99 (columns 2 and 3), the values of               are

puzzlingly large, located in a narrow range between 0.98 (in columns 2 and 3) and 1.02 (columns 6 and 7).

We now investigate the implication of these findings for: i) the elasticity of migration to return differentials,

ii) the country-level variation in mobility frictions, and thus iii) country-level variation in regional inequality.

        Equation (10) provides a direct way to map        and into an estimate for the elasticity of migration to

return differentials. The latter is in fact given (1-τ)/(1-α). Given the value of           = 0.99, if             the

elasticity of capital migration (or, equivalently, employment) equals 2. Because in our regressions we

measure growth over five year intervals, the value 2 should be interpreted as the elasticity of migration over

a five-year period of persistent return differentials. Across countries, Ortega and Peri (2009) find an

elasticity of migration of roughly 0.3 to one-year changes in destination country income, while Barro and

Sala-i-Martin (1991) surprisingly find a number close to zero within the United States. Braun (1993) extends

Barro/Sala-i-Martin results to a sample regions within 6 wealthy countries, and finds an even lower elasticity

of migration than in the US in five of them, and comparable in one (Japan). Our results on migration in Table


                                                              23
6 are indicative of a low elasticity. If barriers to mobility are higher across than within countries, 0.3 should

be viewed as a lower bound on the one-year elasticity for regional mobility of workers. Perhaps more

fundamentally, because our notion of capital includes both human and physical capital, we should expect

the empirical counterpart of Equation (10) to be quite high, reflecting the relatively high mobility of physical

capital. The elasticity of factor mobility implies by Equation (10) is very sensitive to the value of    If drops

from 0.98 to 0.95 elasticity more than doubles from 2 to 5. Given the scant evidence on the elasticity of

migration of different forms of capital, these numbers should be viewed as very preliminary.

        On the other hand, our estimates allow us to examine the country-level determinants of mobility

frictions . As we just discussed, affects the elasticity of factor mobility and thus the speed of convergence.

With all the usual caveats attached to cross-country regressions, in Table 5 finance emerges as a key factor

that explains differences in factor mobility costs. The estimate of the role of finance in Panel A is again

consistent with the value      =0.99 but it further implies that      , the parameter shaping the gradient of

mobility costs with respect to our financial market indicator, is roughly equal to 0.02 (indeed, parameter

estimates for the finance-income interaction imply                   ). This implies that the elasticity of capital

mobility to return differentials should be equal to 0 in a country with fully repressed financial markets

(       ) and to 2 in a country financial markets are fully liberalized (      ).

        What do these values imply for the impact of financial frictions on the speed of regional convergence

and on the steady state level of regional inequality? Our estimates indicate that fully liberalizing financial

markets increases the convergence rate by 1.6 percentage points. This suggests that financial development

can play an important role in the process of regional convergence. At the same time, it indicates that

financial development alone cannot break the shackles of the iron law: the maximum convergence rate

equals 2.8% (=0.0127+0.0157), and has a modest impact on the number of years that it takes for the per

capita GDP of a poor region to catch up to the national average. In sum, the mobility attained with fully

liberalized financial markets is still far from ensuring fast regional convergence.

        Can finance account for cross country patterns of regional income disparities? For         = 0.99 and    =

0.02, Equation (9) implies the variance of log regional GDP in a country with repressed financial markets (      =


                                                             24
0) is 2.95 times larger than in a country with fully liberalized financial markets (       = 1). Unlike in the case of

the speed of convergence, variation in financial liberalization exerts a large impact on the dispersion of

regional GDP. In our data, the average variance of log GDP per capita is 19% among the 20 poorest countries

and 8% among the 20 richest ones. The average            for the poorest 20 countries in our sample is .34; that for

the richest 20 is .70, implying the dispersion of regional GDP pc in the former 1.4 times larger than that in

the latter. The model can thus explain roughly 60% of the 2.4 fold difference in measures of regional income

dispersion.

        Finally, we examine how the mapping between the structural parameters and the estimated

coefficients changes when we relax the assumptions that capital depreciates fully in one period (δ=1) and

that population growth is zero (n=0).          As we show in Appendix 2, in the more general case with the

population growth rate       and depreciation rate , the speed of convergence equals                                and

the coefficient on national per capita GDP is                             . In this case, backing out       and    from

estimated coefficients requires making an explicit assumption on                  . Note that our main estimating

equation (7) holds exactly when δ+n equals 1. In the more general case, the convergence coefficients are

based on a log-linear approximation around the steady state. We assume that the annual growth rate of

population is 2% (i.e., roughly equal to the average growth rate of the world population during the period

1960-2010) and that the annual depreciation rate is 6% in line with the depreciation of physical capital (e.g.

see Caselli 2005).      Next, we combine the assumption that δ+n equals 40% over a five-year period

(=5x(2%+6%)) with the coefficients from estimating the empirical analogue of our preferred specification (i.e.

column 3 of Table 3) for 5-year growth rates of regional GDP per capita. The results suggest that                 = 0.89

and    = 0.95.10 These estimates for        imply that relaxing the assumption that              = 1 does not lead to

regional convergence rates that are meaningfully faster than at the national level (i.e. regional convergence

rates for τ equal to 0.8 are still about one percent faster than under the benchmark suggested by                      ).

Accordingly, our finding of substantial limits to within country factor mobility is robust to allowing for

conventional value of population growth and the depreciation rate of the capital stock.

10
  Alternatively, setting δ+n equal to 8% per year, the estimated coefficients from our basic specification for the annual
growth rate of regional per capita GDP as the dependent variable implies that α equals 0.98 and τ is 0.78.

                                                               25
6. Conclusion

        Our analysis of growth and convergence in 1,503 regions of 82 countries allows for some tentative

conclusions. First, regional growth is shaped by some of the same key factors as national growth, namely

geography and human capital. Second, our estimated annual rate of regional convergence of 2.5% per year

is similar to Barro’s “iron law” of 2%. These regional convergence estimates are about 1% per year higher

than what we estimate for countries, but still raise a key puzzle of why the flow of capital between regions of

a country is so slow. Third, regional growth and convergence are faster in richer countries, consistent with

the prediction of our neoclassical model that the national supply of capital benefits regional investment and

growth. Fourth, among the national factors correlated with the speed of regional convergence is capital

market regulation: countries with better regulation exhibit faster convergence.         This finding is again

consistent with the notion that frictions within countries limit capital flows and convergence. The facts on

persistent regional inequality and slow convergence thus line up with each other, but they do leave open the

puzzle of why resource flows within countries are typically so slow.




                                                          26
                                                References

Abiad, Abdul, Enrica Detragiache, and Thierry Tressel. 2008. “A New Database of Financial Reforms,” IMF

    Working Paper No. 08/266.

Aghion Philippe, Peter Howitt, and David Mayer-Foulkes. 2005. “The Effect of Financial Development on

    Convergence: Theory and Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(1): 173-222.

Aleksynska, Mariya and Martin Schindler. 2011. "Labor Market Regulations in Low-, Middle- and High-

    Income Countries: A New Panel Database," IMF Working Paper 11/154.

Barro, Robert J. 1991. “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics

    106(2): 407-443.

Barro, Robert J. 2012. “Convergence and Modernization Revisited,” NBER Working Paper No. 18295.

Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-I-Martin. 1991. “Convergence across states and regions”, Brookings Papers

    on Economic Activity 1991(1): 107-182.

Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-I-Martin. 1992. “Convergence,” Journal of Political Economy 100(2): 223-

    251.

Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-I-Martin. 1995. Economic Growth. Boston, MA: McGraw Hill.

Barro, Robert J., N. Gregory Mankiw, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 1995. “Capital Mobility in Neoclassical Models

    of Growth,” American Economic Review 85(1): 103-115.

Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence Katz. 1992. “Regional Evolutions,” Brookings Papers on Economics Activity

    23: 1-76.

Braun, Juan. 1993. “Essays on Economic Growth and Migration,” Ph.D. dissertion, Harvard University.

Caselli, Francesco, Gerardo Esquivel, and Fernando Lefort. 1996. “Reopening the Convergence Debate: A

    New Look at Cross-Country Growth Empirics,” Journal of Economic Growth 1(3) : 363-389.

Caselli, Francesco. 2005. “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences.” In Philippe Aghion and Steven

    Durlauf (eds.), Handbook of Economic Growth, vol 1, ch. 9: 679-741. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Cashin, Paul. 1995. “Economic Growth and Convergence Across the Seven Colonies of Australasia: 1861 –

    1991,” The Economic Record 71(213): 132-144.


                                                         27
Coulombe, Serge and Frank C. Lee. 1995. “Regional productivity convergence in Canada,” Canadian Journal

    of Regional Science, 18(1), 39-56.

Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2013. “Human Capital and

    Regional Development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128 (1): 105-164.

Ganong, Peter and Daniel Shoag. 2012. “Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S. Stopped?,”

    Harvard University Mimeo.

Guriev, Sergei and Elena Vakulenko. 2012. “Convergence among Russian Regions,” Working Paper.

Hurwicz, L. 1950. “Least-Squares Bias in Time Series,” in Tjalling C. Koopmans, ed., Statistical Inference in

    Dynamic Economic Models, Wiley, New York.

Kiszewski, Anthony, Andrew Mellinger, Andrew Spielman, Pia Malaney, Sonia Ehrlich Sachs, and Jeffrey

    Sachs. 2004. “A Global Index Representing the Stability of Malaria Transmission,” American Society of

    Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 70, 486-498.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1998. “Law and Finance,”

    Journal of Political Economy 106 (6): 1113-1155.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez de Silanes, Andrei Shleifer. 2008. “The Economic Consequences of Legal

    Origins,” Journal of Economic Literature 46 (2): 285-332.

Lucas,Robert E., Jr. (1990). “Why doesn't capital flow from rich to poor countries?,” American Economic

    Review, 80(2), 92-96.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David Weil. 1992. “A Contribution to the Empirics of Economic

    Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (2): 407-438.

Nickell, Stephen (1981). “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Effects,” Econometrica, 49, November, 1417-

    1426.

Ortega, Francesc and Giovanni Peri. 2009. “The Causes and Effects of International Migrations: Evidence

    from OECD Countries 1980-2005,” NBER Working Paper No. 14833.

Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. 1996. “Regional Cohesion: Evidence and Theories of Regional Growth and

    Convergence,” European Economic Review 40(1996): 1325-1352.


                                                          28
Schindler, Martin, 2009, "Measuring Financial Integration: A New Data Set," IMF Staff Papers 56:1, 2009, pp.

   222-238.

Spilimbergo, Antonio and Natasha Xingyuan Che, 2012, Structural Reforms and Regional Convergence, IMF

   Working Paper No. 12/106.




                                                        29
Appendix 1.

Proof of Proposition 1.

        At time t+1, the employment of capital in region is equal to                               (̂       ) (̂          )    .

By replacing in this expression the capital endowment ̂                                         and the aggregate capital

shock           ∫            , we obtain that the growth of employed capital in region is equal to:


                                                                 (̂           ∫          )


which is Equation (5) in the text.

        A steady state in the economy is a configuration of regional employment                             and an entailed

aggregate capital employment             ∫               such that the steady state capital             in any region is:


                                                            (̂         ∫                 )

where     is the normalization factor in the steady state. This can be rewritten as:

                                                                          ∫
                                                                      (                  )
                                                                              ∫

There is always an equilibrium in which                  for all regions . Once we rule out this possibility, the


equilibrium is interior and unique. In fact, Equation (A.1) can be written as                                      , where    is

a positive constant which takes the same value for all regions, where such value depends on the entire

profile of regional capital employment levels. Because the capital employed in a region does not affect (has

a negligible impact on) the aggregate constant , there is a unique value of                    fulfilling the condition. By

plugging the value of     into the expressions for        and ∫                   , one can find that for           and        ,

there is a unique value of     that is consistent with equilibrium.

        Finally, given the fact that                 (              ) , the economy approaches the interior steady

state according to Equation (5) in the text.




                                                               30
Appendix 2. Convergence coefficients for generic values of depreciation and population growth.

       Our main analysis assumes a zero rate of population growth (                           ) and full depreciation (       ).

Focusing on this case allowed us to obtain an exact closed form for our main estimating equation. We now

perform a log-linear approximation to derive convergence coefficients when                     and      are generic.

       In region , the growth of per capita GDP between periods                       and             is equal to

which, by the assumed production function, is equal to                    (   )           (             ) There is a direct link

between a region’s income growth and the growth of the region’s per capita capital employment.

       Let us therefore find the law of motion for                for generic values of               and . Denote by ̂     the

capital endowment of region at time , and by                   the same region’s employment of capital. The law of

motion for ̂ then fulfills:

                                     ̂                                        ̂

The capital stock next period is equal to undepreciated capital                               ̂       plus this period’s savings

           . To express the equation in per capita terms, we can devide both sides of the above equation

by the region’s population    at time and obtain:

                                 ̂           ̂
                                                                      ̂


                                                                          ̂

The law of motion of the region’s per capita capital endowment can be approximated as:

                                         ̂                                            ̂

To solve for regional GDP growth, we need to transform the above equation into a law of motion for regional

capital employment     . To do so, we can exploit our migration equation (4) to write:


                                     ̂       (        )   (̂      )

By plugging the above equation into          we then obtain, after some algebra, the following equation:


                       *                         (̂       )                       +       [       ]      [    ]




                                                                  31
By noting that the aggregate capital stock grows at the rate                                                                 , we can

rewrite the above law of motion as:


                *                   (̂       )                        +       [                                ]       [         ]


A steady state is identified by the condition                                     and thus                         . Because in the

steady state there is no migration, and the human capital endowment of a region is also equal to its ideal

employment level, we also have that                        . As a result, the steady state is identified by the

following conditions:


                                                  (̂          )


                                                   (∫                     )




If we log-linearize with respect to regional employment            and national output             the right hand side of the

law of motion of        around the steady state above, we find that for any                      we can write the following

approximation:


                                                          (        )                                 (         )


By exploiting the fact that     (   )    (          )         (                    ), we can then write:


                                                          (       )                                        (       )


As a result, the speed of convergence is equal to                                  and regional growth increases in country

level income with coefficient                          . These coefficient boil down to those obtained under the

exact formulas of our model when                  (and thus when, as assumed in the model,                                 and       ).

When, on the other hand,                     , the mapping between our estimates and the economy’s “deep”

parameters will be different, entailing different values for       and .




                                                              32
Figure I: Sample Coverage




                  33
                                     Table 1: Sample Coverage for GDP and Years of schooling

                                             Data on GDP                                     Data on Years of Schooling

Country                                     Sample Period                                         Sample Period

Albania                                    1990,2001,2009                                          1989, 2001
Argentina                             1953,1970,1980,1993-2005                            1970, 1980, 1991, 2001, 2010
Australia                               1953,1976,1989-2008                                        1966, 2006
Austria                               1961-1992,1995-2008,2010                         1964, 1971, 1981, 1991, 2001, 2009
Bangladesh                            1982,1993,1995,1999,2005                                     1981, 2001
Belgium                                 1960-1968,1995-2010                                        1961, 2001
Benin                                      1992,1998,2004                                          1992, 2002
Bolivia                                 1980-1986,1988-2010                                     1976, 1992, 2001
Bosnia and Herzegovina                        1963,2010                                            1961, 1991
Brazil                           1950-1966,1970,1975,1980,1985-2009                 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, 1991, 2000, 2010
Bulgaria                                   1990,1995-2010                                       1965, 1992, 2011
Canada                                     1956,1961-2011                              1961, 1971, 1981, 1991, 2001, 2006
Chile                                   1960-2001,2008-2010                               1960, 1970, 1982, 1992, 2002
China                              1952-1978,1982,1985,2006-2010                             1982, 1990, 2000, 2010
Colombia                                   1950,1960-2010                                 1964, 1973, 1985, 1993, 2005
Croatia                                    1963,2000-2009                                          1961, 2001
Czech Republic                             1993,1995-2010                                          1993, 2011
Denmark                                 1970-1991,1993-2010                                        1970, 2006
Ecuador                               1993,1996,1999,2001-2007                         1962, 1974, 1982, 1990, 2001, 2010
Egypt, Arab Rep.                           1992,1998,2007                                       1986, 1996, 2006
El Salvador                             1996,1999,2002,2010                                        1992, 2007
Estonia                                       1996-2009                                            1997, 2009
Finland                            1960,1970,1983-1992,1995-2010                             1960, 1980, 1985, 2010
France                             1950,1960,1962-1969,1977-2010                    1962, 1968, 1975, 1982, 1990, 1999, 2006
Germany, East                                 1991-2010                                   1970, 1971, 1981, 1987, 2009
Germany, West                           1950,1960,1970-2010                               1970, 1971, 1981, 1987, 2009
Greece                                1970,1974,1977-2008,2010                               1971, 1981, 1991, 2001
Guatemala                          1995,2004,2005,2006,2007,2008                                   1994, 2002
Honduras                                      1988-2003                                            1988, 2001
Hungary                               1975,1994-2002,2007-2010                                     1970, 2005
India                                   1980-1993,1999-2010                                        1971, 2001
Indonesia                             1971,1983,1996,2004-2010                1971, 1976, 1980, 1985, 1990, 1995, 2000, 2005, 2010
Ireland                                 1960,1979,1991-2010                   1966, 1971, 1979, 1981, 1986, 1991, 1996, 2002, 2006
Italy                            1950,1977,1978-1996,2001,2007,2010                    1951, 1961, 1971, 1981, 1991, 2001
Japan                              1955-1965,1975-2003,2006-2009                                1960, 2000, 2010
Jordan                                     1997,2002,2010                                          1994, 2004
Kazakhstan                                    1990-2010                                            1989, 2009
Kenya                                         1962,2005                                      1962, 1989, 1999, 2009
Korea, Rep.                                   1985-2010                       1970, 1975, 1980, 1985, 1990, 1995, 2000, 2005, 2010
Kyrgyz Republic                         1996-2000,2002-2007                                     1989, 1999, 2009
Latvia                                        1995-2006                                            1989, 2001
Lesotho                                    1986,1996,2000                                          1976, 2006
Lithuania                                     1995-2010                                            1989, 2001
Macedonia                               1963,1990,2000-2009                                        1989, 2001
Malaysia                      1970,1975,1980,1990,1995,2000,2005-2010                        1970, 1980, 1991, 2000
Mexico                           1950,1960,1970,1975,1980,1993-2010              1950, 1960, 1970, 1990, 1995, 2000, 2005, 2010
Mongolia                           1989,1990-2004,2006-2007,2010                                   1989, 2000
Morocco                                   1990, 2000-2010                                             2004
Mozambique                                    2000-2009                                            1997, 2007
Nepal                                         1999,2006                                               2001
Netherlands                             1960,1965,1995-2010                                           2001
Nicaragua                                  1974,2000,2005                                             2001
Nigeria                                       1992,2008                                            1991, 2006
Norway                        1973,1976,1980,1995,1997-2005,2009-2010                              1960, 2010
Pakistan                                      1970-2004                                         1973, 1981, 1998
Panama                                        1996-2007                                1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2010
Paraguay                                   1992,2002,2008                                          1992, 2002
Peru                                    1970-1995,2001-2010                                     1961, 1993, 2007
Philippines                   1975,1980,1986-1987,1992,1997,2006-2009                     1970, 1990, 1995, 2000, 2007
Poland                                     1990,1995-2010                                          1970, 2002
Portugal                                   1977-2008,2010                                 1960, 1981, 1991, 2001, 2011
Romania                                       1995-2008                                         1977, 1992, 2002
Russian Federation                            1995-2009                                            1994, 2010
Serbia                                        1963,2002                                            1961, 2002
Slovak Republic                               1995-2010                                         1991, 2001, 2011
Slovenia                                   1963,1995-2010                                       1961, 2002, 2011
South Africa                       1970,1975,1980-1989,1995-2010                             1970, 1996, 2001, 2007
Spain                                      1981-2008,2010                                       1981, 1991, 2001
Sri Lanka              1990,1991,1993,1995,1997,1999,2001,2003,2005,2009-2010                      1981, 2001
Sweden                                     1985-2008,2010                                          1985, 2010
Switzerland                   1965,1970,1975,1978,1980-1995,1998-2005                     1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2010
Tanzania                           1980,1985,1990,1994,2000-2010                                1978, 1988, 2002
Thailand                                      1981-2009                                      1970, 1980, 1990, 2000
Turkey                                        1975-2001                                      1965, 1985, 1990, 2000
Ukraine                                    1990,2004-2010                                          1989, 2001
United Arab Emirates               1981-1982,1988-1991,2001-2009                                   1980, 2005
United Kingdom                          1950,1960,1970,2010                                     1951, 1991, 2001
United States                                 1950-2010                                1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2005
Uruguay                                    1961,1991-2002                                 1963, 1975, 1985, 1996, 2006
Uzbekistan                                    1995-2005                                               1989
Venezuela                             1950,1961,1971,1981,1990                               1971, 1981, 1990, 2001
Vietnam                               1990,1995,2000,2006,2008                                  1989, 1999, 2009



                                                              Page 1
                                   Table 2: Dispersion of Regional GDP per capita

                                                                                       75th pctl /             Ctry GDP /
Country                  Year   Minimum   25th pctl    Mean     75th pctl   Maximum                  Max/Min
                                                                                        25th pctl                World
Mozambique               2009     $423      $475        $768      $860       $2,033       1.8         4.8         0.06
Nepal                    2006     $647      $754        $917      $993       $1,258       1.3         1.9         0.08
Bangladesh               2005     $760      $819        $995     $1,037      $1,830       1.3         2.4         0.10
Tanzania                 2010     $727      $780       $1,125    $1,311      $2,615       1.7         3.6         0.10
Lesotho                  2000     $675      $766        $923     $1,178      $1,228       1.5         1.8         0.10
Kenya                    2005     $669      $703       $1,765    $1,798      $4,472       2.6         6.7         0.11
Benin                    2004     $600      $798       $1,171    $1,529      $1,542       1.9         2.6         0.12
Kyrgyz Republic          2007     $967     $1,123      $2,154    $2,533      $4,870       2.3         5.0         0.15
Nigeria                  2008    $1,149    $1,461      $1,929    $2,398      $2,736       1.6         2.4         0.15
Uzbekistan               2005    $1,178    $1,398      $1,917    $2,321      $3,203       1.7         2.7         0.17
Pakistan                 2004    $1,585    $1,606      $1,836    $2,067      $2,261       1.3         1.4         0.17
Vietnam                  2008    $1,249    $1,588      $2,120    $2,619      $4,504       1.6         3.6         0.20
India                    2010    $1,453    $2,853      $4,713    $5,611     $12,831       2.0         8.8         0.24
Nicaragua                2005    $1,410    $1,700      $1,908    $1,888      $3,023       1.1         2.1         0.25
Philippines              2009    $1,484    $1,552      $3,101    $2,936      $9,631       1.9         6.5         0.27
Honduras                 2003    $1,733    $1,991      $2,733    $3,340      $3,984       1.7         2.3         0.27
Mongolia                 2010     $867     $1,177      $2,154    $2,309      $8,044       2.0         9.3         0.28
Indonesia                2010     $934     $2,447      $4,103    $3,704     $16,115       1.5         17.2        0.30
Morocco                  2010    $2,399    $2,834      $3,357    $3,889      $4,871       1.4         2.0         0.33
Paraguay                 2008    $2,361    $2,982      $3,748    $4,307      $7,443       1.4         3.2         0.34
Guatemala                2008    $1,756    $2,510      $4,591    $6,049     $14,331       2.4         8.2         0.34
Bolivia                  2010    $2,863    $3,153      $4,097    $4,619      $7,716       1.5         2.7         0.34
Sri Lanka                2010    $2,411    $2,847      $3,434    $3,378      $6,451       1.2         2.7         0.36
Egypt, Arab Rep.         2007    $3,463    $4,118      $4,381    $4,606      $5,417       1.1         1.6         0.39
Jordan                   2010    $3,178    $3,723      $4,133    $4,425      $5,717       1.2         1.8         0.41
El Salvador              2010    $3,890    $4,465      $5,229    $5,754      $8,401       1.3         2.2         0.47
Ukraine                  2010    $2,646    $3,520      $5,084    $6,048     $17,454       1.7         6.6         0.47
Ecuador                  2007    $3,095    $3,892      $5,585    $5,738     $20,777       1.5         6.7         0.53
China                    2010    $3,127    $5,249      $8,012    $9,974     $17,622       1.9         5.6         0.53
Thailand                 2009    $1,982    $2,817      $7,215    $6,269     $52,001       2.2         26.2        0.58
Bosnia and Herzegovina   2010    $3,760    $4,571      $5,829    $6,184     $12,575       1.4         3.3         0.58
Albania                  2009    $4,932    $5,578      $6,338    $6,617     $10,846       1.2         2.2         0.60
Serbia                   2002    $1,612    $4,517      $5,466    $6,318      $9,439       1.4         5.9         0.66
Colombia                 2010    $3,125    $4,147      $6,311    $7,019     $14,876       1.7         4.8         0.66
Peru                     2010    $2,382    $3,511      $6,008    $6,965     $16,401       2.0         6.9         0.67
Macedonia                2009    $3,542    $4,618      $6,713    $7,798     $11,762       1.7         3.3         0.73
South Africa             2010    $5,836    $6,279      $7,048    $7,817      $8,659       1.2         1.5         0.74
Brazil                   2009    $2,909    $3,848      $6,426    $8,978     $12,113       2.3         4.2         0.76
Uruguay                  2002    $3,640    $5,142      $6,156    $6,917     $10,745       1.3         3.0         0.78
Turkey                   2001    $1,989    $4,598      $6,215    $7,467     $14,759       1.6         7.4         0.85
Kazakhstan               2010    $3,489    $7,237     $12,986   $13,681     $43,931       1.9         12.6        0.85
Bulgaria                 2010    $5,600    $6,403      $8,028    $8,355     $23,397       1.3         4.2         0.90
Panama                   2008    $2,737    $3,857      $6,797    $5,335     $17,713       1.4         6.5         0.90
Argentina                2005    $3,704    $4,651     $10,179   $12,652     $28,358       2.7         7.7         0.91
Romania                  2008    $4,911    $6,684      $8,772   $10,260     $26,242       1.5         5.3         0.91
Mexico                   2010    $5,130    $8,033     $13,442   $12,823     $84,158       1.6         16.4        0.98
Venezuela                1990     $466     $3,790      $7,677   $10,741     $21,422       2.8         46.0        1.05
Malaysia                 2010    $4,098    $7,451     $11,086   $13,515     $20,500       1.8         5.0         1.07
Russian Federation       2009    $2,528    $7,770     $12,995   $13,017     $64,254       1.7         25.4        1.09
Chile                    2010    $4,878    $8,324     $13,189   $14,874     $42,174       1.8         8.6         1.14
Latvia                   2006    $3,048    $5,550      $8,030    $9,082     $21,320       1.6         7.0         1.18
Lithuania                2010    $6,243    $9,098     $11,555   $13,473     $21,935       1.5         3.5         1.22
Croatia                  2009    $8,207   $10,597     $12,694   $12,933     $26,079       1.2         3.2         1.29
Estonia                  2009    $7,272    $8,264     $10,744   $11,120     $25,738       1.3         3.5         1.30
Hungary                  2010    $7,552   $10,737     $13,548   $14,964     $35,690       1.4         4.7         1.33
Poland                   2010   $11,220   $12,370     $15,196   $17,380     $26,612       1.4         2.4         1.36
Slovak Republic          2010   $10,558   $15,024     $20,018   $20,665     $45,815       1.4         4.3         1.57
Portugal                 2010   $15,903   $17,040     $19,974   $20,423     $27,260       1.2         1.7         1.69
Czech Republic           2010   $16,586   $18,431     $21,581   $21,383     $49,908       1.2         3.0         1.85
Greece                   2010   $17,072   $18,537     $21,459   $22,887     $32,612       1.2         1.9         1.88
Slovenia                 2010   $16,155   $18,857     $21,866   $23,494     $35,628       1.2         2.2         1.96
Korea, Rep.              2010   $16,738   $21,924     $25,703   $30,724     $34,461       1.4         2.1         2.09
Spain                    2010   $12,173   $21,554     $25,677   $29,765     $39,849       1.4         3.3         2.10
Italy                    2010   $18,167   $21,283     $27,252   $32,654     $36,672       1.5         2.0         2.12
France                   2010   $24,439   $25,312     $27,901   $28,074     $48,123       1.1         2.0         2.31
Japan                    2009   $19,510   $25,290     $27,581   $29,208     $52,074       1.2         2.7         2.38
Finland                  2010   $24,781   $28,561     $32,086   $37,851     $39,964       1.3         1.6         2.45
Denmark                  2010   $19,873   $23,268     $36,691   $53,383     $61,723       2.3         3.1         2.53
United Kingdom           2010   $25,515   $27,239     $31,067   $32,761     $46,666       1.2         1.8         2.57
Belgium                  2010   $23,055   $24,405     $31,586   $33,740     $49,930       1.4         2.2         2.57
Germany, West            2008   $26,532   $28,755     $34,692   $38,602     $52,740       1.3         2.0         2.63
Germany, East            2010   $26,631   $27,256     $27,290   $27,304     $27,983       1.0         1.1         2.63
Sweden                   2010   $28,711   $30,328     $32,718   $33,526     $48,285       1.1         1.7         2.67
Australia                2010   $32,602   $37,430     $43,708   $53,063     $56,915       1.4         1.7         2.68
Canada                   2011   $27,987   $29,726     $37,224   $39,928     $55,356       1.3         2.0         2.70
Austria                  2010   $25,457   $33,379     $37,438   $40,304     $50,553       1.2         2.0         2.76
Ireland                  2010   $22,393   $23,793     $30,186   $43,553     $44,459       1.8         2.0         2.82
Netherlands              2010   $29,929   $31,916     $36,799   $41,398     $47,625       1.3         1.6         2.89
Switzerland              2005   $26,290   $30,636     $37,728   $40,397     $78,885       1.3         3.0         3.10
United States            2010   $32,190   $35,999     $41,080   $44,123     $73,257       1.2         2.3         3.29
United Arab Emirates     2009   $13,253   $17,188     $37,176   $53,496     $112,294      3.1         8.5         3.63
Norway                   2010   $37,442   $40,568     $45,860   $47,061     $89,007       1.2         2.4         3.67
                                                      Table 3: Determinants of Regional Growth

                              (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)           (9)

                                     a            a            a              a               a            a             a            a             a
Ln(GDP pc Region)           -0.0104      -0.0244      -0.0262        -0.0207        -0.0254       -0.0305      -0.0299       -0.0181       -0.0199
                            (0.0022)     (0.0064)     (0.0066)       (0.0048)       (0.0070)      (0.0070)     (0.0072)      (0.0046)      (0.0062)

Ln(GDP pc Country)                       0.0169a      0.0163a                        0.0097       -0.0072      -0.0180        0.0044        0.0062
                                         (0.0061)     (0.0061)                      (0.0103)      (0.0117)     (0.0168)      (0.0047)      (0.0052)

Latitude                    0.0004a      0.0003a       0.0002c        0.0002         0.0003        0.0002       0.0002       0.0004b       0.0004b
                            (0.0001)     (0.0001)     (0.0001)       (0.0002)       (0.0003)      (0.0003)     (0.0003)      (0.0002)      (0.0002)

                                     c            b            a                                           c             b
Inverse Distance to Coast    0.0361      0.0412       0.0537          0.0116         0.0192        0.0272      0.0259         0.0363        0.0374
                            (0.0189)     (0.0194)     (0.0168)       (0.0136)       (0.0168)      (0.0140)     (0.0125)      (0.0218)      (0.0225)

Malaria Ecology              0.0003       0.0006       0.0007         0.0010         0.0012        0.0014       0.0014        0.0009        0.0009
                            (0.0007)     (0.0007)     (0.0009)       (0.0009)       (0.0010)      (0.0011)     (0.0011)      (0.0011)      (0.0011)

Ln(Cum Oil & Gas Prod)       0.1879c     0.2370b       0.1862c        0.1117         0.1145        0.0571       0.0488        0.0153        0.0250
                            (0.1000)     (0.1158)     (0.1019)       (0.0879)       (0.0967)      (0.0909)     (0.0916)      (0.0691)      (0.0777)

Ln(Population density)      0.0019b      0.0020b       0.0010         0.0005         0.0005       -0.0013      -0.0015c       0.0004        0.0004
                            (0.0008)     (0.0008)     (0.0007)       (0.0005)       (0.0006)      (0.0010)     (0.0009)      (0.0010)      (0.0010)

Capital is in Region         0.0008      0.0087b      0.0090b        0.0122a        0.0150a       0.0124a      0.0120a        0.0046        0.0054
                            (0.0030)     (0.0038)     (0.0038)       (0.0034)       (0.0045)      (0.0046)     (0.0036)      (0.0043)      (0.0042)

Years of Education                                    0.0018b                                     0.0064a      0.0067a       0.0025b       0.0026b
                                                      (0.0008)                                    (0.0020)     (0.0022)      (0.0011)      (0.0011)

Constant                    0.0959a      0.0673a      0.0833a        0.1954a        0.1459b       0.3119a      0.3496a       0.1116a       0.1113a
                            (0.0157)     (0.0127)     (0.0197)       (0.0392)       (0.0665)      (0.0864)     (0.1066)      (0.0294)      (0.0291)

Observations                 7,772        7,772        6,651          7,772           7,772        6,651         6,651        4,136         4,136
Adjusted R2                   6%           8%           9%             7%              8%          10%           17%           9%            9%
Number of countries           82           82            82             82             82           80            80
Within R2                                                              7%              8%          10%           17%
Between R2                                                             7%              8%           6%            7%
Fixed Effects                None         None         None          Country        Country       Country      Ctry, Year     None           None
Estimation                    OLS          OLS          OLS            OLS            OLS           OLS           OLS          OLS            IV
Instrument                    NA           NA           NA             NA             NA            NA            NA           NA         Lagged GDP
                                             Table 4: Determinants of National GDP Growth
                                          (Countries that have initial GDP data no later than 1965)

                                         (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)

                                                 a             c             b             a             a              a             a
Ln(GDP pc Ctry)                        -0.0043       -0.0029       -0.0050       -0.0177       -0.0165        -0.0169       -0.0173       -0.0160a
                                       (0.0015)      (0.0015)      (0.0021)      (0.0021)      (0.0020)       (0.0021)      (0.0023)      (0.0022)

Ln(GDP pc World)                                     -0.0160a      -0.0233a      -0.0400a                                   -0.0381a       0.0000
                                                     (0.0052)      (0.0062)      (0.0066)                                   (0.0081)      (0.0000)

Latitude                               0.0003a       0.0002a       0.0002b        -0.0000       -0.0000        -0.0000       0.0001        0.0001
                                       (0.0001)      (0.0001)      (0.0001)      (0.0001)      (0.0001)       (0.0001)      (0.0001)      (0.0001)

Inverse Distance to Coast              0.1389a       0.1281a       0.1222a        0.0251        0.0279         0.0280        0.0285        0.0387
                                       (0.0320)      (0.0315)      (0.0340)      (0.0235)      (0.0234)       (0.0235)      (0.0551)      (0.0545)

Ln(Cum Oil & Gas Prod)                  -0.0003       -0.0015       -0.0017       0.0019        0.0014         0.0017        0.0029        0.0030
                                       (0.0025)      (0.0025)      (0.0025)      (0.0037)      (0.0035)       (0.0036)      (0.0034)      (0.0035)

Malaria Environment                    -0.0009a      -0.0008a      -0.0007a      -0.0006b       -0.0004        -0.0004      -0.0016b      -0.0013c
                                       (0.0003)      (0.0003)      (0.0003)      (0.0003)      (0.0003)       (0.0003)      (0.0007)      (0.0006)

Years Education                                                    0.0016b        -0.0004       -0.0007        -0.0006       -0.0000       -0.0002
                                                                   (0.0008)      (0.0008)      (0.0008)       (0.0008)      (0.0009)      (0.0009)

1/(life expectancy at birth)                                                     -1.9446a      -2.2905a       -2.3255a       -0.6167       -1.1106
                                                                                 (0.6455)      (0.6296)       (0.6319)      (0.9993)      (0.9462)

Fertility                                                                        -0.0264a      -0.0258a       -0.0261a      -0.0306a      -0.0304a
                                                                                 (0.0046)      (0.0046)       (0.0047)      (0.0064)      (0.0062)

                                                                                          c                            c
Law and Order                                                                    0.0137         0.0126        0.0127         0.0107        0.0080
                                                                                 (0.0073)      (0.0076)       (0.0077)      (0.0074)      (0.0075)

Investment-to-GDP ratio                                                          0.0723a       0.0730a        0.0732a       0.0556a       0.0563a
                                                                                 (0.0125)      (0.0130)       (0.0131)      (0.0169)      (0.0173)

Government-consumption-to-GDP ratio                                              -0.0577b      -0.0445c       -0.0451c       -0.0659       -0.0551
                                                                                 (0.0276)      (0.0267)       (0.0268)      (0.0434)      (0.0422)

Openess                                                                          0.0061b       0.0050c        0.0051c       0.0093b       0.0080b
                                                                                 (0.0027)      (0.0028)       (0.0028)      (0.0038)      (0.0037)

(Change in terms of trade) x Openess                                              0.0231        0.0187         0.0191        -0.0020       -0.0074
                                                                                 (0.0152)      (0.0153)       (0.0154)      (0.0229)      (0.0218)

Democracy                                                                        0.0124b       0.0085c        0.0088c        0.0280        0.0155
                                                                                 (0.0051)      (0.0048)       (0.0048)      (0.0305)      (0.0283)

Democracy Squared                                                                -0.0010a      -0.0007b       -0.0007b       -0.0265       -0.0191
                                                                                 (0.0003)      (0.0003)       (0.0003)      (0.0268)      (0.0254)

Inflation                                                                        -0.0042a      -0.0037a       -0.0037a       -0.0020       -0.0013
                                                                                 (0.0012)      (0.0013)       (0.0013)      (0.0018)      (0.0016)

Constant                               0.0485a       0.1731a       0.2439a       0.5476a       0.2268a        0.2306a       0.5148a       0.2158a
                                       (0.0122)      (0.0404)      (0.0524)      (0.0664)      (0.0216)       (0.0219)      (0.0822)      (0.0298)

Observations                             868           868           868           868           868            868           536           536
Adjusted R2                              7%            8%            9%           27%           27%             31%          22%           28%
Number of countries                      89            89            89            89            89              89           54            54
Fixed Effects                            No            No            No            No           Year            Year         Year          Year
Instrumental Variables                  None          None          None          None          None         Lagged GDP      None          None
                                         Table 5: Country-level determinants of the speed of convergence

                                                             Panel A: Basic Specification
                                                    English Legal Financial                                                          Yrs Educ
                                      Ln(GDP pc)                                   Trade       Labor     Transf / Gov   Gov / GDP
                                                       Origin     Regulation                                                        (Regional)

Ln(GDP pc Region)                      0.0413b        -0.0237a     -0.0127a      -0.0127      -0.0068      -0.0027      -0.0138     -0.0256a
                                       (0.0207)       (0.0056)     (0.0038)      (0.0091)     (0.0121)     (0.0163)     (0.0090)    (0.0082)

Interaction Var                        0.0818a                      0.1574a      0.1583b       0.1379      0.4302b       0.1343     0.0154b
                                       (0.0296)                     (0.0340)     (0.0625)     (0.1806)     (0.2119)     (0.1922)    (0.0066)

                                                a              b             a            b                         b
Ln(GDP pc Region) x Interaction Var    -0.0078        0.0131       -0.0157       -0.0159      -0.0196      -0.0439      -0.0197     -0.0011
                                       (0.0026)       (0.0065)     (0.0034)      (0.0074)     (0.0209)     (0.0216)     (0.0202)    (0.0007)

Latitude                                0.0004         0.0003        0.0001       0.0002       0.0003       0.0003       0.0002      0.0003
                                       (0.0003)       (0.0002)      (0.0002)     (0.0002)     (0.0003)     (0.0005)     (0.0002)    (0.0002)

Inverse Distance to Coast               0.0164         0.0073        0.0158       0.0182       0.0209       0.0082       0.0146     0.0281b
                                       (0.0165)       (0.0122)      (0.0152)     (0.0175)     (0.0125)     (0.0261)     (0.0149)    (0.0138)

Malaria Ecology                         0.0011         0.0007        0.0011       0.0012       0.0013      -0.0010       0.0011      0.0015
                                       (0.0010)       (0.0007)      (0.0010)     (0.0010)     (0.0009)     (0.0012)     (0.0009)    (0.0011)

Ln(Cum Oil & Gas Prod)                  0.1340         0.0961        0.1054       0.1320       0.1662       0.0545       0.1197      0.0803
                                       (0.1039)       (0.0954)      (0.1009)     (0.0831)     (0.2042)     (0.1380)     (0.0842)    (0.1036)

Ln(Population density)                  0.0003         0.0005        0.0001       0.0003      -0.0007      -0.0003       0.0003     -0.0013
                                       (0.0007)       (0.0005)      (0.0008)     (0.0007)     (0.0007)     (0.0011)     (0.0006)    (0.0010)

Capital is in Region                   0.0160a        0.0122a       0.0146a      0.0144a      0.0160a      0.0251a      0.0138a     0.0147a
                                       (0.0048)       (0.0033)      (0.0039)     (0.0040)     (0.0052)     (0.0051)     (0.0035)    (0.0035)

Constant                               -0.4644b       0.1932a       0.1219a       0.1174       0.0952       0.0246       0.1524c    0.2085a
                                       (0.2227)       (0.0361)      (0.0308)     (0.0716)     (0.1023)     (0.1489)     (0.0790)    (0.0657)

Observations                            7,772          7,772         5,492        6,180        2,697        2,158         7,040       6,651
           2
Adjusted R                               18%            16%          17%           17%         19%          26%           16%         20%
Fixed Effect                           Country        Country       Country      Country      Country      Country       Country     Country
                                              Table 5: Determinants of the speed of convergence (continued)

                                             Panel B: Control for both level and interactions of GDP per capita
                                                         English Legal Financial                                                              Yrs Educ
                                         Ln(GDP Country)                                  Trade       Labor       Transf / Gov   Gov / GDP
                                                             Origin      Regulation                                                          (Regional)

Ln(GDP pc Region)                            0.0413b          0.0397c      0.0037        -0.0024      -0.0288       0.0836c       0.0606a     0.0687c
                                             (0.0207)        (0.0201)     (0.0273)      (0.0208)     (0.0429)      (0.0496)      (0.0227)    (0.0357)

Ln(GDP pc Country)                            0.0818a        0.0841a       -0.0173       0.0035       -0.0442       0.0712        0.1032a    0.1037b
                                             (0.0296)        (0.0300)     (0.0293)      (0.0360)     (0.0541)      (0.0604)      (0.0374)    (0.0521)

ln(GDP pc Region) x Ln(GDP pc Country)       -0.0078a        -0.0080a      -0.0017       -0.0013      0.0028       -0.0106c      -0.0101a    -0.0128b
                                             (0.0026)        (0.0026)     (0.0032)      (0.0035)     (0.0046)      (0.0058)      (0.0033)    (0.0053)

Interaction Var                                                            0.1375a       0.1184       0.1713        0.2834        -0.0889     -0.0094
                                                                          (0.0388)      (0.1051)     (0.1609)      (0.2213)      (0.1552)    (0.0116)

Ln(GDP pc Region) x Interaction Var                          0.0146b      -0.0109b       -0.0106      -0.0218       -0.0273       0.0063      0.0020
                                                             (0.0058)     (0.0045)      (0.0123)     (0.0195)      (0.0228)      (0.0170)    (0.0014)

Latitude                                      0.0004          0.0004       0.0001        0.0002       0.0002        0.0004        0.0003      0.0002
                                             (0.0003)        (0.0003)     (0.0002)      (0.0002)     (0.0003)      (0.0004)      (0.0002)    (0.0003)

Inverse Distance to Coast                     0.0164          0.0117       0.0087        0.0148       0.0206        0.0080        0.0185      0.0238c
                                             (0.0165)        (0.0156)     (0.0143)      (0.0177)     (0.0130)      (0.0265)      (0.0168)    (0.0129)

Malaria Ecology                               0.0011          0.0007       0.0009        0.0011       0.0013        -0.0011       0.0012      0.0012
                                             (0.0010)        (0.0008)     (0.0009)      (0.0009)     (0.0009)      (0.0011)      (0.0010)    (0.0011)

Ln(Cum Oil & Gas Prod)                        0.1340          0.1172       0.0923        0.1277       0.1584        0.0693        0.1449      0.0426
                                             (0.1039)        (0.1147)     (0.0925)      (0.0807)     (0.2033)      (0.1404)      (0.0987)    (0.0877)

Ln(Population density)                        0.0003          0.0003       0.0001        0.0003       -0.0007       -0.0003       0.0002      -0.0016
                                             (0.0007)        (0.0006)     (0.0007)      (0.0007)     (0.0007)      (0.0011)      (0.0007)    (0.0010)

Capital is in Region                          0.0160a        0.0162a       0.0124a       0.0130a     0.0151b        0.0253a       0.0171a    0.0112b
                                             (0.0048)        (0.0044)     (0.0041)      (0.0047)     (0.0058)      (0.0051)      (0.0045)    (0.0044)

Constant                                     -0.4644b        -0.4853b      0.2601        0.0987       0.4545        -0.5231      -0.6256b     -0.5432
                                             (0.2227)        (0.2302)     (0.2446)      (0.2268)     (0.4920)      (0.5103)      (0.2677)    (0.3634)

Observations                                  7,772           7,772         5,492        6,180        2,697          2,158         7,040       6,651
Adjusted R2                                    18%            18%           18%          17%           19%           28%           19%         22%
Fxd Effect                                   Country         Country      Country       Country      Country        Country       Country     Country
                                     Table 6: Migration between regions

                                                Panel A: Raw Data
                                                                                     Migration College Educated /
Country                         Years with census data      Migration / Population
                                                                                          College Educated
Argentina                      1970;1980;1991;2001                    2.1%                       4.4%
Bolivia                          1976;1992;2001                       3.7%                       5.9%
Brazil                              1991;2000                         1.9%                       3.3%
Canada                         1971;1981;1991;2001                    1.9%                       3.2%
Chile                          1970;1982;1992;2002                    3.3%                       6.1%
China                                 1990                            2.0%                       8.5%
Colombia                         1985;1993;2005                       2.3%                       2.7%
Ecuador                             1990;2001                         4.5%                       7.4%
France                                2006                            6.8%                      13.4%
Greece                         1971;1981;1991;2001                    1.4%                       4.2%
Indonesia            1976;1980;1985;1990;1995;2000;2005;2010          0.4%                       1.3%
Malaysia                            1991;2000                         3.2%                      10.6%
Mexico                      1990;1995;2000;2005;2010                  0.9%                       1.6%
Mongolia                              2000                           27.8%                      55.1%
Morocco                               2004                            4.0%                       9.6%
Nepal                                 2001                            1.6%                       9.7%
Nicaragua                        1971;1995;2005                       1.8%                       3.2%
Peru                                  2007                            7.2%                      12.5%
Philippines                           2000                            3.0%                       3.8%
Portugal                            1991;2001                         1.2%                       5.0%
South Africa                          2001                            4.6%                      11.0%
Spain                                 1991                            5.8%                      13.5%
Switzerland                    1970;1980;1990;2000                    2.0%                       3.6%
United States               1960;1970;1980;1990;2000                  2.4%                       3.6%
Uruguay                        1975;1985;1996;2006                    1.8%                       5.0%
Vietnam                          1989;1999;2009                       1.1%                       2.3%
All                                                                  3.8%                       8.1%

                                          Panel B: OLS Regressions
                                              Dependent Variable:
                                                              Migration College
                                Migration / Population       Educated / College
                                                                  Educated

ln(density)                            -0.0009                      -0.0038b
                                      (0.0014)                      (0.0014)

Temperature                            0.0001                        0.0005
                                      (0.0003)                      (0.0005)

ln(Reg GDP pc / Ctry GDP pc))          0.0124b                       0.0062
                                      (0.0046)                      (0.0038)

Constant                               0.0291a                       0.0568a
                                      (0.0061)                      (0.0090)

Number of Observations                  1,380                        1,369
Adjusted R2                              62%                          68%
Fixed Effect                             Ctry                         Ctry
                               Table 6: Migration between regions (continued)

                               Panel C: Regressions with country-fixed-effects
                                                             Control Variable:
                                                           Financial                              Transf /                Yrs Educ
                                None        Ln(GDP pc)                   Trade        Labor                  Gov / GDP
                                                          Regulation                                Gov                  (Regional)

ln(density)                    -0.0009      -0.0011       -0.0022a      -0.0020a     -0.0031a      0.0021     0.0018     -0.0021c
                               (0.0009)     (0.0010)      (0.0004)      (0.0004)     (0.0005)     (0.0041)   (0.0031)    (0.0011)

Temperature                     0.0001       0.0001       -0.0001       -0.0001       -0.0003      0.0004     0.0004      0.0004
                               (0.0002)     (0.0002)      (0.0002)      (0.0002)     (0.0002)     (0.0012)   (0.0008)    (0.0002)

ln(Reg GDP pc / Ctry GDP pc)    0.0124a      0.0127a       0.0106a       0.0114a      0.0133a      0.0148b    0.0135a     0.0112a
                               (0.0020)     (0.0020)      (0.0015)      (0.0015)     (0.0019)     (0.0062)   (0.0047)    (0.0030)

Control Variable                             0.0125a      0.0106a       0.0094a       0.0218       0.0018     0.0133     0.0043a
                                            (0.0016)      (0.0019)      (0.0028)     (0.0143)     (0.0071)   (0.0233)    (0.0005)

                                        a             a             a            a            a
Constant                        0.0291      -0.0834        0.0253        0.0233       0.0299       0.0289     0.0183     -0.0004
                               (0.0040)     (0.0138)      (0.0038)      (0.0033)     (0.0102)     (0.0247)   (0.0200)    (0.0064)

Number of Observations          1,380         1,380         1,085        1,213         630          322        425        1,234
Adjusted R2                      62%           62%           51%          47%          52%          62%        63%         62%
Fixed Effect                     Ctry          Ctry          Ctry         Ctry         Ctry         Ctry       Ctry        Ctry
                                     Table7: Robustness

                  Panel A: Regional fixed effects; Driscoll standard errors
                                            (1)            (2)           (3)        (4)
Ln(GDP pc Region)                        -0.0423a       -0.1066a      -0.1141a   -0.1136a
                                         (0.0066)       (0.0078)      (0.0097)   (0.0102)

Ln(GDP pc Country)                                      0.0861a      0.0768a     0.0528a
                                                        (0.0079)     (0.0113)    (0.0162)

Ln(Population density)                    0.0302a       0.0119a       0.0059      -0.0085
                                          (0.0042)      (0.0041)     (0.0088)    (0.0090)

Years of Education                                                    0.0049c     0.0022
                                                                     (0.0029)    (0.0031)

Constant                                  0.2770a       0.1441a      0.2849a     0.4970a
                                          (0.0455)      (0.0310)     (0.0712)    (0.1425)

Observations                               7,776          7,776        6,655      6,655
Number Regions                             1,503          1,503        1,482      1,482
Within R2                                   15%            27%         28%         35%
                                                                                 Region &
Fixed Effects                              Region         Region      Region
                                                                                   Year
                          Panel B: National GDP; Country fixed effects
                                              (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)
Ln(GDP pc Ctry)                           -0.0293a     -0.0301a       -0.0456a      -0.0432a
                                          (0.0053)     (0.0052)       (0.0049)      (0.0050)

Ln(GDP pc World)                           0.0134b       0.0064        -0.0141
                                          (0.0065)      (0.0108)      (0.0100)

Years Education                                           0.0013       -0.0016      -0.0037c
                                                        (0.0016)      (0.0018)      (0.0020)

1/(life expectancy at birth)                                           -0.8026       -1.0569
                                                                      (1.2028)      (1.2522)

Fertility                                                             -0.0341a      -0.0337a
                                                                      (0.0084)      (0.0083)

                                                                               c
Law and Order                                                          0.0161        0.0141
                                                                      (0.0095)      (0.0107)

Investment-to-GDP ratio                                                0.0815a       0.0838a
                                                                      (0.0192)      (0.0199)

Government-consumption-to-GDP ratio                                   -0.1627a      -0.1355a
                                                                      (0.0451)      (0.0463)

Openess                                                               0.0267a       0.0228a
                                                                      (0.0060)      (0.0063)

(Change in terms of trade) x Openess                                   0.0343        0.0270
                                                                      (0.0258)      (0.0253)

Democracy                                                              0.0116b       0.0072
                                                                      (0.0056)      (0.0051)

Democracy Squared                                                     -0.0009b      -0.0006c
                                                                      (0.0004)      (0.0003)

Inflation                                                             -0.0035a      -0.0032a
                                                                      (0.0007)      (0.0007)

Constant                                   0.1536a       0.2112a      0.5535a       0.4334a
                                          (0.0424)      (0.0756)      (0.0917)      (0.0431)

Observations                                 868           868           868           868
Adjusted R2                                  12%           12%          28%           32%
Countries                                     89            89           89            89
Within R2                                    12%           12%          29%           33%
Between R2                                   14%           13%          1%            2%
Fixed effects                              Country       Country      Country      Country & Yr
