                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           LOCAL DEFICITS AND LOCAL JOBS:
                  CAN U.S. STATES STABILIZE THEIR OWN ECONOMIES?

                                            Gerald Carlino
                                            Robert P. Inman

                                         Working Paper 18930
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18930


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      March 2013




The authors appreciate the many insightful comments on an earlier draft of this paper by our colleagues
at Penn and the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. The comments of conference participants at
the Carnegie Rochester NYU Conference on Public Policy and those of our conference discussant,
David Wildasin, were very valuable as well. Particular thanks are due to the efforts of a very conscientious
and insightful referee and to the journal editors. Frank Ragusa, Sue Lim, and particularly Jake Carr
and Adam Scavette provided excellent research assistance for which we are most grateful. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, or the Federal Reserve System.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Gerald Carlino and Robert P. Inman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Local Deficits and Local Jobs: Can U.S. States Stabilize Their Own Economies?
Gerald Carlino and Robert P. Inman
NBER Working Paper No. 18930
March 2013
JEL No. E62,H74,H77,R23

                                               ABSTRACT

Using a sample of the 48 mainland U.S. states for the period 1973-2009, we study the ability of U.S.
states to expand own state employment through the use of state deficit policies. The analysis allows
for the facts that U.S. states are part of a wider monetary and economic union with free factor mobility
across all states and that state residents and firms may purchase goods from “neighboring” states.
Those purchases may generate economic spillovers across neighbors. Estimates suggest that states
can increase own state employment by increasing their own deficits. There is evidence of spillovers
to employment in neighboring states defined by common cyclical patterns among state economies.
For large states, aggregate spillovers to its economic neighbors are approximately two-thirds of own
state job growth. Because of significant spillovers and possible incentives to free-ride, there is a potential
case to actively coordinate (i.e., centralize) the management of stabilization policies. Finally, job effects
of a temporary increase in state own deficits persist for at most one to two years and there is evidence
of negative job effects when these deficits are scheduled for repayment.


Gerald Carlino
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Research Department
Ten Independence Mall
Philadelphia, Pa 19106
jerry.carlino@phil.frb.org

Robert P. Inman
Department of Finance
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
inman@wharton.upenn.edu
        Local Deficits and Local Jobs: Can U.S. States Stabilize Their Own Economies?

                                                  by

                              Gerald Carlino and Robert Inman
     Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania


       The recent Great Recession in the United States and European Union has generated a

renewed interest in the management of macro-economic fiscal policy within economic and monetary

unions. The received wisdom is that such fiscal policies will only be efficient if done by an

overarching central government. Wallace Oates (1972) in his classic treatise on fiscal federalism

concludes:

       The case for having the central government assume primary responsibility for the
       stabilization function appears, therefore, to rest on a firm economic foundation. . .
       . (L)ocal government cannot use conventional stabilization tools to much effect and
       must instead rely mainly on beggar-thy-neighbor policies, which from a national
       standpoint are likely to produce far from the desired results. The central government,
       on the other hand, is free to adopt monetary policies and fiscal programs involving
       deficit finance; consequently, the stabilization problem must be resolved primarily
       at the central government level. (p. 30).

Within economic and monetary unions deficits by lower tier governments, either states or member

countries, are viewed as ineffective for restoring employment within the local economy. Deficits

may stimulate local demand for goods and services but because those goods and services are

produced and traded within the wider union, the impact on local employment is thought to be modest

at best. Even if there are increases in local employment opportunities, they may be “diluted” by the

entry of workers from another state or country. Because of demand spillovers or worker mobility,

therefore, any employment benefits of the deficit will accrue to all members of the union, while

future tax costs remain the responsibility of the deficit creating jurisdiction. If so, we have a public

goods spillover and a need for coordinated fiscal policies managed by the union’s central

                                                   1
government.

       We test empirically for the two important “facts” behind this familiar conclusion: Do local

fiscal policies impact the aggregate performance of the local economy for the benefit of state

residents, and are there significant economic spillovers? Using United States data from 1973-2009

for the 48 mainland states, we first examine the impact of state government’s own deficits on each

individual state’s own rate of establishment employment growth, and because these are open

economies, state population growth due to net migration. Unique to this study, our measure of state

deficits is explicitly specified to capture the full impact of state budgets on state economies and

includes not just the usual general fund deficit but also deficits in the state capital accounts and in

the state trust fund accounts, including public employee pensions; see Section II.         Section III

provides our specification for the impact of fiscal policies on state economies within an economic

and monetary union as well as two specifications for how one state’s policies might impact the

economies of its “economic neighbors.”

       Section IV presents our core empirical results. We find temporary state deficits do have a

positive impact on the rate of employment growth within the state (Table 2) and a modest and

statistically insignificant effect on state population growth because of net migration (Table 3). There

is a small reduction in the state’s rate of unemployment (Table 3). We conclude that most of a

state’s employment growth must be satisfied by residents returning to the work force – that is, by

a rise in a state’s rate of labor force participation. Section IV (Table 2) also provides estimates for

the effects of the deficit’s two main components on job growth. It is state net revenues (taxes and

fees minus transfers) rather than state spending for goods and services that has the primary effect

on local employment. We compute an impulse response function for a temporary, one year increase


                                                  2
in state deficits and find the employment effects are relatively short-lived; state employment growth

returns to its equilibrium level after one year (Figure 3). Job growth declines eight after years after

the initial increase in debt as taxes rise to cover scheduled debt repayments.

       In addition to the positive though temporary impact on its own economy, state own deficits

also impact job growth of their economic neighbors specified as states with common patterns of

economic fundamentals, e.g., the older industrial states of the upper Midwest or the energy region

of the Gulf Coast and Mountain states. The aggregate regional impact is roughly 2/3's of a state’s

own impact, suggesting significant spillover effects (Table 2). The results parallel those found for

fiscal policy interdependencies across EU economies; see for example, Beetsma and Giuliodori

(2011), Hebous and Zimmerman (2012), and Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012).

       Section V (Table 4) summarizes the job impacts and the present value tax cost per job

created from a temporary one standard deviation increase in state own deficits. Estimates are

calibrated to states’ economies at the start of the Great Recession. The present value of the future

tax costs per job created for each deficit state range from $72,000/job to perhaps as much as

$91,000/job.    Importantly, when we include positive job spillovers to neighboring states,

“collective” tax costs fall to $44,000/job to $53,000/job. Given significant spillovers, each state has

an incentive to free-ride on the deficit policies of their economic neighbors. If so, the results argue

for fiscal policy coordination for macro-economic stabilization. From the U.S. evidence, the

familiar Oates conclusion stands.

II. Measuring State Deficits

       In contrast to previous studies focusing on state general fund deficits and state economies,

we are the first to develop and use an encompassing definition of state deficits, one defined as the


                                                  3
difference between state expenditures and state revenues for all state funds. Included in our measure

of state deficits are the state’s general fund, the state’s capital fund, the state’s unemployment and

workmen’s compensation insurance funds, and state administered pension funds. For each of the

state’s four fund accounts, we use a cash accounting measure of deficits defined as the difference

between money spent by the state in each account less revenues received by each account during the

government’s fiscal year (FY). Deficits are dated by the fiscal year typically beginning on July 1

and ending on June 30 – for example, deficits in FY 2000 are for the period July 1, 1999 to June 30,

2000.

        Included in the general fund deficit are expenditures for wages and salaries and pension

contributions for state employees, transfers to households (including Medicaid payments), transfers

to local governments, maintenance of state infrastructure, and payments for supplies. General fund

revenues include all taxes, fees, licenses, and federal aid (including “aid” paid as part of the national

tobacco settlement) into the general fund. Included in the capital fund are expenditures for all new

construction; fees collected from the use of existing infrastructure have been included as part of

general fund revenues. Included in insurance and pension fund expenditures are all payments to

households for workmen’s compensation, unemployment benefits, and all payments to retired and

disabled public employees. Included as revenues for the insurance and pension funds are the annual

payments by state employers into the unemployment and workmen’s compensation funds plus

pension contributions from covered state and local employees, from local governments whose

employees are members of the state pension plan, and the state’s own pension contributions. Since

the state’s own contributions to the pension fund are also counted as a state general fund

expenditure, these payments are an internal transfer and have no implication for the aggregate state


                                                   4
deficit as measured here. Importantly, even when a state’s general fund deficit is constrained by an

effective balanced budget rule, the state’s capital, insurance trust, and pension deficits are not.

Deficits in each account can be funded by short-term or long-term borrowing or by drawing down

accumulated reserves in each of the funds. Fund reserves are fungible across accounts. Importantly,

states with effective balanced budget rules can still run significant deficits for aggregate demand

management. All deficits and supporting fiscal variables are measured in real dollars with a state

specific price deflator set equal to 1.00 for Wyoming in 2004.1

        In our empirical analysis of the impact of state deficits on state economies we use not total

state deficits, but rather total state own deficits, denoted hereafter as OwnD and defined as total state

deficits minus all federal aid paid to the state. We use OwnD for two reasons. First, we wish to

focus on the role of the state’s own fiscal policies on its own economy. Including federal aid in our

definition of state deficits compounds federal and state fiscal policies. Second, both total and own

deficits are likely to be endogenous to the state’s economy. We will therefore need instruments so

that unbiased estimates of the effects of state deficit’s on state employment and population growth

can be obtained. Effective instruments are more likely to be available from variation in state fiscal

environments. Our analysis includes an exogenous measure of federal aid as a separate regressor,

however.

        Figure 1a shows the historical path of the national (population weighted) average of total and

own state deficits for the 48 mainland states’ for our sample period, where both deficit measures

are defined as expenditures minus revenues and will be positive (negative) when there is a deficit


        1
        All fiscal data for our analysis comes from the Census of Governments, State Government
Finances, various years. The price deflator is from Craig and Inman (1982), updated by the national
urban CPI for those years for which state specific indices are not available.

                                                   5
(surplus) in the budget. The gap between own and total deficits is the average level of federal aid

given to the sample states. It is clear that without this assistance states would required a significant

increase in state revenues or cuts in state spending to balance their aggregate budgets.

        Figure 1b shows the ratio of total deficits and total own deficits to national GDP. On average

U.S. states have run small surpluses over the years on their combined budgets; the exceptions are

the two most current recession periods. Comparing the share of total deficits and own deficits to

GDP over time again shows the importance of federal aid to the final balancing of state budgets.

Nonetheless, aggregate state own deficits as a share of national GDP, what states do without federal

assistance, is modest and usually no more than 2 to 3 percent except for the most recent recessions.

        Figures 2a-d shows the spatial pattern of state own (exclusive of federal aid) deficits per

capita averaged over the four decades of our sample. States whose average own deficits fall in the

upper quartile (darkest shading) over at least three of the four decades include Louisiana, Maine,

Mississippi, Montana, New York, South Carolina, West Virginia, and Vermont (the one state

without a balanced budget rule). With the exception of New York, they are all relatively poor states

and heavily dependent on federal aid to balance their final budgets. States consistently ranking in

the lowest quartile (lightest shading) of own deficits include Colorado, Delaware, Florida, Missouri,

Nevada, Ohio, Texas, and Wisconsin. All but Nevada and Wisconsin have strong balanced budget

rules based on constitutional provisions requiring balanced general fund budgets at the end of each

fiscal year without the ability to carry over a deficit from one fiscal year to the next. The remaining

states show significant variation over time in their relative rankings for own deficits, many moving

between quartile rankings, and some dramatically so (Massachusetts, Utah, Idaho, New Mexico, and

North Dakota). It will be this across-state and within-state over time variation in own deficits that


                                                   6
we use to identify the impact of state fiscal policy on state economies.

III. State Deficits and State Economies

        A. State Economy: Our understanding of the potential impact of state deficits on state

economies begins with the equilibrium framework for open economies in economic and monetary

unions; see Haughwout and Inman (2001). All states compete in the world economy and receive

the competitive world price (p) for their outputs. Technology is constant returns to scale in labor,

capital, and land, defined uniquely for each local jurisdiction by the production “amenities” of the

jurisdiction (AF). Factor prices for labor (W) and land (R) are determined in the local market while

the price of capital (r) is set in the world market. Firms pay a tax per unit output (tF) and obtain

productive public goods and services (GF). Profits will equal the world price for the state’s output

minus average costs minus taxes per unit output (tF). In equilibrium, firms make zero excess returns.

Thus:

                                    Π(W, R; tF, GF; r, p, AF) = 0.                       (1)

        Labor is supplied by state residents at a constant level of hours per year. Each working

resident earns the market wage (W) and that income less local household taxes (tH) is allocated to

the consumption of goods and services produced locally or imported, to housing services, and to

the purchase of land. Households within a state pay the market price (R) for the land they consume.

Households receive residential public goods and services (GH) and enjoy residential amenities (AH).

Household welfare is specified by their indirect utility function as:

                                      U(W, R; tH, GH; r, p, AH) = Û,                        (2)

where in equilibrium every household in a state receives the exogenously determined level of utility

(Û) available from living in any other state. Labor mobility is assumed.


                                                 7
       Equilibrium allocations within the state are determined in two steps. First, Eqs. (1) and (2)

are solved jointly to specify equilibrium wages and rents, conditional upon local fiscal policies (tF,

GF, tH, GH), world prices (r and p), and local production and residential amenities (AF, AH). Second,

aggregate output and thus the final size of the local economy is determined by the availability of

productive land within the jurisdiction (‹s); see Haughwout and Inman (2001). Land demanded by

firms and households is equal to the exogenous supply of land to define equilibrium gross state

product (X):

                               X = X(tF, GF, tH, GH; r, p; AF, AH, ‹s);                     (3)

equilibrium state employment (N):

                               N = N(tF, GF, tH, GH; r, p; AF, AH, ‹s);                     (4)

and the equilibrium number of households (H) needed to supply N:

                         H = N/μ = N(tF, GF, tH, GH; r, p; AF, AH, ‹s)/μ,                    (5)

where μ is the equilibrium rate of labor force employment.

       Equations (3)-(5) provide the starting point for our empirical analysis. We focus on the net

impact of state own deficits (OwnD), defined here as state expenditures minus state own revenues:

OwnD = (GF + GH) - (tFCX + tHCH). In particular we are interested in the effects of a temporary

increase in OwnD on changes in gross state product (X), state employment (N), state population (H),

and temporary changes in rate of employment (μ) as the economy adjusts to a new equilibrium. Our

empirical analysis will also test for the separate effects of state spending (GF + GH) and state own

revenues (tFCX + tHCH), denoted hereafter as GovServices and OwnNetRev respectively. .

       A positive impact of temporary state deficits on the local private economy may occur in

either of three cases. First, if firms and households fully anticipate the future tax burden of current


                                                  8
deficits – the case of Ricardian equivalence – but local government services add more to productive

efficiency and household utility than current and anticipated taxes, then firms will increase their

demand for labor and workers will be attracted to the region. Here the temporary deficit creates a

permanent improvement in the state productive or residential environments. Capital spending may

be an example.

        Second, if firms or households within the state are credit-constrained, temporary state deficits

can ease that constraint by financing current period tax cuts for constrained firms and households

to allow desired investment and consumption. If such state deficit financing overcomes a failure in

the local capital markets, credit-constrained firms and households will be attracted to the state.

Again X, N, and H will rise in equilibrium. Deficit financing of scholarships to state universities

may be an example.

        Third, if firms and households are myopic and do not anticipate the future tax burdens of

state own deficits then deficits act as de facto fiscal transfers from future (perhaps future self) state

residents, or in the case of bailouts, from residents of the full monetary union. Such transfers act

to increase current period consumption and investment within the state leading to an increase in X,

N, and H. When deficits are repaid, however, firm and household taxes will rise causing X, N and

H to fall back to their original equilibrium levels. If the eventual tax consequences of temporary

deficits are perceived immediately, then there will be no change in X, N, and H, even in the short

run. That is, Ricardian equivalence will hold.

        In each case it is plausible to assume a period of adjustment to the new economic

equilibrium, or in the case of myopic firms and households, a period before the tax consequences

of state deficits are recognized and the economy returns to its original equilibrium; see, for example,


                                                   9
Wildasin (2000). We will estimate the effects of temporary own state deficits per capita (OwnD)

on annual changes in N and H, each specified as an annual state growth rate ( N , H ). The impact

of OwnD on the growth rate of state economic output is not possible because of a re-definition of

real state GSP by the Bureau of Economic Analysis during our sample period making annual

comparisons inappropriate.

       B. State Spillovers: In addition to any impact a state’s deficit may have on its own economy,

there may be consequences for other states’ economies as well – that is, spillover effects onto the

levels of jobs, output, and population of its neighbors. Temporary deficits that finance a permanent

improvement in the state’s firm or household amenities may draw firms, workers, and residents from

other states. Here the spillover effects are negative. In contrast, temporary deficits that finance an

expansion of household consumption or firm investment may expand state aggregate demand and

then economic activity in neighboring states as state residents buy goods and services produced

outside their state economy. Here the spillover effects are positive. Spillovers, whether negative

or positive, may have global welfare implications and therefore argue for fiscal coordination of

deficit policies among states within the union.

       We will test for presence of such fiscal spillovers among the 48 mainland states in two ways.

Each measure uses an alternative specification of trade linkages between member states to define

the reach of spillovers. Direct information on trade flows between U.S. states is not available,

however. As a first alternative we combine information on each state’s major industries with the

national input-output matrix to approximate trade flows between productive enterprises across states.

The matrix is specified by the shares of each of 63 industry inputs needed to produce one dollar of

a “buy” state’s gross state product multiplied by the national input-output matrix then multiplied by


                                                  10
the share of a “sell” state’s production of those 63 industry inputs.2 The resulting matrix connects

each state’s purchases of inputs needed to make one dollar of the state’s output to the inputs supplied

by all other states. States that are major “sellers” of inputs demanded by “buy” states will be

closely linked to those states. We call this measure of states’ economic interdependence input-

output spillovers, denoted IOSpillovers. Because most states have multiple providers of their inputs

and sell their outputs to many states, the state input-output spillover indices closely approximate the

relative importance of a state’s economy in the aggregate U.S. economy.3

       The input-output measure of state linkages has the weakness, however, that it is a production

based measure of state interdependencies and omits the final demands by the household sector for

goods and services produced in other states. We therefore offer a second, more inclusive measure

of state interdependencies that includes demand by the household sector. In this measure states are

grouped by economic regions as specified by Crone (2004). Crone uses the Philadelphia Federal

Reserve Bank’s indices of coincident economic activity to first identify the cyclical components of

each state’s aggregate economy.       He then applies cluster analysis to the resulting cyclical

components to group the 48 contiguous states into eight regions with similar business cycles. Here

the spillover measure connecting states will be the change in economic activity in a state’s Crone-


       2
           We use the Bureau of Economic Analysis’s 2010 specification of the national input-output
matrix; see http://ww.bea.gov/iTabke/index_industry.cfm. In computing this measure we assume
that all inputs into state production are imported from outside the state. Unfortunately there are no
compelling measures for state “self-sufficiency” in production.
       3
         For example, to produce an additional dollar of gross state product (GSP) in California the
production in the average “seller” state needs to rise by about $.01 (S.D. = .01). California’s most
important suppliers are New York ($.03) and Texas ($.04). Conversely, a $1 increase in GSP
production elsewhere in the country will mean an average $.05 increase in production of California
goods and services. It is this later weighting – how exposed is California to demands elsewhere in
the country – that we use as our measure of national spillovers that impact each state.

                                                  11
specified, regional neighbors, excluding the change in the state itself. We call this measure of state

interdependence the regional spillover measure, denoted REGSpillovers. Table 1 lists the states in

each of the eight economic regions as specified by Crone.4

        Economic activities specified to influence a given state’s growth in jobs and population are

the jobs and population growth respectively for that state’s spillover “neighbors.”5 Weightings used

to reflect “neighborliness” are either the input-output weights or the Crone-region (state shares)

weights. The correlation of the two measures of spillovers is .47 for job growth spillovers and .24

for population spillovers. We test for spillovers with both specifications. We anticipate the

spillover variable based upon the more economically inclusive within-region connections to show

a larger spillover impact than those obtained using the input-output connections. Finally both our

measures may overstate spillovers among U.S. states as they ignore purchases from non-U.S.

suppliers. Unfortunately data on the demand for foreign goods and services by a state’s firms and

households are not available.

IV. Estimation and Results

        A. Estimation: We estimate the impact of each state’s own deficit on the state’s growth in

jobs ( N ) and population from net migration ( H ) for a panel of the 48 mainland states for the period




        4
        For evidence that the Crone economic regions are likely to capture most of the important
economic spillovers across state economies, see Bronars and Jansen (1987).
        5
           We use outcome measures (growth in jobs and population) rather than policies (e.g., own
state deficits) to avoid compounding policy interdependencies, say through yardstick competition,
with economic interdependencies. We did test for the effects of a population weighted average of
OwnD(-1) of neighboring states as a separate regressor to control for regional fiscal competition.
The variable was never a statistically significant determinant of state growth rates.

                                                   12
1973-2009.6 The growth specification for state jobs and population is preferred, first because it

allows for adjustment lags of states’ economies with respect to fiscal policies, and second, because

it ensures stationarity of the relevant dependent variables. One and two period lagged values of

growth rates are included in each equation to allow for adjustments in the dependent variables.

Levels of state jobs (N) and population (H) are non-stationary by the Im-Persaran-Shin (2003) test

for stationarity in panel data allowing for unit roots to differ across states; growth rates are

stationary.

        State’s own deficits per capita, denoted OwnD, is defined as the sum of state deficits from

all accounts – general fund, capital fund, and insurance trust fund (including public employee

pensions) – less federal aid paid to the state. OwnD is also stationary by the Im-Persaran-Shin test.

Because our data are annual data and because fiscal policy requires from one to four quarters before

impacting the private economy, we lag OwnD one period; see Ramey (2011). Contemporary values

and one period lags of the two spillover variables, IOSpillovers and REGSpillovers, are as specified

above and included alternatively in each growth equation. All fiscal variables are denominated in

2004 dollars, allowing for across state variation with Wyoming 2004 prices as the base deflator.

        In addition to OwnD we also include federal aid to states as a separate regressor in each

growth equation, specified as non-matching federal aid to state and local government, denoted as

ZAID. Matching aid is endogenous to state government spending and thus potentially endogenous

to variations in state economic outcomes. Matching aid includes Medicaid aid, AFDC aid (to

1996), and federal highway aid. In 1996, AFDC funding was re-structured as a lump-sum transfer



        6
          The year 2010 is omitted from the analysis as it stands as a significant outlier for both state
deficits and state economies.

                                                   13
without matching, known as Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), and was then

included in ZAID. Always included in ZAID are all non-matching aid programs paid to states,

including programs with explicit “pass-through” requirements for the states to fund local

governments – for example, programs funded by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act.

States have treated these programs as potential substitutes for their own support of local activities;

see Craig and Inman (1982). Finally, also included in ZAID are payments to states as a result of the

1998 settlement with tobacco companies for reimbursement of state health expenditures due to

smoking. As for OwnD, ZAID will be lagged one year in our regressions.

        The underlying specifications for our job and population growth equations follow from Eqs.

(3)-(5) above and suggest the need to control for initial levels of state firm and residential amenities

(AF, AH,) and state land area (‹s). We do so by including state fixed effects in each growth equation.

Also included in each specification are common national interest rates and prices for state inputs and

outputs. The potential influence of changes in these macro variables are captured by the inclusion

of year fixed effects. The estimated equations has the final specification as:

                  ( N , H ) = f(OwnD(-1), ZAID(-1), Spillovers; Controls) + υst,

where υst = vt + vs + vst, with year (vt) fixed effects to control for common changes in aggregate

demand and interest rates and state fixed effects (vs) to control for state amenities, state political and

legal environments, and the land area of each state. The two spillover specifications – IOSpillovers

and REGSpillovers – will be tested separately. Control variables included in each regression are

lagged values of the spillover variables as a control for shocks to “neighbors” economies, changes

in world energy prices interacted with whether the state is an energy producing state, and changes




                                                   14
in state productivity as measured from the state production function for manufacturing.7 Our

estimation strategy corrects for serial correlation and heteroscedasticity in vst.

       Two important econometric issues remain when estimating our growth equations. First is

the potential endogeneity of state own deficits, even when lagged one year. Unmeasured shocks to

a state’s economy will lower the measures of economic performance and at the same time increase

the state’s deficit. If these unmeasured shocks have an autocorrelated path, then they will be

correlated with lagged OwnD and contemporary performance as well. Since deficits rise when the

economy declines, the bias is likely to be downward; OLS results reported below confirm this

negative bias.

       To correct for the possible endogeneity of OwnD, we instrument for OwnD using as

instruments four to six year lags of OwnD. The identifying assumptions are, first, that deficit

changes arising from fiscal choices of preceding legislative regimes have an institutional persistence

helping to predict contemporaneous state deficits and second, that those lagged deficit changes are

not correlated with the current economic performance of the state except through their impact on

OwnD. For example, accumulated cash reserves from prior general fund surpluses or in capital or

pension funds available from prior long-term debt each allows for funding current period OwnD.



       7
          Changes in world energy prices are from Hamilton (2003). Changes in state productivity
in manufacturing is estimated as dln(κst)/dt, where ln(κst) is computed as the residual from the state
Cobb-Douglas production function linking state manufacturing output to state capital stocks and
labor. Other within state, year controls but generally found to be statistically insignificant and
therefore excluded from our final results include: decade-to-decade changes in the level of advanced
education in the state (percent with college degrees or more) and in state urbanization (percent of
population living in urban areas); losses from major natural disasters thought to impact the state
economy; oil price changes interacted with whether the state could be considered a major consumer
of energy; and population weighted changes in OwnD(-1) of the other states in each state’s
economic region as a control for potential fiscal competition among economic neighbors. Finally,
controlling for region-wide fixed effects had no statistically significant effect on our results.

                                                  15
This first assumption is tested directly using the Stock-Yogo F test for weak instruments in the first

stage of the IV regression. For our job growth equation we can reject the null hypothesis of weak

instruments at the .95 level of confidence; see Table 2 below. For our population growth equation

we can reject the null hypothesis of weak instruments at the .90 level of confidence; see Table 3.

The second assumption is supported by the preponderance of macro-economic evidence for the time

horizon of fiscal policy impacts as never longer than sixteen quarters and by results from the

application of the Hansen and Difference-in-Hansen tests for instrument exogeneity; see Tables 2

and 3. In particular, see Figure 3 below showing the estimated impact of state own deficits on the

state economy as exhausted within two years.

       Second, each of our growth equations uses state fixed effects to control for state unique

variables (AF, AH, and ‹s) setting initial conditions. To control for these state fixed effects, each

growth equation is estimated in first differences as recommended by Caselli, Esquivel, and Lefort

(1996). Because our data and specification define a dynamic panel, however, the resulting error

term in the first differenced estimating equation is likely to be correlated with the first differences

of the lagged dependent variables. Thus the estimated coefficients for the lagged dependent

variables will be biased. Holtz-Eakin, Newey, and Rosen (1988) provide an efficient GMM

estimator for dynamic panels with fixed effects using long-lagged values of the dependent variables

as instruments. There must be no evidence of serial correlation of the within state errors (vst) for

the longer lags. Arellano and Bond (1991) develop the test for within state serial correlation for

second-order and longer lags and we report those results for our GMM estimates; see Tables 2 and

3. The preferred GMM estimator also corrects standard errors for heteroscedasticity and first-order




                                                  16
autocorrelation.8

       B. Results: Col. (1) of Tables 2 and 3 provide the OLS estimates of the job growth and

population growth equations, respectively. Both show a negative correlation between OwnD(-1)

and the two outcome variables as would be expected when there are common omitted events causing

both the local economy to decline and local deficits to rise. To control for this downward bias we

instrument for OwnD(-1) using lags of OwnD(-1) from a previous legislative session, dated four,

five, and six fiscal years prior. Prior to GMM estimation, we test for whether these instruments

qualify as “strong” instruments for OwnD(-1) from the IV estimation of each equation. The

resulting Stock-Yogo F test statistic for the null hypothesis of weak instruments is 10.06 for the job

growth equation and 9.05 for the population growth equation; see Tables 2 and 3. The threshold

value for the F statistic for 10% maximal relative bias between OLS and IV estimates is 9.08; see

Stock, Wright, and Yogo (2002). We conclude lags of (-4) to (-6) for OwnD qualify as strong

instruments.

           For estimation of the job and population growth equations using OwnNetRev(-1) and

GovServices(-1) as the two components of OwnD (-1) we use the (-4) to (-6) year lags of the two

fiscal variables as instruments. In this case the Stock-Yogo F test statistics for lagged revenues and

lagged spending as strong instruments are 13.58 and 164.29 respectively in the job growth equation

and 16.83 and 188.89 respectively in the population growth equation; see Tables 2 and 3, col. 6. We

conclude lags of (-4) to (-6) of OwnNetRev and GovServices are strong instruments for the two

component fiscal variables of OwnD.

       Also important for the validity of our instruments is that they are exogenous to the second



       8
           We use the “Two-Step Differenced GMM” estimator as proposed Windmeijer (2005).

                                                 17
stage job and population growth equations. We use the Hansen test of overidentifying restrictions

to test this assumption; see Tables 2 and 3. We cannot reject the null hypothesis that the instruments

can be excluded from the second stage equations. There is the potential problem in the GMM

estimation of dynamic panels, however, that the Hansen test loses power to identify exclusion when

there are many instruments in the first stage where candidate instruments include long-lagged values

of the dependent and other included exogenous variables; see Roodman (2008). Restricting the set

of instruments can offer substantial gains in power for exclusion tests; see Bowsher (2002).            We

have done so by limiting the number of lags of the dependent and exogenous variables used as

instruments in first stage estimation to no more than three. In an alternative specification of our core

model, we have also estimated our job and population growth equations excluding year fixed effects;

see Tables 2 and 3, col. (5). Here too we fail to reject the null hypothesis of instrument exclusion

from the second stage.9 Finally, we report the test statistic for the Difference-in-Hansen test for

exclusion of only our primary instruments for OwnD(-1), OwnNetRev(-1) and GovServices(-1)

specified as lags (-4) to (-6) of each variable; by this test too we fail to reject the null hypothesis that

the instruments are excluded from the second stage equations.

        Our core results appear in Tables 2 and 3. After instrumenting for the endogeneity of

OwnD(-1), we find that own state deficits now have a positive impact on state job growth one year

after deficit spending; see Table 2, cols. (2)-(5). The GMM estimated coefficients are statistically

significant at the 95% confidence level and resulting estimated impact on job growth is

economically important. For example, a one standard deviation increase in state deficits over the

        9
         While omitting year fixed effects gives us confidence that our primary instruments can be
thought of as excluded from the growth equation, those variables are necessary to control for
possible bias in our estimates of the marginal effects of OwnD(-1) on job and population growth.
See footnote 13 below.

                                                    18
last ten years of our sample period of $390/person will increase the rate of job growth in the

subsequent calendar year by from .012 (= .00003 x $390; Table 2, col. 4) to perhaps .016 (= .00004

x $390; Table 2, cols. 2 and 3), compared to a sample mean rate of job growth of .018. For an

average state in our sample period with employment of 2.816 million jobs, this is an increase of

33,800 (= .012 x 2.816 million) to 45,000 (= .016 x 2.816 million) state jobs. For our sample’s

average state with a population of 6.222 million residents, the present value cost/job ranges from

$53,857/job to $71,809/job (= [$390/person x 6.222 million]/New Jobs).

       State deficits not only create jobs within the deficit state, but there is direct evidence of

positive job spillovers to its economic neighbors. Both IOSpillovers and REGSpillovers show a

positive effect on other states’ job growth. The estimated effects are strongest, both statistically and

economically, for neighbors within the economic region as defined in Table 1. The estimated

coefficient for REGSpillover implies that a one percent increase in the rate of job growth among all

of a state’s regional neighbors will increase the state’s rate of job growth by 6/10's of one percent.

In contrast, the estimated coefficient for IOSpillovers implies a one percent increase in the rate of job

growth among all of the state’s national neighbors will increase the state’s rate of job by 1/10 of one

percent. The larger estimated impact for regional spillovers seems plausible. The regional spillover

variable is defined to include all economic activities between the states, including consumer demand,

while the input-output measure is restricted to production relationships between state firms.10

        10
            Even the estimates for REGSpillovers may be an underestimate of the full spillover
effects. Our referee suggested one additional test for aggregate spillover effects and that was to
repeat our core regression but omit year fixed effects. Including year fixed effects not only controls
for common macro economic shocks to state economies but also for the level of deficits in all other
states. To the extent a state’s own deficit correlates with other state’s deficits in a year – i.e., all
states trying to stimulate their economies – then these “aggregate” effects will be captured as part
of year fixed effects. By omitting year fixed effects, the OwnD(-1) variable could then include these
correlated effects of other states’ deficits. This alternative specification for job growth appears in

                                                   19
        Tables 2, col. (6) provides separate estimates for the fiscal components of OwnD(-1). State

own deficits are defined as spending on government services less state own revenues by all funds.

We follow the specification used in studies of the macro economic effects of tax policy and define

revenues as net state revenues specified as own state revenues collected minus all transfers paid to

households including welfare payments, Medicaid payments, unemployment insurance, and pensions

for retired public employees. We also deduct state payments to local governments, viewing such

payments as transfers to households for local tax relief or local spending. As for own state deficits

we lag the variable one year, denoted as OwnNetRev(-1). Spending on government services is also

lagged, denoted as GovServices(-1), and now excludes all transfer payments. Service spending does

include wages paid to state public employees, spending on purchased goods and services, and state

infrastructure spending. As noted, we instrument for GovServices(-1) and OwnNetRev(-1) with their

four to six year lags.

        OwnNetRev(-1) has a statistically significant negative effect on state job growth. Raising

state tax revenues depresses job growth while returning revenues as transfers to households improves

growth. The negative effect of net revenues on job growth is consistent with previous estimates for

state and local economies (e.g., Helms, 1985) and for the macro-economy as well (Romer and Romer,




 Tables 2 and 3, col. 5. The estimated coefficient for OwnD(-1) remains positive and is statistically
 significant, but is in fact smaller than the estimate with year fixed effects included. Even after
 including the national rate of unemployment in these regressions, we suspect that omitting controls
 for year-to-year variation in the aggregate economy leads to a downward bias in the estimate of the
 effects of OwnD(-1) on state job growth. When the aggregate economy is in decline state job
 growth is low and state deficits are high. Including year fix effects controls for this possible bias.
 Still, to the extent our estimates with year fixed effects do control for the spillover benefits from
 other states’ deficits, then our reported estimates for OwnD(-1) should be viewed as a lower bound
 to total job effects when all states react in unison.

                                                  20
2010). GovServices(-1) has a positive but statistically insignificant effect on state job growth.11 This

result too mirrors previous estimates; see Holtz-Eakin (1994). Importantly for our work here, the

revenue and expenditure components provide impact estimates of the same order of magnitude and

statistical significance as those for OwnD(-1).

        The effects of OwnD(-1) on state population growth through net migration (including possible

foreign migrants) are statistically insignificant or, if significant, quantitatively small in impact; see

Table 3, cols. (2)-(5). Similar insignificant effects are observed when OwnD(-1) is separated into

OwnNetRev(-1) and GovServices(-1); Table 3, col. (6). This makes sense if state job gains from the

temporary deficit are thought to be short lived, a conclusion consistent with our impulse response

function for the effects of OwnD on job growth in Figure 3 below. Finally, Table 3, col. (7) provides

an estimate of the impact of OwnD(-1) on the deficit state’s rate of employment, μ. The effect is

positive, but statistically insignificant.

        Spillover effects of population growth outside the state are statistically significant, however,

but small in magnitude as well and consistent with within state effects. For the IOSpillovers

specification, a temporary increase in OwnD(-1) leads to an increase in the deficit state’s population

and, from the negative coefficient on IOSpillovers, to a decline in the population of all other states

nationally. For the REGSpillovers specification, a temporary increase in OwnD(-1) leads to more

residents in the deficit state and, from the positive coefficient on REGSpillovers, to an increase in



         11
             While not a central concern of this study, the estimated effect of non-matching federal-to-
 state aid, denoted as ZAid(-1) in Tables 2 and 3, deserves comment. The effect is generally negative
 and most often statistically insignificant. We are reluctant to conclude that such assistance depresses
 state economic growth. More likely such programs include a redistributive component that channels
 more aid to declining states. To correct for this downward bias one would need an instrument for
 ZAid. For more precise estimates of the effects of federal aid on local economies, see Suárez
 Serrato and Wingender (2011).

                                                   21
the populations of the other states in the economic region. Together the two results imply a gain in

population for the deficit state and its regional neighbors and a population loss for all other states,

a result suggestive of a region-wide job search by new residents.12

       Combining the estimated effects of OwnD(-1) on new jobs, on new residents, and on changes

in rate of state employment allows us to estimate who benefits from the increase in state debt. Will

it be current residents through protection of their existing jobs, current residents through new

employment opportunities, or outside residents moving in to “steal” new state jobs? A simple

example provides the answer. From Table 2, col. (4), we find a one standard deviation increase in

state deficits of $390 will increase the rate of state job growth by .012 (= .00003 x $390), or for the

average state in our sample with 2.816 million jobs, an increase of 33,800 jobs. From Table 3, col.

(7), we estimate the state rate of employment will rise by .0020 (= .000005 x $390) from its mean of

.942 to .944. For the average state’s labor force of 2.989 million potential workers, this means saving

6,000 jobs of those already working (= .002 x 2.989 million). Finally, new residents are estimated

to take about 7,200 of the new jobs. This follows from fact that the $390/person deficit increases

        12
           Two calculations provide a sense of the magnitude of these estimated population effects.
First, we estimate that with a one standard deviation increase in state own deficits of $390/person,
state population growth rates will increase by .0027 (=.000007 x $390) and increase population in
the average state by 17,000 new residents (= .0027 x 6.222 million residents). Second, from the
spillover variables we can compute the change in populations outside the state. For IOSpillovers,
the average “weight” for one state’s increase in population growth is .015 so that the deficit state’s
impact on the value of IOSpillovers will therefore be .00004 (= .0027 x .015). From the estimated
spillover effect of -2.004 for IOSpillovers, this means a decline in the population growth rate of each
of the other states of about -.00008 (= -2 x .00004) or about 500 residents (= -.00008 x 6.222
million). The typical economic region has six states. Thus 42 states will be “sending” 500 residents
each into the region for a total in-migration of 21,000 residents, 17,000 of whom will settle in the
original deficit state and 4,000 of whom will settle in the other five states. REGSpillover measures
this population gain for the region’s other states. The implied regional job search process is
reminiscent of the 1950's “Caterpillar trail” where job-seekers from the South went first to Peoria,
Illinois (home of Caterpillar Tractor), then to Gary, Chicago, Milwaukee, Green Bay, and finally
Minneapolis-St. Paul in search of work.

                                                  22
own state population from net migration by about 17,000.13          About 45 percent of current state

residents participate in the labor market. If the new residents participate and are employed at the

same rates as current residents then 7,200 new workers, in jobs, will come from outside the state

(7,200 = 17,000 x .45 x .944). This leaves 20,600 (= 33,800 - 6,000 - 7,200) of the new jobs to be

filled by current state residents who now enter the labor force. All told, 18 percent of the new jobs

are filled by protecting work for residents already employed, 21 percent are filled by non-residents

moving into the state, and 61 percent by current state residents who enter the labor force and find

work. The majority of beneficiaries of state own deficits, approximately 79 percent, are residents of

the deficit state.

        The gain in jobs is short lived, however. Figure 3 provides an estimate of the impulse

response function using the direct projection method of Jordá (2005) for state employment growth

following a one year, 1 percent increase in state own deficits represented as the percent increase in

state job growth. The estimated effect is shown as a solid line and the 95% confidence interval as

dashed lines. Three conclusions follow from these estimates. First as noted, the impact of a current

period increase in state own deficits will increase state employment one year hence. A state deficit

increase during FY 2008 for example will increase jobs over the calendar year 2009, a response time

as short as two quarters or as long as ten quarters. By calendar 2010, however, there are no longer

significant effects on state jobs. Second, the lack of a permanent effect on jobs suggests that

historically at least state deficit financing has not been funding productive new state infrastructure

(AF) or residential amenities (AH) leading to a permanently more attractive state economy. Third, the

observed statistically significant negative effect of today’s deficits on jobs eight to ten years from the



         13
              See footnote 12 above.

                                                   23
date of deficit financing is consistent with jobs declining when taxes rise to repay debt. This third

result rejects strong Ricardian Equivalence for state deficit financing.

V. Local Deficits and Local Jobs

        Table 4 provides a policy experiment based on the results of Table 2 asking what an increase

in own state deficits would mean for jobs both in the deficit state(s) and surrounding economic

neighbors. We focus on the largest state in each of the eight Crone economic regions; the economic

neighbors are the other states within the region. The year chosen for the deficit increase is FY 2008,

the first year of the Great Recession. Projected job impacts will occur over calendar 2009.14 The

level of the simulated state deficit increase is set equal to $390/person, the one standard deviation of

all state deficits over the period 2000-2007. These deficits have been funded by increases in the

general fund deficit, the capital fund deficit, the unemployment insurance fund deficit, or the pension

fund deficit. Use of the latter three funds for deficit financing is still available to states constrained

by strong balanced budget rules on their general fund. This $390/person deficit is from 6 to as much

as 15 percent of each of the largest state’s own fund revenues in FY 2008 and will require a sizeable

increase in state spending and transfers or a significant reduction in state taxes and fees.

        Three alternative simulations are presented in Table 4. The upper panel of Table 4 illustrates

the impact on state jobs of a deficit increase in the largest state alone, with no new deficits by its

(Crone) regional neighbors. The middle panel shows the impact of deficits by all other states in the

region, except the largest state. These two panels illustrate the potential spillovers across states, first

from the largest state to its neighbors and then from the neighbors to the largest state. The lower

panel shows the increase in region jobs if all states agree to cooperate in a common policy where each

         14
           There is no evidence of significant job creation after the first year following the temporary
 increase in state own deficits; see Figure 3.

                                                    24
state increases its state own deficits by $390/person.

         A $390/person deficit is estimated to lead to an increase of .011 in the deficit state’s rate of

job growth which leads in turn to the change in jobs reported in Table 4.15 The job growth in the

deficit state then spills over into neighboring states through changes in the growth of regional jobs

surrounding each neighbor, measured by a change in REGSpillovers. This change, which varies by

each neighboring state, allows a prediction of new job growth and thus new jobs in each neighboring

state. Those new jobs are summed to provide an estimate of the overall level of job spillovers.16

Finally, the large state’s own jobs and the spillover jobs are summed to give the total jobs created in

the region. We also report the present value tax cost/job created defined as the total level of deficits

in the largest state divided by jobs created. For the second panel, jobs created and the present value

cost/job from increasing deficits in each region’s smaller states, but now excluding the largest state,

are computed in a similar way. Finally, the third panel aggregates the results of the upper two panels

to show the impact on total regional jobs and the average tax cost/job if all states agreed to jointly

increase their deficits by $390/person.

       Three conclusions are evident from Table 4. First, from the first row of the first two panels

(OWN JOBS), state own deficits can create state jobs, at least for one year. But sizeable deficits will


        15
           Jobs estimates follow from estimates in Table 2, col. 4. First, we compute the increase
in the rate of job growth as Δjob growth = .0109 = .000028 x $390/person. (The coefficients in
Table 2 have been rounded to save space.). The predicted rate of job growth is then multiplied by
actual employment in each state in 2009 to obtain the predicted level of new jobs.
        16
            The largest state’s predicted increase in employment is added to existing growth for each
of the state’s regional neighbors to obtain a new estimate of each neighboring state’s REGSpillovers.
That value is then multiplied by the estimated coefficient for impact of REGSpillovers on job growth
from Table 2, col. (4) (= .685) to obtain a new value of each neighbor’s job growth. Each neighbor’s
new jobs are then be estimated as the new growth rate times the neighbor’s existing employment in
2009. Neighbors’ new jobs are then summed to obtain the estimate of “spillovers to other states”
reported in Table 4.

                                                   25
be required. The present value tax cost/job created in the state for the state running the deficits

ranges from $72,000 per job in Massachusetts to $91,000 per job in California. These cost estimates

are comparable to those obtained by the recent evaluative literature of the impact of American

Reinvestment and Recovery Act’s fiscal assistance to state and local governments on local job

growth; see, for example, Wilson (2012).

        Second, there can be significant aggregate job spillovers onto the deficit state’s neighbors.

The costs of these “spillover jobs” will be $0 for the neighbors. This spillover benefit creates a

strong incentive for the neighbors of the largest state to free-ride on that state’s deficit behavior. For

comparable deficit levels large states can often create more jobs for its neighbors than neighbors can

create for themselves. For example, in the Far West region spillovers from California (108,561)

exceed its neighbors own job creation (90,301).

        The second panel in Table 4 shows the incentive to free ride runs both ways. If the largest

state’s neighbors were to collectively increase their deficits, but the large state did not, then the large

state would receive the spillover jobs. Collectively then, all states may choose to “sit on their hands”

hoping the other states in the region will run deficits in times of recessions. Or if a each state does

run a deficit to create jobs within the state – as would occur if state benefits of a new job exceed the

state’s own tax cost/job – there will likely be a downward adjustment in own state’s deficit behavior

to the job spillovers received from the other states. The Nash equilibrium to such a “race to the

bottom” policy game will be Pareto inferior to a cooperative allocation in which all states collectively

agree to deficit finance region-wide job creation; see Pauly (1970).

        Third, the lower panel of Table 4 shows the outcome of such a cooperative policy, if all states

in the region agreed to run a common $390/person deficit. Total jobs created is be the sum of total



                                                    26
jobs created when the two sets of governments operated separately (REGION’S TOTAL JOBS) and

tax cost/job becomes the weighted average of cost/job after allowing for spillovers. The tax cost/job

under the cooperative policy is significantly lower than when each state, or set of states, operated

independently ignoring spillovers. For example, in the New England region the “private” cost/job

to Massachusetts of the deficit policy would be $72,103, or to the other smaller states $76,724, but

working together and allowing for spillover jobs, the “social” cost/job falls to $44,250. A deficit

policy that was not attractive for an individual state when comparing the benefits of a state job to its

own tax costs may become attractive when all states agree to cooperate and collectively share the

deficit costs of job creation.17 If so, then there is a argument for centralizing stabilization fiscal

policy.

VI. Conclusion

          The accepted wisdom for managing stabilization policy in an economic and monetary union,

as summarized by the opening quote from Oates, assigns these policy responsibilities to the central

government for either or both of two reasons. First, no state can have a significant impact on its own

level of economic activity as firms and households within the state purchase much of their inputs and

consumption from producers outside the state. As a result, the primary beneficiary of any temporary

fiscal stimulus will be workers outside the state because of economic spillovers. Second, even



          17
          Though that decision must ultimately rest on the net social benefits of moving residents
from unemployment to employment. Whether these net benefits of a created job exceed our
estimated social costs remains an open question. For example, as part of an effort to understand
fluctuations in employment rates, Hall and Milgrom (2008, Table 2) estimate the annual (flow)
benefits to a risk-neutral worker of remaining unemployed (and searching or providing home
production) as 70 percent of the overall gain in added output. The net social surplus of moving from
unemployed to employed would therefore be 30 percent of the worker’s added output. It is this net
output benefit that must be compared to our computed costs. For risk adverse workers, the required
output gain would be smaller.

                                                  27
without significant spillovers, workers from other states may move into the state adopting the fiscal

stimulus with the consequence that job opportunities will not improve for state residents. In either

case, state officials may under provide job creation policies for their residents. If so, only the central

government can implement efficient macro-stabilization policies.

        Our results here suggest that for the U.S. economic union the familiar conclusion is correct.

While states can implement effective deficit policies and the primary beneficiaries of the resulting

increases in state jobs will be state residents, the present value costs per job of such policies to each

individual state – ranging from $70,000 to $90,000 per job – may exceed the benefits of the jobs

created. After allowing for the resulting positive job spillovers to neighboring states, however, the

social costs of created jobs falls to $45,000 to $50,000 per job. What may not optimal from the

perspective on an individual state may be justified collectively because of spillovers. If so, only a

central government, or a fiscal treaty as in the case of the European Union, will be capable of

coordinating state deficits for efficient fiscal stabilization policies.

        Whether central government policy-makers will be able to achieve efficient coordination of

state fiscal policies is another matter, however. Within fiscal unions, the central government typically

relies upon state or provincial governments for the implementation of its domestic fiscal policies,

including transfers to households. Rather than spending funds as the central government desires,

states often have their own policy agendas. Having now examined states as their own “principals,”

the next task for understanding stabilization policy in economic unions should be to evaluate states

as “agents” for central government fiscal policies.




                                                    28
                                        REFERENCES

      Arellano, M. and S. Bond (1991), “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte Carlo
Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations,” The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 58,
pp. 277-297.

      Auerbach, Alan and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2012), “Output Spillovers from Fiscal Policy,”
Working Paper 18578, NBER.

      Beetsma, Roel and Massimo Giuliodori (2011), “The Effects of Government Purchase
Shocks: Review and Estimates for the EU,” Economic Journal, Vol. 121, pp. F4-F32.

      Bowsher, Clive (2002), “On Testing Overidentifying Restrictions in Dynamic Panel Data
Models,” Economic Letters, Vol. 77, pp. 211-220.

      Bronars, Stephen and Dennis Jansen (1987), “The Geographic Distribution of
Unemployment Rates in the United States: A Spatial-Time Series Analysis,” Journal of
Econometrics, Vol. 36, pp. 252-279.

      Caselli, Francesco, Gerardo Esquivel, and Fernando Lefort (1996), “Reopening the
Convergence Debate: A New Look at Cross-Country Growth Empirics,” Journal of Economic
Growth, Vol. 1, pp. 363-389.

       Craig, Steven and Robert Inman (1982), “Federal Aid and Public Education: An Empirical
Look at the New Fiscal Federalism,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 64, pp. 541-552.

        Crone, Theodore (2004), “An Alternative Definition of Economic Regions in the United
States Based on Similarities in State Business Cycles,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
87, pp. 617-626.

      Hall, Robert and Paul Milgrom (2008), “The Limited Influence of Unemployment on the
Wage Bargain,” American Economic Review, Vol. 98, pp. 1653-1674.

      Hamilton, James D. (2003), “What Is an Oil Shock?” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 113, pp.
363-398.

      Haughwout, Andrew and Robert Inman (2001), “Fiscal Policies in Open Cities with Firms
and Households,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 31, pp. 147-180.

       Hebous, Shafik and Tom Zimmerman (2012), “Estimating the Effects of Coordinated Fiscal
Actions in the Euro Zone,” European Economic Review, (Forthcoming).

        Helms, L. Jay (1985), “The Effect of State and Local Taxes on Economic Growth: A Time
Series, Cross Section Approach,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 67, 574-582.

                                              R-1
      Holtz-Eakin, Douglas (1994), “Public Sector Capital and the Productivity Puzzle,” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 76, pp. 12-21.

      Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, Whitney Newey, and Harvey Rosen (1988), “Estimating Vector
Autoregressions with Panel Data,” Econometrica, Vol. 56, pp. 1371-1395.

       Im, K. S., M. H. Pesaran, and Y. Shin (2003), “Testing for Unit Roots in Heterogeneous
Panels,” Journal of Econometrics, Vol 115, pp. 53-74.

      Jordá, Oscar (2005), “Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local Projections,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 95, pp. 161-182.

       Oates, Wallace E. (1972), Fiscal Federalism, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich: New York.

       Pauly, Mark (1970), “Optimality, ‘Public’ Goods, and Local Governments: A General
Theoretical Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 78, pp.572-585.

      Ramey, Valerie (2011), “Can Government Purchases Stimulate the Economy?,” Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol. 49, pp. 673-685.

       Romer, Christina and David Romer (2010), “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes:
Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks,” American Economic Review, Vol. 110, pp.
763-801.

       Roodman, David (2008), “A Note on the Theme of Too Many Instruments,” Working Paper
125, Center for Global Development.

        Stock, James, Jonathan Wright, and Motohiro Yogo (2002), “A Survey of Weak Instruments
and Weak Identification in Generalized Methods of Moments,” Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics, Vol. 20, pp. 518-529.

       Suárez Serrato, Juan Carlos and Philippe Wingender (2011), “Estimating Local Fiscal
Multipliers,” University of California, Berkeley, Economics Department.

       Wildasin, David (2000), “Factor Mobility and Fiscal Policy in the EU: Policy Issues and
Analytical Approaches,” Economic Policy, Vol. 15, pp. 339-378.

      Wilson, Daniel (2012). “Fiscal Spending Jobs Multipliers: Evidence from the 2009 American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Vol. 4, pp. 251-
282.

      Windmeijer, Frank (2005), “A Finite Sample Correction for the Variance of Linear Efficient
Two-step GMM Estimators,” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 126, pp. 25-51.


                                              R-2
                               TABLE 1: Economic Regions[


           ECONOMIC REGIONS                                 MEMBER STATES
                New England                          Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont,
                                                  Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut
                   Mideast                         New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania,
                                                          Delaware, Maryland
                  Southeast                       Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina,
                                                   Georgia, Florida, Kentucky, Tennessee,
                                                      Alabama, Mississippi, Arkansas
                 Great Lakes                      West Virginia, Michigan, Ohio, Indiana,
                                                      Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota
                    Plains                           Missouri, Kansas, Nebraska, Iowa
           Mountain/Northern Plains             South Dakota, North Dakota, Montana, Idaho
                 Energy Belt                    Louisiana, Wyoming, Utah, Colorado, Texas,
                                                          Oklahoma, New Mexico
                   Far West                         Arizona, California, Nevada, Oregon,
                                                                Washington


       [
        Economic Regions are defined as in Crone (2004). Crone’s Economic Regions differ from
the BEA definitions by moving West Virginia into the Great Lakes Region and Louisiana into the
“Energy Belt” Region, both from BEA’s Southeast Region. Minnesota is added to the Great Lakes
Region from the BEA’s Plains Region. South Dakota and North Dakota are moved to a new
Mountain/Northern Plains Region from BEA’s Plains Region. Wyoming. Utah, and Colorado are
moved to the “Energy Belt” Region from BEA’s Rocky Mountain States Region. Finally, Arizona
is moved to the Far West Region from the BEA’s Southwest Region. The BEA’s Southwest Region
is now omitted.
                                TABLE 2: Own State Deficits and State Rate of Job Growth†
                                           ( N : Mean = .018 ; S.D. = .024)
                                   N                N              N               N           N            N
                                 (OLS)            (GMM)          (GMM)              (GMM)       (GMM)         (GMM)
                                   (1)              (2)            (3)                (4)         (5)           (6)

        OwnD(-1)                -.000002           .00004           .00004          .00003       .000005          -
  (Mean = 276; S.D. = 500)      (.0000008)*       (.00002)**       (.00002)**      (.00001)**   (.000002)**

         ZAID(-1)                .000006          -.00006           -.00005         -.00004      .00002       -.00006
  (Mean = 476; S.D. = 253)      (.000002)**       (.00004)         (.00004)        (.00002)*     (.00005)     (.00003)*

     OwnNetRev(-1)                 -                 -                -                -            -         -.00004
 (Mean = 2537; S.D. = 915)                                                                                    (.00002)**

     GovServices(-1)               -                 -                -                -            -          .00003
 (Mean = 2001; S.D. = 742)                                                                                    (.00003)

       IOSpillovers                -                 -               .093              -            -             -
(Mean = .0067; S.D. = .014)                                         (.078)

      REGSpillovers               .634               -                -              .685          .887         .676
 (Mean = .017; S.D. = .023)      (.033)**                                           (.091)**      (.050)**     (.609)

         Year Fixed               YES              YES              YES              YES          NO            YES

  IV F-Test for OwnD(-1)            -              10.06            10.06            10.06       10.06            -

IV F-Test for OwnNetRev(-1)         -                -                -                -            -          13.58

IV F-Test for GovServices(-1)       -                -                -                -            -          164.29

 Arellano-Bond Test: AR(2)         -                .479            .389             .330         .312          .359

   Hansen Exclusion Test            -               .732            .651             .785         .733          .515

 Difference-in-Hansen Test          -               .765            .714             .745         .635          .514
†
   Dependent variable is the rate of job growth in the state. Sample includes the 48 mainland states for the years 1973-2009; means and standard
deviations for all variables are for this sample. All regressions include state fixed effects; the GMM estimator uses a differenced specification to remove
state fixed effects. All equations also include one and two lags of the dependent variable. Coefficients for the one year lag of the dependent variable
range from .47 (for REGSpillovers) to .60 (for all other specifications) and are statistically significant at the .95 level of confidence; the coefficient
for the two year lag is typically near -.10 and never statistically significant. Other variables included in all regressions are lagged measures of the
spillover variable, a measure of shocks to state manufacturing productivity, shocks to the price of oil interacted with whether the state is an oil
producing state. For the one regression excluding year fixed effects (col. 5) we included the national rate of unemployment as a control for the national
economy and the coefficient estimate was negative and statistically significant. Standard errors are reported within parentheses. Estimates indicated
by ** are significant at the .95 level of confidence and those by * at the .90 level of confidence.
                             TABLE 3: Own State Deficits and State Rate of Population Growth from Net Migration†
                                                         : Mean = .005 ; S.D. = .010)
                                                       (H


                                        H             H             H             H             H               H           Δμ
                                      (OLS)          (GMM)          (GMM)          (GMM)         (GMM)             (GMM)       (GMM)
                                        (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)               (6)         (7)

        OwnD(-1)                    -.0000004        .000005        .000007        .000007      -.0000007             -         .000005
  (Mean = 276; S.D. = 500)          (.0000004)      (.000008)      (.000004)*     (.000005)      (.000002)                     (.000004)

         ZAID(-1)                    .000003          .00002        .000009        -.00002       -.00002           -.00006      -.00001
  (Mean = 476; S.D. = 253)          (.000001)**      (.00002)      (.000009)       (.00002)     (.000008)**        (.00004)*   (.000008)

     OwnNetRev(-1)                       -              -              -                 -          -              -.000004        -
 (Mean = 2537; S.D. = 915)                                                                                         (.000006)

     GovServices(-1)                     -              -              -                 -          -           -.000007           -
 (Mean = 2001; S.D. = 742)                                                                                     (.000009)

      IOSpillovers                       -              -           -2.004               -          -                 -            -
(Mean = .0017; S.D. = .003)                                         (.937)**

      REGSpillovers                     .345            -              -            .272           .231              .258        .415
(Mean = .0041; S.D. = .0067)           (.050)**                                    (.104)**       (.122)*           (.092)**    (.074)**

         Year Fixed                    YES            YES            YES            YES            NO               YES          YES

  IV F-Test for OwnD(-1)                 -            9.05           9.05           9.05           9.05               -          7.02

IV F-Test for OwnNetRev(-1)              -              -              -                 -          -               16.83          -

IV F-Test for GovServices(-1)            -              -              -                 -          -              188.89          -

 Arellano-Bond Test: AR(2)               -            .240           .206           .348           .703              .995        .936

   Hansen Exclusion Test                 -            .366           .624           .518           .376              .510        .404

 Difference-in-Hansen Test               -            .365           .458           .371           .282              .510        .280
†
   Dependent variable is the rate of population growth due to net migration into the state including immigrants from outside the United States. Sample
includes the 48 mainland states for the years 1973-2009; means and standard deviations for all variables are for this sample. All regressions include
state fixed effects; the GMM estimator uses a differenced specification to remove state fixed effects. All equations also include one and two lags of
the dependent variable. Coefficients for the one year lag of the dependent variable range from .60 (for REGSpillovers) to .90 (for all other
specifications) and are statistically significant at the .95 level of confidence; the coefficient for the two year lag is typically equal to -.20 and is never
statistically significant. Other variables included in all regressions are lagged measures of the spillover variable, a measure of shocks to state
manufacturing productivity, shocks to the price of oil interacted with whether the state is an oil producing state. For the one regression excluding year
fixed effects (col. 5) we included the national rate of unemployment as a control for the national economy and the coefficient estimate was negative
and statistically significant. Standard errors are reported within parentheses. Estimates indicated by ** are significant at the .95 level of confidence
and those by * at the .90 level of confidence.
                  TABLE 4: State Own Deficits, State Jobs, and Benefits of Cooperation: Impact Effects^


    REGION           NEW          MIDEAST     SOUTHEAST     GREAT       PLAINS       MOUNTAIN        ENERGY         FAR
                   ENGLAND                                  LAKES                   NORTH PLAINS      BELT          WEST

 LARGEST JOBS     Massachusetts   New York      Florida     Illinois    Missouri        Idaho             Texas    California
    STATE
(ΔOwnD/Own Rev)       (.06)         (.07)        (.15)        (.11)       (.14)         (.12)             (.11)      (.10)

 LARGE STATE’S
   OWN JOBS           35,253        95,237       81,337       63,294      29,831        6,850         113,563       158,483
    (Cost/Job)      ($72,103)     ($79,063)    ($89.467)    ($78,851)   ($77,934)     ($88,502)      ($85,175)     ($90,956)

 JOB SPILLOVERS
TO OTHER STATES      24,149        65,237       55,716       43,356      20,434         4,692             77,791   108,561
     (Cost/Job)       ($0)          ($0)         ($0)         ($0)        ($0)           ($0)              ($0)      ($0)

REGION’S TOTAL
     JOBS             59,402       160,475      137,053      106,650      50,265        11,542        191,354       267,043
   (Cost/Job)       ($42,791)     ($46,922)    ($53,078)    ($46,796)   ($46,251)     ($52,523)      ($50,549)     ($53,980)

 OTHER STATES’
   OWN JOBS           40,086       137,926      242,881      199,416      41,730        13,201         88,759        90.301
    (Cost/Job)      ($76,724)     ($79,299)    ($84,819)    ($79,574)   ($71,759)     ($72,556)      ($81,294)     ($84,234)

JOB SPILLOVERS
TO LARGE STATE       15,286        48,756       46,429       38,907      14,936         3,965             37,577    43,836
    (Cost/Job)        ($0)          ($0)         ($0)         ($0)        ($0)           ($0)              ($0)      ($0)

REGION’S TOTAL
     JOBS             67,544       232,406      409.254      336,015      70,315        22,245        149,559       152,158
   (Cost/Job)       ($45,534)     ($47,061)    ($47,061)    ($47,225)   ($42,587)     ($43,057)      ($48,245)     ($49,990)

REGIONAL POLICY
      JOBS           126,946       392,881      546,307      442,665     120,580        33,787        340,913       419,201
    (Cost/Job)      ($44,250)     ($47,004)    ($51,025)    ($47,121)   ($44,114)     ($46,293)      ($49,538)     ($52,532)
^
 Simulations are for an increase in OwnD(-1) in each region, both on own states and on neighbors based upon estimates from Table 2,
col. 4. The simulations are for a deficit increase equal to one S.D. of OwnD(-1) for the decade, 2000-2007: $390/person. Simulations
are for a deficit increase in FY2008 impacting jobs in calendar 2009. Only impact effects, one year following the increase in state deficits,
are reported here.
                                     Figure 1: States’ Deficits Over Time*


                                                        a) Deficits Per Capita

Dollars
3500
                                                                                                             Total Deficit
3000
                                                                                                             Own Deficit
2500

2000

1500

1000

 500

   0

-500

-1000

-1500
    1970         1974         1978          1982         1986         1990         1994         1998         2002            2006       2010




                                                      b) Deficits’ Share of GDP
Percent
 10

                                                                                                       Total Deficit/GDP
  8                                                                                                    Own Deficit/GDP

  6


  4


  2


  0


  -2


  -4
   1970         1974          1978         1982         1986         1990          1994         1998         2002          2006        2010




* Figure 1a plots the paths of total deficits per capita (including federal aid as revenues) and state own deficits per capita (excluding
federal aid as revenues) for the 48 mainland U.S. states. Figure 1b plots the paths of total and state own deficits as a share of GDP. Total
state deficits are represented by solid lines; state own deficits are represented by dashed lines. Positive dollar amounts indicate a
deficit; negative dollar amounts indicate a surplus. Both are measured in 2004 dollars. NBER recession periods are indicated by
shaded bands.
                                                  Figure 2: Distribution of State Own Deficits by Decade*                                                               Upper Quartile States
                                                                                                                                                                        Middle Two Quartile States
                                                                                                                                                                        Lower Quartile States


                                  a) 1970s: Own Deficit                                                                                         b) 1980s: Own Deficit




      Mean               = $485                                                                                   Mean               = $356
      Median             = $537                                                                                   Median             = $389
      Standard Deviation = $148                                                                                   Standard Deviation = $164




                                  c) 1990s: Own Deficit                                                                                         d) 2000s: Own Deficit




      Mean               = $463                                                                                   Mean               = $1,135
      Median             = $490                                                                                   Median             = $1,126
      Standard Deviation = $305                                                                                   Standard Deviation = $388



* State own deficits exclude federal aid as state revenues. All dollar amounts are measured in 2004 dollars, with Wyoming set equal to 1.00.
Figure 3: Response of State Job Growth to an Increase in State Own Deficits*


           Elasticities
           3

           2

           1

           0

          -1

          -2

          -3

          -4

          -5

          -6
                0         1      2        3         4         5           6      7         8         9        10       11
                                                                  Years




 * Impulse responses are computed by local projection method for a 1 percent increase in state own deficits introduced in period 0.
 Responses are reported as a percentage increase in a state's own jobs. The dashed lines represent the 95 percent confidence bands
 for each projection.
