                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              INSPECTION TECHNOLOGY, DETECTION AND COMPLIANCE:
                EVIDENCE FROM FLORIDA RESTAURANT INSPECTIONS

                                            Ginger Zhe Jin
                                             Jungmin Lee

                                        Working Paper 18939
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18939


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2013




We thank Michael Grubb, John Ham, Daifeng He, and the seminar participants at the College of William
and Mary, MIT, the Federal Board of Governors, and Brown University for their constructive comments.
Yiyan Liu has provided excellent research assistance throughout the project. We are especially grateful
to various people at the Florida Division of Hotels and Restaurants for providing us with the data and
patiently answering our questions. Jin acknowledges financial support from the Sloan Foundation.
Lee’s work was supported by a Sogang Research Frontier (SRF) grant. All errors are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Ginger Zhe Jin and Jungmin Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Inspection Technology, Detection and Compliance: Evidence from Florida Restaurant Inspections
Ginger Zhe Jin and Jungmin Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 18939
April 2013, Revised October 2014
JEL No. D81,D82,H75,I18,K32,L51

                                             ABSTRACT

In this article, we show that a small innovation in inspection technology can make substantial differences
in inspection outcomes. For restaurant hygiene inspections, the state of Florida has introduced a handheld
electronic device, the portable digital assistant (PDA), which reminds inspectors of 1,000 potential
violations that may be checked for. Using inspection records from July 2003 to June 2009, we find
that the adoption of PDA led to 11% more detected violations and subsequently restaurants may have
gradually increased their compliance efforts. We also find that PDA use is significantly correlated
with a reduction in restaurant-related foodborne disease outbreaks.


Ginger Zhe Jin
University of Maryland
Department of Economics
3115F Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and NBER
jin@econ.umd.edu

Jungmin Lee
Sogang University
Seoul, Korea
junglee@sogang.ac.kr
1. Introduction

Firms are inspected on a regular basis when their products or production processes involve potential
environmental, public health, or safety hazards. However, little is known of the effectiveness of such
inspections, mostly because inspection outcomes, often reported in terms of the number of violations,
reflect both detection and compliance. While efforts to detect violations are costly, the detection is never
perfect; separating detection from compliance poses a real empirical challenge. In this paper, we
overcome this problem by exploiting a change in detection technology for restaurant hygiene inspections
in Florida.
        In particular, the Florida Division of Hotels and Restaurants (DHR hereafter) introduced portable
digital assistants (PDAs) in restaurant inspections in November 2003. Prior to the use of PDAs, inspectors
made manual marks on a two-page “bubble sheet” that listed 31 categories of critical violations and 24
categories of noncritical violations. A PDA is a handheld computer that reminds inspectors of about 1,000
violations at the subcategory level, with a detailed explanation of each violation accessible by a dropdown
menu. With the help of a PDA, an inspector can also retrieve past reports easily and upload the current
inspection report immediately onto the DHR’s server.
        We present a simple theory to show that the unexpected adoption of PDAs can help separate
changes in detection efforts from changes in restaurant compliance. The idea is straightforward: In an
inspection game between an inspector and a restaurant, the restaurant will comply in expectation of
detection. To the extent that the first use of a PDA is unexpected, restaurant compliance at the first PDA
inspection reflects the restaurant’s expectation of the old detection technology. Assuming equilibrium
play under the old technology, the restaurant’s compliance effort should be the same in the last
paper-based inspection and the first PDA inspection. Therefore, the outcome differences between these
two inspections reveal how much inspector detection effort has changed because of PDA use. After the
first use, the restaurant expects a PDA to be used in the next detection and adjusts its compliance
accordingly. As detailed in our theory, a comparison among the first and subsequent PDA inspections will
identify an upper bound of the change in restaurant compliance (note that as the compliance effect is
negative—compliance decreases violations—the comparison identifies the upper bound in absolute terms).
It is an upper bound instead of a precise point estimate, because the inspector has an incentive to reduce
his/her detection effort if he/she anticipates greater restaurant compliance in response to PDA use.
        We test these predictions using the universe of Florida restaurant inspection records from July
2003 to June 2009. Following the quick adoption of the PDA in the first quarter of 2004, the PDA
adoption rate fluctuated between 2004 and 2006, mostly due to technical problems, before reaching nearly
100% by 2009. After showing evidence that these PDA changes are likely exogenous to individual
                                                     2
restaurants, we find that the first use of a PDA increases the number of violations by 11.3%, which,
according to our theory, reflects a significant increase in detection effort due to the PDA. Subsequently,
each additional previous use of a PDA reduces the number of detected violations by 5.4%. This effect
identifies an upper bound of restaurant compliance in response to the increased detection effort because of
the PDA.
          Although the compliance response is gradual and not large enough to offset the initial PDA
impact immediately, we find that the heightened compliance has contributed to fewer restaurant
foodborne disease outbreaks, therefore improving public health. In particular, we estimate that the
permanent adoption of PDAs would decrease the likelihood of observing any restaurant foodborne
disease outbreaks per county-15-days by 1.2 percentage points, which is non-negligible compared to the
Florida average (4.5 percent).
          We believe our work contributes to the field in several ways. A rich theoretical literature focuses
on the agency problem of inspectors and proposes solutions such as outcome-based contracts, targeted
auditing, reduction in information rents (to inspectors), high penalties for corrupt inspectors, or intentional
selection of biased employees.1 These solutions are often difficult to implement in reality, because
bureaucratic agencies are subject to rigid compensation schemes and limited resources. Our paper shows
that a simple change in inspection technology can go a long way toward improving detection and
compliance, and it is not difficult to implement in a typical government-run program.
          Game-theoretical interaction between inspectors and inspectees highlights the empirical
difficulties in separating compliance from detection. To circumvent this problem, a number of taxation
studies have used randomized detection to identify compliance (see Slemrod and Yitzhaki 2002 for a
survey and Kleven et al. 2011 for a recent example). Similarly, we exploit PDA adoption as an exogenous
source of detection change. However, we argue that a simple comparison of inspection outcomes with and
without a PDA tells us little about the actual hygiene of the restaurant, if we do not consider the game
theory behind the change. We believe that a combination of game theory and empirical identification is
useful for examining detection and compliance in other inspection programs, and our methodology
complements the structural model of detection and compliance that Feinstein (1989) developed for
nuclear plant inspections. A few other papers have presented evidence of inspector heterogeneity
(Feinstein 1991; Macher et al. 2010), an issue we downplay in this paper, but have fully addressed in a
companion paper (Jin and Lee 2012). As shown below, the findings presented in this paper are robust to
control of inspector heterogeneity.
1
    The agency problem of inspectors has been examined in Tirole (1986), Martimort (1999), Lafont and Tirole
(1993), Mookherjee and Png (1989, 1995), and Prendergast 2007. Reviews of this literature are available in
Prendergast (1999) and Dixit (2002).
                                                         3
        Another related strand of literature concerns the impact of technology on productivity. Some
studies found that technology, often in the form of computers or electronic systems, has improved
emergency health care outcomes (Athey and Stern 2002), increased firm productivity (Brynjolfsson and
Hitt 2003), increased capacity, revenue, and resource allocations in the trucking industry (Hubbard 2003),
and increased police departments’ productivity when IT investments are supplemented with particular
organizational and management practices (Garicano and Heaton 2010). Other studies found no positive
effect of classroom computers on student learning (Angrist and Lavy 2002), or even found a harmful
effect of computerized physician orders on the number of adverse drug events and higher medical costs
(Berger and Kichak 2004). We adopt a similar thought process by linking technology adoption to the
mechanisms of productivity change. In our raw data, the average number of detected violations increases
after the introduction of a PDA, if we simply compare inspections with or without a PDA. On the surface,
this seems to suggest little improvement in compliance. However, when we separate detection from
compliance, we are able to document a significant effect of PDA use on both elements. These findings
help us understand the mechanisms underlying the technological impact on inspection and public health
outcomes.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes PDA adoption in Florida.
Section 3 presents a simple game theory between an inspector and a restaurant, and derives testable
predictions pertaining to PDA use. Section 4 tests these predictions on the Florida restaurant inspection
data. Section 5 links PDA use to data on foodborne disease outbreaks in Florida. A brief conclusion is
offered in Section 6.


2. Introduction of the PDA in Restaurant Hygiene Inspections in Florida

In all states in the U.S., restaurants are required to be regularly inspected by licensed and trained
inspectors. In Florida, all food establishments are required to be inspected twice per fiscal year by state
laws and thrice by administrative rules. Inspectors are public employees with a fixed salary scheme. They
are assigned to inspection districts based on their residence and are responsible for restaurants within
those districts. They have full discretion in deciding which restaurants to inspect and when. After
inspections, they submit the inspection reports to the DHR, and if necessary, the DHR determines
disciplinary actions.
        Inspectors are trained to inspect restaurants according to a predetermined inspection checklist,
consisting of 55 categories in the case of Florida. The DHR classifies categories into two groups: critical
and noncritical. Critical violations include 12 categories of foodborne illness risk factors plus another 19
categories “pertaining to life safety, business practices, and food service good retail practices vital to
                                                     4
support a good food safety system within an establishment.” There are many subcategories within each
category. For example, category 22 (“food contact surfaces clean and sanitized”) includes 8 subcategories,
such as “cooking equipment not rinsed of abrasives/detergents,” “presetting of unwrapped silverware,” or
“unused utensils not removed when consumer seated.” The number of subcategories differs by category,
from 1 to 53 per category. Thus, inspectors are supposed to check about 1,000 items at each inspection.
         In November 2003, as part of an initiative to improve the efficiency of the inspection process, the
DHR introduced a handheld computer, namely the PDA. Prior to the use of PDAs, inspectors wrote
inspection reports with pencil and paper on a “bubble sheet” that listed violations only broadly, namely 31
categories of critical violations and 24 categories of noncritical violations, on two pages (Office of
Program Policy Analysis & Government Accountability (OPPAGA) 2005). In comparison, the PDA
reminds inspectors of about 1,000 violations at the subcategory level, with a detailed explanation for each
violation accessible via a dropdown menu. With the help of PDAs, inspectors can also retrieve past
reports easily and upload inspection reports onto the agency server. Figure A.1 in the Appendix displays
the paper-form inspection report, and Figure A.2 shows screenshots of a PDA.
         The introduction of PDAs was decided by the DHR at the state level. To confirm this
understanding, Figure 1 shows the trends in PDA use in seven administrative districts as defined by the
DHR. Across all districts, there was virtually no use of PDAs in 2003. The proportion of PDA inspections
jumped in the first quarter of 2004 to over 80 percent in all districts but one (district 4, 74 percent).
Across all seven districts, this proportion suddenly fell below 50% in the last quarter of 2004, recovered
in the first quarter of 2005, and dropped again in the second or third quarter of 2006. These sudden drops
reflect some mechanical problems with the initial version of the PDA (OPPAGA 2005). In the first
quarter of 2007, PDA use quickly returned to the level prior to the 2006 drop. Thereafter, the proportion
of PDA use rose steadily and reached almost 100 percent by 2009. Similar trends across districts confirm
that the new technology was adopted uniformly at the state level despite geographic heterogeneity across
districts.
         We know less about how the PDAs were distributed within a district. However, our raw data (the
universe of inspection records from July 2003 to June 2009 of restaurants in Florida) allow us to pin
down the exact date when a PDA was first used by each individual inspector. For each of the seven
administrative districts as defined by the DHR (Figure A.3), we can single out a date when a number of
inspectors acting in that district started to use PDAs. Our investigations show that the PDAs were
distributed on a specific date. For example, for district 1, the majority of active inspectors started to use
PDAs on the same day, March 11, 2004. Other inspectors also started to use a PDA around the same day.
Similarly, this “massive adoption” date was February 12, 2004 for district 2, March 4 for district 3,
January 29 for district 4, January 8 for district 5, February 26 for district 6, and February 19 for district 7.

                                                       5
This means that the timing of PDA introduction was determined at the district level rather than by
individual inspectors.
           As a preliminary look at the impact of PDA use on inspection outcomes, Figure 2 examines the
trends in weekly average inspection outcomes for 10 weeks before and after the massive adoption day.
Consistent with the sudden and quick adoption of PDAs, the PDA usage rate jumped on the massive
adoption day we identified and stayed high for 10 weeks. Weekly average violations also increased
discretely on the same day. Thereafter, the number of violations increased, although the PDA usage rate
did not change much after the massive adoption day. This may be because inspectors had to learn how to
handle their new PDAs efficiently.
           One issue fundamental to the exogeneity of PDA use is that the PDAs were not selectively used
for restaurants with bad records. We check this in two ways. First, we depict the average number of
violations detected at the previous inspection for the restaurants inspected in each of the 10 weeks before
and after the massive adoption date of the PDAs. As shown in Figure 2B, there is no systematic difference
between the period before and after the adoption day. 2 In a more systematic check, we focus on
individual inspection records and examine whether the use of a PDA at a given restaurant depends on the
number of violations noted in its previous inspection. We estimate a linear probability model for each
quarter of the year, allowing the effect of previous violations on PDA use to vary over time. In Figure 3,
the dotted line represents the estimates without district fixed effects, while the real line represents those
with district fixed effects. This graph shows that previous violations have little impact on PDA usage at a
current inspection. The marginal effect is small, even though it is defined as the effect of 10 additional
violations at the last inspection.
           Above all, we conclude that PDA adoption was driven by state- or district-level decisions, and
there is no systematic evidence of any selective PDA use based on a restaurant’s inspection history.


3. Model and Identification

In this section, we first present a stylized static model in which a restaurant chooses the extent of its
clean-up effort and inspectors decide the extent of their effort to detect violations. Second, we conduct a

2
    This result is further confirmed in a regression. In particular, for restaurant   inspected in week , we regress the
restaurant’s previous violation on a dummy for whether the district has adopted PDA in week , a cubic polynomial
of , and an interaction between the two, where          lies between -10 and 10, with 0 corresponding to the week of
massive PDA adoption. The dummy of after PDA adoption has a coefficient of -0.19 and a standard error of 0.561.
This suggests no discontinuity immediately before and after the massive adoption.
                                                               6
comparative static analysis of the impact of PDAs. In the next section, we derive testable hypotheses for
our empirical analysis.


3.1. Game-theoretic Model of Detection and Compliance


Consider a regulatory regime of three parties: the principal (DHR), inspectors (government employees),
and clients (restaurants). The principal defines the inspection criteria, inspection technology, inspector
assignment, and inspector compensation. Each inspector earns a fixed wage as a public employee.
Assume that the principal imposes a fine structure                     , where     denotes the number of detected
violations, and       denotes penalty rate per violation. The assumption of constant penalty rates is a
simplification. In practice, the penalty for a violation includes both monetary fines and the possibility of a
callback visit (which incurs time and effort costs due to reinspection). In an earlier version of this model,
we allowed violations to happen in multiple categories and inspectors to be heterogeneous in taste across
categories. As that model produces the same theoretical predictions about PDA usage, for simplicity, we
ignore multiple categories in the model presented here.
          The main task of an inspector is to visit a restaurant (unannounced), detect all hygiene violations,
and report them to the principal. Within the restaurant, the inspector uses his/her discretion as to how
much effort to expend in detecting violations and the extent of information to report. In the eyes of the
principal, hiding detected violations is equivalent to shirking on detection effort; therefore, we do not
distinguish between the two in the model.3 Rather, we consider every inspector to be honest and assume
the cost of detection effort for inspector         is                , where      is the cost parameter specific to
the inspector and denotes the inspector’s leniency.
          Assumed to lie between 0 and 1,           can be interpreted as the probability of detection. If the true
violations are ̃, the detected violations are                  ̃. We do not allow inspectors to report nonexistent
violations (resort to extortion), because in Florida, an appeal procedure allows restaurants to contest any
reported violations. Moreover, the expected fine is very low ($11 per inspection), and the fine amount is
not determined by the inspector.
          The goal of regulation is enforcing food safety, which implies minimization of actual violations.
Since we focus on the interaction between the inspector and the restaurant, we do not model the
principal-inspector relationship explicitly. Rather, we assume that the inspector, as an agent of the
principal, derives negative utility from both detected and undetected violations. Because undetected


3
    The incentive to hide perfectly observable violations has been the focus of many theories on inspector-firm
collusion.
                                                           7
violations may be ignored by the restaurant and pose a bigger public health risk, we assume that the
inspector is more concerned about undetected violations. In other words, the DHR and its employees
would like to see zero violations, if all the violations can be detected. However, given the existence of
violations, identifying them is better than leaving them undetected. To capture this, we introduce
as the disutility of an undetected violation relative to a detected violation. If                  , the inspector will
always prefer minimal effort and detect no violations. Note that                reflects the inspector’s preference,
which may or may not coincide with that of the principal. In short, the inspector trades off his/her own
preference for inspection outcomes for his/her effort cost. This captures the fact that government
inspectors are paid a fixed salary, and their efforts are likely more motivated by intrinsic preferences than
by monetary returns (Prendergast 2007). The inspector’s problem can be written as below:




          For the restaurant, the benefits from cleaning up include reduced fines for detected violations and
the reduced risk of bad publicity due to foodborne illness outbreaks.4 To minimize both, the restaurant
can exert efforts       in cleaning up. Normalizing the maximum violation as 1, we have actual violations,
̃            . Consequently, the detected violations are                 ̃                  , and the fine is        . For
simplicity, we assume the risk of bad publicity is a linear function of actual violations (                ̃), where
can be interpreted as marginal expected penalty or reputational cost that consumers impose on restaurants
with actual violations.
          Assuming the cost of the restaurant’s effort is strictly convex (                        ), we can write the
restaurant’s problem as below:


                                                                                        .


          The timing of the game is as follows: At stage 0, the principal sets the inspection criteria,
inspector assignment, fine structure, and inspector compensation. At stage 1, the restaurant chooses                     .

4
    We may assume that consumers have no information on restaurant hygiene, and therefore, cleaning up does not
directly affect restaurant revenue. In fact, Jin and Leslie (2003) show that restaurant revenue was insensitive to
restaurant inspection outcomes before the introduction of restaurant hygiene report cards. As of 2011, Florida had no
restaurant hygiene report card even though inspection outcomes have been posted online only since 2009. This
implies that concerns over negative publicity should be minor. Still, our model incorporates the risk of publicity for
generality’s sake.
                                                           8
At stage 2, the inspector walks in and chooses detection effort                      . At the end of stage 2, detected
violations        are reported to the principal. Since no new information is generated between stages 1 and 2,
the inspector-restaurant game is treated as a simultaneous game.
           Figure 4 characterizes the equilibrium by two reaction curves. The restaurant’s compliance curve
(              ) shows that the restaurant is more willing to clean up if it knows that the inspector will exert

more effort, but the inspector’s detection curve (                              shows that the inspector will exert less

effort if he/she knows that the restaurant has cleaned up.
           In our simple model, by the timing of the game, the inspector can observe the restaurant’s effort
with no error. Note that the restaurant can also exactly determine the inspector’s detection curve after a
single inspection. The restaurant should be notified by the inspector of the number of violations. The
restaurant knows that this number is determined by                                  . Since the restaurant knows its own
compliance effort, it can calculate the inspector’s detection effort                  . Also, the restaurant knows the

inspector’s reaction function (                             Knowing         and     , the restaurant can calculate        ,

which is enough for it to determine the detection curve (the slope as well as its vertical intercept). This
means that it takes one inspection for the inspection game to reach equilibrium. Given preference and cost
parameters, it is a steady-state equilibrium.

           As the two curves intersect in Figure 4, we have a unique inner solution in equilibrium, if
                                  5
and                                :




           Therefore, the equilibrium reported violations are as follows:



           Our model highlights two fundamental identification problems if we want to use this framework
to empirically identify detection from compliance. First, we observe only the intersection of the two
reaction curves. Interestingly, this problem resembles the typical identification problem in the supply and
demand model, where the difficulty can be resolved by using exogenous demand (supply) shifters to trace
out the supply (demand) curve. However, identification is even harder in the inspection game, because we

5
    The first condition implies that the restaurant’s effort is so costly that bad publicity alone is not sufficient to
motivate complete cleaning up. The second condition implies that the inspector’s effort cost must be high enough
relative to his/her view of undetected violations, such that he/she may choose lower-than-maximum detection effort
even if the restaurant puts in little effort in cleaning up.
                                                               9
observe only the product of non-compliance and detection ( ̃          ), and not the two separately. In other
words, inspector heterogeneity (which shifts the detection curve) and restaurant heterogeneity (which
shifts the compliance curve) cannot identify the two reaction curves. Similarly, exogenous policies that
shift the inspector’s detection curve or the restaurant’s compliance curve cannot fully identify the two
curves either.
           Second, in the literature, researchers often regress detected violations on inspector fixed effects
and interpret these fixed effects as inspector heterogeneity.6 Under the assumption of perfect information,
our theory suggests that inspector fixed effects reflect not only inspector heterogeneity in overall
stringency, but also the differential compliance that restaurants adopt in response to inspector
heterogeneity.


3.2. Comparative Statics of PDA Adoption


The PDA reminds inspectors of about 1,000 potential violations, and therefore, it may reduce the cost of
detection. This suggests that PDA use may substantially reduce an inspector’s detection effort cost ( ) in
the model in subsection 3.1. But the key prediction of the model is that a restaurant’s response to the
introduction of PDAs depends upon its compliance effort as well as the inspector’s detection effort.
           Under the assumptions that PDA adoption is unexpected and there is no change in inspector
identity, we can derive some testable hypotheses from the model. In Figure 5, point A represents the
equilibrium before the adoption of PDAs, when the restaurant had correctly expected paper inspection.
Suppose that PDA use reduces the inspector’s detection cost from            to    ,        , which shifts the
inspector’s detection curve upwards. When the inspector walks in with a PDA for the first time, it is a
surprise to the restaurant. Restaurant compliance remains at       , but the inspector’s effort increases from
      to    . Thus, at the first PDA inspection, the number of detected violations should increase by the
difference between A and B, and this difference is solely driven by the unexpected detection change:



                                                                                                           (1)



           Let us further assume that the restaurant expects continued use of the PDA and complies
accordingly. In response to the increased compliance effort, the inspector should reduce his/her detection
effort. As a consequence, we reach a new equilibrium at point C (note that B is enough for the restaurant


6
    See Feinstein (1989) and Macher et al. (2010) for examples.
                                                         10
to determine the new detection curve). Compared to the first PDA inspection, the number of detected
violations should decrease from B to C, and the decrease reflects both the restaurant’s improved
compliance (          ) and the laxity of the inspector’s detection (          ). Thus, this reduction of
detected violations is an upper bound of the restaurant’s compliance response to the continued use of a
PDA:



                                                                                                        (2)



        It is ambiguous whether the equilibrium number of detected violations under a PDA inspection
(point C) would increase or decrease relative to a paper inspection (point A). This is because point C
corresponds to higher compliance and higher detection, which have opposite effects on the number of
detected violations. Mathematically, the impact of PDAs on the equilibrium number of detected violations
can be written as follows:



                                                                                                        (3)



        The sign is ambiguous because the sign of                         is ambiguous. Empirically, this
means that a simple comparison of violations before and after PDAs tells little about the actual hygiene of
the restaurant. In theory, the actual hygiene must be improved by PDA usage if the PDA implies lower
detection effort and the restaurant increases compliance accordingly.
        Above all, we have two clear predictions regarding PDA adoption: first, assuming PDA adoption
is sudden and unexpected, the first PDA inspection should increase the number of detected violations, and
this increase reflects the increased detection due to PDA usage. Second, assuming restaurants expect
continuous use of a PDA, a subsequent use of a PDA should decrease the number of detected violations
compared to the first PDA inspection, and this decrease reflects an upper bound of the restaurant’s
compliance response to the improved detection during the first use of a PDA. Because the above two
predictions contradict each other, a simple comparison of paper and PDA inspection outcomes (without
accounting for the sequence of PDA use) yields no clear prediction of the number of detected violations,
although the actual hygiene should have improved unambiguously because of PDA usage.
        Several points are worth noting. First, the above discussion assumes no change in inspector
identity. In a companion paper (Jin and Lee 2012), we expanded the model to include inspector identity
change and showed that allowing inspector heterogeneity does not affect the above predictions about

                                                    11
PDA use. Empirically, we control for inspector heterogeneity by inspector-restaurant fixed effects.
Second, the assumption of sudden PDA adoption may be violated in reality, if a restaurant owner hears
from other restaurants about PDA adoption and its effect on enhanced detection. But in that case, the
extra violation reported in the first PDA inspection should underestimate the actual change of detection,
which suggests that our empirical estimate is likely more conservative than the true effect. Third, the
model assumes that restaurant compliance will move to the new equilibrium immediately after the first
PDA inspection. In reality, the process may be gradual if the expected probability of PDA use next time is
less than one, or if the restaurant is facilitated by an inspector who educates it on how to correct the
detected violations. To the extent that the inspector’s education effort focuses on detected violations, it is
part of the compliance response.


4. The Impact of PDA Use on Restaurant Inspection Outcomes

This section has four parts. We first describe the DHR restaurant inspection data, summarize the analysis
sample, and then present the econometric specification. The regression results are discussed last.


4.1. Data and Sample Construction


We merge the three administrative data sets collected by the DHR: (1) restaurant/food service inspection
files, (2) license files, and (3) restaurant disciplinary activity reports. The data include all restaurant
inspections in Florida from July 2003 to March 2010. We start with July 2003, because that is the start of
the 2003 fiscal year (referred to as FY 2003).
           There are two types of inspections. The first type comprises regular inspections conducted at
unannounced times, which Florida officials refer to as “initial” inspections. Depending on the results of a
regular inspection, a callback may follow to ensure compliance. The time lag between a regular
inspection and a callback has modes of one day, one week, two weeks, one month, or two months. In the
raw data, about 81% are regular inspections and 19% are callbacks. The disciplinary activity reports
specify whether a fine is imposed after each inspection and, if so, the amount of the fine. Any decisions
related to fines are determined by a separate branch of the Department and not by individual inspectors.
Complete disciplinary activity reports are only available from FY 2005 to FY 2009. As detailed in Jin and
Lee (2012), the expected fine is very low (on average $11 per inspection).7

7
    Restaurants are not immediately sanctioned after initial inspections. Usually follow-up inspections (callbacks) are
scheduled. Also, restaurants can request a hearing (OPPAGA 2005). This suggests that the incentive for restaurants
                                                           12
           We clean our final analysis sample through several steps. Starting with 740,808 inspections in the
raw data, we first drop inspections conducted during FY 2009, because we do not have complete
inspection data for that fiscal year. Second, we exclude any inspections conducted prior to FY 2004,
because Florida adopted a new classification system classifying violations into three groups—risk factors,
other critical, and noncritical violations—in March 2004.8 This reclassification requests inspectors to pay
more attention to risk factors. If we do not exclude records before March 2004, one may argue that
inspectors find more critical violations because of the DHR reclassification rather than PDA use. One
alternative way to address this data issue is keeping records before FY 2004, but allowing different
year-month fixed effects for risk factors, other critical violations, and noncritical violations separately.
We have done this alternative estimation and found very similar results for PDA use. By focusing on data
since FY 2004, we do not need to separate risk factors from other critical violations in the regression
results. Constructing the sample since FY 2004 also gives us more pre-sample data to define a
restaurant’s history of PDA use and inspector turnover, both of which turn out to have a significant effect
on inspector outcomes. For the same reason, we exclude those inspections done during the first six
months since each restaurant’s first appearance in the data. For these earlier inspections, we do not have
enough information about previous inspections. In the third step, since callbacks are usually conducted on
scheduled dates, we focus on initial inspections. In the fourth step, because we apply restaurant-inspector
fixed effects in all estimations, we exclude observations that either have only one inspection per
restaurant throughout the sample or have no variation in reported violations across multiple observations
within the same restaurant-inspector group. Last, we delete observations with missing values, duplicates,
non-restaurant inspections, or inspections of restaurants outside Florida. The final sample includes
290,179 initial inspections from July 2003 to June 2009, covering 51,192 unique restaurants and 271
individual inspectors.9 There are more than 200 active inspectors for each year.
           The above sample (referred to as the “restricted” sample) is used in our main empirical analysis.
As a robustness check, we also use an “unrestricted” sample that includes those inspections during FY
2003 and during the first six months of each restaurant. The unrestricted sample has 332,010 initial
inspections and 61,861 unique restaurants. One important tradeoff between the two samples is that while
the restricted sample does not confound PDA effects with the increased emphasis on risk factors and is
more precise on the variables that describe a restaurant’s PDA history, it excludes the initial period of

to comply for initial inspections should be low.
8
    On the paper inspection form, risk factors are listed on the first page, and other critical and noncritical categories,
on the second page.
9
    The original inspection files include 386 inspectors and 97,990 restaurants. We exclude those inspectors who
conducted fewer than 200 inspections.
                                                             13
PDA introduction. We can still identify a detection effect from the restricted sample, because some
restaurants did not receive their PDA inspection(s) until FY 2004 even if inspectors used PDAs in other
restaurants, thanks to the low frequency of regular inspections as well as the technical difficulties of using
PDAs initially. If these restaurants anticipated PDA usage before their first PDA experience, we tend to
underestimate the detection effect from the restricted sample. Results from the unrestricted sample will
hint at the magnitude of such a bias.


4.2. Sample Summary


Table 1 shows the summary statistics of our restricted sample. Following the DHR classification, we
aggregate violations into two groups: critical (risk factors and other critical violations) and noncritical
violations.10 An average inspection finds about 7.89 violations, of which 4.85 are critical, and 3.04,
noncritical. Excluding the first six months of each restaurant in our data, the probability of a “new”
inspector (an inspector who has never inspected the restaurant during the data period) arriving is 17%; on
average, an inspector has inspected the same restaurant 3.62 times before the observed inspection. As
mentioned earlier, restaurants are required to be inspected at least twice per fiscal year according to state
laws. However, due to the labor shortage, barring FY 2008, the average number of regular inspections per
restaurant per year was less than 2. About 30% of restaurants receive only one regular inspection per
year.11 The average number of days between the two inspections is about 181, with 4% of inspections
having taken place more than one year after the last inspection. The workload is quite heavy: each
inspector has on average done about 1,830 inspections.
           Most regular inspections are “routine,” while 4% are initiated by consumer complaints, and 0.1%
are licensing inspections. The average restaurant age is 4.11 years, with a wide variation from restaurants
that have just opened, to those as old as 14 years. Restaurant age is calculated from the license issuing
date. For about 24% of observations, this information is missing. Instead of dropping all these

10
     For the DHR’s classification, refer to
http://www.myfloridalicense.com/dbpr/hr/inspections/FoodServiceCriticalViolations.html. For category 08, some
subcategories are identified as “risk factors,” while other subcategories are identified as “other critical violations.”
We consider category 08 as “risk factor.” Also, note that the distinction among the three groups is made at the
subcategory level. But our group distinction is made at the category level, because we do not observe subcategories
in our data.
11
     The average number of regular inspections was 1.66 in FY 2003, 1.93 in FY 2004, 1.67 in FY 2005, 1.72 in FY
2006, 1.85 in FY 2007, and 2.14 in FY 2008. The corresponding proportion of restaurants that were inspected only
once is 50.6%, 22.4%, 39.9%, 26.2%, and 15.2%, respectively.
                                                           14
observations, we create a dummy for missing age and control for it. As mentioned earlier, inspectors have
complete discretion over how many and which restaurants to inspect on a given day. On average, an
inspector has completed 1.85 inspections before coming to the inspection under study and 25% of
inspections are the first one conducted by that inspector on that day. The number of inspections prior to a
specific inspection is important because it may represent the inspector’s fatigue level, i.e., the inspector
may become tired during the day and incur higher effort costs due to fatigue. In the regression, we include
the linear and quadratic terms of this variable to control for (the potentially nonlinear effect of) fatigue.
For 11% of observations, the exact inspection time of the day is not recorded. As with restaurant age, we
create a dummy for missing information and control for it. Lastly, 38% of the inspections occur during
lunchtime (12:00-2:00 pm). Most restaurants are busy at lunchtime and probably pay less attention to
food safety. To capture this and other hourly effects, we control for a full set of inspection hour-of-day
fixed effects.
        In Table 2, we present the summary statistics of the variables associated with PDA use. Several
patterns are worth highlighting. First, in our regression sample, 89% of inspections are done using PDAs.
This high percentage is mainly because most PDAs were first introduced in the beginning of 2004, and
our restricted sample starts from July 2004. As we have shown in Section 2, the analysis indicates that
PDA adoption is a state-and-district decision, and the decision to use a PDA at a particular restaurant is
independent of the restaurant’s last inspection outcome. Since most restaurants are inspected no more
than twice a year, some restaurants had completed all their inspections for a fiscal year before the massive
adoption of PDA; hence, their first inspection with a PDA may not happen until FY 2004 or after. Overall,
about 16% of restaurants first had a paper inspection in our sample and were then subjected to an
inspection with a PDA. About 30% of restaurants, after having been subjected to PDA inspections,
experienced a switch back to paper inspections due to technical problems in the first version of the PDA
(OPPAGA 2005).
        Another crucial variable is the number of previous PDA inspections in a particular restaurant.
Conditional on a restaurant having had no PDA inspections previously, the probability of being inspected
with a PDA for the first time is 75%. Once the PDA was adopted, the probability of subsequent
inspections with the PDA increases. For example, conditional on having one inspection with a PDA, the
probability is 82%. Once a PDA has been used six times, the probability is over 90%. This means that the
more inspections done using the PDA, the more likely restaurants expect it to be used next time.
        Table 3 shows the distribution of restaurants by frequency in the sample and the number of PDA
inspections. There are 51,192 unique restaurants in the regression sample. Among them, 10,359 appear
twice in the sample, and 5,885 appear thrice. Most of them appear 10 times or fewer. As shown in Table 3,
many restaurants experienced both paper and PDA inspections, either because they started with paper

                                                     15
inspections and then moved to PDA inspections, or because they were switched back from PDA to paper
inspections due to technical problems in the first version of the PDA. Both types of switches will help
estimate the impact of PDA use within restaurants. As described below, these two types of switches have
different implications for detection and compliance, as restaurants may have different expectations as to
the likelihood of PDA use.


4.3. Econometric Model


This subsection presents an econometric specification that tests the model’s predictions.                           is the
number of detected violations for restaurant             by inspector      at time .12 Since our dependent variable
is a count of reported violations, we estimate a Poisson model with expected value given as below:


                                                                                                                           (4)


where           indicates whether a PDA is used at , and                  represents the number of PDA inspections
prior to . Vector             includes a constant term and other restaurant/inspector/inspection characteristics,
such as whether the inspector is new to the restaurant, restaurant age, inspector tenure, inspection hour of
the day, and the number of days since the last inspection. Note that we control for a rich set of fixed
effects: inspector-restaurant fixed effects (          ) and year-quarter fixed effects ( ). Inspector-restaurant
fixed effects should capture each restaurant’s time-invariant difficulty or willingness to clean up, each
inspector’s time-invariant detection cost, and the corresponding compliance effort under the assumption
that the restaurant can perfectly predict that particular inspector. The unobserved detection or compliance
cost can even be specific to inspector-restaurant pairs, as long as they do not change over time. Any effort
cost change applicable to all inspectors and all restaurants during a given quarter of a year should be
absorbed in year-quarter fixed effects.
           The coefficients of our main interest are              ,       , and          . Our model predicts that the

first use of a PDA detects more violations:                   , as Equation (1) indicates. This corresponds to the

movement from A to B in Figure 5, and we expect                           . Furthermore, the theory predicts that the
adoption of PDAs subsequently increases the restaurant’s compliance effort, so we should observe the
number of violations drop between the first and the next PDA inspections. In other words, the equilibrium


12
     In fact, time indicates the order of the inspection in our sample. We control for the year-quarter fixed effects to
control for common time trends.
                                                             16
changes from B to C in Figure 5, and this prediction corresponds to                           .
          If the inspector does not return with a PDA after its first use, he/she will find fewer violations for
two reasons: first, the restaurant has increased compliance in expectation of PDA use, and second, the
inspector will expend less detection effort due to both the higher detection cost of a paper inspection and
the expectation of better compliance. This scenario of “paper inspection following the first use of PDA”
corresponds to point D in Figure 5. Our model predicts fewer detected violations at D than at A, which
implies                , and fewer detected violations at D than at C, which implies                      .
          Above all, we expect             ,            ,                     , and
is interpreted as the effect of PDA use on inspector detection. Both              and                     can be
interpreted as an upper bound of restaurant compliance response to the increased detection due to PDA
use. If we take the theory literally, Figure 5 suggests                  , because the reduction in inspection
effort with a PDA (from B to C) is more than the reduction in inspection effort without it (from A to D),
given the same compliance change from            to     .


4.4. Regression Results


Using a fixed effects Poisson model, Table 4 shows our main results. Column (1) includes only
PDA-related variables of our main interest with restaurant fixed effects and year-quarter fixed effects.
Column (2) adds control variables as well as more detailed inspector-restaurant fixed effects and
inspection hour-of-day fixed effects. Both Columns (1) and (2) use the restricted sample, while Column
(3) uses the unrestricted sample for comparison.
          As we expect, inspectors detect more violations when using a PDA, and this impact is sizable.
The estimated           in Column (1) of Table 4 indicates that the first use of a PDA increases the expected
number of violations by 11.5%. When we add more controls, the estimate changes only slightly to 11.3%
in Column (2). As explained in Section 2.2, the impact reflects an increase in the detection effort due to
PDA use. The detection effect estimated from the unrestricted sample (in Column 3) is slightly larger.
This is not surprising given that PDA adoption should be more unexpected by restaurants in the initial
period of PDA introduction.
          As the PDA is repeatedly used, the number of detected violations decreases. As explained above,
both           and                    are expected to be negative. These predictions are well confirmed in
the data:            varies from -0.082 in Column (1) to -0.054 in Column (2). Since              is estimated to
be negative as well,                       is slightly more negative than             , ranging from -0.092 in
Column (1) to -0.067 in Column (2). Recall that both               and                     tend to overestimate

                                                       17
the restaurant’s compliance response to the increased detection effort through PDA use. Similar results
are found in the unrestricted sample in Column 3. Taking Column (2) as our preferred specification, these
estimates imply that the restaurant’s compliance response is no greater than a 5.3% decrease in the
number of detected violations per additional previous use of PDA.
           Assuming a PDA is continuously used, our estimates suggest that it takes at least two inspections
to offset the initial increase in the number of violations detected by it. However, one needs to be careful
with this interpretation. Note that once the inspector increases his/her detection effort, the restaurant
subsequently increases its compliance effort. As long as the compliance effort is increased, the
restaurant’s actual hygiene should improve irrespective of the additional number of detected violations.
           Many other coefficients reported in Table 4 are also statistically significant. First, new inspectors
are more likely to find more violations, repeat inspectors report fewer violations when they have a longer
relationship with the restaurant, and a new inspector, following the last inspector’s (longer) history of the
restaurant, reports even more violations. We have explained these results in light of game theory in a
companion paper (Jin and Lee 2012). Second, we find that more violations are reported if the inspector is
less experienced. The results in Column (2) show that those inspectors whose past inspections are less
than the median detect 2.7% more violations. Novice inspectors, who have done only 30 inspections or
fewer, find significantly more violations (about 20%). Third, we find that inspectors find fewer violations
for later inspections conducted by them on that particular day. This might be because inspectors schedule
inspections for more problematic restaurants earlier during the day. Alternatively, it can be explained by
higher attention or a less fatigued inspector during earlier visits in the day.13 Fourth, the longer the time
since the last inspection, the more the violations, although fewer violations are found when more than one
year has elapsed since the last inspection. Fifth, more violations are found for older restaurants. Lastly,
inspections initiated by a citizen’s complaint or conducted for license renewal find fewer violations.
           Table 5 separates the regression results by three periods: the adoption period of the unrestricted
sample up to the fourth quarter of 2004, the earlier half of the restricted sample up to the third quarter of
2006, and the latter half of the restricted sample after the third quarter of 2006. Due to space constraints,
we only report the coefficients of the PDA-related variables. These coefficients suggest that the detection
effect is identified from the earlier half of the sample and is of a greater magnitude in the adoption period
(0.200 of Column 1 versus 0.148 of Column 2). In comparison, the compliance effect is not significant in
the adoption period and tends to increase over time. This is not surprising as the detection effect depends

13
     In a robustness check, we include a quadratic term of the number of previous inspections by that inspector in the
same day and find it significant and negative, while the linear term remains negative and significant. This suggests
that the fatigue effect increases during the day. Separately, the hour-of-day dummies suggest more violations if the
inspection is done during lunchtime, which may reflect a higher food safety risk at lunchtime.
                                                           18
on the unexpected adoption of and switch from the PDA, which happened mostly before 2006, while the
compliance effect depends on changes in the number of previous PDA inspections, whose variations
originate from periods after PDA adoption.
           One remaining question concerns decrease in detection cost due to PDA use. One possibility is
that it reminds inspectors of potential violations.14 To test this, Table 6 reports the key coefficients by
two groupings of violations. The first two columns compare critical and noncritical violations, while the
last three columns compare categories with <10, 10-19, and 20+ subcategories.
           Because inspectors are trained to believe that critical violations are more important in terms of
health risk (which corresponds to a higher             in our model), they should have paid more attention to
critical violations even without a PDA. If this implies less room for improvement, one may expect a
smaller detection effect of the PDA on critical violations. Conversely, the PDA effect on detection can be
magnified for critical violations, as a PDA reminder may be more salient for items that register greater
importance in one’s mind. As shown in Table 6, the estimated detection effect is remarkably similar—
0.112 for critical and 0.117 for noncritical violations. This suggests that a PDA can improve detection for
both critical and noncritical violations, and the compliance response to these improvements may translate
into a lower health risk, a topic examined in Section 5.
           A more straightforward test of the reminder mechanism is examining whether PDA use has
greater effects on easy-to-ignore items. Arguably, the inspector’s attention bias is more severe in
categories that have many subcategories. As shown in the last three columns of Table 6, we find that the
detection effect of a PDA is only significant in categories with 10+ subcategories and is the greatest in the
categories that contain 20 or more subcategories. In comparison, the (upper bound of the) compliance
effect is roughly similar across the three groups. This suggests that inspectors have limited attention to
detail, and a PDA inspection is more effective than the paper form at restoring their attention to
easy-to-ignore items.
           Our last analysis of restaurant inspection records focuses on a discrepancy between the model and
reality. In particular, our model assumes that the restaurant will learn about the PDA effect in detection
cost after only one PDA inspection, and subsequently, it will fully expect continued use of a PDA. In
reality, given the technical problem encountered in the first version of the PDA, restaurants may learn
more slowly, and their expectation of subsequent PDA use may not jump to 100% immediately. This
introduces an interesting empirical question: How do the detection and compliance effects of a PDA
change over time as it is repeatedly used?
           As a first pass, we run an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression of detected violations on the


14
     This effect is suggested by our contact in the DHR.
                                                           19
dummy of PDA use for each year-quarter separately. The estimated coefficient on the PDA dummy, as
plotted in Figure 6, was large initially, but diminished to zero after 2006. This figure is consistent with the
period-by-period results reported in Table 5. As more and more restaurants clean up in expectation of
PDA use in the near future, the extra violations that can only be found by using a PDA should decline
over time.
           To better separate the detection and compliance effects of PDA use over time, we rerun the same
Poisson regression by allowing               and          to vary by the number of previous PDA inspections. In
particular, we define 10 dummies for previous PDA usage, namely 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10+. As
shown in Table 7,                is insignificant when the number of previous PDA usage is 1, and then
becomes significant and progressively negative as previous PDA usage approaches 10+. In comparison,
          is always negative and significant, and tends to be more negative as we increase the number of
previous PDA uses.15 These patterns suggest that restaurant compliance in response to PDA use is
gradual, which is consistent with the cruder data analysis shown in Figure 6 and Table 5.
           More interestingly, although the overall effects are similar for critical and noncritical violations
(see Table 6), they differ in the timing of the effects. As shown in the last two columns of Table 7, when
we distinguish previous PDA usage from 1 to 10+ for critical and noncritical violations separately,
is always negative and significant for critical violations, but it is not significant for noncritical violations
until the previous PDA usage is 6 or more. The absolute magnitude of                        is also much bigger for
critical than for noncritical violations. In comparison, the significance of                  is similar between the
two columns, and the absolute magnitude of                      is usually bigger for noncritical than for critical
violations. One explanation is that restaurants are more keenly and more quickly correcting critical
violations, either due to higher fines on critical violations or more inspector education efforts on how to
correct critical violations.


4.5. Discussion


Our empirical findings are largely consistent with our theoretical predictions: PDA usage tends to
increase detection and compliance. It is important to subject these results to four limitations. First, our
model assumes that the first use of a PDA is unexpected for any restaurant. If this is not true (for example,
a restaurant owner may have heard about increased detection by a PDA in other restaurants), the owner
should have increased his compliance effort before the first PDA use. In this case, the coefficient of PDA

15
     The net effect of PDA use at 10+ previous PDA inspections is negative (-0.019 = 0.165 - 0.184). But it is not
significantly different from zero. This is also true for Columns (2) and (3).
                                                           20
use in our regression should be interpreted as a conservative estimate of the true detection effect.
           Second, our estimate on compliance is only an upper bound of the actual compliance. Because
real improvement in health risk depends on actual compliance rather than on reported violations, we will
address this caveat in Section 5 by associating PDA usage with foodborne illness outbreaks.
           Third, the estimated effects may capture not only the inspectors’ productivity improvements in
detecting violations, but also their increased productivity in educating restaurants about food safety. We
cannot distinguish the two if both are linked to PDA usage. For example, if education focuses on how to
correct detected violations rather than how to prevent hypothetical violations, it will naturally increase
with detection.
           Fourth, all the regression analyses shown above are conducted at the inspection level. If each PDA
inspection takes longer than a paper inspection, either due to heightened inspector attention or the technical
difficulty of using a PDA, its usage may reduce inspection frequency, and such a reduction can counteract
the benefits of PDA usage. To address this concern, we plot the PDA use rate and inspection rate by quarter,
where the PDA use rate is defined by the proportion of inspections that used a PDA in a quarter, and the
inspection rate is defined as the number of inspected restaurants during a certain quarter divided by the
total number of licensed restaurants in the year of that quarter. If inspectors have reduced inspection
frequency because of PDA use, then the two trends should be negatively correlated.
           As shown in Figure A.4, during the initial adoption period, when the PDAs were first introduced
and withdrawn due to technical problems (from the third quarter of 2003 to the fourth quarter of 2004),
inspection and PDA use rates are indeed negatively correlated. This suggests that while the PDA made it
possible for inspectors to check the more detailed list of items, it slowed them down. However, from 2005
onwards, supposedly after the initial technical problems were fixed, PDA use and inspection rates have
been positively correlated.16 Combined with our regression results, this suggests that the slow-down
effect of PDA use is limited to the initial adoption period; after 2005, the overall PDA effects for the state
of Florida can be even higher than our result at the inspection level, because PDA use is accompanied by
a higher inspection rate.


5. PDA and Public Health

One central finding from the restaurant inspection records is that PDA use increases detection, and this

16
     To check this more formally, using county-level panel data, we run a regression of inspection rate on PDA use
rates after controlling for county, year, and month fixed effects. We find that PDA use significantly increased the
inspection rate.
                                                          21
change generates greater compliance from restaurants. It follows that even if more violations are reported
after the first and subsequent uses of a PDA than without it, PDA use should improve restaurant hygiene
because of compliance. This implication motivates us to link PDA use to public health outcomes directly.
Below, we first describe the Florida foodborne disease outbreak data and then present regression results
that associate PDA use with restaurant-related outbreaks.


5.1. Florida Foodborne Disease Outbreak Data


We collect information on foodborne disease outbreaks from the surveillance database of the Florida
Department of Health.17 The Center of Disease Control (CDC) defines a foodborne disease outbreak as
any cluster of two or more similar infections that are shown by investigation to result from ingestion of
the same food. Most foodborne disease outbreaks are investigated by the state or local health department,
and if an outbreak involves at least two individuals, the department is required to report the event to the
CDC. The Florida outbreak database includes cases reported to the CDC as well as cases investigated by
the state but not reported to the CDC. We choose to use the state’s outbreak data instead of the CDC’s
outbreak data, because the former reports the counties of outbreaks, while the latter categories them as per
states.
          In addition to county information, the Florida outbreak database provides details about each
outbreak, such as the date of the outbreak, number of individuals involved, and whether the outbreak is
related to a restaurant or a non-restaurant entity (such as a grocery store, home, or school). The data are
available from 1997 to 2009. We focus on the period starting July 2003. From the raw outbreak data, we

construct a panel of 10,385 observations by county and 15-day intervals (67 counties × 155 intervals)

for restaurant and non-restaurant outbreaks separately. Restaurant-related outbreaks account for
two-thirds of the total outbreaks. We choose county-15-days as the unit of observation, since foodborne
outbreaks are typically short-lived and localized. Only 4.5% of county-interval observations are
associated with a restaurant-related foodborne outbreak, as a foodborne outbreak is a rare event.
Conditional on having any outbreaks, the average number of reported cases is about 12 per
county-interval. There are some outliers. In two observations, the number of reported cases is greater than
500 (see Figure A.5 for the monthly trends).


5.2. Regression Analysis



17
     Source: http://doh.state.fl.us/environment/medicine/foodsurveillance/Online_FWBD_Outbreak_Database.html
                                                       22
To better understand the association between restaurant hygiene violations and restaurant-related
foodborne outbreaks, we estimate the following equation:




where         is an indicator of whether there were any incidences of restaurant-related foodborne disease
outbreaks in county         in the 15-day interval . We use a binary indicator rather than the number of
foodborne disease outbreaks, because such outbreaks are rare events (about 4.5 percent per
county-interval). Also, given the nature of a foodborne disease outbreak, once it occurs, there could be an
explosion of similar incidences. As                       is the proportion of PDA inspections in a given
county-interval (lagged by one interval),           is the coefficient of our interest, showing to what extent the
PDA usage of                induces compliance and therefore improves actual restaurant hygiene level at .
To control for unobservable trends of general conditions regarding food safety, we include                     , which
is the number of non-restaurant foodborne disease outbreaks. We include county-specific fixed effects ( )
to control for time-invariant unobservable county characteristics.18 Also, we include 15-day time interval
fixed effects (     ) to account for seasonality as well as statewide trends.
           The estimation results are presented in Table 8. The first two columns use the dummy of any
restaurant-related outbreak as the dependent variable, the next two columns use the dummy of having
more than four restaurant-related outbreaks in order to capture the degree of outbreaks, and the last two
columns use the dummy of any non-restaurant related outbreaks as a placebo test.19 Overall, Table 8
shows that the incidence of restaurant foodborne disease outbreaks is negatively correlated with PDA
usage in the last time interval, but not for the earlier two intervals. Specifically, moving from no PDA to
100% PDA decreases the likelihood of any restaurant foodborne disease outbreaks by 1.2 percentage
points and the likelihood of having more than four restaurant-related outbreaks by 0.6 percentage points.
Both estimates are significant at the 90% confidence level. These effects are non-negligible compared to

18
     Without county fixed effects, the incidence of foodborne disease outbreaks is positively correlated with the
average number of reported violations per inspection. But this correlation becomes negative when we control for
county fixed effects. These results are reasonable, because across counties under similar detection technology, more
violations imply dirtier restaurants and thus a greater likelihood of an outbreak. However, over time, changes in
reported violations within a county could be driven by enhanced detection, which in turn motivates better
compliance.
19
     Given the limited amount of inspection resources available in the DHR, increased restaurant inspections might
decrease inspection rates for non-restaurant facilities (OPPAGA 2007). As long as this indirect effect matters, our
placebo test is limited.
                                                          23
the average probability of any restaurant foodborne disease outbreak per county-interval (4.5 percent) or
that of more than four restaurant-related outbreaks (1.8 percent) in Florida. Because PDA usage does not
directly affect non-restaurant foodborne disease outbreaks, we believe that the reduction in
restaurant-related outbreaks is likely a consequence of restaurants increasing compliance effort in
response to PDA use.


6. Conclusions

Food safety is of considerable concern in public health. In the U.S., food consumed away from home
amounts to a quarter of the total expenditure on eating (Hamermesh 2007); thus, a substantial amount of
tax money is spent on monitoring restaurant food safety. Hygiene inspections are a major component of
such policy; accordingly, a key question is how to use inspection tools to effectively induce restaurant
compliance. This question is difficult to answer because inspection outcomes are, by definition, a mixture
of detection and compliance.
        We overcame this difficulty by exploiting the introduction of a new inspection technology that
exogenously reduces the effort cost of inspectors. Using game theory, we identified the effect of the
technology on detection as well as the upper bound of compliance response to the detection change. Our
findings have several policy implications. First, a simple technology can go a long way toward improving
the efficiency of detection. Human inspectors are not perfect and have limited attention spans. With the
help of a small electronic device, which simply shows a checklist in detail, inspectors find significantly
more violations, some of which are critical. Second, restaurants do increase compliance in response to
higher detection effort by inspectors. However, their response is gradual and increases by the expected
permanency of the reform. Lastly, despite the gradual response, the increased detection rate and
subsequent compliance does correlate to a lower risk of restaurant-related foodborne disease outbreak.
We do not have the exact dollar estimates for the cost of PDAs, the costs of restaurant compliance, or the
benefits from fewer outbreaks. Nevertheless, our quantitative findings should help policy makers attempt
such a benefit-cost analysis.



References
Angrist, Joshua and Victor Lavy (2002) “New Evidence on Classroom Computers and Pupil Learning.”
          Economic Journal. 112(482): 735-765.
Athey, Susan and Scott Stern (2002) “The Impact of Information Technology on Emergency Health Care

                                                   24
         Reforms.” RAND Journal of Economics. 33: 399-432.
Berger, Robert G., and J. P. Kichak. (2004) “Computerized Physician Order Entry: Helpful or Harmful?”
         Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. 11(2): 100–103.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Lorin M. Hitt (2003) “Computing Productivity: Firm-level Evidence.” Review of
         Economics and Statistics. 85(4): 793–808.
Dixit, Avinash (2002) “Incentives and Organizations in the Public Section: An Interpretative Review”
         Journal of Human Resources. 37(4): 696-727.
Feinstein, Jonathan (1989) “The Safety Regulation of U.S. Nuclear Power Plants: Violations, Inspections,
         and Abnormal Occurrences.” Journal of Political Economy. 97: 115-154.
Feinstein, Jonathan (1991). “An Econometric Analysis of Income Tax Evasion and its Detection.” RAND
         Journal of Economics. 22(1): 14-35.
Garicano, Luis, and Paul Heaton (2010) “Information Technology, Organization, and Productivity in the
         Public Sector: Evidence from Police Departments.” Journal of Labor Economics. 28(1):
         167-201.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. (2007) “Time to Eat: Household Production under Increasing Income Inequality.”
         American Journal of Agricultural Economics. 89(4); 852-863.
Hausman, Jerry, Bronwyn H. Hall, and Zvi Griliches (1984) “Econometric Models for Count Data with
         an Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship.” Econometrica. 52(4): 909-938.
Hubbard, Thomas N (2003) “Information, Decisions, and Productivity: Onboard Computers and Capacity
         Utilization in Trucking.” American Economic Review. 93(4): 1328–53.
Jin, Ginger Z. and Phillip Leslie (2003): “ The Effects of Information on Product Quality: Evidence from
          Restaurant Hygiene Grade Cards, the Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2003, 118(2),
          409-51.
Jin, Ginger Z. and Jungmin Lee (2012): “A Tale of Repetition: Lessons from Florida Restaurant
         Inspections,” working paper.
Kleven, Henrik J., Martin B. Knudsen, Claus T. Kreiner, Soren Pedersen, and Emmanuel Saez (2011)
         “Unwilling or Unable to Cheat? Evidence from a Randomized Tax Audit Experiment in
         Denmark.” Econometrica. 79(3): 651-692.
Laffont, Jean-Jacques and Tirole, Jean (1993) A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and Regulation.
         Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Macher, Jeffery T., John W. Mayo, and Jack A. Nickerson (2010) “Exploring the Information Asymmetry
         Gap: Evidence from FDA Regulation.” forthcoming at Journal of Law and Economics.
Martimort, David (1999) “The Life Cycle of Regulatory Agencies: Dynamic Capture and Transaction
         Costs.” Review of Economic Studies. 66(4): 929-947.

                                                   25
Mookherjee, Dilip, and Ivan Png (1989) “Optimal Auditing, Insurance, and Redistribution.” Quarterly
         Journal of Economics. 104(2): 399-415.
Mookherjee, Dilip, and Ivan Paak-Liang Png (1995) “Corruptible Law Enforcers: How Should They Be
         Compensated?” Economic Journal. 105(428): 145-159.
Office of Program Policy Analysis & Government Accountability (2005) “Division of Hotels and
         Restaurants Improves Operations But Not Meeting Inspection Goals.” Report No. 05-51, An
         Office of the Florida Legislature.
Office of Program Policy Analysis & Government Accountability (2007) “Division of Hotels and
         Restaurants Improves Operations and Makes Progress in Meeting Inspection Goals.” Report No.
         07-41, An Office of the Florida Legislature.
Prendergast, Canice (2007) “The Motivation and Bias of Bureaucrats.” American Economic Review.
         97(1): 180-196.
Prendergast, Canice (1999) “The Provision of Incentives in Firms.” Journal of Economic Literature.
         37(1): 7-63.
Slemrod, Joel and Shlomo Yitzhaki (2002) “Tax Avoidance, Evasion and Administration” in Handbook
         of Public Economics, number 3, edited by Alan Auerbach and Martin Feldstein, Elsevier.
Tirole, Jean (1986) “Procurement and Renegotiation.” Journal of Political Economy. 94(2): 235-259.




                                                  26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.4




                                                                                                                                               0.1
                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                                                                                                                                           0.3
                                                                                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                                                                            0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.9

                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.8




                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2003q3
                                                                                                                                  2003q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2003q4
                                                                                                                                  2003q4                                                                                            2004q1                                                                                                       2003q3
                                                                                                                                  2004q1                                                                                                                                                                                                         2003q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2004q2
                                                                                                                                  2004q2                                                                                                                                                                                                         2004q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2004q3
                                                                                                                                  2004q3                                                                                                                                                                                                         2004q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2004q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2004q3




     quarter of 2009.
                                                                                                                                  2004q4                                                                                            2005q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2004q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2004q4
                                                                                                                                  2005q1                                                                                            2005q2                                                                                                       2005q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2004q4
                                                                                                                                  2005q2                                                                                            2005q3                                                                                                       2005q2
                                                                                                                                  2005q3                                                                                            2005q4                                                                                                       2005q3




                                                                                                                                                                   2004q4
                                                                                                                                  2005q4                                                                                            2006q1                                                                                                       2005q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2006q2                                                                                                       2006q1
                                                                                                                                  2006q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2006q3                                                                                                       2006q2
                                                                                                                                  2006q2                                                                                            2006q4                                                                                                       2006q3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2006q3
                                                                                                                                  2006q3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    District 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2007q1                                                                                                       2006q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2006q2




                                                                                                                                  2006q4




                                                                                                                                                                                  2006q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2007q2                                                                                                       2007q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              District 1




                                                                                                                                  2007q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       District 7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2007q3                                                                                                       2007q2
                                                                                                                                  2007q2                                                                                            2007q4                                                                                                       2007q3
                                                                                                                                  2007q3                                                                                            2008q1                                                                                                       2007q4
                                                                                                                                  2007q4                                                                                            2008q2                                                                                                       2008q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2008q3                                                                                                       2008q2
                                                                                                                                  2008q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2008q4                                                                                                       2008q3
                                                                                                                                  2008q2                                                                                                                                                                                                         2008q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009q1
                                                                                                                                  2008q3                                                                                                                                                                                                         2009q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009q2
                                                                                                                                  2008q4                                                                                            2009q3                                                                                                       2009q2
                                                                                                                                  2009q1                                                                                                                                                                                                         2009q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009q4
                                                                                                                                  2009q2                                                                                                                                                                                                         2009q4
                                                                                                                                  2009q3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                  2009q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2003q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2003q4                                                                                                       2003q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2004q1                                                                                                       2003q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2004q2                                                                                                       2004q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2004q3                                                                                                       2004q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2004q4                                                                                                       2004q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2005q1                                                                                                       2004q4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2004q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2005q2                                                                                                       2005q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2004q4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2005q3                                                                                                       2005q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2005q4                                                                                                       2005q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2006q1                                                                                                       2005q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2006q2                                                                                                       2006q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2006q3                                                                                                       2006q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2006q4                                                                                                       2006q3




27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2006q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2006q2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           District 5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2007q1                                                                                                       2006q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2007q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      District 2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2007q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2007q3                                                                                                       2007q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2007q4                                                                                                       2007q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2008q1                                                                                                       2007q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2008q2                                                                                                       2008q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2008q3                                                                                                       2008q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2008q4                                                                                                       2008q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009q1                                                                                                       2008q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009q2                                                                                                       2009q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009q3                                                                                                       2009q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009q4                                                                                                       2009q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2009q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2003q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2003q4                                                                                                       2003q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2003q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2004q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2004q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2004q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2004q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2004q3                                                                                                       2004q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2004q4                                                                                                       2004q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2004q4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2005q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2004q4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2005q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2005q2                                                                                                       2005q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2005q3                                                                                                       2005q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2005q4                                                                                                       2005q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2006q1                                                                                                       2006q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2006q2                                                                                                       2006q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2006q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2006q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Figure 1. Fraction of Inspections with PDA over Time by District




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2006q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2006q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2006q3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2006q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           District 3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2007q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              District 6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2007q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2007q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2007q2                                                                                                       2007q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2007q3                                                                                                       2007q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2007q4                                                                                                       2008q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2008q1                                                                                                       2008q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2008q2                                                                                                       2008q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2008q3                                                                                                       2008q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2008q4                                                                                                       2009q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009q1                                                                                                       2009q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2009q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2009q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009q4
     seven districts in Florida. The time unit is a quarter. The sample period spans from the third quarter of 2003 to the last
     Notes: The graphs show the time trends of the fraction of inspections with PDA by Florida inspection district. There are
Figure 2. Impacts of First Adoption of PDA on Violations and Exogeneity of PDA Adoption
            (10 Weeks before and after the District’s Massive Adoption Date)

                                A. PDA Adoption and Effects on Violations
                                                          7                                    1.0


                                                                                               0.9
                                                          6

                                                                                               0.8


                                                          5
                                                                                               0.7


                                                                                               0.6
                                                          4

                                                                                               0.5

                                                          3
                                                                                               0.4


                                                                                               0.3
                                                          2


                                                                                               0.2

                                                          1
                                                                                               0.1


                                                          0                                    0.0
                    -10             -5                        0              5       10

                                              Violation                PDA


     Notes: The horizontal axis represents the weeks around the date when most inspectors
     adopted PDAs in each district. The diamonds represent the proportion of inspections done
     using the PDA in each week. The squares represent the average number of detected
     violations per inspection in each week.

                                 B. Effects of Past Violations on PDA Use
                                                              5




                                                              4




                                                              3




                                                              2




                                                              1




                                                              0
                          -10            -5                       0              5        10




     Notes: The horizontal axis represents the weeks around the date when most inspectors
     adopted PDAs in each district. The dots represent the average number of violations
     detected at the last inspection for restaurants inspected in each week.



                                                                  28
Figure 3. Trends of the Effects of Previous Violations on the Probability of PDA Use

           0.5




           0.4




           0.3




           0.2




           0.1




            0
                                            2004q2




                                                                                                                                               2007q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2009q4
                 2003q3
                          2003q4
                                   2004q1


                                                     2004q3
                                                              2004q4
                                                                       2005q1
                                                                                2005q2
                                                                                         2005q3
                                                                                                  2005q4
                                                                                                           2006q1
                                                                                                                    2006q2
                                                                                                                             2006q3
                                                                                                                                      2006q4


                                                                                                                                                        2007q2
                                                                                                                                                                 2007q3
                                                                                                                                                                          2007q4
                                                                                                                                                                                   2008q1
                                                                                                                                                                                            2008q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     2008q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                              2008q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2009q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2009q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2009q3
          -0.1

                                                                                                   Region FE                                   No region FE

                           Notes: The horizontal axis represents the quarter of the year
                           from July 2003 to December 2009. For each quarter, we run a
                           regression of PDA use on previous violations. The squares
                           represent the OLS estimates, and the diamonds represent the
                           estimates after controlling for district fixed effects.




                                                                                                                             29
                                 Figure 4. Equilibrium with Perfect Information

             𝑒𝑖




𝜆                     Inspector’s detection curve           Restaurant’s compliance curve
    𝜃𝑖


                                          A
    𝑒𝑖𝐴




                  0                                     1               𝑒𝑟
                           𝑹            𝑒𝑟𝐴
                          𝟐𝜽𝒓




                      Figure 5. Comparative Statics by PDA Adoption (                        )

             𝑒𝑖
    𝜆
        𝜃𝑖
                          Inspector’s detection curve
                                                             Restaurant’s compliance curve
    𝜆
        𝜃𝑖

                                         B

                                              C
                                    A

                                              D



                  0                                      1              𝑒𝑟
                            𝑹           𝑒𝑟𝐴   𝑒𝑟𝐶
                           𝟐𝜽𝒓



                                                        30
              Figure 6. Changes in Detection Effects over Time
5




4




3




2




1




0
                       2004q1




                                                  2004q4




                                                                                                                                                                                                           2009q1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2009q4
     2003q3
              2003q4


                                2004q2
                                         2004q3


                                                           2005q1
                                                                    2005q2
                                                                             2005q3
                                                                                      2005q4
                                                                                               2006q1
                                                                                                        2006q2
                                                                                                                 2006q3
                                                                                                                          2006q4
                                                                                                                                   2007q1
                                                                                                                                            2007q2
                                                                                                                                                     2007q3
                                                                                                                                                              2007q4
                                                                                                                                                                       2008q1
                                                                                                                                                                                2008q2
                                                                                                                                                                                         2008q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2008q4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2009q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2009q3
-1




-2




-3

                                                                    Region FE                                                                         No region FE



Notes: The horizontal axis represents the quarter of the year from
July 2003 to December 2009. For each quarter, we run a regression
of detected violations by PDA use. The squares represent the OLS
estimates, and the diamonds represent the estimates after
controlling for district fixed effects.




                                                                                                                 31
                      Table 1. Summary Statistics of Variables Used in Regression Analysis

                                                                    Mean        SD        Min        Max
Detected violations
Total violations                                                     7.89       6.99        0        111
Critical violations                                                  4.85       4.53        0         66
Noncritical violations                                               3.04       3.24        0         47

Inspector characteristics
New inspector (new to the current restaurant)                        0.17       0.38        0          1
Number of inspections by previous inspector                          3.62       2.91        1         36
Days since previous inspection                                       181         87         1        1754
More than one year since the last inspection                         0.04      0.19         0         1
Inspector’s past inspections                                         1830      1245         0        6480

Inspection and restaurant characteristics
Inspection performed in response to a citizen’s complaint            0.04       0.19        0          1
Inspection performed upon initial license or change of
                                                                    0.001      0.031        0          1
ownership
Restaurant age in years                                              4.11       2.65        0       14.19
Number of inspections done per day before the current
                                                                     1.85       1.70        0         36
inspection
First inspection today                                               0.25       0.43        0          1
Inspection during lunch time (12:00-2:00 PM)                         0.38       0.49        0          1

Notes: Summary statistics for the restricted sample, excluding those inspections during the first six months
after each restaurant’s first appearance in the data and FY 2003. N = 290,179. Number of observations with
non-missing restaurant age and non-missing inspection time = 261,128.




                                                            32
                 Table 2. Summary Statistics of PDA Variables

                                                                    Mean         SD
PDA                                                                 0.89         0.31
Previous PDA inspections                                            4.55         3.38
Restaurants with paper inspection initially in the sample*          0.16         0.37
Restaurants that experienced switching back to paper**              0.30         0.46

No previous PDA inspection                                           0.07        0.25
One previous PDA inspection                                          0.11        0.31
Two previous PDA inspections                                         0.13        0.34
Three previous PDA inspections                                       0.13        0.33
Four previous PDA inspections                                        0.11        0.31
Five previous PDA inspections                                        0.10        0.29
Six previous PDA inspections                                         0.08        0.28
Seven previous PDA inspections                                       0.07        0.26
Eight previous PDA inspections                                       0.06        0.23
Nine previous PDA inspections                                        0.05        0.21
10 or more previous PDA inspections                                  0.10        0.30

PDA conditional on no previous PDA inspection                        0.75        0.43
PDA conditional on one previous PDA inspection                       0.82        0.39
PDA conditional on two previous PDA inspections                      0.85        0.36
PDA conditional on three previous PDA inspections                    0.87        0.34
PDA conditional on four previous PDA inspections                     0.88        0.33
PDA conditional on five previous PDA inspections                     0.89        0.31
PDA conditional on six previous PDA inspections                      0.91        0.28
PDA conditional on seven previous PDA inspections                    0.93        0.25
PDA conditional on eight previous PDA inspections                    0.95        0.23
PDA conditional on nine previous PDA inspections                     0.96        0.20
PDA conditional on 10 or more previous PDA inspections               0.97        0.17

Probability of switching back to paper***                            0.09        0.29

Notes: * represents the proportion of restaurants with paper inspection during the first
inspection in the sample, out of 51,192 restaurants included in the regression analysis.
** represents the proportion of restaurants that experienced switching back to paper
inspection, out of those that were subjected to PDA inspection once. *** represents the
proportion of paper inspections for those restaurants that subjected to PDA inspection
once. All the statistics are calculated from the restricted sample.




                                            33
                   Table 3. Distribution of Restaurants by Total Number of Observations in the Sample and Total Number of PDA Inspections

                                                                                                    Number of PDA Inspections
          0          1         2         3         4         5         6         7         8         9        10            11       12       13       14       15       16       17       18       19       20       21       Total
   2      258       1,812     8,289           0         0         0         0         0         0         0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0   10,359
   3          32     257      1,227     4,369           0         0         0         0         0         0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0    5,885
   4          12         73    406      1,494     3,882           0         0         0         0         0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0    5,867
   5           0         24    100       397      1,316     2,910           0         0         0         0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0    4,747
   6           1          9        20    126       468      1,445     2,589           0         0         0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0    4,658
   7           0         29        41        34    159       612      1,440     2,046           0         0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0    4,361
   8           0          3        12        12        46    187       689      1,491     1,875           0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0    4,315
   9           0          0         1         2        10        60    233       718      1,437     1,678          0             0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0    4,139
  10           0          0         0         0         3        23        79    234       655      1,251     1,233              0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0    3,478
  11           0          0         0         0         0         2        12        49    150       434       742          558           0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0    1,947
  12           0          0         0         0         0         0         6         9        28        86    194          307      229           0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0      859
  13           0          0         0         0         0         0         0         3         3        12     46           95      125       75           0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0      359
  14           0          0         0         0         0         0         0         1         0         1        9         19       32       49       30           0        0        0        0        0        0        0      141
  15           0          0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0        3             5        5        7    17           8        0        0        0        0        0        0       45
  16           0          0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0         1        0             2        3        6        6        2        1        0        0        0        0        0       21
  17           0          0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0        0             0        0        2        2        0        1        0        0        0        0        0           5
  18           0          0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0        1        2        0        0        0           3
  19           0          0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0        0             0        0        0        1        0        0        0        0        0        0        0           1
  20           0          0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0        0             0        0        0        0        0        1        0        0        0        0        0           1
  21           0          0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0         0        0             0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        1           1
 Total    303       2,207 10,096        6,434     5,884     5,239     5,048     4,551     4,148     3,463     2,227         986      394      139       56       10           3        1        2        0        0        1   51,192

Notes: The number in each cell represents the number of restaurants. There are 51,192 restaurants in total in the restricted sample. For each restaurant, we
count its frequency in the sample and the total number of PDA inspections. For example, the first cell shows that 258 restaurants appear twice in the
sample and that they were not subjected to PDA inspection (i.e., both inspections were paper-based).




                                                                                                                       34
          Table 4. Results from Fixed-Effect (FE) Poisson Models: Total Number of Violations

                                                                                                 Unrestricted
                                                                        Restricted Sample           Sample
                                                                      (1)                 (2)          (3)
PDA                                                               0.115***            0.113***     0.130***
                                                                   (0.009)             (0.012)      (0.011)
Previous PDA inspections                                         -0.082***           -0.054***    -0.047***
                                                                   (0.003)             (0.003)      (0.003)
Previous PDA inspections × PDA                                   -0.010***           -0.013***    -0.016***
                                                                   (0.002)             (0.002)      (0.002)
New inspector (new to the current restaurant)                                         0.094***     0.102***
                                                                                       (0.005)      (0.005)
Inspections by the previous inspector × New inspector                                 0.007***     0.007***
                                                                                       (0.002)      (0.002)
Inspections by the previous inspector                                                -0.008***    -0.009***
                                                                                       (0.001)      (0.001)
Inspector’s past inspections are less than the median                                 0.027***     0.026***
                                                                                       (0.005)      (0.005)
Inspector’s past inspections are 30 or less                                           0.200***     0.194***
                                                                                       (0.018)      (0.017)
Number inspections done before the current inspection per day                        -0.030***    -0.030***
                                                                                       (0.001)      (0.001)
First inspection today                                                                   0.005        0.000
                                                                                       (0.005)      (0.005)
Missing inspection time                                                                -0.044*      -0.038*
                                                                                       (0.023)      (0.022)
Days since the last inspection                                                        0.000***     0.001***
                                                                                       (0.000)      (0.000)
More than one year since the last inspection                                         -0.079***    -0.102***
                                                                                       (0.009)      (0.009)
Restaurant age in years                                                               0.063***     0.052***
                                                                                       (0.019)      (0.018)
Missing restaurant age                                                                  -0.193       -0.129
                                                                                       (0.200)      (0.107)
Inspection performed in response to a citizen’s complaint                            -0.147***    -0.146***
                                                                                       (0.008)      (0.007)
Inspection performed upon initial license or change of                               -0.399***    -0.375***
ownership                                                                              (0.059)      (0.036)
Restaurant FE                                                        Yes                   --           --
Quarter-by-year FE                                                   Yes                  Yes          Yes
Inspection time hourly FE                                             No                  Yes          Yes
Inspector-by-restaurant FE                                            No                  Yes          Yes
Number of restaurants                                               51,192              51,192       61,861
Observations                                                       290,179            290,179      332,010

                                                            35
Notes: The dependent variable is the number of violations per inspection. In Columns (1) and (2), we use the
restricted sample. There are 19 quarter-by-year, 23 inspection time hour, and 79,270 inspector-restaurant fixed
effects. For Column (3), we use the unrestricted sample. There are 24 quarter-by-year, 23 inspection time hour, and
88,700 inspector-restaurant fixed effects. Robust standard errors are clustered at the inspector-restaurant level. ***
denote significance at the 1% level, **, at the 5% level, and *, at the 10% level.




                                                          36
         Table 5. Impacts of PDA Use by Period: Adoption, Earlier, and Later Periods

                                                  (1)                     (2)                    (3)
Period                                         Adoption                  Earlier                Later
PDA                                            0.200***                0.148***                 0.008
                                                (0.044)                 (0.021)                (0.019)
Previous PDA inspections                        -0.012                -0.059***              -0.081***
                                                (0.023)                 (0.007)                (0.004)
Previous PDA inspections × PDA                  -0.014                -0.025***                -0.002
                                                (0.014)                 (0.004)                (0.003)
Control variables                                 Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Quarter-by-year FE                                Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Inspection time hourly FE                         Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Inspector-by-restaurant FE                        Yes                     Yes                    Yes
Observations                                    30,851                  106,867               166,586

Notes: Estimation results are obtained from FE Poisson models. The dependent variable is the number of
violations per inspection. Robust standard errors are clustered at the inspector-restaurant level. *** denote
significance at the 1% level, **, at the 5% level, and *, at the 10% level. For Column (1), we use our
unrestricted sample, including inspections during the first six months after each restaurant’s first
appearance in the data and FY 2003. The adoption period is from July 2003 to December 2004. For
Columns (2) and (3), we use the restricted sample, excluding certain observations, as we explained in
Section 4.1. The earlier period refers to the period from July 2004 to September 2006, and the later period
refers to the period from October 2006 to June 2009. All the control variables in Column (2) of Table 3
are included.




                                                     37
                             Table 6. Results by Violation Category Characteristics

                                        Critical vs. Noncritical                     Number of Subcategories
                                          (1)            (2)                    (3)             (4)              (5)
                                        Critical      Noncritical              Large         Medium             Small
                                                                            20 or more         10~19        Less than 10
PDA                                     0.112***         0.117***            0.180***        0.087***           0.026
                                         (0.014)          (0.015)             (0.015)         (0.015)          (0.018)
Previous PDA inspections               -0.064***        -0.040***           -0.051***       -0.063***        -0.048***
                                         (0.003)          (0.004)             (0.003)         (0.004)          (0.004)
Previous PDA inspections × PDA         -0.012***        -0.016***           -0.018***       -0.012***        -0.007***
                                         (0.002)          (0.002)             (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.003)
Control variables                          Yes              Yes                 Yes             Yes              Yes
Quarter-by-year FE                         Yes              Yes                 Yes             Yes              Yes
Inspection time hourly FE                  Yes              Yes                 Yes             Yes              Yes
Inspector-by-restaurant FE                 Yes              Yes                 Yes             Yes              Yes
Observations                             287,893         277,690              282,296         280,250         268,119

Notes: Main estimation results are obtained from FE Poisson models using the restricted sample. The dependent variable
is the number of violations per inspection. Robust standard errors are clustered at the inspector-restaurant level. All the
control variables in Column (2) of Table 3 are included. The cutoff numbers of subcategories were chosen so as to divide
the sample as equally as possible. *** denote significance at the 1% level, **, at the 5% level, and *, at the 10% level.
Detailed results are available upon request.




                                                           38
         Table 7. Detection and Compliance Effects over Repeated Uses of PDA

                                                  (1)           (2)           (3)
                                                  All        Critical    Noncritical
PDA                                            0.165***     0.144***      0.200***
                                                (0.019)      (0.021)       (0.023)
Previous PDA inspections = 1                    -0.025      -0.058**         0.027
                                                (0.021)      (0.023)       (0.025)
Previous PDA inspections = 2                  -0.086***    -0.140***        -0.000
                                                (0.022)      (0.024)       (0.027)
Previous PDA inspections = 3                  -0.113***    -0.201***         0.020
                                                (0.024)      (0.026)       (0.029)
Previous PDA inspections = 4                  -0.190***    -0.291***        -0.035
                                                (0.026)      (0.028)       (0.031)
Previous PDA inspections = 5                  -0.195***    -0.305***        -0.024
                                                (0.027)      (0.029)       (0.033)
Previous PDA inspections = 6                  -0.242***    -0.358***       -0.060*
                                                (0.029)      (0.032)       (0.037)
Previous PDA inspections = 7                  -0.295***    -0.412***     -0.111***
                                                (0.032)      (0.035)       (0.040)
Previous PDA inspections = 8                  -0.340***    -0.465***     -0.145***
                                                (0.036)      (0.039)       (0.046)
Previous PDA inspections = 9                  -0.415***    -0.531***     -0.234***
                                                (0.040)      (0.044)       (0.051)
Previous PDA inspections = 10 or more         -0.461***    -0.602***     -0.239***
                                                (0.038)      (0.041)       (0.047)
PDA × (Previous PDA inspections = 1)           -0.047**       -0.031     -0.071***
                                                (0.020)      (0.023)       (0.025)
PDA × (Previous PDA inspections = 2)          -0.066***     -0.051**     -0.093***
                                                (0.020)      (0.022)       (0.025)
PDA × (Previous PDA inspections = 3)          -0.106***    -0.068***     -0.161***
                                                (0.022)      (0.024)       (0.026)
PDA × (Previous PDA inspections = 4)          -0.085***      -0.043*     -0.146***
                                                (0.022)      (0.024)       (0.027)
PDA × (Previous PDA inspections = 5)          -0.136***    -0.094***     -0.200***
                                                (0.022)      (0.024)       (0.028)
PDA × (Previous PDA inspections = 6)          -0.145***    -0.108***     -0.203***
                                                (0.025)      (0.026)       (0.031)
PDA × (Previous PDA inspections = 7)          -0.144***    -0.114***     -0.193***
                                                (0.027)      (0.030)       (0.033)
PDA × (Previous PDA inspections = 8)          -0.151***    -0.130***     -0.186***
                                                (0.031)      (0.032)       (0.039)
PDA × (Previous PDA inspections = 9)          -0.129***    -0.120***     -0.145***
                                                (0.034)      (0.038)       (0.045)
                                         39
PDA × (Previous PDA inspections = 10 or more)        -0.184***        -0.160***        -0.224***
                                                       (0.029)          (0.031)          (0.036)
Control variables                                        Yes              Yes              Yes
Restaurant FE                                            Yes              Yes              Yes
Quarter-by-year FE                                       Yes              Yes              Yes
Inspection time hourly FE                                Yes              Yes              Yes
Inspector-by-restaurant FE                               Yes              Yes              Yes
Observations                                          290,179          287,893          277,690

Notes: The main estimation results are obtained from FE Poisson models using the restricted sample.
The dependent variable is the number of violations per inspection. Robust standard errors are
clustered at the inspector-restaurant level. All the control variables in Column (2) of Table 3 are
included. *** denote significance at the 1% level, **, at the 5% level, and *, at the 10% level.




                                                40
                                       Table 8. Impacts of PDA Inspections on Foodborne Disease Outbreaks

                                                                                           More than four restaurant
                                                Any restaurant foodborne disease                                                Non-restaurant foodborne disease
Dependent variable (sample average)                                                     foodborne disease outbreak cases
                                                   outbreaks (Mean = 0.045)                                                        outbreaks (Mean = 0.022)
                                                                                            reported (Mean = 0.018)

                                                      (1)                (2)                  (3)                (4)                  (5)                (6)
PDA (t-1)                                          -0.013**           -0.012**              -0.007*           -0.006*                0.003              0.004
                                                    (0.006)            (0.005)              (0.004)            (0.003)              (0.003)            (0.003)
PDA (t-2)                                                               -0.005                                 -0.004                                  -0.004
                                                                       (0.005)                                 (0.003)                                 (0.003)
Non-restaurant foodborne disease outbreaks         0.002**             0.002**             -0.0001            -0.0001
                                                   (0.001)             (0.001)             (0.0002)           (0.0002)
Inspection rate                                      1.054              1.044                0.737              0.757                1.768              1.974
                                                    (1.179)            (1.138)              (0.525)            (0.533)              (1.612)            (1.619)
County fixed effect                                   Yes                Yes                  Yes                Yes                  Yes                Yes
Time interval fixed effect                            Yes                Yes                  Yes                Yes                  Yes                Yes
R-squared (within group)                            0.023              0.023                 0.017              0.017                0.020              0.020

Notes: N = 10,385 = 67 counties × 155 time intervals for Columns (1), (3), and (5). The unit of time interval is 15 days. N = 10,318 for Columns (2), (4), and (6).
Linear probability models. The dependent variable is the indicator for any restaurant-related foodborne disease outbreaks in Columns (1) and (2), the indicator for
whether there were more than four restaurant-related foodborne disease outbreaks in Columns (3) and (4), and for non-restaurant foodborne disease outbreaks in
the bottom panel in Columns (5) and (6). The linear probability model is estimated with county-specific and time fixed effects. PDA (t - 1) is the proportion of
PDA inspections out of all inspections conducted in a county at time (t-1). The inspection rate is defined as the number of inspections done during a given time
interval divided by the number of licensed restaurants in the year. Robust standard errors, clustered by county, are presented in parentheses. *** denote
significance at the 1% level, **, at the 5% level, and *, at the 10% level.




                                                                                 41
Appendix




   42
                                         Appendix A. Derivation of Equilibrium

The restaurant’s problem is the following:




Taking the first-order condition of the restaurant’s problem with respect to restaurant effort, we get the restaurant’s
optimal effort as              . The inspector’s problem is the following:




Taking the first-order condition of the inspector’s problem with respect to inspector effort, we get the inspector’s optimal

effort as

Putting the two first-order conditions together and solving for       and     , we have the following:




Plugging them in     , we obtain the following:




To ensure both      and      strictly lie between 0 and 1, we need             and                           . The first condition

implies that the restaurant’s cleaning effort is costly enough for it to always have incentives to shirk if bad publicity is the
only penalty for violations. The second condition implies that the cost of detection is sufficiently high relative to the
perceived importance of detection, such that the inspector will not exert his/her maximum effort of 1 even if he/she knows
that the restaurant puts in little effort in cleaning up. A more restrictive version of the first condition is                In that

case, cleaning up is so costly that the restaurant will not clean up completely even if it knows that the inspector will

engage in full detection. In some range of the second condition (                                    , the intercept of the

detection curve exceeds one, and therefore, the inspector will engage in full detection if restaurant effort is sufficiently

low (i.e.               ). This corner-solution range of the detection curve still leads to an inner solution in equilibrium as

long as                          .



                                                                43
Figure A.1. Inspection Report (Page 1)




                 44
Inspection Report (Page 2)




           45
                                                         Figure A.2. Screenshots of PDA Screens




Source: Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation, Division of Hotels and Restaurants, Mobile Inspection User Manual, November 12, 2003.
The first figure shows how to check a violation after retrieving a dropdown menu in the bottom. The second figure shows how to report the details of the violation.
The last figure shows how to retrieve the inspection history of the restaurant.




                                                                               46
Figure A.3. Restaurant Inspection in the Seven Districts of Florida




                                47
                       Figure A.4. Time Trends of PDA Use Rates and Inspection Rates
                  1                                                                                                0.8


                 0.9
                                                                                                                   0.7

                 0.8
                                                                                                                   0.6
                 0.7

                                                                                                                   0.5
                 0.6




                                                                                                                         Inspection rate
  PDA use rate




                 0.5                                                                                               0.4


                 0.4
                                                                                                                   0.3

                 0.3
                                                                                                                   0.2
                 0.2

                                                                                                                   0.1
                 0.1


                  0                                                                                                0




                                                PDA                 Inspection

Notes: The PDA use rate is defined as the proportion of PDA inspections out of all inspections done during a certain
quarter. The inspection rate is defined as the number of inspected restaurants during a certain quarter divided by the total
number of licensed restaurants in the quarter’s year.




                                                            48
          Figure A.5. Monthly Trends of Restaurant Foodborne Disease Outbreaks
                     (1997-2009, Number of Reported Cases per Month)
600
400
200
      0




      1996m1     1998m1      2000m1       2002m1 2004m1            2006m1      2008m1       2010m1
                                            Time in Month


Data source: Florida Department of Health, Online Database:
 http://doh.state.fl.us/environment/medicine/foodsurveillance/Online_FWBD_Outbreak_Database.html




                                                49
