                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      BONUS CULTURE: COMPETITIVE PAY, SCREENING, AND MULTITASKING

                                           Roland Bénabou
                                             Jean Tirole

                                        Working Paper 18936
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18936


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2013




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Sylvain Chassang, Wouter Dessein, Xavier Gabaix, Thomas Mariotti,
Harry Di Pei, Wolfgang Pesendorfer, Canice Prendergast, David Sraer, Lars Stole, Glen Weyl and
participants in conferences and seminars at Maastricht University, TSE-IAST, CEPR, the NBER Summer
Institute, Princeton University, Columbia GSB, Chicago GSB, the Institute for Advanced Study, CIFAR,
Yale University and the Econometric Society Winter Meetings for helpful comments. Both authors
gratefully acknowledge financial support from the ERC programme grant FP7/2007-2013 No. 249429,
"Cognition and Decision-Making: Laws, Norms and Contracts". Bénabou also gratefully acknowledges
support from the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research. Doron Ravid and Juha Tolvanen provided
superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Roland Bénabou and Jean Tirole. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Bonus Culture: Competitive Pay, Screening, and Multitasking
Roland Bénabou and Jean Tirole
NBER Working Paper No. 18936
April 2013
JEL No. D31,D82,D86,J31,J33,L13,M12

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the impact of labor market competition and skill-biased technical change on the
structure of compensation. The model combines multitasking and screening, embedded into a Hotelling-like
framework. Competition for the most talented workers leads to an escalating reliance on performance
pay and other high-powered incentives, thereby shifting effort away from less easily contractible tasks
such as long-term investments, risk management and within-firm cooperation. Under perfect competition,
the resulting efficiency loss can be larger than that imposed by a single firm or principal, who distorts
incentives downward in order to extract rents. More generally, as declining market frictions lead employers
to compete more aggressively, the monopsonistic underincentivization of low-skill agents first decreases,
then gives way to a growing overincentivization of high-skill ones. Aggregate welfare is thus hill-shaped
with respect to the competitiveness of the labor market, while inequality tends to rise monotonically.
Bonus caps and income taxes can help restore balance in agents' incentives and behavior, but may
generate their own set of distortions


Roland Bénabou
Department of Economics
and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
rbenabou@princeton.edu

Jean Tirole
Institut d'Economie Industrielle
Bureau MF529 - Bat. F
21 allees de Brienne
31000 Toulouse
FRANCE
jean.tirole@tse-fr.eu




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18936
1    Introduction
Recent years have seen a literal explosion of pay, both in levels and in diﬀerentials, at the top
echelons of many occupations. Large bonuses and salaries are needed, it is typically said, to retain
“talent” and “top performers” in finance, corporations, medicine, academia, as well as to incentivize
them to perform to the best of their high abilities. Paradoxically, this trend has been accompanied
by mounting revelations of poor actual performance, severe moral hazard and even outright fraud
in those same sectors. Oftentimes these behaviors impose negative spillovers on the rest of society
(e.g., bank bailouts), but even when not, the firms involved themselves ultimately suﬀer: large
trading losses, declines in stock value, loss of reputation and consumer goodwill, regulatory fines
and legal liabilities, or even bankruptcy.
    This paper proposes a resolution of the puzzle, by showing how competition for the most
productive workers can interact with the incentive structure inside firms to undermine work ethics
—the extent to which agents “do the right thing” beyond what their material self-interest commands.
More generally, the underlying idea is that highly competitive labor markets make it diﬃcult for
employers to strike the proper balance between the benefits and costs of high-powered incentives.
The result is a “bonus culture” that takes over the workplace, generating distorted decisions and
significant eﬃciency losses, particularly in the long run. To make this point we develop a model that
combines multitasking, screening and imperfect competition, making a methodological contribution
in the process.
    Inside each firm, agents perform both a task that is easily measured (sales, output, trading
profits, billable medical procedures) and one that is not and therefore involves an element of public-
goods provision (intangible investments aﬀecting long-run value, financial or legal risk-taking, co-
operation among individuals or divisions). Agents potentially diﬀer in their productivity for the
rewardable task and in their intrinsic willingness to provide the unrewarded one —their work ethic.
When types are observable, the standard result applies: principals set relatively low-powered in-
centives that optimally balance workers’ eﬀort allocation; competition then only aﬀects the size
of fixed compensation. Things change fundamentally when skill levels are unobservable, leading
firms to oﬀer contracts designed to screen diﬀerent types of workers. A single principal (monop-
sonist, collusive industry) sets the power of incentives even lower than the social optimum, so as
to extract rents from the more productive agents. Labor-market competition, however, introduces
a new role for performance pay: because it is diﬀerentially attractive to more productive workers,
it also serves as a device which firms use to attract (or retain) these types. Focusing first on the
limiting case of perfect competition, we show that the degree of incentivization is always above the
social optimum, and identify a simple condition under which the resulting distortion exceeds that
occurring under monopsony. Competitive bidding for talent is thus destructive of work ethics, and
ultimately welfare-reducing.
    We then develop a Hotelling-like variant of competitive screening to analyze the equilibrium
contracts under arbitrary degrees of imperfect competition. As mobility costs (or horizontal diﬀer-
entiation) decline, the monopsonistic underincentivization of low-skill agents gradually decreases,


                                                  1
then at some point gives way to a growing overincentivization of high-skill ones. Aggregate welfare
is thus hill-shaped with respect to competition, while comprehensive measures of inequality (gaps
in utility or total earnings) tend to rise monotonically. This leads us to analyze diﬀerent policies,
such as bonus caps or taxes on total compensation, that can potentially improve eﬃciency and
restore balance in agents’ incentives and focus. The extent to which this is achievable depends
on how well the government or regulator is able to distinguish the incentive versus fixed parts of
compensation packages, as well as on the distortions that may arise as firms try to blur that line
or resort to even less eﬃcient screening devices.
    In our baseline model, one task is unobservable or noncontractible, and thus performed solely
out of intrinsic motivation. This (standard) specification of the multitask problem is convenient,
but inessential for the main results. We thus extend the analysis to the case where performance
in both tasks is measurable and hence rewarded, but noisy, which limits the power of incentives
(e.g., deferred compensation versus yearly bonuses) given to risk averse agents. This not only
demonstrates robustness (no reliance on intrinsic motivation) but also yields a new set of results
that bring to light how the distorted incentive structure under competition (or monopsony) and
the resulting misallocation of eﬀort are shaped by the measurement noise in each task, agents’
comparative advantage across them, and risk aversion.
    Finally, we contrast our main analysis of competition for talent with the polar case where agents
have the same productivity in the measurable task but diﬀer in their ethical motivation for the
unmeasurable one. In this case, competition is shown to be either beneficial (reducing the overin-
centivization which a monopsonist uses to extract rent, but never causing underincentivization), or
neutral —as occurs in a variant of the model where ethical motivation generates positive spillovers
inside the firm instead of private benefits for the agent.
    The rest of this section discusses empirical evidence and related literature. Section 2 presents
the basic model. Section 3 analyzes equilibrium under varying degrees of competition, and Section 4
the eﬀects of pay regulation. Section 5 allows both tasks to be observable, while Section 6 considers
heterogeneity in motivation rather than ability. Section 7 concludes. The main proofs are gathered
in Appendices A to C, more technical ones in the online supplementary Appendix D.


1.1    Evidence
Although bankers’ bonuses and CEO pay packages attract the most attention, the parallel rise in
incentive pay and earnings inequality is a much broader phenomenon, as established by Lemieux
et al. (2009). Between the late 1970’s and the 1990’s, the fraction of jobs explicitly paid based on
performance rose from 38% to 45%. Further compounding the direct impact on inequality is the
fact that the returns to skills, both observable (education, experience, job tenure) and unobservable,
are much higher in such jobs. This last finding also suggests that diﬀerent compensation structures
may play an important sorting role.1 Lemieux et al. calculate that the interaction of structural

   1
    Consistent with this view and with our modelling premise that performance incentives aﬀect not only moral
hazard (e.g. Bandiera et al. 2007, Shearer 2004) but also selection, Lazear’s (2000) study of Safelite Glass Company


                                                         2
change and diﬀerential returns account for 21% of the growth in the variance of male log-wages
over the period, and for essentially 100% (or even more) above the 80 percentile.
    The source of escalation in incentive pay in our model is increased competition for the best
workers, and this also fits well with the evidence on managerial compensation in advanced countries.
In a long-term study (1936-2003) of the market for top US executives, Frydman (2007) documents
a major shift, starting in the 1970’s and sharply accelerating since the late 1980’s, from firm-specific
skills to more general managerial ones —e.g., from engineering degrees to MBA’s. In addition, there
has been a concomitant rise in the diversity of sectoral experiences acquired over the course of a
typical career. Frydman argues that these decreases in mobility costs have intensified competition
for managerial skills and shows that, consistent with this view, executives with higher general
(multipurpose) human capital received higher compensation and were also the most likely to switch
companies. Using panel data on the 500 largest firms in Germany over 1977-2009, Fabbri and Marin
(2011) show that domestic and (to a lesser extent) global competition for managers has contributed
significantly to the rise of executive pay in that country, particularly in the banking sector.
    Our theory is based on competition not simply bidding up the level of compensation at the top,
but also significantly altering its structure toward high-powered incentives, with a resulting shift
in the mix of tasks performed toward more easily quantifiable and short-term-oriented ones. This
seems to be precisely what occurred on Wall Street as market-based compensation spread from the
emerging alternative-assets industry to the rest of the financial world:

          “Talent quickly migrated from investment banks to hedge funds and private equity.
      Investment banks, accustomed to attracting the most-talented executives in the world
      and paying them handsomely, found themselves losing their best people (and their best
      MBA recruits) to higher-paid and, for many, more interesting jobs... Observing the re-
      markable compensation in alternative assets, sensing a significant business opportunity,
      and having to fight for talent with this emergent industry led banks to venture into
      proprietary activities in unprecedented ways. From 1998 to 2006 principal and pro-
      prietary trading at major investment banks grew from below 20% of revenues to 45%.
      In a 2006 Investment Dealers’ Digest article... one former Morgan Stanley executive
      said... that extravagant hedge fund compensation —widely envied on Wall Street, ac-
      cording to many bankers— was putting upward pressure on investment banking pay, and
      that some prop desks were even beginning to give traders "carry." Banks bought hedge
      funds and private equity funds and launched their own funds, creating new levels of risk
      within systemically important institutions and new conflicts of interest. By 2007 the
      transformation of Wall Street was complete. Faced with fierce new rivals for business
      and talent, investment banks turned into risk takers that compensated their best and
      brightest with contracts embodying the essence of financial-markets-based compensa-
      tion.” (Desai 2012, The Incentive Bubble).


found that half of the 44% productivity increase reaped when the company replaced the hourly wage system by a
piece rate was due to in- and out-selection eﬀects.


                                                     3
   Similar transformations have occurred in the medical world with the rise of for-profit hospital
chains: Gawande (2009) documents the escalation of compensation driven by the overuse of revenue-
generating tests and surgeries, with parallel declines in preventive care and coordination on cases
between specialists, increases in costs and worse patient outcomes.

1.2    Related Literature
• Adverse selection. Our paper relates to and extends several lines of work. The first one is that
on screening with exclusive contracts, initiated by Rothschild and Stiglitz’s (1976) seminal study
of a perfectly competitive (free entry) insurance market. Croker and Snow (1985) characterize
the Pareto frontier for the two types in the Rothschild-Stiglitz model and show how it ranges
from suboptimal insurance for the safer type (as in the original separating equilibrium) to over-
insurance for the risky type. Stewart (1994) and Chassagnon and Chiappori (1997) study perfectly
competitive insurance markets with adverse selection and moral hazard: agents can exert risk-
reducing eﬀorts, at some privately known cost. In equilibrium the better agents choose contracts
with higher deductibles, for which they substitute higher precautionary eﬀort.23 Moen and Rosen
(2005) consider a perfectly competitive labor market with adverse selection about workers’ eﬀort
cost function. As in Baker (1992), true output is mismeasured by the employer and subject to a
productivity shock, which agents learn prior to choosing eﬀort. Focusing on aﬃne contracts leads
to a separating equilibrium in which high types are overincentivized relative to the social optimum,
and thus bear too much risk; progressive taxes can ameliorate this distortion.4
    Our paper extends the literature by analyzing screening in a multitask environment and by
deriving equilibrium and welfare for the whole range of competition intensities between the polar
cases of monopsony and perfect competition, which most previous work has focused on comparing
to the first-best. A notable exception to the latter point is Villas-Boas and Schmidt-Mohr (1999),
who study Hotelling competition between banks that screen credit risks through costly collateral
requirements. As product diﬀerentiation declines lenders compete more aggressively for the most
profitable borrowers, and the resulting increase in screening costs (collateral posted) can be such
that overall welfare falls. Banks’ problem is one of pure adverse selection, whereas in our context
there is also (multidimensional) moral hazard. We thus analyze how the structure of wage contracts,
eﬀort allocations, earnings and welfare vary with market frictions. We characterize the socially
optimal degree of competitiveness and derive the model’s predictions for changes in total pay
inequality and its performance-based component, which accord well with the empirical evidence
discussed earlier.

   2
     Scheuer and Netzer (2010) contrast this beneficial incentive eﬀect of private insurance markets to a benevolent
government without commitment power, which would provide full insurance at the interim stage (once eﬀorts have
been chosen) and thereby destroy any ex-ante incentive for eﬀort.
   3
     Armstrong and Vickers (2001) and Rochet and Stole (2002) study price discrimination in private-value models
where, in contrast with the present work, principals do not directly care about agents’ types but are purely concerned
with rent extraction. Vega and Weyl (2012) study product design when consumer heterogeneity is of high dimension
relative to firms’ choice variables, which allows for both cream-skimming and rent-extraction to occur in equilibrium.
   4
     Allowing nonlinear contracts leads to a somewhat weaker result, namely that the first-best cannot be attained.



                                                          4
    Most recently, Bannier et al. (2013) study competition for risk-averse employees with diﬀerent
abilities between two vertically diﬀerentiated single-task firms. A worker’s output is the product of
his and the firm’s productivities, his eﬀort and a random shock. In equilibrium, the low-productivity
firm does not employ anyone, but its oﬀer defines workers’ reservation utilities. The degree of
competition is represented here by the relative productivity of the less eﬃcient firm; as in our
case, its impact on screening results in a hump-shaped profile for welfare. We focus on horizontal
firm diﬀerentiation and our multitask model incorporates distortions to eﬀort allocation (short-
termism, hidden risk, etc.), which can arise even absent risk-sharing concerns. Besides hurting
the firms these may also have important externalities on the rest of society, since what is hard
to observe by employers is a fortiori diﬃcult to monitor by regulators. We further analyze how
competition aﬀects the level and structure of earnings inequality and derive from these positive
results a simple test of whether it lies in the beneficial or harmful range. In the latter case, we also
study the regulation or taxation of bonuses and total pay.5

• Multitasking. From the multitask literature we borrow and build on the idea that incentivizing
easily measurable tasks can jeopardize the provision of eﬀort on less measurable ones (e.g. Holm-
ström and Milgrom 1991, Itoh 1991, Baker at al. 1994, Dewatripont et al. 1999, Fehr and Schmidt
2004). Somewhat surprisingly, the impact of competition on the multitasking problem has not
attracted much attention —a fortiori not in combination with adverse selection.6 As in earlier work,
employers in our model choose ( linear or nonlinear) compensation structures aiming to balance
incentives, but the desire to extract rents or the need to select the best employees lead them to oﬀer
socially distorted compensation schemes. In relatively competitive labor markets, in particular, a
firm raising its performance-based pay exerts a negative externality: it fails to internalize the fact
that competitors, in order to retain their own “talent”, will also have to distort their incentive
structure and eﬀort allocation, thereby reducing the total surplus generated by their workforce.
     Tymula (2012) studies a teamwork problem in which a worker’s output depends on both his own
selfish eﬀort and his partner’s helping eﬀort, each augmented by the respective agent’s productivity;
unlike here, there is no substitutability between eﬀorts. Both individual and team output are
observable, and thus rewarded by employers, which compete under free entry by each oﬀering a
single linear contract. The equilibrium is separating and characterized by assortative matching,
which prevents low types from free-riding on high ones. To achieve separation, high types are
overincentivized on both tasks relative to the first-best, so they work harder not only on their own
project but also on helping their teammate. By contrast, we predict underinvestment in the second

   5
      Stantcheva (2012) studies optimal income taxation when perfectly competitive firms use work hours to screen
for workers’ productivity. Welfare can then be higher when agents’ types are unknown to employers, as the need to
signal talent counteracts the Mirrleesian incentive to underproduce. The contrast in results arises from firms and
the state being able to observe labor inputs, whereas in our context only output is observable (were it measurable in
Stantcheva’s single-task model, screening would yield the first best).
    6
      Acemoglu et al. (2007) show how career concerns can lead workers to engage in excessive signaling to prospective
employers, by exerting eﬀort on both a productive task and an unproductive one that makes performance appear
better than it really is. Firms could temper career incentives by organizing production according to teamwork, which
generates coarser public signals of individual abilities, but the required commitment to team-based compensation
fails to be credible when individual performance can still be observed inside the partnership.


                                                          5
(less easily measurable) task at high enough levels of competition, even when it can be incentivized.
• Managerial compensation. While our paper is not specifically about executive pay, this is an
important application of the model. The literature on managerial compensation is usually seen as
organized along two contrasting lines (see, e.g., Frydman and Jenter (2010) for a recent survey). On
one hand is the view that high executive rewards reflect a high demand for rare skills (Rosen 1981)
and the eﬃcient workings of a competitive market allocating talent to where it is most productive,
for instance to manage larger firms (Gabaix and Landier 2008). Rising pay at the top is then
simply the appropriate price response to market trends favoring the best workers: skilled-biased
technical change, improvements in monitoring, growth in the size of firms, entry or decreases in
mobility costs.
     On the other side is the view that the level and structure of managerial compensation reflect
instead significant market failures. For instance, indolent or captured boards may grant top ex-
ecutives pay packages far in excess of their marginal product (Bertrand and Mullainathan 2001,
Bebchuk and Fried 2004). Alternatively, managers are given incentive schemes that do maximize
profits but impose significant negative externalities on the rest of society by inducing excessive short-
termism and risk-taking at the expense of consumers, depositors or taxpayers —public bailouts and
environmental cleanups, tax arbitrage, etc. (e.g., Bolton et al. 2006, Besley and Ghatak 2011). In
particular, private returns in the finance industry are often argued to exceed social returns (Baumol
1990, Philippon and Reshef 2012).
     Our paper takes on board the first view’s premise that pay levels and diﬀerentials largely reflect
market returns to both talent and measured performance, magnified in recent decades by technical
change and increased mobility. At the same time, and closer in that to the second view, we show
that this very same escalation of performance-based pay can be the source of severe distortions and
long-run welfare losses in the sectors where it occurs —even absent any externalities on the rest of
society, and a fortiori in their presence.
     The idea that labor market pressure will force firms to alter the structure of contracts they oﬀer
to managers is shared with a few other recent papers.7 In Marin and Verdier (2009), international
trade integration leads new entrants to compete with incumbents for managerial talent required to
operate a firm; within each firm principals also find it increasingly optimal to delegate decision-
making to middle-management, further raising the demand for skilled labor. The papers’ focus and
mechanism are very diﬀerent from ours, however. Agents receive no monetary incentives but derive
private benefits from delegation, and those rents are non-monotonic with respect to competition.
Furthermore, equilibrium changes in organizational design and activities performed tend to be ef-
ficient responses to relative factor endowments. In Acharya et al. (2011), firms can use two types
of incentives: a reward in case of success, and making it hard to resist a takeover —with its ensuing
loss of private benefits— in case of failure (“strong governance”). Managers with high skills (which
are observable) are in short supply, so in equilibrium they appropriate all the rents they generate.

  7
    There is also an earlier literature examining the (generally ambiguous) eﬀects of product market competition
on managerial incentives and slack, whether through information revelation (Holmström 1982, Nalebuﬀ and Stglitz
1983) or demand elasticities and the level of profits (Schmidt 1997, Raith 2003).


                                                       6
This forces their employers to renounce the threat of takeovers (“weak governance”), whereas firms
employing the more abundant low-skill managers can still avail themselves of it. In contrast to our
model, competition weakens here certain forms of incentives (dismissal for failure) while strength-
ening others (reward for success). Most importantly, firms’ governance choices, and therefore also
the competitiveness of the labor market, have no allocative impact: they only redistribute a fixed
surplus between managers, shareholders and potential raiders.8 In Acharya et al. (2012), labor
market competition interferes with the process of learning about agents’ abilities. A manager can
invest in a safe asset or in a risky one whose return depends on his ability but will be observable
(to the firm and others) only if he remains in charge of it, with the same employer, for two periods.
There are no bonuses, so incentives are implicit (career concern) ones. Absent mobility, firms can
commit ex-ante to paying everyone the same lifetime wage, thus insuring managers against the risk
of being of low ability; this also makes it optimal to quickly find out one’s talent, so as to choose
the type of project one is better suited to. With free mobility, managers who stayed in a firm
long enough to be revealed as talented would be bid away by competitors; such insurance is thus
precluded, as in Harris and Holmström (1982). Instead, during the early stages of their careers
everyone moves to a diﬀerent firm in every period so as to delay learning, and in these short-term
jobs all managers ineﬃciently select the risky investment.
• Intrinsic motivation. Finally, a recent literature incorporates considerations of intrinsic motiva-
tion and crowding out (Bénabou and Tirole 2003, 2006) into compensation design and labor-market
sorting. Besley and Ghatak (2005, 2006) find conditions under which agents who derive private
benefits from working in mission-oriented sectors will match assortatively with such firms, where
they receive low pay but exert substantial eﬀort. Focusing on civil-service jobs, Prendergast (2007)
shows how it can be optimal to select employees who are either in empathy with their “clients”
(teachers, social workers, firefighters) or somewhat hostile to them (police oﬃcers, tax or customs
inspectors). When the state has imperfect information about agent’s types, however, it is gen-
erally not feasible to induce proper self-selection into jobs. Most closely related to our work in
this literature is the multitask model of Kosfeld and von Siemens (2011), in which workers diﬀer
in their social preferences rather than productivity: some are purely self-interested, others con-
ditional cooperators. Competition among employers leads to agents’ sorting themselves between
“selfish jobs”, which involve high bonuses but no cooperation among coworkers and thus attract
only selfish types, and “cooperative jobs” characterized by muted incentives and cooperative be-
havior, which are populated by conditional cooperators. Notably, positive profits emerge despite
perfect competition. Because the source of heterogeneity is diﬀerent from the main one emphasized
in our paper, it is not surprising that the issue of excessive incentive pay does not arise in theirs.

   8
     In Thanassoulis (2013), competition also works by raising managerial rents (there is no ex-ante adverse selection,
hence no designing of contracts to attract or retain talent): the disutility of eﬀort increases through an income eﬀect,
requiring stronger incentives. If deferred compensation is more expensive to provide than short-term bonuses due to
managers’ impatience, firms will use more of the latter, resulting in excessively myopic decisions.




                                                           7
2       Model
2.1     Agents
• Preferences. A unit continuum of agents (workers) engage in two activities  and , exerting
eﬀorts ( ) ∈ R2+ respectively:
    — Activity  is one in which individual contributions are not (easily) measurable and thus
cannot be part of a formal compensation scheme: long-term investments enhancing the firm’s
value, avoiding excessive risks and liabilities, cooperation, teamwork , etc. An agent’s contribution
to  is then driven entirely by his intrinsic motivation, , linear in the eﬀort  exerted in this
task. In addition to a genuine preference to “do the right thing” (e.g., an aversion to ripping
oﬀ shareholders or customers, selling harmful products, teaching shoddily, etc.),  can also reflect
social and self-image concerns such as fear of stigma, or an executive’s concern for his “legacy”.9
In some contexts it can also capture outside incentives not controlled by the firm, such as potential
legal liability.
    — Activity  by contrast, is measurable and therefore contractible: individual output, sales,
short-term revenue, etc. When exerting eﬀort  a worker’s productivity is  + , where  is a talent
parameter, privately known to each agent.10
    The total eﬀort cost, ( ) is strictly increasing and strictly convex in ( ) with   0
unless otherwise noted, meaning that the two activities are substitutes. A particularly convenient
specification is the quadratic one, ( ) = 2 2 + 2 2 +  where 0    1 as it allows for
simple and explicit analytical solutions to the whole model.11 These are provided in Appendix
 whereas in the text we shall maintain a general cost function, except where needed to obtain
further results.
    We assume an aﬃne compensation scheme with incentive power or bonus rate  and fixed wage
 so that total compensation is ( + ) + 12 Agents have quasi-linear preferences

                                  ( ;   ) =  + ( + )  +  − ( )                                     (1)

• Types. To emphasize the roles of heterogeneity in  and , respectively, we shall focus on two polar
cases. Here and throughout Section 3, agents diﬀer only in their productivities. Thus  ∈ {  ,  }

    9
     Such preferences leading agents to provide some level of unrewarded eﬀort were part of Milgrom and Holmström’s
original multitasking model (1991, Section 3). They make the analysis most tractable, but Section 5 derives similar
results when performance in both tasks is incentivized but  is measured with more noise than  (or/and less
discriminating of worker talent). For recent analyzes of intrinsic motivation and social norms see, e.g., Bénabou and
Tirole (2003, 2006) and Besley and Ghatak (2005, 2006). In the context of firms, see Akerlof and Kranton (2005) for
evidence and Ramalingam and Rauh (2010) for a model of investment in employees’ loyalty and identification.
  10
     The additive form of talent heterogeneity is chosen for analytical simplicity, as it implies that the first best power
of incentive is type-independent. Qualitatively similar results would obtain with the multiplicative form  as long
as type heterogeneity in  is not so high that the first-best set of contracts becomes incentive-compatible.
  11
      The model also works when the two tasks are complements   0 (e.g., −1    0) but the results in this
case are less interesting, e.g., competition is now, predictably, always more eﬃcient than monopsony.
  12
     Unrestricted nonlinear schemes (as in Laﬀont and Tirole 1986) lead to very similar results; see Appendix B and
the propositions therein.



                                                            8
with respective probabilities (  1 −  =  ) and ∆ ≡  −   0 In Section 6, conversely, we
shall consider agents who diﬀer only in their intrinsic motivations  for task 
• Eﬀort allocation. When facing compensation scheme ( ), the agent chooses eﬀorts () and
() so as to solve
                              max { + ( + )  +  − ( )}                          (2)
                                      ()

leading to the first-order conditions  =   =  Our assumptions on the cost function
imply that increasing the power of the incentive scheme raises eﬀort in the measured task and
decreases it in the unobserved one:
                                                   
                                              0       
                                                   
It will prove convenient to decompose the agent’s utility into an “allocative” term, () which
depends on the endogenous eﬀorts, and a “redistributive” one,  + , which does not:

                              (;  ) ≡  (() ();   ) = () +  +                                (3)

where
                                    () ≡ () + () − (() ())                                         (4)

Note that 0 () = () and  (;  ) =  + ()

• Outside opportunities. We assume that any agent can obtain a reservation utility  , so that
employers must respect the participation constraint:

                                         (;  ) = () +  +  ≥                                           (5)

The type-independence of the outside option is a polar case that will help highlight the eﬀects of
competition inside the labor market. Thus, under monopsony every one has reservation utility equal
to ̄ , whereas with competition reservation utilities become endogenous and type-dependent.13

2.2     Firm(s)
A worker of ability  exerting eﬀorts ( ) generates a gross revenue  + ( + ) for his employer.
Employing such an agent under contract ( ) thus results in a net profit of

                                       Π(  ) = () + ( − )  −                                          (6)

where
                                         () ≡ () + ( − ) ()                                             (7)

represents the allocative component and ( − ) −  a purely redistributive one.

  13
     We make the usual assumption that when a worker is indiﬀerent between an employer’s oﬀer and his reservation
utility he chooses the former. We also assume that ̄ is high enough that  ≥ 0 in equilbrium (under any degree of
competition), but not so large that hiring some worker type is unprofitable (see Appendix D for the exact conditions).


                                                          9
2.3     Social Welfare
In order to better highlight the mechanism at work in the model, we take as our measure of social
welfare the sum of workers’ and employers’ payoﬀs, thus abstracting from any externalities on the
rest of society.14 Again, it will prove convenient to decompose it into an allocative part, (), and
a surplus, , that is independent of the compensation scheme (the transfer ( + ) +  nets out):

                           ( ) ≡  (() ();   ) + Π(  ) = () +                                    (8)

where
                        () ≡ () + () = ( + ) () + () − (() ())                                       (9)

Using the envelope theorem for the worker, 0 () = () we have:

                                          0 () = 0 () + ( − ) 0 ()                                           (10)

We take  to be strictly concave,15 with a maximum at ∗   given by

                                      0 (∗ ) = 0 ( ∗ ) + ( − ∗ ) 0 ( ∗ ) = 0                                  (11)

and generating enough surplus that even low types can be profitably employed, namely

                                                  (∗ ) +    ̄                                                  (12)

In cases where (underprovision of) the “ethical” activity  also has spillovers on the rest of society
—be they technological (pollution), pecuniary (imperfect competition in the product market) or
fiscal (cost of government bailouts, taxes or subsidies)— total social welfare becomes () +  · (),
where  is the per-unit externality. Clearly, this will only strengthen our main results about the
competitive overincentivization of the other activity, 


3     Competing for Talent
Throughout most of the paper (except for Section 6),  is known while  ∈ {   } is private
information, with mean  ≡   +   16 We first consider the polar cases of monopsony and
perfect competition, which make most salient the basic forces at play, then study the full spectrum

  14
     For instance, we can think of firms’ output as being sold on a perfectly competitive product market. It is,
however, very easy to incorporate social spillovers into the analysis, as we explain below.
  15
     Such is the case, in particular, with quadratic costs; see Appendix 
  16
     Asymmetric information about ability remains a concern even in dynamic settings where performance generates
ex-post signals about an agent’s type. First, such signals may be diﬃcult to accurately observe for employers other
than the current one, especially given the multi-task nature of production. Second, many factors can cause  to
vary unpredictably over the life-cycle: age (which aﬀect’s people’s abilities and preferences heterogeneously), health
shocks, private life issues, news interests and priorities, etc. Finally, diﬀerent (imperfectly correlated) sets of abilities
typically become relevant at diﬀerent stages of a career —e.g., being a good trader or analyst, devising new securities,
bringing in clients, closing deals, managing a division, running and growing an international company, etc.


                                                             10
of imperfect competition. Before proceeding, it is worth noting that if agents’ types  =   were
observable, the only impact of market structure would be on the fixed wages   whereas incentives
would always remain at the eﬃcient level,  =  ∗ 

3.1    Monopsony Employer
A monopsonist (or set of colluding firms) selects a menu of contracts (   ) aimed at type  ∈
{ }. We assume that it wants to attract both types, which, as we will show, is equivalent to 
exceeding some threshold. The firm thus maximizes expected profit
                                                  (                                            )
                                                      P
                                    max                       [( ) + ( −  ) −  ]
                              {(   )}=      =


subject to the incentive constraints

                        ( ) +   +  ≥ ( ) +   +  for all   ∈ { }                         (13)

and the low-productivity type’s participation constraint

                                                 ( ) +   +  ≥                                        (14)

This program is familiar from the contracting literature. First, incentive constraints, when added
up, yield ( −  )( −  ) ≥ 0 so the power of the incentive scheme must be non-decreasing in type
—a more productive agent must receive a higher fraction of his measured output. Second, the low
type’s participation constraint is binding, and the high type’s rent above  is given by the extra
utility obtained by mimicking the low type: (∆)  Rewriting profits, the monopsonist solves:
                                             (                                                     )
                                                 P
                              max                      [( ) +  ] −  −  (∆) 
                         {(   )}=   =

           =  ∗ (no distortion at the top) and17
yielding 

                                                      
                                     0 ( ) =         ∆ implying   ∗                                  (15)
                                                      

The principal reduces the power of the low-type’s incentive scheme, so as to limit the high-type’s
rent. It is optimal for the firm to hire both types if and only if
                                         £                 ¤
                                        ( ) +  −  ≥   ∆                                        (16)

meaning that the profits earned on low types exceed the rents abandoned to high types. By (15),
the diﬀerence of the left- and right-hand sides is increasing in   so the condition is equivalent to

  17
    To exclude uninteresting corner solutions we shall assume that 0 (0)   ∆ . Since later on we shall impose
various other upper bounds on   this poses no problem.


                                                                11
 ≥   where   is defined by equality in (16).

Proposition 1 (monopsony) Let (16) hold, so that the monopsonist wants to employ both types.
       =  ∗ and     ∗ is given by
Then             

                                                                
                                                  0 ( ) =      ∆
                                                                

with corresponding fixed payments    = ̄ +   ∆ − ( ∗ ) −   ∗ and   = ̄ − (  ) −    
                                                                                               
The resulting welfare loss is equal to

                                             =  [( ∗ ) − ( )]                                           (17)

It increases with ∆, but need not be monotonic in  or 

    Note that since total social welfare is  [( ) +  ] +  [( ) +  ]  a mean-preserving
increase in the distribution of  always reduces it, by worsening the informational asymmetry. In
contrast, an increase in  (or a decrease in ) has two opposing eﬀects on  : (i) it makes any
given amount of underincentivization on the  task less costly, as the alternative task  is now
more valuable; (ii) the eﬃcient bonus rate  ∗ given to the high types declines, and to preserve
incentive compatibility so must   worsening low types’ underincentivization. In the quadratic
case the two eﬀects cancel out, as shown in Appendix A.

3.2    Perfect Competition in the Labor Market
A large number of firms now compete for workers, each one oﬀering an incentive-compatible menu
of contracts. We first look for a separating competitive allocation, defined as one in which: (i)
each worker type chooses a diﬀerent contract, respectively (   ) and (   ) for  =  
with resulting utilities  and  ; (ii) each of these two contracts makes zero profits, implying in
particular the absence of any cross-subsidy.18 Then, in a second stage, we investigate the conditions
under which this allocation is indeed an equilibrium, and even the unique one.
    In a separating competitive equilibrium, any contract that operates must make zero profit:

                          Π(     ) = 0 ⇐⇒ ( ) + ( −  )  =                                       (18)
                           Π(     ) = 0 ⇐⇒ ( ) + ( −  )  =                                      (19)

which pins down  and  . Furthermore, a simple Bertrand-like argument implies that the low
type must receive his symmetric-information eﬃcient allocation,19

  18
      One can then can indiﬀerently think of each firm oﬀering a menu and employing both types of workers, or of
diﬀerent firms specializing in a single type by oﬀering a unique contract.
   19
      Absent cross-subsidies, the low type cannot receive more than the total surplus ( ∗ ) +   he generates under
symmetric information, or else his employer would make a negative profit. Were he to receive less, conversely, another
firm could attract him by oﬀering (∗   = 
                                                 − ) for  small, leading to a profit  on this type (and an even larger
one on any high type who also chose this contract). Low types must thus be oﬀered utility equal to ( ∗ ) +  
which only their symmetric-information eﬃcient allocation achieves.


                                                           12
                                     = ∗ and  = (∗ ) + ( −  ∗ ) 

He should then not benefit from mimicking the high type, nor vice-versa,


                     (∗ ) +  ≥ ( ) +   +  = ( ) +  −  ∆                                      (20)
                    ( ) +         ≥ ( ∗ ) +  + ∗ ∆                                                     (21)

implying in particular that  ≥  ∗  Among all such contracts, the most attractive to the high
types is the one involving minimal distortion, namely such that (20) is an equality:

                                             
                                          (                    
                                               ) ≡ (∗ ) − ( −  ) ∆                                            (22)

By strict concavity of  this equation has a unique solution    to the right of  ∗  satisfying

∗     The inequality in (21) is then strict, meaning that only the low type’s incentive

constraint is binding. Note that, as illustrated in Figure I, this is exactly the reverse of what
occurred under monopsony.20




                     Figure I: Distortions under monopsony and perfect competition


• Existence and uniqueness. When is this least-cost separating (LCS) allocation indeed an equilib-
rium, or the unique equilibrium of the competitive-oﬀer game? The answer, which is reminiscent
of Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976), hinges on whether or not a firm could profitably deviate to a
contract that achieves greater total surplus by using a cross-subsidy from high to low types to
ensure incentive compatibility.



  20
     To build intuition for this reversal, one can look at how the symmetric-information outcome fails incentive
compatibility. Under monopsony no employee obtains any rent, so type ’s symmetric information contract is:
( =  ∗   = ̄ − ( ∗ ) + (( ∗ ) ( ∗ )) − [ + ( ∗ )] ∗ ) If it were still oﬀered under asymmetric infor-
mation, the high type could then obtain a positive rent (∆) ∗ by choosing ( ∗   ); we thus expect the down-
ward incentive constraint to bind. Under perfect competition, the symmetric-information contract for type  is
( =  ∗   = ( ∗ ) + ( −  ∗ ))  If it prevailed under asymmetric information, the low type could obtain extra
utility ∆ by choosing (   ) We thus now expect the upward incentive constraint to bind.


                                                            13
Definition 1 An incentive-compatible allocation {(∗  ∗ )}= is interim eﬃcient if there exists
no other incentive-compatible {(   )}= that
(i) Pareto dominates it:  ≥  ∗   ≥  ∗  with at least one strict inequality.
                                              
(ii) Makes the employer break even on average: Σ  [( ) +   −  ] ≥ 0


    For the LCS allocation to be an equilibrium, it must be interim eﬃcient. Otherwise, there is
another menu of contracts that Pareto dominates it, which one can always slightly modify (while
preserving incentive-compatibility) so that both types of workers and the employer share in the
overall gain; oﬀering such a menu then yields strictly positive profits. The converse result is also
true: under interim eﬃciency there can clearly be no positive-profit deviation that attracts both
types of agents, and by a similar type of “small redistribution” argument one can also exclude those
that attract a single type. These claims are formally proved in the appendix, where we also show
that when the LCS allocation is interim eﬃcient, it is in fact the unique equilibrium. Furthermore,
we identify a simple condition for this to be case:

Lemma 1 The least-cost separating allocation is interim eﬃcient if and only if

                                               
                                        0 ( ) +  ∆ ≥ 0                                  (23)

This condition holds whenever  exceeds some threshold ̃  1

     The intuition is as follows. At the LCS allocation, we saw that the binding incentive constraint
is the low type’s:  =    −   ∆ Consider now an employer who slightly reduces the power of
                                  
the high type’s incentive scheme,  = − while using lump-sum transfers  = (( ) +  )
+2 to slightly more than compensate them for the reduction in incentive pay, and  = ∆ + 2
to preserve incentive compatibility. Such a deviation attracts both types ( =  = 2 , since
0 () = ()) and its first-order impact on profits is

                    £¡ 0          ¢         ¤          £                   ¤
                                                              
                       ( ) −   −  −   =  0 ( ) +  ∆ (−)

 Under (23) this net eﬀect is strictly negative, hence the deviation unprofitable. When (23) fails,
conversely, the increase in surplus generated by the more eﬃcient eﬀort allocation of the high types
is suﬃcient to make the firm and all its employees strictly better oﬀ. A higher  = 1 −  means
fewer high types to generate such a surplus and more low types to whom rents (cross-subsidies)
must be given to maintain incentive compatibility, thus making (23) more likely to hold.
   We can now state this section’s main results.

Proposition 2 (perfect competition) Let  ≥ ̃  The unique competitive equilibrium involves
two separating contracts, both resulting in zero profit:

  1. Low-productivity workers get (∗   ) where  is given by (19).



                                                  14
                                       ) where   is given by (18) and     ∗ by
   2. High-productivity ones get (                                        

                                                            
                                               ( ∗ ) − (           
                                                              ) = ( −  )∆


   3. The eﬃciency loss relative to the social optimum is

                                       =  [( ∗ ) − (
                                                                        
                                                              )] = ( −  )  ∆                                      (24)


       It increases with ∆ and , but need not be monotonic in 

   These results confirm and formalize the initial intuition that competition for talent will result in
an overincentivization of higher-ability types. As shown on Figure I, this is the opposite distortion
from that of the monopsony case, which featured underincentivization of low-ability types. When
the degree of competition is allowed to vary continuously (Section 3.4), we therefore expect that
there will be a critical point at which the nature of the distortion (reflecting which incentive
constraint is binding) tips from one case to the other.
• Skill-biased technical change. A higher  exacerbates the competition for talented types, result-
                             that makes their performance-based pay rise more than proportionately
ing in a higher bonus rate 
with their productivity   This is in line with Lemieux et al.’s (2009)) findings about the con-
tribution of performance pay to rising earnings inequality. This equilibrium market response to
technical or human-capital change is ineﬃcient, however, as it worsens the underprovision of long-
term investments and other voluntary eﬀorts inside firms, thereby reducing the social value of the
productivity increase. For a mean-preserving spread in the distribution of ’s only the deadweight
loss remains, so overall social welfare declines.
   What happens when the LCS allocation is not interim eﬃcient, that is, when   ̃ ? We saw
that it is then not an equilibrium, since there exist profitable deviations to incentive-compatible
contracts (involving cross-subsidies) that Pareto-dominate it. We also show in the appendix that
no other pure-strategy allocation is immune to deviations, a situation that closely parallels the
standard Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) problem: the only equilibria are in mixed strategy.21 Since
such an outcome is not really plausible as a stable labor-market outcome, we assume from here on

                                                 ≥ max{̃   } ≡ ∗                                               (25)

  21
     An alternative approach is to assume that it is workers who make take-it-or-leave oﬀers, instead of a competitive
industry making oﬀers to them. From Maskin and Tirole (1992) we know that for  ≥ ̃  the unique equilibrium of
the resulting informed-principal game is the LCS allocation, so the result is the same as here with competitive oﬀers.
By contrast, for  ≥ ̃  the set of equilibrium interim utilities is the set of feasible utilities (incentive compatible and
satisfying budget balance in expectation) that Pareto dominate ( ,        
                                                                                 ). A second alternative is to use a diﬀerent
equilibrium concept from the competitive screening literature, as in Scheuer and Netzer (2010); again, this has no
bearing on the region where the separating equilibrium exists. A third alternative would be to introduce search, free
entry by principals and contract posting as in Guerrieri et al. (2010). Self-selection then makes type proportions
among searchers in the market endogenous, in such a way that a separating equilibrium always exists.




                                                              15
3.3    Welfare: Monopsony versus Perfect Competition
• Single task ( = 0). As a benchmark, it is useful to recall that competition is always socially
optimal with a single task. The competitive outcome is then the single contract   =  ∗ =    =
0; agents of either type are residual claimants for their production and therefore choose the eﬃcient
eﬀort allocation.22 Monopsony, by contrast, leads to a downward distortion in the power of the
incentive scheme. Hence competition is always strictly welfare superior.

• Multitasking. From (17) and (22),    is larger if and only if

                                   [( ∗ ) − ( )]   [( ∗ ) − (
                                                                            
                                                                              )]                                  (26)

Consider first the role of labor force composition. As seen from (15) and (22), the monopsony
incentive distortion  ∗ −  is increasing with   (limiting the high types’s rents becomes
more important), whereas the competitive one,      −  ∗ is independent of it (being determined by

an incentive constraint across types). For small      is thus of order  (  )2  =
   so (26) holds provided  is high enough. With quadratic costs, we obtain an exact threshold
that brings to light the role of the other forces at play.

Proposition 3 (welfare) Let ( ) = 2 2 + 2 2 +  Social welfare is lower under compe-
tition than under monopsony if and only if  ≥ ∗ and
                                               r          µ            ¶µ        ¶
                                                                       
                                           +                                                                     (27)
                                       2                  1 − 2        ∆

    The underlying intuitions are quite general.23 First, competition entails a larger eﬃciency loss
when the unrewarded task (long-run investments, cooperation, avoidance of excessive risks, etc.)
is important enough and the two types of eﬀort suﬃciently substitutable. If they are comple-
ments (  0) in contrast, competition is always eﬃciency-promoting. Second, the productivity
diﬀerential ∆ scales the severity of the asymmetric-information problem that underlies both the
monopsony and the competitive distortions. A monopsonistic firm optimally trades oﬀ total surplus
versus rent-extraction, so (by the envelope theorem) a small ∆ has only a second-order eﬀect on
overall eﬃciency. Under competition the eﬀect is first-order, because a firm raising its  does not
internalize the deterioration in the workforce quality it inflicts on its competitors —or, equivalently,
the fact that in order to retain their “talent” they will also have to distort incentives and the
allocation of eﬀort. This intuition explains why (27) is more likely to hold when ∆ decreases.24

  22
      Similar results holds if   0 but  = 0 : since  ≡ 0 for all  the socially optimal bonus rate is  ∗ =  even
though it results in an ineﬃcient eﬀort allocation. This is clearly also the competitive outcome. .
   23
      In particular, the model’s solution with quadratic costs (given in Appendix A) also correspond to Taylor approx-
imations of the more general case when ∆ is small, provided 1(1 −  2 ) is replaced everywhere by −00 ( ∗ )
   24
      As shown in Appendix C, for small ∆ the
                                             √ lower bound ̃ above which (23) holds (and the competitive equilibrium
thus exists) is such that 1 − ̃ is of order ∆ Thus, to rigorously apply the above reasoning involving first- versus
second-order losses for small ∆ one needs to also let  become small. This further reduces  ∗ −    
                                                                                                           while leaving
                                                                                      −32
        ∗                                              
 −  unchanged. This, in turn, further raises    making it of order (∆)             rather than (∆)−1 



                                                          16
3.4    Imperfect Competition
To understand more generally how the intensity of labor market competition aﬀects the equilibrium
structure of wages, workers’ task allocation, firms’ profits and social welfare, we now develop a
variant of the Hotelling model in which competitiveness can be appropriately parametrized.
    As illustrated in Figure II, a unit continuum of workers is uniformly distributed along the unit
interval,  ∈ [0 1]  Two firms,  = 0 1 are located respectively at the left and right extremities
and recruit them to produce, with the same production function as before. When a worker located
at  chooses to work for Firm 0 (resp., 1), he incurs a cost equal to the distance  (resp., (1 − ))
that he must travel. We assume that  and  are independent and that a worker’s position is not
observable by employers, who therefore cannot condition contracts on this characteristic.
    In the standard Hotelling model, agents also have an outside option (e.g., staying put) that yields
a fixed level of utility, ̄  This implies, however, that a change in  aﬀects not only competitiveness
within the market (firm 1 vs. 2) but also, mechanically, that of the outside option —formally,
agents’ participation constraints. To isolate the pure competitiveness of the market from that of
other activities, we introduce an intuitive but novel modeling device, ensuring in particular that
the market is always fully covered.




                          Figure II: Hotelling with co-located outside options

• Co-located outside option. Instead of receiving the outside option ̄ for free, agents must also
“go and get it” at either the end of the unit interval, which involves paying the same cost  or
(1 − ) as if they chose Firm 0 or Firm 1 respectively. One can think of two business districts,
each containing both a multitask firm of the type studied here and a competitive fringe or informal
sector in which all agents have productivity ̄ 25
    Without loss of generality, we can assume that each firm  = 0 1 oﬀers an incentive-compatible
menu of compensation schemes {   }=  in which workers who opt for this employer self-select.
Let  denote the utility provided by firm  to type  :

                                           ≡ ( ) +   +                                      (28)

A worker of type  located at  will choose firm  = 0 (say) if and only if
                                       n                                    o
                       −  ≥ max ̄ −  ̄ − (1 − )  − (1 − )                                (29)

  25
     Alternatively, each agent could produce ̄ “at home” but then have to travel (or adapt his human capital) to
one or the other marketplace to sell his output.


                                                       17
The first inequality reduces to  ≥ ̄ : a firm must at least match its local outside option. If both
attract -type workers,  ≥ ̄ as well, so the third inequality makes the second one redundant.
     We shall focus the analysis on the (unique) symmetric equilibrium, in which firms attracts
half of the total labor force. To simplify the exposition, we shall take it here as given that: (i)
each firm prefers to employ positive measures of both types of workers than to exclude either one;
(ii) conversely, neither firm wants to “corner” the market on any type of worker, i.e. move the
corresponding cutoﬀ value of  all the way to 0 or 1 In Appendix D we show that neither exclusion
nor cornering can be part of a best response by a firm to its competitor playing the strategy
characterized in Proposition 4 below, as long as

                                                 ≥ ̄                                           (30)

where ̄ ∈ [∗  1) is another cutoﬀ independent of  Assuming this condition from here on, we can
                    ¡        ¢
focus on utilities    resulting in interior cutoﬀs, so that firm ’s share of workers of type  is

                                        ³         ´  −  + 
                                         =      
                                                                                                   (31)
                                                        2
The firm then chooses (       ) to solve the program:
       n                                                                              o
                  
    max  ( −  + )[( ) +   −  ] +  ( −  + )[( ) +   −  ]              (32)

subject to the constraints (with Lagrange multipliers in parentheses):
                                       ≥  +  ∆           ( )                               (33)
                                    ≥  −  ∆              ( )                               (34)
                                    ≥ ̄                       ()                                (35)

To shorten the notation, let  ≡ ( ) +   −  denote the firm’s margin on type  =   The
first-order conditions, together with the requirement that  =  in a symmetric equilibrium, are:

                                      ( − ) +  −  = 0                                      (36)
                                   ( − ) +  −  +  = 0                                     (37)
                                           0 ( ) +  ∆ = 0                                  (38)
                                               0
                                            ( ) −  ∆ = 0                                  (39)

Note that  and  cannot both be strictly positive: otherwise (33) and (34) would bind, hence
 =   rendering (38)-(39) mutually incompatible. This suggests that only one or the other
incentive constraint will typically bind at a given point.
• Constructing the equilibrium: key intuitions. Solving the above problem over all values of  is
quite complicated, so we shall focus here on the underlying intuitions. The solution to (33)-(39) is
formally derived in Appendix C; because the objective function (32) is not concave on the relevant
space for (       ) Appendix D then provides a constructive proof that this allocation is

                                                   18
indeed the global optimum. These and other technical complexities (exclusion, cornering) are the
reasons why we confine our analysis to the symmetric separating equilibrium.
    (a) For large  the equilibrium should resemble the monopsonistic one: the main concern is
limiting high types’ rent, so firms distort    ∗ =  to make imitating low types unattractive.
Conversely, for small  the equilibrium should resemble perfect competition: the main concern is
attracting the  types, leading employers to oﬀer them high-powered incentives,    ∗ =  
    (b) As  declines over the whole real line, the high types’ responsiveness to higher oﬀered utility
 rises, so firms are forced to leave them more rent. Since that rent is either  ∆ or  ∆
(depending on which of the above two concerns dominates, i.e. on which types’ incentive constraint
is binding),  and  should both be nonincreasing in 
    (c) Firms 0 and 1 are always actively competing for the high types. If  is low enough, they also
compete for  types, oﬀering them a surplus above their outside option:   ̄  At the threshold
1 below which  starts exceeding ̄   has a convex kink: since the purpose of keeping  above
∗ is to maintain a gap  −  =  ∆ just suﬃcient to dissuade low types from imitating high
ones, as  begins to rise above ̄  the rate of increase in  can be smaller.
    These intuitions translate into a characterization of the equilibrium in terms of three regions,
illustrated in Figure III and formally stated in Proposition 4 below.26




                      Figure III: equilibrium incentives under imperfect competition


Proposition 4 (imperfect competition) Let  ≥ ̄  There exist unique thresholds 1  0 and
2  1 such that, in the unique symmetric market equilibrium:

  1. Region I (strong competition): for all   1 bonuses are  = ∗  ̂ () strictly decreasing

     in  starting from ̂ (0) =    The low type’s participation constraint is not binding, 
                                                                                                     
      ̄  while his incentive constraint is:  −  = ̂ ()∆


 26
      With quadratic costs one can show (see Appendix A) that each of the curves is convex, as drawn in the figure.


                                                         19
  2. Region II (medium competition): for all  ∈ [ 1  2 ) bonuses are  =  ∗  ̂        () with

        ()  ̂  () except at  and strictly decreasing in  The low type’s participation constraint
     ̂                           1
     is binding,  = ̄  and so is his incentive constraint:  −  = ̂      ()∆


  3. Region III (weak competition): for all  ≥ 2  bonuses are  = ̂ ()  ∗ =   with ̂ ()
     strictly decreasing in  and lim ̂ () =   The low type’s participation and the high type’s
                                   →+∞
     incentive constraints are binding :  = ̄   −  = ̂ ()∆

• Welfare. For each value of , either  or  is equal to the (common) first-best value  ∗  while
the other bonus rate, which creates the distortion, is strictly decreasing in  Recalling from (8)-(9)
that  =  ( ) +  ( ) +  ̄ we thus have, as illustrated on Figure IV:

Proposition 5 (optimal degree of competition) Social welfare is hill-shaped as a function of
the degree of competition in the labor market, reaching the first-best at 2 = ( ∗ )+ (−∗ )+ 
where  =  ∗ = 




                              Figure IV: competition and social welfare


    Note that we do not subtract from  the total mobility cost 4 incurred by agents (equivalently,
we add it to their baseline utility). This is consistent with using  as a measure of pure market
competitiveness, without introducing an additional wealth eﬀect. In particular, it is required to
yield back the monopsony levels of utility as  → +∞ One can think of  as a tax on mobility
rebated to agents, or as the profits of a monopolistic transportation or human-capital-adaptation
sector with zero marginal cost, engaged in limit pricing against a competitive fringe with marginal
cost  Alternatively, in contexts where variations in  also involve a net resource cost, one could
subtract it from social welfare (as in Villas-Boas and Schmidt-Mohr 1999). In Appendix A we show
that increases in  can raise aggregate welfare even under this more demanding definition.
    We next examine how the gains and losses in total welfare (under either definition) are distrib-
uted among the diﬀerent actors in the market.




                                                   20
Proposition 6 (individual welfare and firm profits) As the labor market becomes more com-
petitive ( declines), both  and  increase (weakly for the latter), but inequality in workers’
utilities,  −  always strictly increases; firms’ total profits strictly decline.

     In Regions III and II,  = ̄  In Region I,  is decreasing in , as we show in the appendix.
Since ( −  ) ∆ is equal to ̂ () over Regions I and II and to ̂ () over Region III, it follows
directly from Proposition 4 that   ≤  ( −  )   0 As to profits, they must clearly
fall as  declines over Regions II and I, since overall surplus is shrinking but all workers are gaining.
In Region III, as ̂ () rises firms reap some of the eﬃciency gains from low-type agent’s more
eﬃcient eﬀort allocation, but the rents they must leave to high types increase even faster (as shown
in the appendix), so total profits decline here as well.

• Income inequality. Let us now examine the eﬀects of a more competitive labor market on earnings,
which is what is measured in practice. While we analyze these comparative statics over all  ∈ R+
the empirically relevant range for most sectors in a modern market economy is that of medium to
high mobility, namely Regions I and II in Figure III. Indeed, this is where firms are more concerned
with retaining and bidding away from each other the workers of high ability who can easily switch
( close to 12) than with exploiting their more “captive” local markets (forcing down the rents of
those with  close to 0 or 1) We compare how the two types of workers  =   fare in terms of
total earnings  ≡ [( ) +  ]  +   as well as the separate contributions of performance-based
and fixed pay.

Proposition 7 (income inequality) Let  ≥ ̄  As the labor market becomes more competitive
( declines), both  and  increase (weakly for the latter). Furthermore,

  1. Over Regions I and II (medium and high competition), inequality in total pay  −  rises,
     as does its performance-based component. Inequality in fixed wages declines, so changes in
     performance pay account for more than 100% of the rise in total inequality.

  2. Over Region III (low competition), inequality in performance pay declines, while inequality in
     fixed wages rises. As a result, inequality in total pay need not be monotonic. With quadratic
     costs, a suﬃcient condition for it to rise as  declines is  ≤  + (1 −  2 )∆

    These results are broadly consistent with the findings of Lemieux et al. (2009) about the driving
role of performance pay in rising earnings inequality, as well as their hypothesis that the increased
recourse to performance pay also serves a screening purpose. They are also in line with Frydman’s
(2007) evidence linking increased mobility (skills portability) of corporate executives to the rise in
both the level and the variance in their compensation.27 The above properties also imply that the
fraction of the income diﬀerential  −  that is due to incentive pay, 1 − ( −  )( −  )
is -shaped in  and minimized at 2  where it equals 1 Whereas this value reflects the specific

 27
      See also Frydman and Saks’ (2005) evidence on the rising share of performance pay in compensation.



                                                        21
assumption (additive separability of talent and eﬀort) making the first-best incentive rate ∗ type-
independent, the  shape is a more robust result of competition’s opposing eﬀects on the two types’
incentive constraints. For this reason we state the next result in terms of changes rather than levels.

Corollary 1 (testing for eﬃciency) An increase in market competition reduces (raises) aggre-
gate eﬃciency when it is accompanied by an increase (decrease) in the share of earnings inequality
accounted for by performance-based pay.

    This result provides a simple test, based on observables, to assess whether competition is in
the range where it is beneficial, or detrimental. Subject to the caveats inherent in interpreting
empirical data through the lens of a simple, two-type model, the evidence discussed above points
to the latter case, especially as ones gets into the upper deciles and then centiles of the earnings
distribution (top 80%, executive pay, financial sector, etc.).


4        Regulating Compensation
We focus here on the case of perfect competition, which is the most relevant. Since the source of
distortion is the “bonus culture”, a first question is whether the regulator is able to distinguish
and treat diﬀerently the performance-based and fixed parts of compensation. If it is, then absent
other margins that could be distorted, policy can be very eﬀective: as shown below, if bonuses are
capped at  ∗ the only equilibrium is a pooling one in which all firms oﬀer, and all workers take,
the single contract (∗  ( ∗ ) + ( −  ∗ )̄), thereby restoring the first best.
    Of course, in practice things may not be so simple. First, firms may relabel fixed and variable
compensation, in which case only total pay can be regulated, or taxed. Second, they may switch to
alternative forms of rewards that (at the margin) appeal diﬀerentially to diﬀerent types but may be
even less eﬃcient screening devices than performance bonuses. Plausible examples include latitude
to serve on other companies’ boards, to engage in own practice (doctors) or consulting (academics),
lower lock-in to company (low clawbacks, easier terms for quitting).
    Let $1 paid in the alternative “currency” yield utility $ to a type- employee, with    
1 We assume that, absent regulation, employers prefer to use incentive pay rather than ineﬃcient
transfers to screen workers:
                                            −0 (   )
                                                           1 − 
                                                                                               (40)
                                                 ∆          ∆
where ∆ ≡  −  28 Suppose now that regulation constrains bonuses and consider a firm that
leaves incentives unchanged but substitutes in high types’ contract $1 of alternative transfer for a
$ reduction in  ; it can then also reduce  by $∆ while preserving incentive compatibility.

    28
    The left-hand side is the surplus gained on each high type when decreasing  by $1∆ This raises the low
type’s utility from mimicking by $1, so in order to preserve incentive-compatibility the high type’s contract must
include $1(∆) in the ineﬃcient currency, while  is adjusted to keep  unchanged. Monetary wages (fixed plus
variable) thus decrease by $ ∆, resulting in a net cost equal to the right-hand side of (40), exceeding the benefit.




                                                          22
The strategy is profitable if  (1 −  ) −  ∆  0 or

                                                  1 −    
                                                                                                              (41)
                                                    ∆     

Proposition 8 (bonus cap) Assume ∗ ≤  and (40). Under a bonus cap at any ̄ ∈ [0     ]

the unique competitive equilibrium has  = min{ ∗  ̄} ≡ ̄ ∗ and  = ̄ Furthermore:

   1. If (41) does not hold, alternative transfers are not used:   =   = 0  −  = ̄∆ and
                                                                       to  ∗ the equilibrium still involves
       − = (̄)−(̄ ∗ )+ (̄ − ̄ ∗ ) As ̄ is reduced from 
      separating contracts, but now with a growing cross-subsidy from high to low types, and welfare
      strictly increases (in the Pareto sense), reaching first-best at ̄ = ∗  As ̄ is reduced still
      further the equilibrium becomes a pooling one, and welfare strictly decreases.

   2. If (41) holds, the equilibrium is always a separating one. Low types receive their constrained-
      symmetric-information contract ( = ̄∗   = (̄ ∗ )+( − ̄∗ ) ) while high types get bonus
      ̄ a non-monetary transfer   = [( − ̄)∆+(̄)−(̄∗ )](1− ) and a monetary transfer
       = (̄) + ( − ̄)  − ̄(̄) −    Social welfare is now strictly increasing (in the Pareto
      sense) in the cap level ̄ and thus maximized when no binding regulation is imposed (̄ =     )


    In the fist case, using the alternative currency to screen is too onerous: it entails a substantial
deadweight loss 1 −  , would have to be given in large amounts to achieve separation (∆ small),
or to too many high types (  large). A bonus cap ̄        will then successfully limit firms’

ability to poach each other’s high-skill workers through escalating incentive pay, without triggering
other distortions. Such a policy achieves Pareto improvements all the way down to ̄ =  ∗  with
the benefits accruing to both types of workers as higher fixed pay, which is where competition now
takes place, at the margin.
    In the second case, firms increasingly substitute toward ineﬃcient transfers as the bonus cap is
reduced. By (40), even at     where the marginal bonus distortion is maximal, it is still smaller

than that from using the alternative currency. A fortiori, the further down ̄ forces   the less
is gained in productive eﬃciency, while the marginal distortion associated with the alternative
screening device remains constant: a Pareto-worsening welfare loss.29
    When the regulator is unable to distinguish the performance-related and fixed parts of compen-
sation, the only cap he can impose is on total earnings  Such regulations are also counterproductive
when firms have relatively easy access to alternative rewards that allow them to screen and com-
pensate high types. To minimize repetition we focus here on this case (meaning that (41) holds;
otherwise, alternative transfers would again not be used, and regulation eﬃcient).

Proposition 9 (ineﬃcient compensation cap) Assume ∗ ≤  and (40)-(41). Let total earn-
ings be capped at a level ̄ low enough to be binding on high types’ compensation in an unregulated

  29
     Allowing the ineﬃcient transfers to have increasing marginal cost (in the form of (1 −  )∆ rising with   )
would combine the two cases.


                                                         23
equilibrium, but not on what they would earn in a first-best situation of symmetric information:

                                                       
                   ( ∗ ) + ( ∗ ) +  ≤  ≤ (         
                                                         ) + ( ) +  =                   (42)

    1. If  is high enough, the unique equilibrium is the LCS allocation in which low types receive
       their symmetric-information contract ( ∗   ∗ = ( ∗ ) + ( −  ∗ ) ) while high types get a
       “package” (        ) given by
                            

                                                        £                           ¤
                           
              ( ∗ ) − (           
                             ) = ( −                      
                                         )∆ − (1 −  ) (         
                                                               ) + ( ) +  −  
                                    
                                  = (            
                                         ) +  +     
                                                      ( )−
                                                      
                                = ̄ − [ + ( )]  


    2. Any tightening of the earnings cap (reduction in  ) leads to a Pareto deterioration.

   Although a confiscatory tax of 100% above a ceiling ̄ is unambiguously welfare reducing, some
positive amount of taxation is always optimal to improve on the laissez-faire “bonus culture”. While
characterizing the optimal tax in this setting is complicated and left for future work, we can show:

Proposition 10 A small tax  on total earnings always improves welfare:  | =0  0

    The intuition is as follows. To start with, condition (40) ensures that, for  suﬃciently small,
the firm does not find it profitable to resort to ineﬃcient transfers, hence still uses performance pay
to screen workers. Taxing total earnings then has two eﬀects. First, under symmetric information,
it distorts (net) incentives downward from the private and social optimum,  ∗  Second, it shrinks
the compensation diﬀerential received by the two types under any given contract. This reduces low
types’ incentive to mimic high ones, thus dampening firms’ need to screen through high-powered
(net) incentives and thereby alleviating the misallocation of eﬀort. For small  the first eﬀect is of
second-order (a standard Harberger triangle), whereas the second one is of first order, due again
to the externality between firms discussed earlier.


5     Multidimensional Incentives and Noisy Task Measurement
Performance in activity  was so far taken to be non-measurable or non-contractible. Consequently,
eﬀort  was driven solely by intrinsic motivation, or by fixed outside incentives such as potential
legal liability or reputational concerns. In the other version of the multitask problem studied by
Holmström and Milgrom (1991), every dimension of performance can be measured but with noise,
and this uncertainty limits the extent to which risk-averse agents can be incentivized. We now
extend our theory to this case, where there need not be any intrinsic motivation. This variant of
the model is particularly applicable to the issue of short- versus long-term performance and the
possible recourse to deferred compensation, clawbacks and other forms of long-term pay.
    Outputs in tasks  and  are now  +  +  and  +  +  , where  ,  are the employee’s
talents in each task,  and  his eﬀorts as before, and  ,  independent random shocks with

                                                    24
 ∼ N (0  2 ) and  ∼ N (0  2 ) A compensation package is a triple (      ) where   and
 are the bonuses on each task and  the fixed wage. As in Holmström and Milgrom (1991),
agents have mean-variance preferences. Letting  denote the index of risk aversion, utility is thus:

                                                                             £  2 2                 ¤
    ( ;       ) = ( + )  + ( + ) +  − ( ) −        ( )   + (  )2  2    (43)
                                                                             2

with the cost function having the same properties as before. Given an incentive vector  ≡ (    ),
the agent chooses eﬀorts () and () that jointly solve  (() ()) =     (() ()) =   ;
it is easily verified that () is increasing in   and decreasing in   while () has the opposite
properties. The firm’s profit function remains unchanged, so total surplus is () +  +  ,
where the allocative component is now equal to

                                                                    £  2 2                ¤
                  () ≡ () + () − (() ()) −              ( )   + ( )2  2              (44)
                                                                    2

Assuming strict concavity and an interior solution, the vector of first-best bonuses  ∗ ≡ ( ∗   ∗ )
solves the first-order conditions:

                                       ¡ ∗ ∗ ¢   ¡          ¢
                                         
                                                =   ∗   ∗ = 0                                    (45)
                                                  

which is shown in the appendix to imply that ∗   and ∗  
    There are again two types of workers,  and , in proportions  and   who each select their
                                   ©               ª
preferred contract from the menus (     ) = oﬀered by firms. Denoting ∆  ≡ 
                                                                                             − 
                                                                                                 
                
and ∆ ≡  −  for each task  =   incentive compatibility requires that
                                               P
                                                      (∆ )(∆ ) ≥ 0                                    (46)
                                              =


To simplify the analysis, we assume  types to be more productive in both tasks: ∆ ≥ 0 and
∆  0 (otherwise, which type is “better” depends on the slopes of the incentive scheme).
• Monopsony. Denoting  ≡       
                              +   for  =   a monopsonistic employer solves


                  max           { [( ) +  −  ] +  [( ) +  −  ]} subject to
             {(  )}=
              ≥ 
              ≥  +  ∆ +  ∆ 

              =  ∗ , while   is given by
This yields                 

                                     1              1              
                                         
                                              ( ) =      
                                                                ( ) = −                                 (47)
                                    ∆                ∆                 

As before, the incentives of low types (only) are distorted downward, now in both activities. Note
also how the eﬃciency losses, normalized by their oﬀsetting rent reductions, are equalized across
the two tasks. As before, one can show that it is indeed optimal to employ both types as long as

                                                          25
 is above some cutoﬀ    1 which we shall assume.

• Perfect competition. We look again for a least-cost separating equilibrium. Denoting  ≡
( ∗ ) +  type ’s symmetric-information utility, such an allocation must solve:

                                         max           { } subject to
                                    {(  )}=
                                     = ( ) +  
                                                  ∆  −   ∆  
                                     ≥  −          

Let  denote the shadow cost of the second constraint. The first-order conditions are then

                                   1 ( )    1 ( )
                                       
                                             =      
                                                          = −                                  (48)
                                  ∆          ∆     

while the binding incentive constraint takes the form
                                           ¡       ¢  ¡        ¢ 
                                                 
                         ( ∗ ) − ( ) =  −             
                                                    ∆ +  −   ∆                              (49)

                                                     
Hence, a system of three equations determining (        ) independently of the prior probabil-
ities, as usual for the LCS allocation. Clearly, high-ability agents are again overincentivized, now
in both tasks. Note also that even though competitive firms and monopsonist use screening for
very diﬀerent purposes, resulting in opposite types of distortions, both equalize those distortions
(properly normalized by unit rents) across the two tasks.
    The LCS allocation is, once again, the (unique) equilibrium if and only if it is interim eﬃcient.
In the appendix we generalize Lemma 1 to show:

                             is interim eﬃcient if and only if
Lemma 2 The LCS allocation 
                                            )             )
                                   1 (        1 (        
                                       
                                               =      
                                                              ≥−                                  (50)
                                  ∆            ∆             


or, equivalently,  ≤   

   This condition generalizes (23) and has the same interpretation, which can now be given in
terms of either task. Intuitively, the larger the distortion in the partial derivatives, the higher
the welfare loss relative to first best; condition (50) requires that it not be so large as to render
profitable a deviation to a more eﬃcient contract sustained by cross-subsidies.

• Competition vs. monopsony. Competition yields lower welfare when  =  [( ∗ ) −  ( )]
  [(∗ ) − (    )] =   One simple case in which this occurs is, as before, when   is
                                                                                                
                               ∗        
small enough. Indeed ( ) − ( ) is independent of this ratio, whereas under monopsony the
distortion becomes small as the high types from whom it seeks to extract rents become more scarce:
as   tends to zero, (47) shows that  tends to ∗ and ∗ −  is of order (  )  Therefore
( ∗ ) −  ( ) is of order (  )2  implying that    


                                                         26
                            ∗∗ such that for all 
Proposition 11 There exist                           ∗∗
                                                   ≤   welfare is higher under monopsony
than under competition.

• Quadratic cost. This specification allows for many further results, particularly on comparative
                                    ¡          ¢ ¡       ¢           ¡          ¢ ¡       ¢
statics. First, eﬀort levels are  =   −    1 −  2 and () =  −    1 −  2  which
are non-negative as long as     ∈ [ 1]  Next, note that the first-order conditions of the
first-best, monopsony and competitive problems lead to very similar systems of linear equations,
                                                ¡       ¢              ¡       ¢
                          −  −  +  −  1 −  2  2  = −̃ 1 −  2 ∆                                (51)
                                                ¡       ¢              ¡       ¢
                          −  −  +  −  1 −  2  2  = −̃ 1 −  2 ∆                                (52)

with the only diﬀerence being that ( =  ∗  ̃ = 0) in the first case, ( =   ̃ =   ) in the
                     ̃ =  ) in the third. In particular, the first-best solution is
second, and ( = 

                                                   2 ( − ) + 
                                  ∗ =        ¡ 2  2¢                                                          (53)
                                          1 +    +   + (1 −  2 )2  2  2

and a similar formula for  ∗   obtained by permuting the roles of  and  The condition
 ≤ ∗ ∗ ≤ 1, which ensures that ( ∗ ) ≥ 0 and ( ∗) ≥ 0 is then equivalent to30

                                              2      −    1 +  2
                                                      ≤        ≤                                                   (54)
                                            1 +  2    −      2

The properties of this first-best benchmark parallel those in Holmström and Milgrom (1991).

Proposition 12 The first-best incentive  ∗ is decreasing in  in  2  and conversely increasing
in  and  2  whereas ∗ has the opposite properties. Both are decreasing in risk aversion, 

   Turning next to monopsony and competition, the system (51)-(52) can also be rewritten in
terms of the price distortions   −   ∗   =   leading to the following set of results.

Proposition 13 (incentive distortions) The relative overincentivization of task  compared to
task  induced by competition is equal to the relative underincentivization of task  compared to
task  induced by monopsony:
                                      £       ¡       ¢ ¤
      − ∗            ∗ −       1 +  1 −  2  2 ∆ + ∆     ¡                          ¢
    
                  =                    = £                    ¤         ≡   2   2 ; ∆ ∆ ;             (55)
      − ∗           ∗ −                     2    2
                                           1 +  (1 −  )   ∆ + ∆ 


       It is greater:

  30
     An alternative way of ensuring that  remains non-negative (allowing 2 to become arbitrary large) is of course to
incorporate intrinsic motivation   into (43), with  ≥  The model then nests that of Section 2 as a limiting case
for (2   2 ) → (+∞ 0) Alternatively,   0 (say) may be interpreted as nefarious or antisocial activities (stealing
coworkers’ ideas, devising schemes to deceive customers, et.) that require eﬀort but allow the agent to increase his
performance —and bonus earned— in the  dimension.


                                                           27
       (i) The greater the noise 2 in task  and the the lower the noise  2 in task ;
       (ii) The greater the comparative advantage ∆ ∆ of  types in task  relative to task ;
       (iii) The greater workers’ risk aversion if  2  2  ∆ ∆ (and the smaller if not).

    These results are intuitive: more noisy measurement makes a task a less eﬃcient screening de-
vice —whether for rent-extraction or employee-selection purposes— while a higher ability diﬀerential
of low and high types makes it a more eﬃcient one. As to the “mirror image” property of relative
price wedges under monopsony and competition, it reflects the fact that both types of firms equalize
the (normalized) marginal distortions across tasks.31 We next consider workers’ eﬀort allocations.

Proposition 14 (eﬀort distortions) (1) Competition distorts high-skill agents’ eﬀort ratio away
                                                 )(  )  ( ∗ )( ∗ )  (  )(  ) if and
from task  and monopsony away from task  (                                        
only if
                                       −     ∆
                                                                                                 (56)
                                       −     ∆
                                                                       )  ( ∗ ) while increasing
    (2) Competition reduces the absolute level of eﬀort on task , (
that on task  (and monopsony has the opposite eﬀects), if and only if

                                                   2     ∆
                                                                                                                (57)
                                                 1 +  2   ∆

    The broad message of Proposition 14 accords with that of Sections 3.1-3.2, but it also yields
several new insights about how the misallocation of eﬀorts is shaped by the measurement error in
each the two tasks, their substitutability in eﬀort, high-skill agents’ comparative advantage in one
or the other of them, and the degree of risk aversion. The second result is particularly noteworthy:
even though both tasks are more strongly incentivized under competition, eﬀort in task  declines,
because task  becomes disproportionately rewarded.32
• Changes in technology and monitoring. Two important trends may have decreased ∆ ∆
and increased     making (57) more likely to hold and magnifying the relative wedge in (55).
First, skill-biased technical change (information technology, leverage) plausibly raises high-ability
workers’ productivity advantage more in generating individual output or sales than in cooperating
with others or avoiding risks. Second, the increased monitoring of managers that occurs as corporate
boards become more independent (Hermalin 2005) may improve information about earnings, costs
and market share more than about long-term safety, environmental and legal liabilities.
    Finally, we can also state precisely when competition or monopsony is more eﬃcient. As before,
we denote   the threshold value of  above which the monopsonist employs both types, ̃ =
 (1 +  ) the minimum value ensuring that the LCS allocation is the competitive outcome, and
∗ ≡ max{   ̃ }

  31                                                                                                  
     One can also solve explicitly the system with ̃ =   for the monopsony solution    = (       ) In the
                                                                  
competitive case, the LCS condition (49) is quadratic in (   ), so by (55) it reduces to a quadratic equation in
 
   only (or equivalently, in  )
  32
     Note also that when (54) holds, so that ( ∗ ) ≥ 0 ( ∗ ) ≥ 0 (57) implies (56).


                                                          28
Proposition 15 (social welfare) Let  ≥ ∗  Social welfare is then higher under monopsony
than under competition if and only if    ( )2 

    The condition ensures that  ( ∗ −  )2   (
                                                          
                                                              −  ∗ )2 , meaning that the losses from
the mispricing of activity  are higher under competition. Since the mispricing of  is proportional
to that of  with the same coeﬃcient  under monopsony and competition, total losses are also
higher.


6        Competition for the Motivated
We now return to the benchmark specification of Section 3 (task  is non-contractible, task 
is perfectly measurable, agents are risk-neutral) and study the polar case where all workers have
the same productivity  (normalized to 0 without loss of generality) in task  but diﬀer in their
“ethical” motivations  for task  : a fraction  has  =  and the remaining  have  =  
    When facing compensation scheme ( ) an agent of type  has net utility  () +  where

                                        () ≡ max{  +  − ( )}                                         (58)
                                                    ()


Let  () and  () denote the corresponding eﬀorts, namely the solutions to the system { ( ) =
 and  ( ) = } and note that 0 () =  Concavity of the cost function implies here again that
0 ()  0  0 () as well as  ()   () and  ()   () in response to any given incentive
rate   0The employer of an agent with type  makes net profit   () −  where

                                           () ≡  () + ( − ) ()                                       (59)

Finally, we denote
                                           () ≡  () +   ()                                              (60)
                                              ∗    ≡ arg max{ ()}                                           (61)

In contrast to the case of heterogeneity in talent  there are now generally diﬀerent optimal incentive
rates for each type of worker.33 Next, we note that when confronted with an incentive-compatible
menu of options, the more pro-social type ( ) chooses a less powerful incentive scheme:34

                                          ≤             (and so  ≥  ).

This, in turn, implies that if  and  denote the two types’ equilibrium eﬀorts on task , then
 ≤   The more pro-socially inclined employee exerts more eﬀort on task  both because he is
more motivated for it and because he chooses a lower-powered incentive scheme.

    33                                    ∗     ∗
     In the quadratic-cost benchmark,     =    =  −  In general, the variation of  with  involves the third
derivatives of  and is thus ambiguous.
  34
     Adding
           up the two incentive
                                 constraints,  ≥  +  ( ) −  ( ) and  ≥  −  ( ) +  ( ) yields
0 ≥   [0 () − 0 ()]  =   [ () −  ()]  Since  ()   () for all  the result follows.
                                 




                                                              29
• Monopsony. The monopsonist oﬀers an incentive-compatible menu (   ) and (   ) or
equivalently (   ) and (   ) so as to solve:
                                             P
                              max        {           [ ( ) −  ] } subject to
                          {(   )}= =

                           ≥ 
                           ≥  +  ( ) −  ( )
                           ≥  +  ( ) −  ( )

The first two constraints must clearly be binding, while the third imposes  ≤   as seen above.
Substituting in, the solution satisfies
                               ∗
                           =                                                                (62)
                     0            £ 0                  ¤ 
                     ( ) =        ( ) − 0 ( ) =    [ () −  ()]                (63)
                                                          

when it is interior; more generally, the left-hand side of (63) must be no greater than the right-hand
side. Since the latter is strictly negative, one must have   ∗ in any case: the monopsonist
oﬀers a higher-powered incentive scheme than under symmetric information so as to limit the rent
of the more prosocial types, who clearly benefits less from an increase in .
• Perfect competition. Because employees’ intrinsic-motivation benefits  are private, firms have
no reason to compete to select more prosocial types. As a result, the kind of incentive distortion
seen earlier does not arise, and the competitive equilibrium is the symmetric-information outcome.
Employers oﬀer the menu {(∗  ∗ )}=  where for each type ∗ is the eﬃcient incentive rate
defined by (61) and ∗ ≡   (∗ ) leaving the firm with zero profit. Type  =   then chooses
                                           ©                                  ª
                                  max        (∗ ) +   (∗ ) =  (∗ )                  (64)
                                 ∈{}


By definition,  =  is the optimal choice, so the symmetric-information outcome is indeed incentive
compatible.

Proposition 16 When agents are similar in measurable talent  but diﬀer in their ethical values
 monopsony leads to an overincentivization of low-motivation types,   ∗ (with 
                                                                                        =  ∗ ),
                                                                                            
                                                          ∗        ∗
whereas competition leads to the first-best outcome,  =    =  

    Would conclusions diﬀer under an alternative specification of the impact of prosocial hetero-
geneity? Suppose that instead of enjoying task  more, a more prosocial agent supplies more
unmeasured positive externalities on the firm (or on her coworkers, so that their productivity is
higher, or their wages can be reduced due to a better work environment). In other words, agents
 =   share the same preferences,

                               () = max{̄ +  − ( )} ≡ ()
                                         ()


but have diﬀerent productivities in the  activity,

                                                        30
                                 () =  (() +   ) + ( − )()                         (65)

Under this formulation there is no way to screen an agent’s type, so the outcome under both
monopsony and competition is full pooling at the eﬃcient incentive power:

                       ∗ =  ∗ ≡ arg max{() + () −  (() ())}                     (66)

Sorting will occur, on the other hand, when agents’ intrinsic motivation is not unconditional, as
we have assumed, but reciprocal —that is, dependent on the presence in the same firm of other
people who act cooperatively (e.g., Kosfeld and von Siemens (2011)), or on the firm fulfilling a
socially valuable mission rather than merely maximizing profits (e.g., Besley and Ghatak 2005,
2006, Brekke and Nyborg 2006). The fact that the benefits of “competing for the motivated”
are somewhat attenuated in our model with respect to those only reinforces the contrast with the
potentially very distortionary eﬀects of competition for “talent”, thus further strengthening our
main message.


7    Conclusion
This paper has examined how the extent of labor market competition aﬀects the structure of
incentives, multitask eﬀorts and outcomes such as short- and long-run profits, earnings inequality
and aggregate eﬃciency. The analysis could be fruitfully extended in several directions.
    First, one could analyze increased competition as a reduction in fixed costs and examine whether
there is too little or too much entry into the market. The modeling device of co-located outside
options we introduced into the linear Hotelling model should work for the circular one as well.
More generally, it could prove useful in other settings, as it allows for a clean separation between
intra- and inter-market (or brand) competition and ensures that the market remains covered at all
levels of competitiveness between Bertrand and monopoly.
    A second extension is to allow for asymmetries between firms or sectors. For instance, task
unobservability may be less of a concern for some (e.g., private-equity partnerships) and more for
others (large banks), but if they compete for talent the high-powered incentives eﬃciently oﬀered in
the former may spread to the latter, and do damage there. Heterogeneity also raises the question of
the self-selection of agents into professions and their matching with firms or sectors, e.g., between
finance and science or engineering.
    Our analysis has focused on increased competition in the labor market, but similar eﬀects could
arise from changes in the product market. One can thus envision settings in which high-skill workers
become more valuable as firms compete harder for customers, for instance because the latter become
more sensitive to quality. Finally, the upward pressure exerted on pay by competition could also
result in agents motivated primarily by monetary gain displacing intrinsically motivated ones within
(some) firms, potentially resulting in a diﬀerent but equally detrimental form of “bonus culture”.
This idea is pursued in Bénabou and Tirole (2013).



                                                 31
                             Appendix A: Quadratic-Cost Case

Let the cost function be
                                      ( ) = 2 2 + 2 2 +                                        (A.1)

with  2  1 ensuring convexity. The main case of interest is   0 (eﬀorts are substitutes), but
all derivations and formulas hold with   0 (complements) as well. The first-order conditions for
(2) yield  =  +  and  =  +  hence

                         −            −                  −                1
               () =        2
                                () =      2
                                                and 0 () =     2
                                                                     0 () =                            (A.2)
                        1−             1−                   1−              1 − 2

Equations (10)-(11) then lead to

                         ∗ =  −                                                                       (A.3)
                                Z               Z              µ            ¶
                 ∗                   0                               ∗ −               ( −  ∗ )2
              ( ) − () = −       ()  = −                                   =                    (A.4)
                                        ∗                  ∗       1 − 2              2 (1 −  2 )

1. Monopsony. Substituting the last two expressions into Proposition 1 yields

                                                                 
                                       = ∗ − (1 −  2 )         ∆                                    (A.5)
                                                                 
                                                    2
                                                 1 
                                       =            (1 −  2 )(∆)2                                     (A.6)
                                                 2 

2. Perfect competition. From (A.4) and (22), we get:

                                     1
                                            (  − ∗ )2 = ( − 
                                                                 
                                                                   )∆                                    (A.7)
                                2 (1 −  2 ) 
                                            ¡       ¢
           −  ∗ =   −  +   0 and  ≡ 1 −  2 ∆ Then () ≡  2 + 2 ( − ) = 0 and
Let  ≡                              p
solving this polynomial yields  = − +  2 + 2  0 or
                                                          p
                                  
                                  =  −  −  +          2 + 2                                     (A.8)
                                           p
Note that     since  +             2 + 2 Using (22), the The resulting eﬃciency loss
relative to the social optimum is
                                                     ³        p         ´
        =  [( ∗ ) − (
                                         
                               )] = ( −  )  ∆ =  +  − 2 + 2  ∆                            (A.9)

Finally, the least-cost separating allocation is interim eﬃcient if (23) holds, which here becomes
                                             r
                                1                 2
                                       ≥      1+       or equivalently                                   (A.10)
                             1 −                 
                                              µ ¶
                                           1  2 
                                       ≤             +                                                   (A.11)
                                            2        


                                                     32
3. Welfare under monopsony versus competition. Using (A.6) and (A.9), condition (26) becomes:
      µ         ¶
           2
                  ¡       ¢                                                   
                     1 −  2 (∆)2  ( − 
                                           
                                             ) ∆ ⇐⇒        −  ⇐⇒    −     
          2                                          2                        2

Substituting into the polynomial equation () ≡ 0 this is equivalent to:
                                   µ          ¶2    µ      ¶
                                                           2
                                     −       2        =     
                                         2          2     

which yields (27). This inequality and the interim eﬃciency condition (A.11) are simultaneously
satisfied if and only if

                               r                           µ            ¶2
                1 −              1 −             1                         
       ( ) ≡        +                        2
                                                     ≤                       +          ≡ ̄ ( )   (A.12)
                 2                      1 −  ∆   2       1 −             1 − 

   Note that:
   (i)  ( )  ̄ ( ) if and only if    1 so for any   12 (A.12) defines a nonempty
                  £            ¤
range for (∆) (1 −  2 ) 
                                                                                           £           ¤
   (ii) As  → 1  ( ) → 0 and ̄ ( ) → +∞ so arbitrary values of (∆) (1 −  2 )
become feasible, including arbitrarily large values of  or arbitrarily low values of ∆ In particular,
imposing   (1 −  2 ) −  ∆ to ensure 0   ∗   is never a problem for  large enough.
   4. Imperfect competition. In Region I, ̂ () is defined as the solution to (C.22) in Appendix
C, which here becomes:

       ( − ∗ )2                        ( −  ∗ )
                    − (  −   )∆ +                   = 0 ⇐⇒
        2(1 −  2 )                     ∆ (1 −  2 )
                      2 + 2 ( ∆)  − 2( − ) =  2 + 2( +  ∆) − 2 = 0

with the above definitions of  and  =  − ∗  Solving, we have:
                                                           p
                        ̂ () =  −  −  ∆ −  +    ( +  ∆)2 + 2                    (A.13)

                                       and
It is easily verified that ̂ (0) = 

                                      0                  +  ∆
                             ∆ · ̂ () = −1 + p                       0                        (A.14)
                                                    ( +  ∆)2 + 2

Moreover, this expression is increasing in  so ̂ () is decreasing and convex over Region I.
   In Region II, ̂ () is defined as the solution to (C.25) in Appendix 7, which here becomes:

                               ( −  ∗ )2                   ( −  ∗ )
            ( ∗ ) +   −                + ( −  )∆ −                − ̄ −  = 0 ⇐⇒
                                2(1 −  2 )                 ∆ (1 −  2 )



                                                   33
               2                           
                    2
                       + ( − )∆ +                −   + ̄ +  − ( ∗ ) = 0 ⇐⇒
           2(1 −  )                   ∆ (1 −  2 )
                                   2               ¡                      ¢
                 2 + 2( − ) +     + 2(1 −  2 ) ̄ +  −   − (∗ ) = 0 ⇐⇒
                                   ∆                ¡                      ¢
            2 + 2( + ∆) − 2 − 2(1 −  2 ) (∗ ) +   − ̄ −  = 0

Solving, we have:
                              q                                ¡                       ¢
 ̂ () =  −  − ∆ −  + ( + ∆)2 + 2[ + (1 −  2 ) ( ∗ ) +   − ̄ −  ] (A.15)

noting that the expression under the square root can also be written as 2 + (∆)2 + 2[ +
          ¡                  ¢
(1 −  2 ) (∗ ) +   − ̄ ]  0 Moreover,

         0                                              1
       ̂ ()(∆) = −1 + q                      ¡                       ¢               0
                           1 + 2[ + (1 −  2 ) ( ∗ ) +   − ̄ −  ( + ∆)2 ]

and it is increasing in  so ̂ () is decreasing and convex over Region II.

   In Region III, ̂ () is defined as the solution to (C.29). Denoting  =  − ∗  this now becomes:

                                                              
           ( ∗ ) +   − ̄ −  + ( − )∆ −                        = 0 ⇐⇒
                                                         ∆ (1 −  2 )
                                                                            µ         ¶
                                     £                                 ¤         
                           (1 −  2 ) ( ∗ ) +   − ̄ −  + ∆ =   +            
                                                                                 ∆

Solving, we have:
                                                  £                       ¤
                                        (1 −  2 ) ̄ +  − ( ∗ ) −   − 
                     ̂ () =  −  −                                                         (A.16)
                                                       +   ∆

It is easily verified that lim→+∞ ̂ () =  −  − (1 −  2 ) ∆ =   Moreover, by (12),
                                                £                          ¤
                                       (  ) ̄ − ( ∗ ) −   − ∆ − ∆
                    ̂0 ()(∆)   =                                                0
                                               ( +   ∆)2 (1 −  2 )

and this function is increasing in  implying that ̂ () is convex. ¥

    Welfare eﬀects of transport costs (claim following Proposition 5). Let  () =
(̂ ()) +  (̂ ()) +  ̄ and ̃ () ≡  () − 4 By Proposition 5,  0 ()  0 for all
  2  We now find conditions ensuring that ̃ 0 ()  0 for  small enough. For  ≤ 1   0 () =
                 0 () With quadratic costs, and using (A.4), (A.8) and (A.14),  0 (  )̂ 0 (0) =
 0 (̂³())̂            ´³                    ´                                   
            p                          p
(  )      1 + 2 − 1 1 − 1 1 + 2  which for small ∆ is equivalent to (  ) ×
p                                                                                          p
  2 As seen from (A.10), interim eﬃciency requires  ≤ (1 + 2)−12 ≈ 2
                  p
Letting  / 2 yields   0 (0)̂    0 (0) ≈ 1  14 hence the result. ¥
                                                      




                                                       34
     Proof of Proposition 13. Subtracting the first-best solution from (51)-(52) and denoting
   ≡   −   ∗ ,  =   yields
                                          ¡        ¢                   ¡       ¢
                                  − [1 +  1 −  2  2 ] +  = −̃ 1 −  2 ∆              (A.17)
                                                  ¡       ¢            ¡       ¢
                                     − [1 +  1 −  2  2 ] = −̃ 1 −  2 ∆              (A.18)

from which  =       
                    =     is easily obtained. Its comparative statics follow from
direct computation. ¥
                                                         )(  )  ( ∗ )( ∗ )  (  )(  )
    Proof of Proposition 14. (1) It easily seen that (                                        
                                  
if and only if  ∗ ∗    =   =  Using (53) and (55), this means:
                              £       ¡        ¢ ¤
                               1 +  1 −  2  2 ∆ + ∆        2 ( − ) + 
                              £                      ¤                               
                                1 +  (1 −  2 )  2 ∆ + ∆    2 ( − ) + 

This can be rewritten as
                      £       ¡        ¢ ¤£                     ¤    £                  ¤
           ∆         1 +  1 −  2  2  2 ( − ) +  −   2 ( − ) + 
                   £                        ¤£                 ¤    £                  ¤
           ∆          1 +  (1 −  2 )  2  2 ( − ) +  −   2 ( − ) + 
                      £       ¡        ¢ ¤
                        1 +  1 −  2  2  2 ( − ) +  −  +  2 [ − ]
                  = £                        ¤                                        
                       1 +  (1 −  2 )  2  2 ( − ) +  −  +  2 ( − )

which simplifies to (56).
   (2) We have (  )  ( ∗ )  (  ) if and only if    and     which given
                                                                                 
              
that   0   for  =   means that   1This occurs when
      £      ¡       ¢ ¤                  £     ¡      ¢ ¤
      1 +  1 −  2  2 ∆ +  2 ∆  1 +  1 −  2  2 ∆ + ∆ ⇐⇒
          ¡       ¢£                   ¤                      £                 ¤
          1 −  2  2 ∆ −  2 ∆  (1 − )2 ∆ ⇐⇒   2 ∆ −  2 ∆  ∆ 

which yields (57). Furthermore, (  )  ( ∗ ) if only if     i.e.    which is implied by
                                                                     
  1 Note, on the other hand, that competition always increases total gross output above the
                                                                       ¡           ¢    ¡           ¢
eﬃcient level, (∗ )+( ∗ )  (  )+(  ) if only if 0    −  +  −   or
                                                                                              
equivalently (since 
                       0) 0   (1 − ) +  ( − ) =  −  + ( − ) which always holds.
For a monopsonist     0 so the same condition yields ( ) + ( )  ( ) + ( ) ¥
                                                                                      ∗         ∗


     Proof of Proposition 15. Since () is quadratic and minimized at  ∗ 
                                                                        ¡  ¢2
                                    1 ∗                                  
     (   ∗
               ) −  ( )   =       ( −  ) · ()|∗ · ( −  ) =  (1 ) ()|∗ (1 ) 
                                                             ∗    
                                    2                                      2
                                                                        ¡  ¢2
                                    1 ∗                                  
                  
     (∗ ) −  ( ) =                      
                                      ( −                        
                                              ) · ()|∗ · ( ∗ −  )=      (1 ) ()|∗ (1 ) 
                                    2                                     2
where  is the Hessian of  and we used Proposition (14). Therefore,    if and only if
  ¡ ¢2       ¡ ¢2
                                  =   = (   ) hence the result. ¥
                    By Proposition 13,                       
              




                                                          35
                                   Appendix B: Nonlinear Contracts

We allow here for general reward functions  () where  ≡  +  and  is the employer’s revenue
on the verifiable task. As it will be more convenient to work directly with eﬀort  rather than the
marginal incentive () ≡  0 () let us define the pseudo-cost function

                                            ̂() ≡ min {( ) − }                                    (B.1)
                                                        

and denote ̂() the minimizing choice. It is easily verified that ̂0 ()  0 when   0 and that
̂() is strictly convex. To preclude unbounded solutions, we shall assume that lim→+∞ ̂ 0 () ≥ 
The allocative component of total surplus is

                                             ̂() ≡ ̂() +  − ̂()                                  (B.2)

which shall take to be strictly quasiconvex and maximized at ∗  0 The eﬀort levels  chosen by
each type  =   are given by ̂ 0 ( ) =  0 ( + ) with resulting utilities are  =  ( + )−̂( )
so the relevant participation and incentive constraints are now:

                                         =  ( +  ) − ̂( ) ≥ ̄                                  (B.3)
                                           ≥  + ̂( ) − ̂( − ∆)                                 (B.4)
                                         ≥  − ̂( + ∆) + ̂( )                                   (B.5)

Summing up the last two yields ̂( ) − ̂( − ∆) ≤ ̂( + ∆) − ̂( ), which by strict
convexity of ̂ requires that  ≡  +    +  ≡  
  1. Monopsony. As before, the low types’ participation and high type’s incentive constraints
must be binding in an optimum, so the firm solves
                               (                                                          )
                                   P      £                  ¤
                    max                  ̂( ) +  − ̄ −  [̂( ) − ̂( − ∆)] 
                   {  }    =


leading to     ∗
             =  and
                                                     h 0                      i
                                       ̂0 (
                                             ) =       ̂ ( ) − ̂ 0 (
                                                                           − ∆)                          (B.6)
                                                    
when the solution is interior and to                                             ∗
                                       = ∆ when it is not; in either case,    
   As before, the firm is willing to employ the low types provided the profits they generate exceed
the rents abandoned to the high types:
                                 £                   ¤
                                ̂(
                                       ) +   − ̄ ≥  [̂( ) − ̂( − ∆)]                        (B.7)

which defines a lower bound    1 for   Compared with the case of linear incentives, the greater
flexibility aﬀorded by nonlinear schemes allows the monopsonist to reduce the high type’s rents,

                     = ̄ + ̂(                         0               
                                   ) − ̂( − ∆)  ̄ + ̂ ( )∆ ≡ ̄ +  ∆                         (B.8)

                                                            36
while keeping the distortion —underincentivization of the low types— unchanged, thereby increasing
his profits.
    2. Perfect competition. In a separating competitive equilibrium (with no cross-subsidies),
 = ( ) +  for  =   and by the same argument as in Section 3.2 the low type must get
his eﬃcient symmetric-information allocation, so  = ∗  Furthermore, among all such allocations
that are incentive-compatible, the most attractive to high types is the LCS one, defined by:
                               n                                                  o
                    ≡ arg max ̂() | ̂(∗ ) − ̂() ≥ ∆ − ̂( + ∆) + ̂()                               (B.9)
                                 


Denoting the Lagrange multiplier as  ≥ 0 the first-order condition is −̂0 ()(1 − ) = [̂ 0 ( +
∆) − ̂ 0 ()] requiring that  ≥ ∗ and leading to two cases:
    (i) If ̂(∗ + ∆) − ̂(∗ ) ≥ ∆ then  = ∗ 
    (ii) If ̂(∗ + ∆) − ̂(∗ )  ∆ then  is uniquely given by

                               ̂(∗ ) − ̂( ) = ∆ − ̂( + ∆) + ̂( )                               (B.10)

since Ω() ≡ ̂(∗ ) − ̂() + ̂( + ∆) − ̂() is strictly increasing on (∗  +∞) with Ω(∗ )  ∆
and Ω() ≥ ̂ 0 ()∆  ∆ for all  large enough Competition now leads to overincentivization
only if ̂(∗ + ∆) − ̂(∗ ) is not too large, meaning that ∗ itself is not too large, which in turn
occurs when  is large enough.35 Whereas the greater flexibility aﬀorded by nonlinear contracts
allows a monopsonist to reduce the high types’ rents and increase his profits, in a competitive
industry those benefits are appropriated by the high types, in the form of more eﬃcient contracts:

     ̂(∗ ) − ̂( ) ≤ ∆ − ̂( + ∆) + ̂( )  ∆ − ̂ 0 ( )∆ ≡ ( −  )∆                    (B.11)

    As before, the above separating allocation is the equilibrium if and only if it is interim eﬃcient,
meaning that there is no profitable deviation consisting of lowering  by a small amount  = −
to increase total surplus while oﬀering compensating transfers  = [̂ 0 ( + ∆) − ̂ 0 ( )] to
low types so as to maintain incentive compatibility (note that  = [ 0 ( +  ) − ̂ 0 ( )] = 0
to the first order). In other words,
                                                 h                           i
                                     0
                                 ̂ ( ) +  ̂ 0 ( + ∆) − ̂ 0 ( ) ≥ 0                               (B.12)

which defines a lower bound ̃  1 for   We denote again ∗ ≡ max{    ̃ }
   The following proposition summarizes the above results.

Proposition 17 Let   ∗  With unrestricted nonlinear contracts, it remains the case that:

   1. A monopsonist distorts downward the measurable eﬀort of low types:     ∗            
                                                                             =   with 
      given by (B.6).

  35
     Note that ̂(∗ + ∆) − ̂(∗ )  ̂ 0 (∗ + ∆)∆ so ̂(∗ + ∆) − ̂(∗ )  ∆ if ∗  ̂ 0−1 () − ∆ This, in
turn, occurs when ̂0 [̂ 0−1 () − ∆] +   ̂ 0 [̂ 0−1 () − ∆] for which it suﬃces that  be large enough.


                                                           37
  2. Under perfect competition, if ̂(∗ +∆)− ̂(∗ )  ∆ firms distort upwards the measurable
     eﬀort of high types:  = ∗    with  given by (B.10). If ̂(∗ + ∆) − ̂(∗ ) ≥ ∆
     both eﬀort levels are eﬃcient:  = ∗ =  

    For small ∆, Taylor expansions show that: (i) ∗ −   is, as before, of order ∆ with√
                                                                                             coeﬃcient
                                         0  ∗              ∗
  ; (ii) under competition, since ̂ ( )  ∆  − is positive and again of order ∆ with
coeﬃcient independent of  and  ; (iii) 1 − ̃ is also of order ∆ Therefore, the ratio   is
at least of the same order as  ∆ [(  )∆]2 = (  ) ∆ or equivalently (∆)−32  and
hence arbitrarily large.

    3. Quadratic-cost case. Here again, the cost function (A.1) leads to explicit and transpar-
ent solutions, including for the comparison of eﬃciency losses under monopsony and competition.
Minimizing ( ) −  over  leads to ̂() =  −  and

                              1                    1£                         ¤
                       ̂() = [2 − ( − )2 ] =   (1 −  2 )2 + 2 −  2                (B.13)
                              2                    2

Therefore ̂ 0 () = (1 −  2 ) +  and ̂0 () =  −  ( + ) − (1 −  2 ) leading to

                          (1 −  2 )∗ =  −  ( + )                                        (B.14)
                                                    ( − ∗ )2   1 − 2
                       ̂(∗ ) − ̂() = −00 (∗ )            =        ( − ∗ )2 
                                                        2          2
                       ̂() − ̂(∗ ) = ̂(∗ ) − ̂(∗ ) + ( − ) ( − ∗ )
                                         1 − 2
                                       =         ( − ∗ )2 + ( − ) ( − ∗ )              (B.15)
                                            2
Under monopsony, 
                   is defined (when interior) by (B.6), which now becomes:

                                                           
                         −  ( + ) − (1 −  2 )
                                                    =        (1 −  2 )∆ ⇐⇒
                                                           
                                                                
                                                  
                                                        = ∗ −    ∆                         (B.16)
                                                                

This is the same outcome as with linear contracts, and the marginal incentives  ≡  0 ( +  ) =
 0 ( ) are also unchanged. The rent left to high types is now lower, however, implied by (B.8).
    Under competition,  is given by (B.9). Now, for all  ̂(∗ )− ̂() ≥ ∆− ̂(+∆)+ ̂( )
if and only if
                                   h                    i h              i
     ∆ − [̂(∗ ) − ̂()] ≤      ̂( + ∆) − (∗ ) − ̂() − (∗ ) ⇐⇒
            1 − 2              1 − 2                    1 − 2
    ∆ −          ( − ∗ )2 ≤        ( + ∆ − ∗ )2 −         ( − ∗ )2 + ( − ) ∆ ⇐⇒
              2                   2                         2
                    2∆
                              ≤ ∆ [2( − ∗ ) + ∆] + ( − ∗ )2 = ( − ∗ + ∆)2
                     1 − 2

Therefore (B.9) becomes



                                                    38
                                                 (            s       )
                                                               2∆
                                = ∗ + max 0 −∆ +                                         (B.17)
                                                               1 − 2
                                                     ©         √      ª
                                       =  ∗ +max 0 − + 2  Comparing these expressions
or, in terms of marginal incentives, 
to (A.8), its is clear that competition leads to less distortion when nonlinear contracts are allowed
(possibly none, for low ), whereas the monopsony distortion remains the same. Nonetheless, when
 is high enough, or ∆ small enough, competition can still be eﬃciency-reducing:

Proposition 18 Let ( ) = 2 2 + 2 2 +  When employers can oﬀer arbitrary nonlinear
contracts, social welfare is lower under competition than under monopsony if and only if   high
enough and                                    µ        ¶µ     ¶
                                     1 +                
                                                                                          (B.18)
                                       2      1 − 2     ∆

Proof. We have
                                     2
                       (∗ − 
                                 )       ( − ∗ )2
                    =                                  =  ⇐⇒
                         2(1 −  2 )       2(1 −  2 )
          r            s                                    µ   r ¶2
                     2∆                            1                
                  ∆          2
                                   − ∆ ⇐⇒ ̂ ( ) ≡        1+            2
                                                                                
                      1−                             2          1 −  ∆

Thus, together with the interim-eﬃciency condition, which remains unchanged, we require:
                      µ   r        ¶2                  µ      ¶2
                  1         1 −                  1             
       ̂ ( ) ≡      1+                         ≤             +        ≡ ̄ ( )                (B.19)
                  2                   1 −  2 ∆   2 1 −       1 − 

While the upper bound ̄ ( ) is unchanged from (A.12), the lower bound is higher than in the
linear-contracts case: it is easily verified that  ( )  ̂ ( ) for all  ≤ 1 Nonetheless, it remains
the case that:
    (i) ̂ ( )  ̄ ( ) for all    85 so for any   055 (B.19) defines a nonempty range
             £             ¤
for (∆) (1 −  2 ) 
                                                                                           £         ¤
    (ii) As  → 1 ̂ ( ) → 12 and ̄ ( ) → +∞ so arbitrary large values of (∆) (1 −  2 )
become feasible, including arbitrarily large  or arbitrarily low ∆ In particular, imposing  
(1 −  2 ) −  ∆ to ensure 0  ∗   is never a problem for  large enough. ¥




                                                     39
                                   Appendix C: Main Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1. Only the comparative-statics results remains to prove. First, diﬀeren-
tiating (15) and (17) with respect to ∆ yields

                                 1                ( )   
                              =              0             =                                    (C.1)
                         ∆      ( )          − ( )   ∆

Turning next to  and using (10) we have

                   ( )     0 ( )
                  =               =             0                                                     (C.2)
                    − ( )   − ( )
         1                                                              ∗                   
                  =  (∗ ;  ) −  ( ;  ) +  (∗ ;  )          −  ( ;  ) 
                                                                                          
                                               
                  = (∗ ) − ( ) −         ∆                                                    (C.3)
                                               

showing clearly the two opposing eﬀects discussed in the text, and which exactly cancel out in the
quadratic-cost case (see (A.5)). Similarly, for  :

                   ( )     0 ( )
                  =               =             0                                                     (C.4)
                    − ( )   − ( )
         1                                                             ∗                   
                  =  (∗ ;  ) −  ( ;  ) +  ( ∗ ;  )        −  ( ;  ) 
                                                                                         
                                               
                  = ( ∗ ) − ( ) −       ∆                                                     (C.5)
                                              

showing again two oﬀsetting eﬀects on   ¥

Proof of Lemma 1. Denote  and       the two types’ utilities in the LCS allocation, and recall

that the former takes the same value as under symmetric information.

Claim 1 The LCS allocation is interim eﬃcient if and only if it solves the following program

                         (P) :        max         { } subject to:
                                 (     )

                                               ≥  = ( ∗ ) +                                  (C.6)

                                               ≥  −  ∆                                          (C.7)
                                               ≥  +  ∆                                          (C.8)
                                                    P
                                               0≤        [( ) +  −  ]                       (C.9)
                                                      =


   Proof. Conditions (C.7) and (C.8) are the incentive constraints for types  and  respectively,
and condition (C.9) the employers’ interim break-even constraint. Now, note that:
   (i) If the LCS allocation does not achieve the optimum, interim eﬃciency clearly fails.


                                                       40
    (ii) If the LCS allocation solves (P) there can clearly be no incentive-compatible Pareto im-
provement in which           but neither can there be one in which                      
                                                                                 =  and    
Otherwise, note first that one could without loss of generality take such an allocation, to satisfy
 ≥  ∗ ; otherwise, replacing  by ∗ while keeping  and  unchanged strictly increases
profits, so the LCS allocation remains (even more) dominated. Starting from such an allocation
with  ≥  ∗  let us now reduce  by some small   0 and increase  by some small , while
also increasing  by ( + ) ∆ to leave (C.6) unchanged (while (C.7) is only strengthened). This
results in extra profits of  [0 ( ) ( + ) ∆ − ] +   which is positive as long as

                                             [1 − 0 ( )∆] 
                                                                
                                              +  0 ( )∆

Both types and the firm are now strictly better oﬀ than in the LCS allocation, contradicting the
fact that it is a solution to (P)

    To study interim eﬃciency and prove Lemma 1, let us therefore analyze the solution(s) to (P)
First, condition (C.9) must be binding, otherwise  and  could be increased by the same small
amount without violating the other constraints. Second, (C.7) must also be binding, otherwise
solving (P) without that constraint and with (C.9) as an equality leads to  = ∗ =    = 
and  = (∗ ) +  ; thus  −  = ∆ violating (C.7). Third, (C.8) now reduces to
 ≥   Two cases can then arise:
   (i) If (C.6) is binding, the triple ( ,  ,  ) is uniquely given by the same three equality
constraints as the LCS allocation, and thus coincides with it.
    (ii) If (C.6) is not binding, the solution to (P) is the same as when that constraint is dropped.
Substituting (C.7) into (C.9), and both being equalities, we have  = Σ [( ) +  ]+  ∆
so (P) reduces to

                       max { [( ) + ( ∆ )  ] +  ( ) | ≥  }                   (C.10)
                       


For all  ≥ 0 define the function ̃() ≡ arg max {()+ } and let ̄ ≡ −0 (). On the interval
[0 ̄] the function ̃ is given by 0 (̃()) = − so it is strictly increasing up to ̃(̄) =  while
for   ̄ ̃() ≥  Furthermore, it is clear that ̃() ≥  ∗ with equality only at  = 0 so the
pair ( = ̃( ∆ )  =  ∗ ) is the solution to (C.10). It is then indeed the case that (C.6) is
non-binding,  = (∗ ) +    −  ∆ =   if and only if

                 ( ∗ ) +    [( ) +  ] +  [( ∗ ) +  ] −   ∆

with  = ̃( ∆ ) Equivalently, ( ∆ )  0 where

                               () ≡ (̃()) − ( ∗ ) + [ − ̃()] ∆                          (C.11)

Note that (0)  0 and ()  0 for  ≥ ̄ while on [0 ̄] we have  0 () = [0 (̃()) − ∆] ̃ 0 () =


                                                    41
(  − 1) ∆̃ 0 () = −(∆ )̃0 () Therefore, there exists a unique ̃ ∈ (0 ̄) such that (C.6) is
non-binding —and the solution to (P) thus diﬀers from the LCS allocation— if and only if ∆  
̃ Equivalently, the LCS allocation is the unique solution to (P) and therefore interim eﬃcient, if
and only if  (1− ) ≥ ̃∆ ≡ ̃ (1− ̃ ) hence the result. For small ∆ it is easily verified from
(̃) ≡ 0 and 0 (̃()) = − (implying ̃ 0 () = −100 (̃())) that −̃2 00 ( ∗ ) ≈ 2 ( −  ∗ ) ∆
                     √                    p
so that ̃ ≈ 1 −  ∆ where 1 ≡ −2”(∗ ) ( ∗ − ) ¥

Proof of Proposition 2. To complete the proof of Results (1) and (2), it just remains to show
that: (a) If the LCS allocation is interim eﬃcient, it is a competitive equilibrium; (b) It is then the
unique one. We shall also prove here that: (c) If the LCS allocation is not interim eﬃcient, there
exists no competitive equilibrium in pure strategies.

Claim 2 In any competitive equilibrium, the utilities (   ) must satisfy

                                   ≥  =  ≡ (∗ ) +                                    (C.12)
                                                       
                                      ≥      ≡   ( ) +                                   (C.13)

    Proof. If     a firm could oﬀer the single contract ( =  ∗   =  − ) for  small,
attracting and making a profit  on type  (perhaps also attracting the more profitable type  ).
Similarly, if     it could oﬀer the incentive-compatible menu {( ∗    − ) (     − )}
                                                                                         
thereby attracting and making a profit  on type  (perhaps also attracting and making zero
profit on type  ).

Claim 3 If an allocation Pareto dominates (in the interim-eﬃciency sense) the least-cost separat-
ing one, it must involve a cross-subsidy from high to low types, meaning that

                            ( ) +  −   0  ( ) +  −                               (C.14)

    Proof. If  ≤ ( )+  then  ≥  requires that  =  ∗ and  = ( )+  =  
Incentive-compatibility and Pareto-dominance then imply that  +  ∆ ≥           =  +
                                                                                               
                                                                             
 ∆ hence     This, in turn, leads to ( ) +   −   ( ) +   −  =
 −   0 violating the break-even condition. Therefore, it must be that ( ) +  −  
                                                                                            
0 meaning that low types get more than the total surplus they generate. For the employer to break
even, it must be that high types get strictly less, ( ) +  −   0

   We are now ready to establish the properties (a)-(c) listed above, and thereby complete the
proof of Results (1) and (2) in Proposition 2.

    (a) Suppose that the LCS allocation, defined by (18)-(22), is oﬀered by all firms. Could another
one come in and oﬀer a diﬀerent set of contracts, leading to new utilities (   ) and a strictly
positive profit? First, note that we can without loss of generality assume that  ≥  : if
   and  is indeed selected (with positive probability) by type , then ( ,  ) is
incentive-compatible. By oﬀering  to  types (via their symmetric-information allocation), the


                                                      42
deviating firm does not alter its profitability. Second, if       , the deviating employer does

not attract type ; since it cannot make money on type  while providing  ≥  , the deviation
is not profitable. Finally, suppose that  ≥  and  ≥     . If at least one inequality is strict,

then interim eﬃciency of the LCS allocation implies that the deviating firm loses money. If both
are equalities, let us specify (for instance) that both types workers, being indiﬀerent, do not select
the deviating firm.
    (b) By (C.12)-(C.13), in any equilibrium both types must be no worse oﬀ than in the LCS allo-
cation, and similarly for the firm, which must make non-negative profits. If any of these inequalities
is strict there is Pareto dominance, so when the LCS allocation is interim eﬃcient, they must all
be equalities, giving the LCS allocation as the unique solution.
    (c) Suppose now that LCS allocation is not interim eﬃcient. The contract that solves (P)
is then such that  = ̃()  =  ∗     (equation (C.6) is not binding) and     

(since the LCS does not solve (P)) A firm can then oﬀer a contract with the same  and 
but reducing both  and  by the same small amount, resulting in positive profits; the LCS
allocation is thus not an equilibrium. Suppose now that some other allocation, with utilities 
and  , is an equilibrium. As seen in (b), it would have to Pareto-dominate the LCS allocation,
which by Claim 3 implies:
                                      ≥  −  ∆
                                     ( ) +  −   0

Consider now a deviating employer oﬀering a single contract, aimed at the high type:  0 =  +
                                                                                              
      0                        0
and  =  + (∆)2  ( ) +   The low type does not take it up, as it would yield
0 =  − (∆)2 The high type clearly does, leading to a positive profit for the deviator.k

    The only part of Proposition 2 remaining to prove are the comparative static results. Diﬀeren-
tiating (22) and (24) with respect to ∆ yields
                                                                            
                        −                                  
                   =            ;  )  0            = −  ( ;  )   0                   (C.15)
               ∆   ∆ −  (                     ∆                     ∆

Turning next to 
                                                                                                
                                                                         ∗
       − ∆                                   
                     =  ( ∗ ;  ) −  ( ;  ) +  ( ∗ ;  )              
                                                                                −  ( ;  ) 
                                                                                            
                                                        
                                                      
                                    
                     = ( ∗ ) − (          
                                      ) −  ( ;  )  ⇒
                                                      
                              ) − ( ∗ )                 
                        (                              
                     =              ;  )  0  − ∆     =                                       (C.16)
                       ∆ −  (                          

Again there is a direct and an indirect eﬀect of  on  , but now the direct one always dominates.
For  in contrast, the ambiguity remains
                                                                                           
                                                                     ∗
       ∆ − ∆                               
                     =  (∗ ;  ) −  ( ;  ) +  (∗ ;  )            
                                                                            −  ( ;  ) 
                                                                                        


                                                    43
                                                                       
                                                                     
                                              
                                = (∗ ) − (          
                                                ) −  ( ;  )       ⇒
                                                                     
                          
                                        ) − ( ∗ )
                                  ∆ + (
                                =            ;  )  0                                       (C.17)
                                ∆ −  (
                     1                 − (  ;  ) − (  ) + ( ∗ )
                                = 1−  =                             
                                                                 ;  )                       (C.18)
                    ∆                        ∆ −  (

In the quadratic case,  is independent of  and the last term thus equal to zero; see (A.9). ¥

Proof of Proposition 4. We solve for the symmetric equilibrium under the assumption that
market shares are always interior, and thus given by (31). In Appendix D we verify that individual
deviations to corner solutions (one firm grabbing the whole market for some worker type, or on the
contrary dropping them altogether) can indeed be excluded.
   To characterize the symmetric solution to (32)-(35), we distinguish three regions.

   Region I. Suppose first that the low type’s individual rationality constraint is not binding,
  ̄ so that  = 0

Lemma 3 If  = 0 then  = 0 ≤  and  =  ∗ ≤ 

    Proof. (i) If  =  = 0 then  =  = ∗ by (38)-(39), so (33)-(34) imply that  −  =
∗ ∆ Next, from (36)-(37) we have  − = − = 0 whereas  − ≡ ∆−( − ) =
( − ∗ )∆  0 a contradiction.
    (ii) If   0 =  condition (39) implies 0 ( )  0 hence    ∗ , and condition (38)
 = ∗  Moreover, (36)-(37) and    require that      . However,

                           −  = ( ∗ ) − ( ) + ( −  )∆  0

a contradiction. We are thus left with  = 0    which implies  =  ∗   by (38)-(39).

   Let us now derive and characterize  as a function of  We can rewrite (38) as

                              0 ( ) = − ∆ = − ( − )∆                             (C.19)

Summing (36)-(37) and recalling that  ≡ ( ) +   −  yields

                  +  =  [( ) +   − ( −  )] +  [(∗ ) +  ]
                          =  [( ) +   −  ∆] +  [(∗ ) +  ]                     (C.20)

where the second equality reflects the fact that (34) is an equality, since   0 Therefore:

            −  = ( ∗ ) +   −  − 
                     = ( ∗ ) +   −  [( ∗ ) +  ] −  [( ) +   −  ∆]
                     =  [( ∗ ) − ( ) − ( −  )∆]                                       (C.21)


                                                 44
Substituting into (C.19) yields

                                                                         0 ( )
                      Φ( ; ) ≡ ( ) − ( ∗ ) + ( −  )∆ +                 = 0            (C.22)
                                                                           ∆
                                                                                           ()
   The following lemma characterizes the equilibrium value of  over Region I, denoted ̂

Lemma 4 For any  ≥ 0 there exists a unique ̂      () ∈ ( ∗  ) to (C.22). It is strictly decreasing

                                                       (0) =   
in  starting from the perfectly competitive value ̂          

   Proof. The function Φ(; ) is strictly decreasing in  on [∗  ) with Φ( ∗ )  0  Φ()
hence existence and uniqueness. Strict monotonicity then follows from the fact that Φ is strictly
decreasing in  while setting  = 0 in (C.22) shows that ̂ (0) must equal    defined in (22) as
                                                                               
the unique solution to
                                                
                                   ( ∗ ) − (           
                                                  ) = ( −  )∆
                                               () is consistent with the initial assumption that  = 0
It only remains to verify that the solution ̂
or equivalently   ̄  By (C.20), we have for all 

                  +  =  [( ) +   −  ∆] +  [( ∗ ) +  ]
                          = ( ∗ ) +   +  [( −  ) ∆ + ( ) − (∗ )]  ¥

               () the corresponding value of  is strictly above ̄ if and only if ()  ̄ + 
   For  = ̂                                  
where we define for all :
                                               £¡              ¢                         ¤
                  () ≡ ( ∗ ) +   +               
                                                     − ̂                        
                                                            () ∆ − ( ∗ ) + (̂ ())         (C.23)

Lemma 5 There exists a unique 1  0 such that () ≥ ̄ +  if and only if  ≤ 1  On [0 1 ] the
low type’s utility  is strictly decreasing in  reaching ̄ at 1

    Proof. At  = 0 the bracketed term is zero by definition of ̂  (0) =    so (0) = ( ∗ ) +  
                                                                                                      
                                                                                   £           ¤
 ̄ by (16), which stated that a monopsonist hires both types, and lim→+∞ () − ̄ −  = −∞
there exists at least one solution to () = ̄ +  To show that it is unique and the monotonicity
of   we establish that,  0 ()  1 for all   0 From (C.22) and (C.23), this means that
                     µ                                  ¶
  £              ¤          −0 (̂ ) ∆
 ∆ − 0 (̂ )                                           1 ⇐⇒
                     ∆ − 0 (̂ ) − 00 (̂ ) ∆
                     £              ¤¡                  ¢                     00
                    ∆ − 0 (̂ ) −0 (̂ ) ∆  ∆ − 0 (̂ ) −  (̂ ) ∆ ⇐⇒
                          £                 ¤¡          ¢        £               ¤      00
                         ∆ − 0 (̂ ) −0 (̂ )   ∆ ∆ − 0 (̂ ) −  (̂ ) ⇐⇒
                                                   00        £             ¤£                    ¤
                                                  (̂ )  ∆ − 0 (̂ )  0 (̂ ) +  ∆

where we abbreviated ̂ () as ̂  In the last expression, the first bracketed term is always non-
                                   
negative, whereas in the second one ∗  ̂  ̂   implies that  0 (̂ ) +  ∆   0 (̂  ) +
                                                                                            
 ∆  0, by (23).

                                                       45
    In summary, Region I consists of the interval [0 1 ] where 1 is uniquely defined by (1 ) =
1 + ̄  Over that interval,  = ∗ while  = ̂  () is strictly decreasing in  and therefore so

is the high type’s relative rent,  −  = ̂  ()∆ The low type’s utility level  need not be
                                                                                          
declining, but its starts at a positive value and reaches ̄ exactly at 1 

    For  ≥ 1  the constraint  ≥ ̄ is binding. Recalling that   must always equal zero,
we distinguish two subregions, depending on whether  = 0 (Region II) or  = 0 (Region III),
and show that these are two intervals, respectively [1  2 ] and [2  +∞), with 1  2  Thus, inside
Region II the low type’s incentive constraint is binding but not the high type’s (  0 =  for
 ∈ (1  2 )) whereas inside Region 2 it is the reverse (  0 =  for   2 )

   Region II. Consider first the values of  where  = 0    As before, this implies that
 = ∗   and  −  =  ∆ or  = ̄ +  ∆ since  = ̄  Therefore:
                                                    £                              ¤
  =  ( − ) =  [( ) +   −  − ] =  ( ) +   −  ∆ − ̄ −   (C.24)

Substituting into condition (38), the latter becomes

                                                                        0 ( )
                      Γ( ; ) ≡ ( ) +   −  ∆ − ̄ −  +                = 0              (C.25)
                                                                          ∆
On the interval [ ∗  ) the function Γ(; ) is strictly decreasing in  and  with

                                                                  0 (̂ ())
                  Γ(̂ (); ) ≡ (̂ ()) +   − ̂  ()∆ +                 − ̄ − 
                                                                         ∆
                                                   µ         ¶
                                      ∗                    1 0 (  ( ))
                                                                          1
                                = ( ) +   + 1 −                           − ̄ − 
                                                                  ∆
                                                    µ                   ¶
                                                             0 ( )
                                = ( ∗ ) +  −  1 +                   − ̄                     (C.26)
                                                             ∆

                                                       ( );  ) = 0 Furthermore, as  rises above  
At  = 1 substituting (C.22) into (C.23) yields Γ(̂   1    1                                      1
                      0   
̂ () decreases, so  (̂ ()) increases. Since

                                                                                    
                 ∆ +  0 (̂ ())   ∆ +  0 (̂ (0)) =  ∆ +  0 ( )0
          £                       ¤
                             ()) is also increasing in  implying that Γ(̂  (); ) is decreasing in 
by (23),   ∆ +  0 (̂                                                  
and therefore negative over (1  +∞) Next, observe that Γ( ∗ ; ) = ( ∗ )+ (− ∗ )+ ∗ − ̄ −
Define therefore
                                 2 ≡ ( ∗ ) +  ( −  ∗ ) +  ∗ − ̄                         (C.27)

and note that
                                        £¡              ¢                           ¤
                1 = ( ∗ ) +   +    − ̂                          
                                                   (1 ) ∆ − ( ∗ ) + (̂ (1 )) − ̄
                                        ¡              ¢
                                               
                    ( ∗ ) +   +   − ̂  (1 ) ∆ − ̄
                    ( ∗ ) +   + 1 · ( −  ∗ ) ∆ − ̄ = 2 


                                                     46
Lemma 6 For all  ∈ [1  2 ] there exists a unique ̂    () ∈ [ ∗  ̂  ( ))] such that Γ(̂  (); ) = 0
                                                                               1                     
Furthermore, ̂  () is strictly decreasing in  starting at ̂  ( ) = ̂( ) and reaching  ∗ at  =  
                                                                    1               1                              2
For all   2  Γ( ; )  0 over all  ≥  ∗ 

    Proof. For  ∈ [1  2 ] we have shown that Γ(̂ (1 ); ) ≤ 0 ≤ Γ( ∗ ; ) with the first equality
strict except at 1 and the second one strict except at 2  Since Γ(; ) is strictly decreasing in 
and  the results follow. The fact that ̂   ()  ̂  () on (   ] also means that if there is a kink
                                                                     1 2
between the two curves at 1 it is a convex one, as shown in Figure III. And indeed, diﬀerentiating
                                 ¡  ¢0            ¡  ¢0
(C.22) and (C.25), we have − ̂        (1 )  − ̂      (1 ) if and only if

                    −0                  ∆ − 0               −”       ¡             ¢
        −               0       00
                                             0       00
                                                         ) ⇐⇒        0
                                                                        −  0 +  ∆ 
             ∆(∆ −  ) −       ∆(∆ −  ) −          ∆ − 

                                     ( ) = ̂  ( ) Since  ∗  ̂  ( )    the term on the left is
with all derivatives evaluated at ̂   1       1                      1        
positive and that on the right negative.
    As to 2  note that it is the only point where  = 0 =  (the only intersection of Regions II
and III). Indeed, this require  =  ∗ =  by (38)-(39) and condition (39) together with  = ̄
then implies that  =  = (∗ ) +   −  ∗ ∆ − ̄ = 2
                                                                                                    () is
    Region II thus consists of the interval [ 1  2 ]. Over that interval,  =  ∗ while  = ̂
strictly decreasing in  and therefore so is the high type’s utility,  = ̄ +     ∗ ()∆ while the

low type’s utility remains fixed at  = ̄  Furthermore, we can show.
    Putting together Regions I and II, we shall define:
                                                  (
                                                         ()
                                                      ̂     for  ∈ [0 1 ]
                                      ̂ () =         
                                                                                                             (C.28)
                                                      ̂ () for  ∈ [1  2 ]

   Region III. Inside this region, namely for   2  we have  = ̄ but now    = 0.
This implies that  = ∗   by (38)-(39) and  = ̄ +  ∆ by (33). Furthermore,
                                               £                               ¤
                          =  ( −  ) =   + ̄ +  ∆ − (∗ ) −  

Substituting into condition (39), the latter becomes

                                   £                               ¤  0 ( )
                     Λ( ; ) ≡  ( ∗ ) +   −  ∆ − ̄ −  +             = 0                        (C.29)
                                                                         ∆

On the interval [0 ∗ ] the function Λ(; ) is strictly decreasing in   with
                                    £                               ¤
                     Λ( ∗ ; ) =  ( ∗ ) +   − ∗ ∆ − ̄ −  =  (2 − )  0

Recall now that the monopsony price  is uniquely defined by 0 ( ) = (  ) ∆ Therefore:
                                         £                                 ¤
                          Λ( ; ) =  (∗ ) +   − ̄ + ( −  ∆)  0



                                                           47
Lemma 7 For all  ≥ 2 there exists a unique ̂ () such that Λ(̂ (); ) = 0 and   ̂ () ≤ ∗ 
with equality at  = 2  Furthermore, ̂ () is strictly decreasing in  and lim→+∞ ̂ () =  

   Proof. Existence and uniqueness have been established. Next, Λ(; ) =  0 ()∆ − 1
At  = ̂ () this equals 1 times
         £                               ¤                £                           ¤
      − ( ∗ ) +   −  ∆ − ̄ −  −  = −  −  ( ∗ ) +   − ̄ −  ∆  0

so the function ̂ () is strictly decreasing in  Taking limits in (C.29) as  → +∞ finally, yields
as the unique solution lim→+∞ ̂ () =  

Proof of Proposition 6. The fact that    0 over Region I was shown in Lemma 5. To
show the last result, note that over Region III, we have

                     2Π =  [( ∗ ) +   − ̂ ∆] +  [(̂ ) +  ] − ̄ ⇒
                  1 Π                                     
                          = 0 (̂ ) −    ∆  0 (̂ ) −    ∆ = 0
                   ̂                                  

so profits fall as  declines, as was shown to be the case over Regions I and II. ¥

Proof of Proposition 7. Consider first total pay. Since  =  − ( ) −    we can write
 =  + ( ) − ( ) for  =   As  declines,  and  increase (at least weakly) and
therefore so does   since 0 () =  Furthermore,

                     −  =  −  + ( ) − ( ) + ( ) − ( ) 

Over Regions I and II this becomes [∆ + ( )]  −( ) plus a constant term, with  = ̂ ();
the result then follow from 0 () =  Over Region III,  −  = [∆ − ( )]  + ( ) plus a
constant term, with  = ̂ (); therefore, ( −  )  0 if and only if 0 ( )  ∆ which
need not hold in general. With quadratic costs, 0 ( ) = 1(1 −  2 ) so it holds on [2  +∞) if and
only if  ∗ =  −   (1 −  2 )∆ Turning now to performance-based pay, we have

([( ) +  ]  − [( ) +  ]  ) £                         ¤  £                          ¤ 
                                         = ( ) +  +  0 ( )      − ( ) +  +  0 ( )      
                                                                                                    
In Regions I and II the first term is negative and the second zero; in Region III it is the reverse.
    Turning finally to fixed wages,  −  =  −  −   +   − ( ) + ( ). In Regions
I and II,  −  = − ( −  ∗ ) − ( ) + ( ∗ ) is decreasing in   hence increasing in  In
Region III,  −  = ( −  ∗ )  − (∗ ) + ( ) so the opposite holds. ¥

    Proof of Proposition 8. For any ̄ ∈ [0  ) let ̄ ∗ ≡ min{ ∗  ̄} A firm can always oﬀer low

types their constrained symmetric-information allocation  = ̄ ∗    = 0 and (̄∗ ) +  ≡ ̄ 
so in equilibrium they must receive at least that much. Consider therefore the relaxed program
(from which high types’ incentive-compatibility constraint has been omitted):




                                                   48
                     (P  ) :              max                  { } subject to:
                                {( 0≤ ≤̄ 0≤  )}=

                        ≥ ̄                                                       ()              (C.30)
                        ≥  −  ∆ −   ∆                                         ( )            (C.31)
                             P
                        0≤       [( ) +  − (1 −  )  −  ]                 ()              (C.32)
                                 =


The first-order conditions in  and  are respectively 1 −  −   = 0 and  +  −   = 0;
thus  = 1 +   0 (C.32) so that must bind, and  =  (1 + ) −  The first-order conditions
in  and   then take the form
                     £                  ¤
             (1 + )  ∆ +  0 ( ) − ∆ ≥ 0 with equality unless  = ̄         (C.33)
            (1 + ) [ ∆ −  (1 −  )] − ∆ ≤ 0                    with equality unless   = 0   (C.34)

• Case 1. Suppose that (41) does not hold:  ∆ ≤  (1 −  ) If this is strict, or if it is an
equality and   0 (C.34) requires that   = 0 In the (measure-zero) case where it is an equality
and  = 0 the firm is indiﬀerent and we shall break the indiﬀerence by assuming that it still does
not use the ineﬃcient currency. Replacing   = 0 into (C.31) and the binding (C.32), we obtain

                           ≥  [( ) +  ] +  [(̄∗ ) +  ] −   ∆ ⇒
              − ̄           ≥  [( ) + ( −  )∆ − (̄ ∗ )]                                (C.35)

    Let us first show that  = ̄ Otherwise, (C.33) implies that (1+) =  + 0 ( )∆  0
(by (23)), so  = ̄ ; meanwhile,  ≥ 0 requires (1 + ) ≤   so  ≥  ∗  But then ̄ ∗ =  ∗
                                                                         )) contradicting  = ̄  
and in (C.35) the right-hand side is strictly positive (as  ∈ ( ∗                           
    Next, with  = ̄ the right-hand side of (C.35) equals  ( − ̄)∆ if ̄ ≤  ∗ and  [(̄) +
( − ̄)∆ − ( ∗ )] if  ∗  ̄ Thus in both cases   ̄  implying  = 0 and   0 From
(C.33) it follows that (C.31) and (C.35) are equalities, with  = ̄; the latter shows that low
types receive a cross-subsidy which increases as ̄ declines to ∗  then remains constant. This
allocation is the one described in Proposition 8-(1), and since  −  = ̄∆ ≥ ̄∗ ∆ it satisfies
the (omitted) high type’s incentive constraint. It is separating for ̄   ∗ and pooling for ̄ ≤  ∗ 
since (    ) = (    ) = (̄ 0) and  −  = ̄∆ implying  =   As it solves the
relaxed problem it is interim eﬃcient and therefore (by standard arguments) the unique equilibrium.
Finally,  = (̄) +  and  = (̄∗ ) − ̄∆ +  both increase as ̄ declines to  ∗ 

• Case 2. When (41) holds, (C.30) must bind, otherwise  = 0 and (C.34) fails. From (C.31) and
the binding (C.32) we have  = ( ) +  − (1 −  )  ≤ ̄ +  ∆ +   ∆, so

                           (1 −  )  ≥ ( −  )∆ + ( ) − (̄ ∗ )  0                            (C.36)

since  ≤ ̄     With 
                                0 (C.34) must be an equality, which yields (1 + ) =  −
 (1 −  )∆  0 and  (1 + ) =  − (1 + )  0 Thus (C.31) is binding, (C.36) holds
with equality, and the left-hand side of (C.33) becomes (1 + ) [0 ( ) + (1 −  )∆∆]  0


                                                            49
by (40); therefore  = ̄ By (C.36),   = [( − ̄)∆ + (̄) − (̄ ∗ )](1 −  ) is then strictly
increasing as ̄ decreases from    to 0 Since  −  = ̄∆ +  ∆   ∆ the high type’s
                                                                              
omitted incentive constraint is also satisfied. The solution to the relaxed program thus coincides
with the constrained-LCS allocation described in Proposition 8-(2), which is thus interim eﬃcient
and therefore, the unique equilibrium.
    Finally, consider how welfare varies with ̄ Profits always equal zero and low types always
receive ̄  which is increasing in ̄ below  then constant. As to high types, they achieve
                                           µ            ¶
                                               1 − 
                    ̄ = (̄) +  −                     [( − ̄)∆ + (̄) − (̄∗ )]         (C.37)
                                               1 − 
                                                                         ] with a derivative that is
As a function of ̄, the right-hand side is strictly concave on [ ∗  
negative below  (by (40)). Therefore, ̄ is strictly increasing in ̄ and maximized at    where
                                                                                            
the constraint ceases to bind. ¥

    Proof of Proposition 9. Given (42), the cap ̄ does not constrain low types from receiving
their full symmetric-equilbrium allocation,  = ( ∗ ) +   We look for a zero-profit, least-cost
separating allocation, now satisfying
                                ( ) +  +  ( ) =  +                                   (C.38)
                                     −  ∆ −   ∆ =                                      (C.39)
The first condition implies that

                 = ( ) +  − (1 −  )  = ( ) −  ( ) +  +                    (C.40)

and the second thus becomes

                             = ( ) −  ( ) +  +    −  ∆                         (C.41)

Adding (C.38) to this last equation and substituting in  yields

 ( ∗ ) +  +  +       = ( ) +  −  ∆ +  +    ⇐⇒
           (∗ ) − ( ) = ( −  )∆ − (1 −  ) 
                                                     £                            ¤
                            = ( −  )∆ − (1 −  ) ( ) +  ( ) +  −  ⇐⇒
                                                              £                           ¤
                    ( ∗ ) = ( ) + ( −  )∆ − (1 −  ) ( ) + ( ) +  −  

where the next-to-last equation uses (C.38) to substitute for   and the last one follows from
the definition of  Denoting ( ) the right-hand side of this last equation, (10) implies that
 0 ( ) = 0 ( ) − (1 −  ) [0 ( ) +  0 ( )] − ∆  0 for  ≥  ∗  while (22) and (42) ensure
that ( ∗ )  (∗ ) ≥ (  ) Therefore, the equation has a unique solution   ∈ ( ∗   ] which is
                                                                                               
easily seen to be increasing in ̄ 
      The next step consists once again in checking whether this allocation is interim eﬃcient, and
thus the equilibrium outcome. Consider therefore the following (relaxed) program:

                                                    50
                   (P  )    :             max               { } subject to:
                                   {(      )}=

                      ≥                                                                      ()     (C.42)
                      ≥  −  ∆ −   ∆                                                      ( )   (C.43)
                       ≤ ( ) −  ( ) +  +                                            ()     (C.44)
                            P
                       0 ≤        [( ) +   − (1 −  )  −  ]                          ()     (C.45)
                                   =


For the LCS allocation not to be interim eﬃcient, the optimum must have     hence  = 0
Solving the first-order conditions in  and  then yields  =   and  = 1 −  −   = 1 − 
Furthermore, the first-order condition with respect to   is

                                    (1 − ) +  ∆ −  (1 −  ) ≤ 0

which is ruled out by (41). Thus, interim eﬃciency obtains.
   Finally, let us examine how  varies with   Equations (C.39) and (C.40) imply that

                         = ∆ + ∆  = 0 ( ) − (1 −  ) 
                                              £             ¤
                            ⇒ −(1 −  )  = ∆ − 0 ( ) 

We saw earlier that  is increasing in ̄ , and thus naturally   is increasing, as firms substitute
toward the ineﬃcient currency. Substituting for   into the first equation, we have:
                                       µ                             ¶µ            ¶
                                        0 ( ) 1 −                 ∆∆         
                                  =                +                                         0           (C.46)
                              ̄           ∆        ∆                  1 −         ̄

by (40). Therefore, as ̄ is reduced,  decreases. Since low types’ utility is unaﬀected and profits
remain equal to zero, the result follows. ¥

   Proof of Proposition 10. Let us adopt the convention that  and  are net compensations.
In particular,  is still the eﬀective power of the incentive scheme. Profit on type  =   under
contract ( ) is then
                                                                           + [ + ()]
                                 Π = () + [ + ()] −                                              (C.47)
                                                                               1−
while the expression for  is unchanged. Furthermore,

            + (1 −  )Π = (1 −  ) [() + ( + ())] − [(() ()) − ()]
                                    b
                                  ≡ () + (1 −  )                                                    (C.48)

Let ∗ ( ) ≤ ∗ be the bilaterally eﬃcient power of incentives: ∗ ( ) = arg max{()}
                                                                                   b      The LCS
                        ∗
equilibrium has  =  ( ) and  given by

                                   b ∗ ( )) − (
                                   (         b  ) = ∆ [(1 −  ) −  ]

                                                                51
Welfare  is equal to  ( ) +  ( ) + , and so

                                                ∗                              
                             | =0 =  0 ( )      +  0 ( )     =  0 ( )          (C.49)
                                                                                 
Finally, for small  

                                                
                 b0 ( ) = 0 ( ) − 
                                                  [( ) + ( )] = 0 ( ) + o( ) ⇒
                                               
                                      ∆
                    | =0     = −                   0 ( )  0 ¥                           (C.50)
                                   ∆ − 0 ( )

Lemma 8 The first-best solution defined by (45) satisfies  ∗   and  ∗  

   Proof. The first-order conditions (45) take the form
                                                             ¡       ¢
                         ( −  ∗ )( ∗ ) + ( − ∗ )  =  ∗  2 
                                                             ¡       ¢
                         ( −  ∗ )( ∗ ) + ( −  ∗ )   =  ∗  2 
                                                                     ¡        ¢                ¡      ¢
with all derivatives evaluated at ( ∗   ∗ ) Let  ≡ (  )   − (  )   
which is easily seen to equal 1[  − ( )2 ]  0 (this holds for any (    )) We then have

                                  1 £         ¡             ¢            ¡             ¢¤
                − ∗ =             ( )  ∗  2 2 − (  )  ∗  2 2  0
                                  
                                  1 £         ¡             ¢             ¡            ¢¤
                −  ∗ =            ( )  ∗  2 2 − ( )  ∗  2 2  0
                                  
hence the result.

   Proof of Lemma 2. The LCS allocation is interim eﬃcient if and only if it solves the relaxed
program
                          max{(   )}= { } subject to
                           ≥  −      ∆  −   ∆  
                                                     
                           P
                                [( ) +  −  ] ≥ 0
                                      =
                                       ≥  
The solution to this program must satisfy  =  ∗ . If the LCS allocation is not interim eﬃcient, the
solution must be such that    , implying  = 0. Using the zero-profit condition, substituting
 , using the incentive-compatibility condition and taking derivatives yields:

                                     1 ( )    1 ( )   
                                         
                                               =      
                                                            =−                                 (C.51)
                                    ∆          ∆          

Letting  denote the “subsidy” from the - to the -type, the above program can be rewritten as:




                                                        52
                                 (P  ) : max{ } subject to
                                           ≤ ( ) +  −  

                                           +  ≥  −  · ∆

                                          ≥0
                                                     ¡  ¢                ¡          ¢
where  · ∆ denotes the scalar product of  ≡         and ∆ ≡ ∆  ∆ . Note first that
the first two constraints must both be binding. Indeed, denoting  the Lagrange multiplier on the -
th constraint, the first-order conditions are 1−1 −2 = 0 for   1 ∇( )+2 ∆ = 0 for  and
3 −1   +2 = 0 for  The first two clearly exclude 1 = 0 If 2 = 0 then  = ∗ and 3  0
implying  = 0; but then the second constraint becomes (∗ ) +  =  ≥ ( ∗ ) +  −  ∗ · ∆
hence 0 ≥  −  −  ∗ · ∆ = ( −     ∗ )∆  + ( −  ∗ )∆   a contradiction of Lemma 8.
                                                            
    Next, eliminating  from the binding constraints shows that  solves max{( ) + ∆ ·  }
where  ≡   ∈ (0 ∞) is the likelihood ratio. Consider any two such ratios  and ̂ and the
corresponding optima  and b for this last program; if ̂  , then

                               ( ) ≥ (̂ ) + ∆ · (̂ −  ) 
                               (̂ ) ≥ ( ) + ̂∆ · ( − ̂ ) 

Adding up these inequalities yields ∆ · (̂ −  ) ≥ 0, which in turn implies that ( ) ≥
(̂ ) Observe now from (48) that the LCS allocation corresponds to an interior solution to
max{( ) +  ∆ ·  } Consider now any    and the corresponding solution  . We have
( ) ≤  ( ) and so
                                                                
                            ( ) +  −  ≤  (   ) +  =  

with strict inequality if   0 This last case is impossible, however, since type ’s utility from the
relaxed program cannot be lower than       . Therefore,  = 0 and  =   : the LCS allocation is
                                                                             
interim eﬃcient. Conversely, let    ; we then have (as a row-vector equality)

                             
                                [( ) + ∆ ·  ] = = ( −  ) ∆
                                                      



with ∆ ≥ 0 and ∆  0 Since  maximizes (each component of) the expression in brackets,
it must be that  ≤   and       hence ∆ · (  −  )  0 By the same properties shown
                                                           
above, it follows that ( )  ( ) If  = 0 the two binding constraints in (P  ) then imply
                                    



                             =  +  · ∆   + 
                                                                   
                                                            · ∆ =  
                                                             
                             = ( ) +   ( ) +  =  

another contradiction. Therefore  must be positive after all, and interim eﬃciency fails. ¥




                                                  53
                                      REFERENCES

Acemoglu, D., Kremer, M. and A. Mian (2007) “Incentives in Markets, Firms and Governments,”
The Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 24(2), 273-306.
Acharya, V., Gabarro, M., and P. Volpin (2012) “Competition for Managerial Talent, Corporate
Governance and Incentive Compensation,” CEPR W.P. 8936.
Acharya, V., Pagano, P. and P. Volpin (2012) “Seeking Alpha: Excess Risk Taking and Competition
for Managerial Talent,” NYU mimeo, May.
Akerlof, G. and Kranton, R. (2005) “Identity and the Economics of Organizations,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 19(1), 9-32.
Armstrong, M. and J. Vickers (2001) “Competitive Price Discrimination”, Rand Journal of Eco-
nomics, 32(4), 579-605.
Baker, G. (1992) “Incentive Contracts and Performance Measurement,” Journal of Political Econ-
omy, 100(3), 98-614.
Baker, G., R. Gibbons and K. J. Murphy (1994) “Subjective Performance Measures in Optimal
Incentive Contracts”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 1125-56.
Bandiera, O., Barankay, I. and I. Rasul (2007) “Incentives for Managers and Inequality among
Workers: Evidence from a Firm-Level Experiment”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122,
729-773.
Bannier, C., Feess, E. and Packham, N. (2013) “Incentive Schemes, Private Information and the
Double-Edged Role of Competition for Agents,” Frankfurt University mimeo, January.
Bartling, B., Fehr, E. and K. Schmidt (2012) “Screening, Competition and Job Design”, American
Economic Review, forthcoming.
Baumol, W.J. (1990): “Entrepreneurship: Productive, Unproductive, and Destructive,” Journal of
Political Economy, 98, 893-921.
Bebchuk, L. and J. Fried (2004) Pay without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive
Compensation. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2004.
Bénabou, R., and J. Tirole (2003), “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation,” Review of Economic
Studies, 70, 489-520.
Bénabou, R., and J. Tirole (2006), “Incentives and Prosocial Behavior,” American Economic Re-
view, 96(5), 1652-1678.
Bénabou, R., and J. Tirole (2011), “Laws and Norms,” NBER Working Paper 17579, November.
Bénabou and Tirole (2013) “Competitive Pay, Work Ethics, and Corporate Image,” mimeo.
Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan (2001) “Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck? The Ones without
Principals Are”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 901-932.
Besley, T., and M. Ghatak (2005) “Competition and Incentives with Motivated Agents,” American
Economic Review, 95(3), 616-636.
Besley, T., and M. Ghatak (2006) “Sorting with Motivated Agents: Implications for School Com-
petition and Teacher Incentives,” Journal of the European Economics Association, 4, 404-414.
Besley, T. and M. Ghatak (2011) “Taxation and Regulation of Bonus Pay”, mimeo, LSE.




                                              54
Bolton, P., Scheinkman, J. and W. Xiong (2006)‘”Executive Compensation and Short-Termist
Behaviour in Speculative Markets,” Review of Economic Studies, 73, 577-610.
Brekke, K. A., and K. Nyborg (2008) “Attracting Responsible Employees: Green Production as
Labor Market Screening,” Resource and Energy Economics, 39, 509-526.
Chassagnon, A. and P.A. Chiappori (1997) “Insurance under Moral Hazard and Adverse Selection:
the Case of Pure Competition, DELTA mimeo, March.
Crocker, K. and A. Snow (1985) “The Eﬃciency of Competitive Equilibria in Insurance Markets
with Asymmetric Information”, Journal of Public Economics, 26, 207-219.
Desai, M. (2012) “The Incentive Bubble,” Harvard Business Review, 90(3), 124-132,
Dewatripont, M., Jewitt, I. and J. Tirole (1999a) “The Economics of Career Concerns, Part 1:
Comparing Information Structures”, Review of Economic Studies, 66, 183-198.
Fabbri, F. and D. Marin (2012) “What explains the Rise in CEO Pay in Germany? A Panel Data
Analysis for 1977-2009”, CESifo W.P. 3757.
Fehr, E. and K. Schmidt (2004) “Fairness and Incentives in a Multi-Task Principal-Agent Model,”
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 106, 453-474.
Frydman, C. (2007) “Rising Through the Ranks: The Evolution of the Market for Corporate
Executives, 1936-2003,” MIT mimeo, September.
Frydman, C. and D. Jenter (2010) “CEO Compensation,” Annual Review of Financial Economics,
2(1), 75-102.
Frydman, C. and R. E. Saks (2010) “Executive Compensation: A New View from a Long-Term
Perspective, 1936-2005,” Review of Financial Studies, 23, 2099-2138.
Gabaix, X. and A. Landier (2008) “Why has CEO Pay Increased So Much?,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 123: 49-100.
Gawande, A. (2009) “The Cost Conundrum: What a Texas Town Can Teach Us About Health
Care,” The New Yorker, June 1.
Guerrieri, V., Shimer, R. and R. Wright (2010) “Adverse Selection in Competitive Search Equilib-
rium”, Econometrica, 78, 1823-1862.
Hermalin, B. (2005) “Trends in Corporate Governance,” The Journal of Finance, 60(5), 2351—2384.
Holmström B. (1982) “Moral Hazard in Teams,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 13( 2), 324-340.
Holmström B., and P. Milgrom (1991) “Multi-Task Principal-Agent Analyzes: Incentive Contracts,
Asset Ownership, and Job Design,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 7, 24-52.
Itoh, H. (1991) “Incentives to Help in Multi-Agent Situations”, Econometrica, 59, 611-636.
Kosfeld, M. and F. von Siemens (2011) “Competition, Cooperation and Corporate Culture”, Rand
Journal of Economics, 42, 23-43.
Laﬀont, J.J., and J. Tirole (1986), “Using Cost Observation to Regulate Firms,” Journal of Political
Economy, 94, 614-641.
Lazear, E. (2000) “Performance Pay and Productivity,” American Economic Review, 90(5), 1346-
1361.
Lemieux, T., MacLeod, B. and D. Parent (2009) “Performance Pay and Wage Inequality,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 104 (1), 1-49.


                                                55
Marin, D. and T. Verdier (2009) “Globalization and the Empowerment of Talent”, Journal of
International Economics, 86, 209-223.
Maskin, E., and J. Tirole (1992), “The Principal-Agent Relationship with an Informed Principal,
II: Common Values,” Econometrica, 60(1), 1-42.
Moen, E. and Rosen, A. (2005) “Performance Pay and Adverse Selection,” Scandinavian Journal
of Economics 107(2), 279—298.
Netzer, N. and F. Scheuer (2010) “Competitive Markets without Commitment,” Journal of Political
Economy, 118,(6), 1079-1109
Philippon, T. and A. Reshef (2012) “Wages and Human Capital in the U.S. Financial Industry:
1909-2006”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Prendergast, C. (1992) “Career Development and Specific Human Capital Collection,” Journal of
the Japanese and International Economies, 6, 207-227.
Prendergast, C. (2007) “The Motivation and Bias of Bureaucrats,” American Economic Review,
97(1), 180—196.
Raith, M. (2003) “Competition, Risk, and Managerial Incentives,” American Economic Review,
93(4), 1425—1436.
Ramalingam, A. and M. Rauh (2010) “The Firm as a Socialization Device,” Management Science,
56(12), 2191-2206.
Rochet, J.C. and L. Stole (2002) “Nonlinear Pricing with Random Participation,” Review of Eco-
nomic Studies, 69, 1, 277-311.
Rosen, S. (1981) “The Economics of Superstars”, American Economic Review, 71: 845-858.
Rothschild, M., and J. Stiglitz (1976) “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay
on the Economics of Imperfect Information,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(4), 629—649.
Stantcheva, S. (2012) “Optimal Income Taxation with Adverse Selection in the Labor Market”,
mimeo, MIT.
Schmidt, K. (1997) “Managerial Incentives and Product Market Competition,” Review of Economic
Studies, 64(2), 191-213.
Shearer, B. (2004) “Piece Rates, Fixed Wages and Incentives: Evidence from a Field Experiment,”
Review of Economic Studies, 71, 513-534.
Stewart, J. (1994) “The Welfare Implications of Moral Hazard and Adverse Selection in Competitive
Insurance Markets, Economic Inquiry, 32(2), 193-208.
Thanassoulis, J. (2013) “Industry Structure, Executive Pay and Short-Termism,” Management
Science, 59, 402-419.
Tymula, A. (2012) “Competitive Screening of Heterogeneous Labor Force and Corporate Teamwork
Attitude, ” NYU mimeo, April.
Veiga, A. and G. Weyl (2012) “Multidimensional Product Design,” University of Chicago mimeo,
May.
Villas-Boas, M. and U. Schmidt-Mohr (1999) “Oligopoly with Asymmetric Information: Diﬀeren-
tiation in Credit Markets,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 30(3), 375-396.



                                               56
