                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       A TALE OF TWO STANDARDS:
    PATENT POOLS AND INNOVATION IN THE OPTICAL DISK DRIVE INDUSTRY

                                            Kenneth Flamm

                                         Working Paper 18931
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18931


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     March 2013




I am grateful to Anustubh Agnihotri, Blake Messer, Sankar Rengarajan, and Amin Shams for their
invaluable research assistance on this project, and to participants in the NBER premeeting on Patents,
Standards, and Innovation conference in May, 2011, and the NBER Patents, Standards, and Innovation
conference in January 2012. Without implicating them in my errors, I thank Rudy Bekkers, Shane
Greenstein, and Tim Simcoe for very useful comments on a prior draft. This material is based upon
work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0830389. I note that I first became
aware of the fascinating history of these two patent pools while serving as a consultant providing factual
analysis to a party involved in antitrust litigation in the optical disk drive industry. The effect of the
patent pools on innovation has not been at issue in the litigation. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Kenneth Flamm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
A Tale of Two Standards: Patent Pools and Innovation in the Optical Disk Drive Industry
Kenneth Flamm
NBER Working Paper No. 18931
March 2013
JEL No. O3,O31,O33,O34

                                              ABSTRACT

The impact of patent pools on the rate and direction of technological change is an open question in
both theoretical and empirical studies. Economic theory makes no unequivocal prediction. By contrast,
empirical studies of patent pools, to date, have largely concluded that patent pools have been associated
with reduced rates of technical innovation in the industries studied. This study differs from previous
empirical studies of patent pools by focusing primarily on direct measures of innovation in product
markets, rather than on indirect correlates of innovation (like patents), and by exploiting variation
over time in how pools were organized in the same technology area.

The paper analyzes the economic history of two successive sets of patent pools organized in substantially
the same technological area—the use of optical discs in data storage peripherals connected to computer
systems. These two patent pool episodes differed significantly in their organizational and institutional
details. These differences appear to have coincided with very different effects on the structure of product
markets, and the rate of technical innovation in optical disc products. The analysis concludes that different
approaches to pool organization and licensing policies implemented in these two patent pool examples
were associated with very different outcomes. The clear implication is that organizational details matter:
no single conclusion is likely to fit all cases. As theory seems to predict, the empirical effects of patent
pools on innovation are likely to be ambiguous, dependent on the historical and institutional particulars
of the pool and the industry it affects.


Kenneth Flamm
Director, Technology and Public Policy Program
Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs
SRH 3.227, P.O. Box Y
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78713-8925
kflamm@mail.utexas.edu
         Patent pools—agreements among multiple firms to issue joint licenses to a set of patents owned
by individual pool members—became increasingly common in high tech industry in the final decade of
the last century.1 The patent system motivating these pools sits at the intersection of two sometimes
conflicting objectives of economic policy. On the one hand, societies typically encourage innovation by
granting temporary monopolies (i.e., patents) on new technologies, as a dynamic incentive to induce
investment in R&D, the results of which otherwise are often difficult to appropriate by an inventor,
absent the state‐issued grant of temporary monopoly embodied in a patent. On the other hand, once a
particular technology has been created, it is socially optimal to make it available as widely as possible at
its marginal social cost of transfer, which is often close to zero, a price that would offer no return to an
inventor and discourage new investment in innovation. There is a fundamental tension between these
two divergent goals.

Conceptual Issues

         Patent pools further complicate this tradeoff. In complex technological systems, which
frequently are associated with formal or informal industry standards, it is common for patents owned by
different firms to cover distinct elements used in building the high tech system or technology platform.
It is now well‐established in the industrial organization literature that in this circumstance, a joint
licensing arrangement for all patents essential to the standard for the high tech system can have a
positive social impact in reducing both transactions and royalty costs for the multiple complementary
patent licenses that would be required to implement the system absent a pool (cutting through the
“patent thicket,” and avoiding “royalty stacking”2), thus making the production of such an innovative
high tech system less costly and more likely to actually occur. By increasing future profits for the
inventors, the prospect of a pool would also encourage investment in innovation.

        Offsetting the advantages of a patent pool in encouraging the introduction of a given
technological system is its potential to serve as a mechanism for restraining competition in markets for
the resulting technological system. A patent pool is an agreement to coordinate in setting prices for
technological inputs, and profit‐maximizing price‐setting from the perspective of the pool members
requires their consideration of the impacts of technology license pricing on downstream production
costs and sales prices for the technological system, product markets in which pool members frequently

1
  I am grateful to Anustubh Agnihotri, Blake Messer, Sankar Rengarajan, and Amin Shams for their invaluable
research assistance on this project, and to participants in the NBER pre‐meeting on Patents, Standards, and
Innovation conference in May, 2011, and the NBER Patents, Standards, and Innovation conference in January
2012. Without implicating them in my errors, I thank Rudy Bekkers, Shane Greenstein, and Tim Simcoe for very
useful comments on a prior draft. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 0830389. I note that I first became aware of the fascinating history of these two patent pools
while serving as a consultant providing factual analysis to a party involved in antitrust litigation in the optical disk
drive industry. The effect of the patent pools on innovation has not been at issue in the litigation.
2
  C. Shapiro, “Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross Licenses, Patent Pools, and Standard Setting,” in A. Jaffe, J.
Lerner, and S. Stern, Ed., Innovation Policy and the Economy, Vol. 1, (Cambridge: MIT Press), 2001.

                                                                                                                       3
also participate. In addition, the existence of the pool, and the recognition and joint defense of all
patents in the pool by its members, can protect weak pool patents from possible challenge by other
pool members. Further, joint defense by the pool will reduce the costs to an individual pool member of
defending against legal challenges to individual patents in the pool by outsiders, again providing
additional protection to weak patents that might otherwise be challenged in the courts.3

         For these reasons, there has been a continuing ebb and flow in attitudes toward patent pools in
U.S. antitrust policy. In the period after World War II, up until the early 1990s, antitrust policy in the U.S.
largely viewed patent pools as per se illegal.4 This changed in the 1990s, and the CD patent pool that I
analyze in this paper was arguably the first, modern postwar patent pool, whose creation coincided with
this change in US competition policy.

        The goal of this paper is to analyze the organization and operation of the two seminal patent
pool groups of the 1980s and 1990s, the CD patent pools, and their successors, the DVD patent pools,
and focus on an assessment of their impact on the pace of product market innovation in the optical disk
drive industry.5 The analysis will also touch on the impact of the pools on the industrial organization of
the optical disk drive industry. The primary focus will be to explore how the pace of technological
innovation in optical disk drives changed over time, and to study the linkages between the particulars of
patent pool licensing arrangements and product market technological change.

Patent Pools and the Rate of Innovation

         Since a patent pool increases profits from pool patents for pool members, anticipation of the
formation of a patent pool will increase the return ex ante on investment in innovation by firms planning
to join the pool. Indeed, this may even result in overinvestment (from a social perspective) before the
pool is formed.6

      The impact of patent pools on further innovation after a pool’s formation is ambiguous in the
economics literature. In effect, a patent pool is a coordination mechanism approximating the creation of

3
  See N. Gallini, “Private Agreements for Coordinating Patent Rights: The Case of Patent Pools,” IEL Paper in
Comparative Analysis of Institutions, Economics, and Law No. 5, July 2011, pp. 12‐13, available at
http://polis.unipmn.it/pubbl/RePEc/uca/ucaiel/iel005.pdf .
4
  R.J. Gilbert, “Anti‐trust for Patent Pools: A Century of Policy Evolution,” Stanford Technology Law Review, vol. 3,
2004.
5
  In this paper, I do not discuss the MPEG patent pool, which was organized after the CD patent pools but just
before the DVD patent pools. MPEG video compression technology is important to industry standards adopted for
the storage and playback of digital video content, but not needed for other, more general, forms of digital data
storage used in the computer industry. The MPEG patent pool was also organized very differently from the patent
pools examined in this paper.
6
  For summaries of this literature, see K.M. Schmidt, “Standards, Innovation Incentives, and the Formation of
Patent Pools,” in A. Fredenberg, Ed., The Pros and Cons of Standard Setting, (Swedish Competition Authority:
Stockholm), 2010, pp. 64‐65, available at
http://www.kkv.se/upload/Filer/Trycksaker/Rapporter/Pros&Cons/rap_pros_and_Cons_standard_setting.pdf ;
Gallini, 2010, pp. 15‐16.

                                                                                                                    4
a de facto technological monopolist for the technology standard and platform associated with the
patent pool. Kenneth Arrow’s seminal 1962 article on the impact of market structure on incentives to
innovate pointed out that an unchallenged incumbent monopolist will always have less incentive to
invest in the R&D required to create a particular new invention than a firm operating in a competitive
product market. With a competitive market, successful development of a new patented invention would
create monopoly power—and rents—not previously present in the industry.7 By contrast, an
unchallenged incumbent monopolist operating in the same product market will have a diminished
incentive to develop the same innovation, since a technological monopoly resulting from the new
innovation would in part be cannibalizing existing monopoly profits. These preexisting monopoly profits
would not be present for a firm considering the development of this same innovation in a competitive
product market. This reduced incentive for a monopolist to innovate has been dubbed the “replacement
effect”.8

         Furthermore, owners of other essential but complementary technology outside the pool would
be able to free‐ride on the standard supported by pool members, reducing the return on new R&D
investments by those within the pool. Rules for allocating pool income may also weaken incentives for
those within the pool to undertake further R&D if standard‐related R&D results are shared with other
pool members. On the other hand, as Gallini points out, the reduced costs of litigation among pool
members, and access to patents of other pool members, could have some offsetting simulative effect on
further investment in pool‐related innovation by pool members.9

        The most compelling study to date of the empirical effects of a patent pool on innovation is
Lampe and Moser’s detailed studies of the 19th century sewing machine patent pool. Lampe and Moser
conclude that innovation—measured by either patenting or technical metrics—was high before the
formation of the pool, dropped for firms both inside and outside the pool during its life, and then
increased once again after the pool was dissolved.10 I find both similarities and differences with this
pattern in the optical disk drive industry.

        Similarly, Joshi and Nerkar document that both the quantity and quality of patents granted to
pool members and their licensees, as well as patents granted to other firms patenting in the optical disk
industry fell after the creation of the DVD patent pools discussed in this study.11 They estimate statistical
models of patent numbers and quality over the 1982‐2006 period. Their results lead them to conclude

7
  K. Arrow, “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources to Innovation”, in R.R. Nelson, Ed., The Rate and
Direction of Economic Activity, (Princeton: Princeton University Press), 1962.
8
  L.M.B. Cabral, Introduction to Industrial Organization, (Cambridge: MIT Press), 2000, pp. 292‐298 lays out a
spare and intuitive presentation of the basic argument.
9
  Gallini, 2010, pp. 15‐16.
10
   R. Lampe and P. Moser, “"Do Patent Pools Encourage Innovation? Evidence from the Nineteenth‐Century Sewing
Machine Industry," Journal of Economic History, vol. 70(04), 2010, pages 898‐920, December; "Patent Pools and
the Direction of Innovation ‐ Evidence from the 19th‐century Sewing Machine Industry," NBER Working Paper
17573, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.
11
   A. Joshi and A. Nerkar, "When Do Strategic Alliances Inhibit Innovation by Firms? Evidence from Patent Pools in
the Global Optical Disc Industry," Strategic Management Journal, vol. 32, 2011, p. 1152.

                                                                                                                5
that both the quantity and quality of patented innovation declined for DVD pool members and their
licensees, relative to other industry participants, after 1998, and interpret these results as suggesting
that innovation in the optical disk industry was reduced by the creation of the DVD patent pools.

         My results suggest that this interpretation may not be entirely correct. In particular, there was
an optical disk patent pool already in place during Joshi and Nerkar's "control period" of 1982‐1997‐‐ the
CD patent pool. The analysis in this paper suggests that the economics of the licensing arrangements
adopted by the CD patent pool operated in a substantially different fashion from those later
implemented in the DVD patent pool, and that rather than comparing a no‐pool control period with a
later pool period, they are in fact comparing rates and quality of patenting in the first CD pool period to
patent quantity and quality in the later DVD pool period. Viewed in this light, their results are consistent
with the central conclusion of this paper‐‐ that the first pool, the CD pool, appears to have adopted
policies that on balance seem to have stimulated both competition and innovation, while the later DVD
pool adopted policies that inhibited both‐‐ rather than documenting some more general effect of patent
pools inhibiting innovation in the optical disk industry relative to a no‐pool counterfactual. I arrive at this
conclusion based on product market data, complementing the Joshi and Nerkar focus on patenting, an
indirect correlate of innovation.

Origins of the Optical Disk Data Storage Industry


        Optical disks have been used commercially to store digital data since the introduction of
Laserdisc technology in the late 1970s.12 Laserdisc was a higher quality, though largely unsuccessful,
competitor to VHS and Beta magnetic tape cassette video players (just 2% of US households had
Laserdisc players in 1998, while 10% of Japanese households had Laserdisc players in Japan in 1999).13
Dutch multinational Philips (along with US entertainment giant MCA) had jointly developed the
Laserdisc.

         By 1977, numerous companies had demonstrated prototypes of music players using optical
disks. In 1979, Philips had demonstrated a promising initial prototype of a digital audio system. Philips
then agreed to cooperate with Sony, jointly defining a common signal format and error‐correction
methods, and by 1980, the two companies had extended this partnership to other aspects of a common
standard for digital audio discs and players.14 The resulting system, the compact disc (CD), united Sony’s

12
   The video on a Laserdisc was reproduced using an analog signal, but the audio could be stored using either
analog or digital formats.
13
   The 2 million US households owning Laserdisc players in 1998 contrasted with 80‐90 million US VHS households.
(K.R. Brancolini, ”New and Emerging Video Technologies: A Status Report,” October 1998, available at
http://www.dlib.indiana.edu/~brancoli/videostatus.html ); J. Flaherty, “Bittersweet Times for Collectors of Laser
Disk Movies,” New York Times, April 29, 1999, available at
http://www.nytimes.com/1999/04/29/technology/bittersweet‐times‐for‐collectors‐of‐laser‐disk‐
movies.html?pagewanted=print&src=pm .
14
   This chronology is based on J.B. H. Peek and J.P. Sinjou, “The CD System as Standardized by Philips and Sony,” in
H. Peek, J. Bergmans, J. van Haaren, F. Toolenaar, and S. Stan, Origins and Successors of the Compact Disc,
Contributions of Philips to Optical Storage, (Springer, 2009).

                                                                                                                   6
error correction technology with Philips’ optical technology. The two companies announced the
proposed standard in 1980, and published it in 1981.15 It was also adopted by Japan’s Digital Audio Disc
Committee in 1981. The latter committee had been appointed by Japan’s Ministry of International Trade
and Industry to recommend a world standard for digital audio.16 Thus, a powerful government entity
overseeing firms headquartered within its borders that were, at the time, the most important
international consumer electronics producers, had effectively thrown its support behind what was to
evolve into the global standard for digital data storage technology.

        The first CD audio players went on the market in 1982.17 It soon became clear that there would
also be a significant market for an optical disk storage system for computer applications. In 1984 Philips
and Sony announced the original CD‐ROM (CD Read Only Memory) standard, and in 1985 the first
commercial CD‐ROM players were shipped as peripherals to large computer systems. The standard was
also adopted by international standards organizations in that year. There was no standard for
organization of the data and file systems on the CD‐ROM disks, however, until 1988, when proprietary
formats were supplanted by the international standard ISO 9660 file interchange format. Shortly
thereafter, in 1989, Philips and Sony were also joined by Microsoft in proposing a unified CD‐ROM XA
standard which also allowed computers to use multimedia variants of CD discs. These extensions of the
CD‐ROM format were soon incorporated into computer operating systems, most notably UNIX and
Windows. CD‐ROM data disk players were first shipped as add‐on units to personal computers in 1990.18

          Table 1 contains a timeline of the principal events in the historical development of optical
storage drive technology in the CD format. The CD‐ROM patent pool effectively came into being with the
joint 1984 announcement of the read‐only CD‐ROM standard by Philips and Sony. The same two
companies, in association with materials industry partners (who brought with them key elements of the
materials technology need to produce consumer‐writeable CDs), later organized distinct patent pools to
jointly license writeable CD formats (CD‐R, CD‐RW) in the 1990s, after their joint announcement in 1990
of the CD‐R format and standard.

Table 1 CD Technology Timeline

1980    Philips‐Sony announcement of the CD‐DA digital audio standard
1981    MITI Advisory Committee adopts Philips‐Sony CD‐DA standard, CD‐DA standard published
1982    CD‐DA audio players introduced, CD‐DA patent pool formed
1984    Philips‐Sony announcement of CD‐ROM standard
1985    1st CD‐ROMs shipped, peripherals to large computer systems
1988    Non‐proprietary ISO 9660 computer data/file system standard for CD‐ROMs

15
   S.G. Stan, “Compact Disc Standards and Formats,” in Peek, Bergmans, van Haaren, Toolenaar, and Stan, 2009,
pp. 138‐9.
16
   These details can be gleaned from S. G. Stan, “Optimization of the CD‐ROM System Towards Higher Data
Throughputs,” Thesis, Technical University of Eindhoven, Netherlands, 1999, pp. 5‐6, available at
http://alexandria.tue.nl/extra3/proefschrift/boeken/9901167.pdf ; J.H.B. Peek and J.P. Sinjou, 2009, pp. 53‐58.
17
   Stans, 2009, p. 139.
18
   S. Stan, “Compact Disc Standards and Formats,” in Peek, et. al., 2009, pp. 143‐150; Stan, 1999, p. 5.

                                                                                                                  7
1989 Microsoft joins in CD‐ROM XA standard
1990 Philips‐Sony CD‐R standards published; first PC CD‐ROM drives shipped
1991 1st CD‐R drives shipped
Early 1990s    CD‐R patent pool formed
1994 US Dept. of Justice investigation into CD licensing practices
        Taiwan, Korea producer entry in CD‐ROM drives
1996 CD‐RW standard published
1997 1st CD‐RW drives shipped

Sources: See text; also Stans, 2009.


        The CD‐ROM market for PCs grew explosively in the mid‐1990s, rising from under 5 million units
annually in 1993, to a peak of about 85 million units per year just five years later, in 1998 (Figure 1).
After 1998, computers increasingly were attached to writeable CD format drives, and later, DVD drives.

Figure 1            Estimated World‐wide Sales of Notebook and Desktop CD‐ROM Drives




Source: Stans, 1999, p. 8.


Technical Innovation and the Evolution of Product Markets

         Rapidly falling prices clearly explain much of the increase in sales. In 1988, the average sales
price for a CD‐ROM was about $500. In 1990, average unit price was about $300, and by 1995, under
$100.19 This amounts to a fall in average unit price of about 20.5% annually.

         Moreover, this is a lower bound on the rate of quality‐adjusted price decline, because the CD‐
ROM drive sales depicted in the later years in the above figure also capture dramatically higher quality
drives than the original CD‐ROM units sold back in 1988. Back in 1984, the original specification called

19
  D. J. Lee, “A study on the standards in optical storage device industry,” M.S. thesis, Sloan School, MIT, 2000, pp.
17, 20. Lee was an employee of Korean optical drive producer LG Electronics.

                                                                                                                        8
for a drive with a sustained data transfer rate of 153.6 kilobits per second (1X speed).20 By 1998, new
versions of the CD‐ROM drive specification called for transfer rates 32 times higher (32X).

        Figure 2 shows the rapid evolution of the sustained data transfer rate in the Philips‐Sony CD
format specifications, and the related decline in the average access time to read a random bit of
information off a CD‐ROM. Figure 3, based on a sample compiled for this study of 318 optical drive
reviews available on online from computer magazines and web sites, shows (by year of review) the
maximum CD format disk data transfer rates available in optical disk drives reviewed in these industry
publications. CD drive write ("burn") performance converged with read performance in 2002. Both
readers and burners continued to improve rapidly through 2003, to 52X, and then leveled off after
2003.21

          Figure 2 Evolution of Philips CD‐ROM drive specifications




Source: Stans, 1999, p. 9.




20
   While the original CD digital audio specification called for a disk with a capacity of 74 minutes, or 650MB of
digital data, the CD‐ROM specification expanded disc capacity up to 703MB of digital data, or 80 minutes of audio,
on a disk. The initial CD‐ROM specification also created a technological improvement over the CD‐DA specification,
then, by increasing the data storage capacity of a CD format audio disk. Two "flavors" of blank CD‐R and CD‐RW
discs with 650 and 700 MB capacities became de facto standards in the market.
21
   The 52X writers, though widely sold, were not technically incorporated into the CD‐R standard. (Drives with 56X
write speeds were even marketed at one point.) In 2002, Philips and Sony announced that no further increase
beyond 48X data transfer rates for CD writing would be incorporated into the CD‐R standards. The official position
was that “[s]tressing the system beyond 48X does not pay off in terms of customer satisfaction (i.e., significantly
shortening the recording time), while relatively unsafe operating electromechanical conditions are approached by
increasing the spinning rate toward 200Hz.” Stan, 2009, P. 157.

                                                                                                                  9
Figure 3                                               Maximum CD Data Transfer Rates in a Sample of 318 Reviewed Optical Disk Drives

                                                                                           CD Data Transfer Speeds
                             52




                             42
     Multiples of 1X Speed




                             32


                                                                                                                                     max burn
                                                                                                                                     max read
                             22




                             12




                             2
                                  1998   1999   2000    2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011




Source: Author’s analyses of sample of reviews of 318 optical disk drive models over 1998‐2011, published in online magazines
and web sites. Year is date of review.

         Little in the way of systematic collections of historical prices for CD‐format optical data storage
drives seems to have survived from the 1980s and 1990s. The best available data appear to be matched
model producer price indexes for optical disk storage devices from the Bank of Korea that cover the
1995‐2000 period.22 Table 2 shows massive declines in price over most of this period, accelerating from
46% to 62% annual drops from 1995 through 1997. The price increase in 1998 and more muted (but still
large) decline in 1999 coincided with an appreciation of the Korean won against the dollar, and, as we
shall see next, with an apparent consolidation in the industry and the beginning of the transition to the
successor technology, the DVD. Thus, both anecdotal reports on price and the best available price
indexes support the inference of a high rate of technical innovation, and quality‐adjusted price decline in
the CD format drive era, through the early 2000s.




22
  Though these indexes are presented as constructed using 2005 base period weights, they start in 1995 before
the DVD drives that accounted for the vast bulk of production in 2005 were being shipped. Since DVD drives were
not being shipped in any significant volume by Korean producers prior to 2000, they clearly must primarily reflect
movements in CD optical drive prices in the 1990s. There is no published documentation available on these
particular price indexes, and the most likely explanation is that the Bank of Korea spliced earlier optical storage
producer price indexes based on 1995 and 2000 weights to the 2005 base index it currently reports. The current
(2005 base) price indexes apparently make use of hedonic methods, so it less likely but not impossible that the
Bank went back and estimated hedonic price functions for the 1995‐2005 period. The Korean price indexes have
been converted to a U.S. dollar equivalent basis using average monthly won‐dollar exchange rates published online
by the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank.

                                                                                                                                                10
Table 2, Rates of Change in Dollar Basis Korea Producer Price Index for Optical Disk Drives

Time Period            Percent Change
1/95-1/96                      -46.1%
1/96-1/97                      -52.6%
1/97-1/98                      -62.0%
1/98-1/99                       11.2%
1/99-1/00                      -25.1%

Source: Author's calculations based on Bank of Korea Producer Price Index for Optical Disk Drives, converted to dollar basis using annual
average exchange rates published online by the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank.


Market Structure

        Initially, Philips and Sony were joined by Hitachi as the principal manufacturers of CD‐ROM units,
primarily for use as peripherals in high end (mainframe and mini‐) computer systems. By 1990, Toshiba
had also entered the market in force, and soon thereafter, a small Japanese producer of floppy disk
drives, Mitsumi, pioneered a lower cost drive unit with a PC‐oriented hardware interface. 23 The cheaper
Mitsumi‐style unit, combined with development of CD‐ROM extensions for the Windows operating
system, led to an explosion in demand for CD‐ROMs for use in PCs, and incorporation of a CD‐ROM as a
standard peripheral into mainstream PC designs.

         By the mid‐1990s, Korean and Taiwanese producers had entered the CD‐ROM business. The first
production of CD‐ROMs in Taiwan and Korea, for example, took place in 1994; within two years,
Taiwanese producers accounted for 12 percent of global output.24 By 1996, Korea’s LG alone accounted
for just under 10% of global sales.25 Propelled by intense competition from these new entrants, CD‐ROM
drive prices plummeted.

         The numbers of new entrants were impressive. According to data compiled from Disk/Trend (an
industry consulting company) reports, the number of optical disk drive producers went from 2 in 1983,
to 16 in 1985, to roughly 65 in 1995, then fell to 44 by 1999.26 Specialist startup firms just entering the
optical drive industry were initially disproportionately important in stimulating initial technological
improvements to optical drives. Prior to 1988 (when the industry standard ISO 9660 digital storage

23
   See Lee, 1999, pp. 18‐21. The Mitsumi design also replaced a separate external "caddy" carrier needed to hold
the CD disc when it was inserted into the drive and interfaced with the drive's optical pickup unit, with a simple
motorized plastic tray that loaded the disc into the correct position.
24
   G. W. Noble, “Conspicuous Failures and Hidden Strengths of the ITRI Model: Taiwan’s Technology Policy Toward
Hard Disk Drives and CD‐ROMs,” Report 2000‐02, Information Storage Industry Center, UC San Diego, March 2000.
25
   Lee, 1999, p. 20. Korea's Samsung reported shipping its first CD‐ROM drive at the end of 1994. "Driven," Invest
Korea Journal, vol. 58, no. 3, May‐June 2008.
26
   See O. Khessina, “Effects of Entry Mode and Incumbency Status on the Rates of Firm Product Innovation in the
Optical Disk Drive Industry, 1983‐1999,” Report 2002‐01, Information Storage Industry Center, University of
California, San Diego, October 2002, Figure 2, p. 45. Disk/Trend’s own J.N. Porter gives slightly different numbers:
he has optical disk companies rising from 16 in 1985 to a peak of 60 in 1995, then falling to 44 by 1999. J.N. Porter,
“A Historical Perspective of the Disk Drive Industry,” presented at THIC Meeting, San Jose, April 2005, slide 18,
available at http://www.thic.org/pdf/April05/disktrend.jporter.050419.pdf .

                                                                                                                                            11
format was defined), the fastest CD drives shipped‐‐using proprietary data formats‐‐ were consistently
coming from new, startup companies, but after the standard was defined, incumbent, existing
electronics and computer firms took the lead in shipping faster drives, with the newer firms now trailing
close behind.27

         One time‐recordable and rewritable CD standards, which would allow computer users to write
data to (and not just read data from) optical disks were defined by Philips and Sony in the early 1990s. A
specification for a magneto‐optical disk created in 1990 was not widely adopted by others, but did lead
to the Sony Minidisc, introduced in 1992. This standard was incompatible with existing CD‐ROM drives.
Another compatible standard defined in 1990, for a one‐time writable CD‐R (Recordable) disc, became
the de facto standard of the computer industry. Yet another recordable system, for a CD‐RW
(Rewritable) was specified in 1996.28 Disks recorded using either the CD‐R or CD‐RW technologies were
compatible with technology used in CD‐ROM (read only) drives. Prices of optical disk recorders dropped
rapidly, from $15,000 in 1991, to $5,000 in 1993, to under $1,000 in 1995.29


The CD Patent Pools

        In 1982, Philips and Sony formed a patent pool, and launched a worldwide joint licensing
program for the original CD digital audio patents, administered by Philips. This patent pool was later
extended to other formats and technologies related to CD standards proposed by Philips and Sony.30 In
the early 1990s, Philips and Sony formed a patent pool for the CD‐R technology with Taiyo Yuden,31 a
Japanese materials producer with patents covering the specialized materials technology used in
manufacturing recordable CD‐R disks. Later, a similar pool was formed by Philips and Sony with
Japanese producer Ricoh to license the CD‐RW technology's patents.

         The CD‐ROM patents were reportedly licensed to some drive manufacturers with a running
royalty rate of 3 percent of sales of equipment using the technology.32 Another manufacturer in 1994
acknowledged paying about a 2% royalty rate on each CD player sold.33 Similarly, the royalty rate for CD
drives in 1995 was reportedly 2‐3% of sales.34 This low royalty rate (“a reasonable level for a new



27
   See O. Khessina, op. cit., Figure 3.
28
   Stans, 2009, p. 151.
29
   “The hows and whys of optical proliferation. (interview with Carl M. Rodia), “ Tape‐Disc Business, vol. 10, no. 12,
December 1995; L.S. Kempster, “A Media Maniac’s Guide to Removable Mass Storage Media,” Nonvolatile
Memory Technology Conference, 1986, p. 184. See also S.L. Adkins, “CD‐ROM: A review of the 1994‐95 literature,”
Computers in Libraries, vol. 16, no. 1, Jan. 1996.
30
   M.A. Pena‐Castellot, “Commission settles allegations of abuse and clears patent pools in the CD market,”
European Union, Competition Policy Newsletter, No. 3, Autumn 2003, p. 57.
31
   Judge Sidney Harris, Initial Determination, In the Matter of CERTAIN RECORDABLE COMPACT DISCS AND
REWRITABLE COMPACT DISCS, Investigation No. 337‐TA‐474, U.S. International Trade Commission, 2003, p. 140.
32
   Lee, 1999, p. 18. The author, Lee, worked for LG Electronics, a major Korean manufacturer of CD‐ROMs.
33
   W. Sekiguchi, “U.S. probes Sony‐Philips CD‐license pact, Manufacturers Complain of Hefty Fees, Fear Patent
Extension,” Nikkei Weekly, July 18, 1994.
34
   D.J. Parker, “High‐density & re‐inventing the disc,” CD‐ROM Professional, vol. 8, no. 6, June 1995.

                                                                                                                   12
entrant”35) is of great interest, because, as we have just seen, it facilitated entry by large numbers of
new entrants into the optical drive business, and intense price competition. This royalty structure
contrasted markedly with the very different royalty rate structures adopted later by the DVD patent
pools.

         It is notable that the initial choice of the Philips‐Sony CD audio standard by the Japanese
industry advisory group in 1980 had immediately followed an unsuccessful attempt by MITI in the mid‐
1970s to pressure the Japanese consumer electronics industry to adopt Betamax as its sole video player
standard.36 That, and the bruising standards battle between Betamax and VHS that was in full swing
when the CD standard was blessed in 1981, likely played some role in Philips and Sony setting a low
royalty rate. Both Philips and Sony certainly would have wanted to avoid any further standards battles
with unhappy Japanese licensees with alternative competing optical storage technologies in their
portfolios.

         Indeed, Philips actually had a previous history of lowering royalties in order to attract support
for its proposed standards. In the early 1960s, for example, it had invented the audio cassette. After
failing to attract support from other companies when it attempted to charge a royalty for the
technology (and some hard bargaining by Sony), Philips ultimately made the technology freely available
to any company supporting the standard.37

        One can speculate that some informal understanding about a low royalty rate may have figured
into the decision by the MITI advisory committee—which would have included participants tied to
Sony’s Japanese competitors—to choose the Philips‐Sony CD standard proposal in 1980. In March 1979,
a team from Philips had visited most of the major players in the Japanese consumer electronics industry,
and MITI’s Digital Audio Disc Committee, to lobby for its system, which at the time was competing for




35
   Lee, 1999, p. 18.
36
   M.A. Cusumano, Y. Mylonadis, and R.S. Rosenbloom, “Strategic Maneuvering and Mass‐Market Dynamics: The
Triumph of VHS over Beta,” Business History Review, vol. 66, no. 1, Spring 1992.
37
   H.J. Braun, Music and Technology in the Twentieth Century, (Baltimore: JHU Press), 2002, p, 161; J. Barker,
“Computers: Who really invented the compact disc? Somebody stands to make a fortune out of the compact disc
revolution, but it certainly won’t be Philips,” The Guardian, London, November 15, 1990; “Making a penny or three
from digital discs,” New Scientist, Nov. 5, 1981, p. 374. Sony reportedly used its market position in tape recorders
to pressure Philips into royalty‐free licensing for the audio tape cassette, per Sony’s official corporate history:
“Philips initially suggested that it receive a payment of 25 yen for each unit sold by companies in Japan. [Sony's]
Ohga thought this was excessive and did not agree to it. A few days later, Philips showed some flexibility and asked
for 6 yen per unit, a figure it said other companies had agreed to. Masanobu Tada, Operations Division manager,
recommended that Sony accept the offer, but Ohga still refused, insisting that unless Philips waived royalties
altogether, Sony would collaborate with Grundig. Finally, Philips agreed to waive royalties, but did not give Sony
exclusive rights to the technology. In 1965, based on a patent that guaranteed compatibility, Philips made the
technology available free of charge to manufacturers all over the world.” From Sony Corporation, Sony History,
Part II, Chap. 5, available at http://www.sony.net/SonyInfo/CorporateInfo/History/SonyHistory/2‐05.html .

                                                                                                                 13
designation as the standard against alternative solutions developed by other Japanese consumer
electronics firms.38

         A rather different licensing fee structure was set for the removable disks going into CD players.
Here, Philips had bitter memories of not collecting any royalties on the manufacture of the audio tape
cassettes it had pioneered two decades earlier. For blank writeable disks, a fixed fee per disk
manufactured was charged—what Philips had initially sought unsuccessfully two decades earlier with
audio cassettes.39 A base fee of three cents per disk had been established for U.S. licensees in 1982, and
an escalation clause linked increases in this fee to the Consumer Price Index. By 1995, this fee had risen
to five cents per disc, and with a dramatic reduction over time in manufacturing costs for discs, the cost
of the license fees paid to the patent pool by 1995 had risen to almost a third of the costs of
manufacture for a recordable disc.40

         The Department of Justice began an active antitrust investigation into the CD format disc
licensing practices of Sony and Philips in 1994,41 and a private antitrust suit over licensing practices for
CDs and CD players was also filed against Philips and Sony in 1995.42 The Justice investigation reportedly
led to a settlement in which the two firms agreed to no longer compel licensees to license all patents in
a technology package, but instead to permit licensing of subsets or even individual patents from the
pool portfolio. (This was to become standard policy for later patent pools approved by the Justice
Department.) This antitrust suit and Justice scrutiny led Philips to formally organize the successor to the
Sony‐Philips CD patent pool, the DVD 3c patent pool (discussed next), as a formal, official patent pool,
and to seek a so‐called “comfort letter” from the Justice Department officially blessing its existence
several years later.43

        Still later, in 2002, Philips sued Taiwanese CD‐R manufacturer Princo and 20 others, filing a
complaint before the U.S. International Trade Commission asserting that CD‐R (blank) disks being
imported into the U.S. infringed patent pool patents. Princo's response alleged that Philips’ licensing
practices constituted patent misuse, and an administrative law judge initially found the pool patents
unenforceable by reason of patent misuse in 2003. This decision was ultimately appealed and


38
   And it is reasonable to surmise that ranges of royalties to be charged for its system would have been a topic of
conversation with these groups as it lobbied for support. On the 1979 Philips visit to Japan, see Peek and Sinjou,
2009, p. 54.
39
   And of course, Sony was on the same side of the bargaining table with Philips this time.
40
   Parker, 1995.
41
   The license fees were reportedly about 6 cents per disk at this time. B. Holland and M.A. Gillen, “Sony, Philips
Under CD‐Patent Scrutiny? U.S. Justice Dept. to Conduct Antitrust Investigation,” Billboard, July 23, 1994; W.
Sekiguchi, “U.S. probes Sony‐Philips CD‐license pact, Manufacturers Complain of Hefty Fees, Fear Patent
Extension,” Nikkei Weekly, July 18, 1994; “U.S. Investigates CD Trade Practices,” International Herald Tribune, July
14, 1994; A. Sandler, “Justice looking into Sony‐Philips deals,” Daily Variety, July 13, 1994; E. Corcoran, “Justice
Probing Compact Disc Industry; Licensing Agreements by Firms Said to Be Under Scrutiny,” Washington Post, July
13, 1994.
42
   A. Sandler, “CD Lawsuit targets Sony, Philips,” Daily Variety, May 5, 1995.
43
   R.P. Merges, “Institutions for Intellectual Property Exchange: The Case of Patent Pools,” in R. Dreyfuss, Ed.,
Intellectual Products: Novel Claims to Protection and Their Boundaries (Oxford Univ. Press, 2001).

                                                                                                                 14
overturned, and the U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear a final appeal by Princo in May 2011.44 A
Federal circuit court decision in 2010 had revisited this legal doctrine in a controversial analysis, and, it is
argued, reinterpreted the legal doctrinal bounds placed on patents that may be included in pools (in this
case, for example, nonessential patents apparently were included in the pool). Putting aside legal issues,
the U.S. ITC investigation and proceedings shed considerable light on the economic structure of the CD‐
R patent pool and its fees and licensing provisions.

         In particular, the U.S. ITC proceedings established that the CD‐R license agreements required a
payment of 3% of net sales price per disc, with a minimum per unit royalty of 10 Japanese yen.45 The
effective royalty rate in 1996, at the time the Justice antitrust investigation was settled, was the
relatively small 3%, at a time when CD‐R disks sold for about $7 and the dollar was worth about 101
yen.46 By 2000, however, the price of a CD‐R had declined to under 50 cents, and the now binding 10
yen minimum fee translated into an 18 percent royalty.47

        After peaking in 2000, the number of CD‐R disk manufacturers began to decline.48 Despite the
low cost Asian competition, CD‐R pool members Sony, Philips, and Taiyo Yuden still accounted for about
13 percent of global CD‐R disk sales in 2002. (Sony, Philips, and Ricoh accounted for a smaller‐‐under 10
percent‐‐ share of production of the more expensive CD‐RW disks.) Nonetheless, by 2003, over 70
percent of the world’s CD‐R disk production was produced by manufacturers with a pool license.49

        The ITC proceedings also established that disks sold by licensed disk manufacturers to pool
members paid no royalties to the pool. That is, rather than paying a royalty to the pool on subcontracted
outside production, then dividing the resulting revenues according to the pool’s income allocation
formula, subcontracted production paid no royalties at all.50 Effectively, in a competitive disk
manufacturing market, this would mean that pool members paid incremental manufacturing cost for
disk production they had contracted out, while third parties faced an incremental cost that was roughly
22 percent higher, in 2000, after accounting for the royalty. It is understandable then that Philips, Sony,
and Taiyo Yuden continued to successfully produce and market blank discs despite increasing
competition from relatively low cost Asian entrants into optical disk production.

         Effectively, the royalty structure encouraged a globalized production network, with
manufacturing contracted out to efficient, low cost, producers in Taiwan and China, and pool members
collecting the royalty wedge between manufacturing cost and market price. A competitive fringe of
arms‐length, licensed producers could ultimately be squeezed out by the pool members simply setting

44
   Greg Stohr, “Philips Wins Princo Patent Clash as High Court Rejects Appeal,” available at
http://mobile.bloomberg.com/news/2011‐05‐16/philips‐wins‐princo‐patent‐clash‐as‐high‐court‐rejects‐appeal .
45
   The original CD‐R license agreement called for the 3 percent of net sales royalty with a 10 yen minimum; the
agreement in force in 2003 called for a royalty of 6 cents per disk if in “full compliance” with license obligation, 10
yen if not fully compliant. The joint CD‐RW disk license had a 10 cent per disk royalty. Harris, p. 372.
46
   Manufacturing cost for Taiwanese CD‐R disk producer Gigastorage was 97.5 cents in 1997. Harris, 2003, p. 394.
47
   Harris, 2003, pp. 141, 144‐145.
48
   Ibid., p. 172.
49
   Ibid., pp. 172‐173.
50
   Ibid., p. 183.

                                                                                                                     15
their blank disc prices just a little lower than the sum of the most efficient contract manufacturer's cost
and the pool royalty to external licensees. It is therefore not surprising that there seems to have been a
rapid decline in the number of independent, third party (non pool‐affiliated) producers in the blank disc
market after 2000.

        Of course, there was nothing to prevent the pool members from dropping the final sales prices
on their subcontracted production closer to the purchase price (and their marginal cost) paid to their
subcontractors, in order to steal market share, and royalty profits, from their fellow pool members. If
such a price war were to break out, however, it would force royalty‐paying arms‐length licensees out of
business, push down prices for all disks as subcontracted production ramped up, and ultimately, reduce
the profits pool member collectively derived from both licensing fees and their sales of contracted‐out
production. There is no evidence in the historical record, however, that this sort of technology rent‐
eliminating, Bertrand‐style price competition among the pool members ever broke out.

         It is useful to contrast this arrangement with the terms of the CD‐ROM/‐R/‐RW drive hardware
licenses, where licensing fees were apparently capped at 2‐3 percent of sales price. As long as a non‐
pool producer could tolerate a cost disadvantage fixed at this level (perhaps making it up with lower
input costs or overhead or scale economies), then, absent a fixed minimum royalty, even the precipitous
decline in price typically observed in these sorts of high tech products would not put them at an
increasing and ultimately ruinous disadvantage relative to pool producers and their subcontractors.

         The USITC proceeding also established that royalties were not paid internally within the patent
pool, i.e., that pool members did not pay royalties to each other. Indeed, it seems to be the case that no
royalties were also paid by cross‐licensees outside the pool as well. “Philips maintains that in the case of
discs sold to cross‐licensees, there are no royalties, because the royalty has, in effect, already been paid
“in kind” by the cross‐license back to Philips.”51 This would create a second source of disadvantage for
third party disk manufacturers with no cross‐licenses with pool members, since standards‐related patent
holders outside the patent pool who had negotiated cross‐licenses with pool members would be able to
require that still an additional royalty be paid to them by third parties even if they had a pool license. At
the end of the day, with this type of license structure in place in a highly competitive manufacturing
environment, one would expect to see remaining in the industry only the patent pool members, their
subcontractors, and third parties in possession of a cross‐license with the pool members. That seems to
have been precisely the situation that developed in the DVD drive industry, which adopted a variant of
the CD‐R disc licensing model.




51
  Ibid., p. 181. Also, third party manufacturers producing discs on behalf of a company with a cross‐license with
Philips are not required to pay royalties to the Philips. In 2003, there were a number of these cross‐licensed non‐
pool member companies, including some who were active in the manufacture or sale of CD‐R or CD‐RW disks.
Maxell, a subsidiary of Hitachi, was one of those companies. 42% of global CD‐R sales and 43% of sales in the
Americas did not require royalty payments to Philips. Ibid., p. 410‐11.

                                                                                                                  16
The DVD Optical Storage Industry

         Unlike the CD‐R patent pools, the origins of the DVD patent pools have been described in some
detail in a variety of other sources.52 I begin with an overview of the technological innovations that led
to their formation.

         In 1993, Toshiba, Hitachi, Pioneer, and Panasonic began work on a higher capacity replacement
for the CD that would be able to accommodate video data, and in particular, speeds and capacities that
would accommodate movies. Philips and Sony reacted by beginning work on their own alternative, next
generation digital data disk format, in 1994. Both groups sought allies in the computer and motion
picture industries to support their approaches. IBM ultimately brokered a compromise, through an
organization (the DVD Forum) that was set up to bring the competing efforts together on a common
specification.

         This effort was successful in brokering a common specification for video programming, the DVD‐
Video specification (1996), a read‐only computer data format, DVD‐ROM (1996), and a rewritable data‐
only format, DVD‐RAM (1997), but the two rival groups were not able to agree on a common
specification for the one time‐recordable DVD formats. They were also unable to agree to a common,
single pool, and license, for their DVD‐video patents. As a result, two incompatible DVD recording
formats were ultimately introduced, with the Philips and Sony group promoting its DVD+R(2002) and
DVD+RW (1999, revised 2001) recordable and rewritable formats, while the Toshiba, Hitachi, Pioneer53,
Panasonic group introduced its alternative DVD‐R and DVD‐RW recordable and rewritable formats.54
Each of the two groups also formed its own separate pool to license its patents for DVD‐video, in
addition to its version of the recordable and rewritable formats. As a result, it was necessary for a third
party to take out a license from both groups in order to manufacture DVD‐Video players or disks (and
possibly licenses to patents held by firms not in either pool, like Thomson). In addition, a different
version of the pool’s license would be required if manufacturing equipment or disks for one or the other
pool’s recordable/rewritable formats.

         DVD video players were first commercialized in Japan in late 1996, and shipped to the U.S.
market in 1997. While the first DVD‐ROMs for computer use were made available in 1997, they were not
really attractive to early adopters until 1998, when some software vendors began to use them for
product distribution. The first writeable DVD‐R standard published in 1997 (version 1.0) was not entirely
compatible with drives using DVD‐ROM and DVD‐Video technology, and it was not until an upgrade to

52
   See Lee, 2000, op. cit.; S. Gauch, “+ vs ‐: Dynamics and Effects of Competing Standards of Recordable DVD‐
Media,” in T.M. Egyedi and K. Blind, Ed., The Dynamics of Standards, (E. Elgar), 2009; R. Bekkers, E. Iversen, and K.
Blind, “Patent pools and non‐assertion agreements: coordination mechanisms for multi‐party IPR holders in
standardization,” August, 2006; R. Aoki and S. Nagaoka, “Coalition formation of a standard consortium and a
patent pool: Theory and evidence from MPEG2, DVD, and 3G,“ March 2007; R. P. Merges, “Institutions for
Intellectual Property Exchange: The Case of Patent Pools,” in R. Dreyfuss, Ed., Intellectual Products: Novel Claims
to Protection and Their Boundaries (Oxford Univ. Press, 2001).
53
   Pioneer was to later shift into the “+” camp and join the DVD 3c consortium.
54
   Dates for the specifications shown here are taken from S.G. Stan, "Digital Versatile Discs," chap. 5, in Peek,
Bergmans, van Haaren, Toolenaar, and Stan, 2009.

                                                                                                                   17
version 2.0 in 2000 that DVD‐R discs could be read in DVD‐ROM and DVD‐Video players.55 Thus, the true
commercial advent of writeable DVD storage dates to 2000, when the expensive and incompatible
writeable DVD‐R 1.0 technology that first shipped in 1997 was superseded by the mature, fully
compatible DVD‐R 2.0 technology standard. This was further formalized in 2001 when the DVD Forum
issued a specification for a fully compatible product it dubbed a "multi" DVD recorder‐‐ a unit that would
read or write DVD‐Video, DVD‐ROM, DVD‐R/‐RW, and DVD‐RAM discs.

        Similarly, the initial version of the Philips/Sony group's +RW (1999) recordable standard had
compatibility issues with DVD‐ROM technology that were not fixed until an upgrade to a later version of
the standard published in 2001. While +RW drives were first sold in 2000, the first fully compatible DVD
+RW drives were not shipped until the end of 2001. In 2002, a write once +R standard was also defined.
Thus, the +R/+RW technology was not available as a fully mature technology standard until 2002. In
2003, Microsoft announced it would support all DVD format standards, and producers began to
advertise "super multi" DVD drives‐‐ multi drives that could all read and write the "+" as well as the "‐"
formats. A summary timeline of the development of DVD technology is shown in Table 3.

Table 3, DVD Timeline

1996       First DVD Video players shipped
1997       First DVD‐R (1.0) , DVD‐ROM players shipped
1998       DoJ "comfort letter" for DVD 3c patent pool; Taiwan, Korea entry into CD‐R/RWs
1999       DoJ "comfort letter" for DVD 6c patent pool; first DVD‐R (2.0), DVD‐RW, +RW (incompatible)
           units shipped
2000       +RW recorder (incompatible) sold
2001       DVD+RW recorder (compatible) shipped; DVD Multi standard (read/write ‐R/‐RW/‐RAM/‐
           ROM/Video discs) defined
2002       DVD +R recorder shipped; Blu‐ray, DVD‐dual layer tech intro
2003       1st Blu‐ray players shipped; Microsoft announces it will support all DVD standards
2005       HD‐DVD player shipped
Sources: Described in text.

The DVD Patent Pools

        The Philips and Sony "+" standard group, augmented by Pioneer, formed the so‐called DVD 3c
patent pool, and as remarked earlier, sought a “comfort letter” approving its formation from the Justice
Department. (The DVD 3c pool was later joined by LG in 2003.56) The official blessing from Justice




55
     The definitive discussion of the evolution of these standards is Stans, 2009, Ibid.
56
     “LG partakes in 3C DVD licensing group,” EE Times Asia, August 2003.

                                                                                                        18
followed in December 1998.57 The licensing fees described in this letter, for video players and DVD‐
ROMs, was 3.5% of net sales, subject to a $5 per unit minimum, and 5 cents per disc for DVD disks.58

         When considering the issue of “foreclosure of competition in related markets”59, the Justice
letter made two significant statements. “First, the agreed royalty is sufficiently small relative to the total
costs of manufacture that it is unlikely to enable collusion among sellers of DVD players or discs. Second,
the proposed program should enhance rather than limit access to the Licensors' "essential" patents.
Because Philips must license on a non‐discriminatory basis to all interested parties, it cannot impose
disadvantageous terms on competitors, let alone refuse to license them altogether.”60

         As previously remarked, Justice would have been cognizant, from complaints over CD disc
licensing fees that had already surfaced in 1994 and 1995 and prompted it to investigate the CD pool,
that a fixed minimum licensing cost that was “small relative to the total costs of manufacture” at the
beginning of a high tech product’s life cycle could turn into a vastly larger relative cost share as the
product matured, and product manufacturing costs and prices dropped sharply. Had Justice analysts
reviewed what had happened to CD player and CD‐ROM prices over time, they would have realized that
the hardware royalties on DVD drives, which unlike the earlier CD drive case (but like the CD disk case)
now included a minimum per unit royalty, were likely to become the large share of product cost that
royalties were already en route to becoming in CD discs. It seems likely that both Philips and Sony would
have understood the ultimate implications of this change in their licensing practices for hardware, just
as both firms would have been well aware of the heightened competition from Asian entrants that was
reducing the profitability of CD drive manufacture.

         The language about non‐discrimination in this letter was not very meaningful. As noted earlier,
Philips had a long established policy of discriminating among its competitors when fixing royalty rates,
depending on whether or not they were fellow patent pool members or held cross licenses with Philips.
As I show below, available evidence suggests that this same policy was followed in the DVD patent
pools. This might not be illegal or even harmful on balance from an economic point of view, but it
certainly did impose economically “disadvantageous terms” on potential new market entrants who
needed access to the essential patents to do business. For a pool member (or a third party cross‐
licensed to the pool member), the marginal cost per unit of using other pool members’ patents under
the CD pool rules was zero, quite different from the steadily rising share of royalties in product cost that
was faced by an outsider who did not belong to this club. A patent is in fact a legally granted right to
exclude controlled by the patent holder, but the Justice letter to some extent buries this cold reality
beneath noble rhetorical flourishes about non‐discriminatory licensing.



57
   The DVD 3c comfort letter was actually the second such comfort letter issued; the first one, back in June 1997,
blessed the MPEG video compression standard that was also required to manufacture a DVD player. See
http://www.justice.gov/atr/public/press_releases/1997/1173.pdf .
58
   The minimum per unit royalty was actually $7 until January 1, 2000, when it was slated to drop to $5. See
http://www.justice.gov/atr/public/busreview/2121.pdf .
59
   Ibid., p. 13.
60
   Ibid.

                                                                                                                     19
         The second DVD (‐R/‐RW) patent pool, originally composed of Hitachi, Matsushita, Mitsubishi,
Toshiba, JVC, and Time Warner (and hence called the 6c patent pool) received its own comfort letter
from Justice in June of 1999.61 The same language on royalties being “sufficiently small relative to the
total costs of manufacture that it is unlikely to enable collusion,” and licensing on a “non‐discriminatory”
basis is used as in the DVD 3c letter. The DVD6c patent pool was later joined by Sanyo and Sharp in
2005, and by Samsung in 2006.

         In 1999, little immediate reason for concern about royalties foreclosing downstream
competition may have been readily apparent.62 Within a few short years, however, the royalties charged
by the DVD patent pools evolved into truly significant sums relative to the total cost of manufacturing
optical disk drives (ODDs)—indeed they now account for the majority of manufacturing cost for a
potential entrant. This is a very different reality from that considered by Justice back in 1999, when a
$15‐20 royalty was a relatively small portion of the cost of a recordable DVD drive that typically might
sell for many hundreds of dollars.63

        To understand just how prohibitive a barrier to entry by potential competitors the DVD patent
pool royalties became, consider the average price of a recordable DVD optical drive, such as those
configured with most computers sold in recent years. According to IDC, the average worldwide price for
a DVD burner, on an if‐sold‐OEM basis, was $30 in 2007, $25 in 2008, and $23 in 2009.64 In a December
2008 presentation,65 Hisashi Kato, of Japan's Mitsubishi Electric, estimated that the royalty payable to 4
principal patent pools holding IP related to a DVD recorder to be $17 (of which $14 goes to the DVD6c
and DVD3c pools). This is 68 percent of the average selling price of a DVD recorder in 2008, and
presumably an even larger share of its cost.66 (Table 1)




61
   http://www.justice.gov/atr/public/busreview/2485.htm . One significant difference with the DVD 3c letter is
that this letter discusses a “firewall” that Toshiba, as administrator of the pool, is to erect around sensitive
information about production and pricing obtained from licensees.
62
   Though this was to change very rapidly.
63
   It should also be noted that as in the previous generation of recordable CD discs, the minimum per unit royalty
model was adopted in DVD discs. By 2003, the binding minimum royalty for recordable DVD media amounted to
one third of the net selling price of a recordable DVD. Harris, 2003, p. 179.
64
   IDC’s Worldwide Blu‐Ray, DVD, CD, and Other Optical Storage Drive 2009 ‐ 2013 Forecast and Analysis, Table 20,
p. 22.
65
   Hisashi Kato, "Current status and issues such as patent pools in the area of electronics," available at
http://www.jisc.go.jp/policy/kenkyuukai/ipr/sympo.html
66
   A similar situation applied to DVD disks. As far back as 2003, “[t]he combined royalties paid by DVD disc
manufacturers under the three DVD patent pools that were approved by the DOJ [the two DVD pools and the
MPEG pool] in its Business Review Letters represent a total of 33% of the current net selling price of DVD discs.”
Harris, op. cit., p. 402.

                                                                                                                20
Table 1. DVD Recorder Royalties, Ca. 2008

        Along similar lines, Chinese DVD producers estimated that the licensing fees on DVD patents in
2007 for the first time exceeded the cost of manufacturing the DVD player. That is, the royalty rate
exceeded 100 percent of manufacturing cost.




Figure 3. DVD Player Patent Fees in Relation to DVD Manufacturing Costs

Source: Presentation by Huang Tiejun, AVS Working Group, Hong Kong, March 2008, available at

http://www.smpte.org.hk/smpte.org.hk/march12008/huang‐part1.pdf .

        These data lend credibility to the hypothesis that members of the DVD patent pools have
adopted the earlier Philips/Sony CD pool model, i.e., that royalty‐free cross licenses within the pools,
and between patent pools, are the rule, while outsiders pay stiff royalties. This gives pool members a
large competitive advantage relative to potential entrants from outside the ranks of established players,



                                                                                                       21
and is a powerful explanation for the increase in concentration in the optical disk drive marketplace that
can be observed after 2000.

Impacts on Product Markets

          After Sony and Philips came out with their first CD‐ROM models in the mid‐1980s, Japanese
electronics producers Hitachi, NEC, and Toshiba quickly followed with their own versions of these drives.
Earlier, I noted that first Mitsumi, and then Korean producers LG and Samsung had followed with lower
priced models in the early to mid‐1990s. In the late 1990s, Taiwanese producers entered the fray, and
their market share soared. By 1996, the market share of the patent pool membership (Sony and Philips)
had probably fallen to less than 10 percent of the CD‐ROM drive market.67 By 1999, LG was the largest
producer of CD‐ROM and DVD‐ROMs globally (with a 15% market share), Samsung had 7% of the
market, and Taiwan’s Acer and Lite‐on, together, accounted for another 9% of the market.68 This
contrasted with a 6% market share for Sony.

        In response, Japanese producers effectively abandoned low‐end products, and switched to high
end products—first CD writers and rewriters, then DVD drives, and most recently, Blu‐ray (the higher
capacity 21st century successor to the DVD) drives. This is clearly visible in Figure 4, which shows
Japanese production of optical disk drives, broken out by product types wherever possible. (Yen have
been converted to dollars at market exchange rates.) CD‐ROMs probably accounted for the bulk of the
value of Japanese production until about 1998, when they were surpassed by what would have been
mainly CD writers. The value of Japanese optical drive production (in Japan) peaked in 2001, and then
went into sharp decline.

         U.S. trade statistics show a sharp fall off in the value of imports from Japan over roughly the
same time period (Figure 5). Import volumes show quite clearly that the Japanese value share in Figure
5 is very much larger than its share of units (Figure 6), tracking the Japanese shift toward domestic
production of only high end product types. The displacement of Japanese imports by inexpensive drives
from Korea, Malaysia, and Taiwan is clearly evident in Figure 6, as is the rise of China as the production
location for the vast bulk of the world’s optical disk drives.




67
     Lee, 2000, op. cit., p. 20.
68
     Ibid., p. 21.

                                                                                                        22
                                                   Japan Production, Optical Disk Storage

            2,500




            2,000




            1,500
                                                                                                                Optical disk storages
                                                                                                                CD-ROM
 Mil US $




                                                                                                                Miscellaneous
                                                                                                                Read only
                                                                                                                Write once and rewritable
            1,000




             500




               0
                    1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010




Figure 4, Japanese Production of Optical Disk Storage Units

Source: METI, Machinery Statistics Monthly, various years.




Figure 5 US Imports of Unenclosed Optical Storage Drives, Value



                                                                                                                                            23
Source: U.S. International Trade Commission import data base.




Figure 6 US Imports of Unenclosed Optical Storage Drives, Units

Source: U.S. International Trade Commission import data base.



Increasing Industrial Concentration

         Table 2 calculates the change in the Herfindahl‐Hirschman Index (HHI) of concentration in
optical disk drive (ODD)69 sales over the period from 2001 to 2008. In 2001, an HHI well under 900
characterized the degree of concentration among producers of optical disk drives. By 2005, the HHI had
more than doubled, to over 1950.70 (Concentration remained at about this same level in 2008, the last
year for which I have obtained solid data on the ODD market shares of various producers.)


69
   The ODD figures I am using only include computer data drives, and do not included DVD video player units.
70
   In 2001 through 2008, I calculated upper and lower bounds on the HHI, which is defined as Σi si2 , where the si's
are the market shares of the N firms selling products in the industry. Because the residual category "other"
producers aggregates multiple producers together, simply discarding the terms corresponding to the "other"
producers (or equivalently, assuming this piece of the market is divided up among a near‐infinite number of
"other" firms) yields a lower bound on the HHI.
             To derive an upper bound, we simply assume, very reasonably, that the largest firm in the residual "other
producers" category has a market share that is no greater than the individual producers who are specifically
named in any given year. Let the market share of the smallest separately reported producer, producer number M
(out of a total of N in the industry‐‐ordered so that the largest number is number 1, and the smallest separately
reported producer is number M), be u. Then HHI = Σi si2 = Σi=1,2,...M si2 + Σi=M+1,..N si2 = Σi=1,2,...M si2 + Σi=M+1,..N si* si <
Σi=1,2,...M si2 + Σi=M+1,..N si *u = Σi=1,2,...M si2 + u Σi=M+1,..N si . This last expression is an upper bound because si < u for all
producers smaller than producer M. This upper bound for HHI is simply the sum of squared market shares for all

                                                                                                                                   24
                                                                                          Table 2
                                                              Herfindahl Hirschman Index (HHI) of Concentration for ODD Market

                                                             2001              2003                   2004             2005             2006                   2007                   2008
                                                                        1                   2                   2                3                   3                      3                      3
   2001 Entity        2003 Entity      2005 Entity      Market Share (%) Market Share (%)       Market Share (%) Market Share (%) Market Share (%)       Market Share (%)       Market Share (%)
Hitachi / LG       Hitachi / LG     Hitachi / LG             18.8              24.0                   28.0             25.6             26.0                   30.8                   27.9

Samsung            TSST             TSST                      13.1               19.0                18.0              21.8             18.9                   24.2                  23.6
Toshiba                                                        5.3

LiteOn             LiteOn           LiteOn (PLDS)             10.6               16.0                16.0              26.3             16.9                   11.5                  14.5
BenQ               PBDS                                        5.1                7.0                 6.0
Philips                                                        3.4

Sony               Sony             Sony NEC Optiarc           2.4                                                      7.1              9.9                    9.3                  15.6
NEC                NEC                                         3.3                                    4.0

MKE/Panasonic                                                  4.5                    5.0             6.0               8.4              9.1                    8.6                    7.0
Pioneer                                                        1.9                                    4.0               4.4              5.7                    6.0                    6.3

Teac                                                           6.4                    3.0
BTC                                                            4.7                    4.0
AOpen                                                          2.4
Mitsumi Electric                                               2.0

All Others                                                    16.1               22.0                18.0               6.4             13.5                    9.6                    5.1


                                                              2001                2003               2004              2005             2006                   2007                   2008
                                    HHI upper bound           847                 1358               1540              1990             1609                   1921                   1910
                                    HHI lower bound           816                 1292               1468              1962             1532                   1863                   1878

Market Share of DVD Pool Members, Affiliates (%)               49                     55               66               94                87                    90                     95

Sources:
1
  http://ettrends.etri.re.kr/PDFData/17-6_182_192.pdf, p. 188.
2
  http://merc.e.u-tokyo.ac.jp/mmrc/dp/pdf/MMRC29_2005.pdf, p. 16. 2004 is forecast.
3
  IDC's Worldwide Blu-Ray, DVD, CD, and Other Optical Storage Drive 2009 - 2013
  Forecast and Analysis, Table 2, p. 4.



         The members or controlled subsidiaries of the two DVD patent pools accounted for less than
half of industry sales in 2001. By 2005, this had jumped to 94% of ODD sales globally. (Table 2) In 2008,
ODD producers affiliated with (or controlled by) pool members continued to account for 95% of
worldwide ODD sales.

         The drive toward optical disk drive concentration was kicked off in late 2000, when Japanese
ODD producer Hitachi merged its optical disk operations with LG Electronics, of Korea. The joint venture,
Hitachi LG Data Systems (HLDS), was confined strictly to design, development, and marketing. Actual
manufacturing was contracted out to the parents and their subcontractors.71 The joint venture also had
royalty‐free access to the patents of the parents.72 Hitachi effectively controlled the operation, through
both its ownership and its control of key technologies.73 Indeed, Hitachi's 51% ownership of the JV was



separately enumerated producers, plus the market share of the smallest separately‐counted producer times the
aggregate market share accounted for by the entire "other producers" category.
71
   "Established to pursue the joint development, design and marketing of optical disc drives, a particular advantage
of HLDS was its ability to marry the technological capability of the Japanese partner with the manufacturing
expertise of its Korean counterpart." See
http://www.investkorea.org/InvestKoreaWar/work/ik/eng/bo/print_added.jsp?bno=805090011&sort_num=29 .
72
   "The competitiveness of the HLDS joint venture was enhanced by having access to the patents and technologies
of its parents but without the need to pay royalties." See
http://www.investkorea.org/InvestKoreaWar/work/ik/eng/bo/print_added.jsp?bno=805090011&sort_num=29 .
73
   "However, Hitachi does not transfer technologies of key components to HLDS. Key components
with integral architecture, such as the optical pick‐up and the LSI chipset with microcode, have been
provided to HLDS from Hitachi of Japan." See Koichi Ogawa, Junjiro Shintaku, and Tetsuo Yoshimoto, "
Architecture‐based Advantage of Firms and Nations: New Global Alliance between Japan and Catch‐up Countries,"

                                                                                                                                                                                    25
absolutely critical to its success, since its position as a Hitachi affiliate gave it access to the benefits of
Hitachi's cross licenses with other ODD patent holders, and Hitachi's membership in the DVD 6c patent
pool. As a Japanese study of the industry concluded:

"It is very important for the industry of the catch‐up countries to understand the reason why the
percentage of Hitachi’s investment to HLDS is 51%, and why Mitsubishi’s investment to Digitek [a similar
JV between Mitsubishi and Funai Electric] is 51%. The 51% from Hitachi means that HLDS is consolidated
subsidiary company of Hitachi and thus all the patent royalty issues are automatically handled by
Hitachi. It is said that the actual royalty fee of the DVD business has been significantly decreased
because Hitachi has established patent claim to rank with other patent holders, and moreover Hitachi
has many cross‐licensed partner firms in the world."74

      Even for less technologically complex consumer DVD players, which could feasibly be assembled
and manufactured by new entrants in Taiwan and China, this royalty load rapidly became a major
economic factor limiting their ability to compete successfully against the incumbent patent pool
members. Prior to 2005, Japanese economists studying the industry had noted:

"It will become very difficult for Chinese firms to run the DVD business by paying all of the royalty which
have been claimed from front runner countries, because the percentage of the relative amount of the
royalty will become unreasonably higher and higher as the retail price of the DVD player becomes lower
and lower. It is a noteworthy fact that, in a case of a major DVD manufacturer in Taiwan, the ratio of the
royalty was estimated to be over 50% of the total overhead in year 2004 (Note 5) and have become
almost impossible to continue the business if they would keep paying all of the claimed royalty."75

         This same study notes that "[a]ccording to industry analysts, total sum of the royalty claimed
against Chinese firms is estimated to be well over 10 dollars per a DVD player even though the retail
price of the player in US market has dropped to 30‐50 dollars in 3Q/2005, while royalty claimed against
Japanese firms is estimated to be 2‐4 dollars because the firms are major license holders in the DVD
forum. Further more, the street price of Japanese brand DVD player is 50‐80 dollars, which is 50% higher
than that of Chinese brand products."76

          The same 2005 study made this point diagrammatically, using the following figure. The
manufacturing cost advantages of the Chinese firms were offset by the very high royalties they needed
to pay in order to sell the products abroad. Japanese firms, on the other hand, faced higher overhead
costs if they chose to continue funding technological development, but paid minimal royalties. With
technological progress in semiconductors and optical devices, and economies of scale continuing to
dramatically reduce costs of the materials, parts, and chips needed to manufacture a DVD drive, the
costs of the royalties came to dominate the costs of manufacturing an ODD for potential competitors in
ODDs without low cost access to the ODD patent pools.

Manufacturing Management Research Center, University of Tokyo, Working Paper MMRC‐F‐48, September 2005,
p. 12.
74
    See Ogawa, Shintaku, Yoshimoto, September 2005, p. 12.
75
   Ogawa, Shintaku, and Yoshimoto, p. 12.
76
   Ibid., p. 17.

                                                                                                              26
Figure 7 Cost Structure of Japanese and Chinese DVD Producers

Source: Ogawa, Shintaku, and Yoshimoto, 2005, p. 14.

         Hitachi's ability to manufacture at a much lower cost through its joint venture with LG, yet still
avoid payment of increasingly burdensome royalties by virtue of its 51% ownership of the joint venture
giving it Hitachi's preferred position inside the patent pool, was critical to the business success of what
became a profitable joint venture. Ogawa, Shintaku, and Yoshimoto note:

        Since 2003, only three years after the joint venture company has started, HLDS has turned into
        one of the most profitable subsidiary companies of Hitachi group. It has been said that without
        moving on to the alliance, Hitachi would have been forced to withdraw from the optical storage
        industry. The joint venture company between Mitsubishi Electric and Funai Electric also shows
        similar success story that Funai is exceptionally a profitable firm among the DVD suppliers in
        Japan because Mitsubishi Electric is the majority (51%) among the investors and is one of the
        major license holders in the DVD Forum.77

        This model was quickly emulated by others. In 2001, Japan's JVC, another patent pool member,
formed a similar 51%/49% joint venture with Taiwan's Lite‐On.78 As with HLDS, the patent pool member,
JVC, held the controlling interest (though in the case of HLDS, LG was later allowed to join the patent
pool).




77
  Ibid., p. 15.
78
  See Junjiro Shintaku , Koichi Ogawa, and Tetsuo Yoshimoto, "Architecture‐based Approaches to International
Standardization and Evolution of Business Models," Manufacturing Management Research Center, University of
Tokyo, Working Paper MMRC‐F‐96, September 2006, p. 12.

                                                                                                               27
         In early 2003, Taiwanese ODD producer BenQ and Philips formed a joint venture, Philips BenQ
Digital Storage (PBDS). The jointly owned company would develop, design, and market ODDs; all
manufacturing would be contracted out to BenQ.

        Also in 2003, ODD producers Samsung Electronics and Toshiba concluded an agreement to
integrate their ODD operations into a single entity, Toshiba Samsung Storage Technology (TSST). As was
the case with the HLDS and PBDS, the JV was purely for design, development, and marketing efforts; all
manufacturing was to be contracted out to Samsung. As Korea's national investment promotion agency
describes on its web site:

        Essentially, the two companies had agreed to spin‐off their ODD businesses, and transfer them
        to the joint venture. Mirroring the Hitachi/LG deal, majority control was vested in the Japanese
        parent with 51 percent of the equity compared to 49 percent for the Korean partner. Again,
        company headquarters would be in Japan, this time, within Toshiba's head office in Kawasaki.
        Again the Japanese parent company would bring technical know‐how to the venture, as well as
        international brand power supported by a global sales and service network. Manufacturing also,
        in the case of TSST, would be the province of the Korean partner. …79

         In 2005, ODD producers NEC and Sony announced an agreement to merge all ODD activities of
their two companies in a joint venture, Sony Optiarc. The new JV was to undertake all development,
design, marketing and sales related to optical disk drives; all manufacturing (except a small amount of
manufacturing of magneto‐optical drives, Sony’s Minidisc division) was to be subcontracted out to third
parties.80

         Like the previous joint ventures between patent pool members and outsiders discussed earlier,
this one too had a majority ownership share controlled by the patent pool member (Sony), giving it the
same cost advantage in royalties. In late 2008, NEC sold off its interest in Optiarc to Sony, and Optiarc
finally became a wholly owned Sony subsidiary.

        In early 2006, Taiwanese ODD producer Lite‐On purchased BenQ's ODD production facilities in
China, and took over BenQ's manufacturing ties to PBDS. BenQ exited the ODD contract manufacturing
business. In 2007, BenQ sold its interest in PBDS to Lite‐On, completely exiting the ODD business. The
joint venture with Philips was renamed PLDS (with Lite‐On's 'L' replacing BenQ's 'B').81

        By 2005, the most significant effects of this consolidation within the ODD industry had been felt.
The shrinking number of producers is all the more remarkable given the continuing growth in the size of
the ODD market over this period. (See Table 3; sales reported for 2009 are a forecast.) In 2008, for
example, the very last independent Taiwanese ODD brand (Asustek) disappeared, leaving only Lite‐On




79
   http://www.investkorea.org/InvestKoreaWar/work/ik/eng/bo/print_added.jsp?bno=805090011&sort_num=29 .
80
   See http://ec.europa.eu/competition/mergers/cases/decisions/m4139_20060331_20310_en.pdf, p. 5.
81
   See http://ec.europa.eu/competition/mergers/cases/decisions/m4502_20070216_20310_en.pdf .

                                                                                                        28
and Quanta Storage remaining in once was once a crowded, fast growing technology sector in Taiwan
(with both remaining firms primarily producing as contract manufacturers for pool members).82

                                                                      Table 3
                                                    Global Optical Disk Drive Sales, 2001 - 2009


                         2001          2002             2003         2004         2005         2006         2007         2008         2009
Blu-ray (M)                       0             0                0            0            0            0            1            5           14
DVD-W (M)                         2             5               25           55          124          179          238          235          215
Other (M)                       177           198              203          191          178          123           92           72           53
Total Units (M)                 179           203              228          246          303          301          331          312          281

Total $ (B)                     9.3           9.8           10.5            9.8       10.4            9.6          9.3          7.9          6.8


Sources & Notes
For 2001 through 2004, this chart uses historical data from www.stephenz.com/storageEvent/pdfs/SSI_NYC_Storage_Event_ODD.pdf
Data from IDC's Worldwide Blu-Ray, DVD, CD, and Other Optical Storage Drive 2009 - 2013 Forecast and Analysis, Table 8, p. 18
and Table 9, p.20 is used for subsequent years. Numbers used for 2005 through 2008 are historical sales, while 2009 sales are a forecast.
Total $ for 2005 through 2009 is based on average ODD prices If-Sold-OEM.


Effects on Product Market Innovation: Quality‐Adjusted Prices

         Optical disk drives are priced in a highly integrated global market. As ODD producers reported to
the European Union during a 2007 merger review, “[w]ith respect to the geographic product market, the
parties submit that the overall PC ODD supply market is world‐wide or at least EEA‐wide in scope. Prices
do not vary significantly in world regions.”83

         The Bank of Korea is the only government statistical agency that apparently was tracking prices
for optical disk drives with a price index back in the 1990s, when CD‐ROMs first hit the marketplace. The
Bank of Korea’s matched model price index for this period was converted to a dollar basis using current
exchange rates. The index shows a compound annual decline rate of 38 percent over 1995‐2000. This is




82
   With respect to Quanta, from opening statement by T.D. Garnett, Ricoh v. Quanta (06‐CV‐462‐BBC),
“Stenographic Transcript of First Day of Trial, Afternoon Session Held Before Chief Judge Barbara B. Crabb, and a
Jury,” Madison, Wisconsin, November 9, 2009, pp. 19‐20:
          "Now, as I already mentioned, Quanta Storage is an assembler of optical disc drives. And I have a
graphic that I think will help illustrate their business model. Quanta Storage will buy, for example, a laser and a
motor and the controller chip and it will assemble those components together into a functioning disc drive.
          Now, for the last several years, Quanta Storage has had only one main customer and that customer is
Sony Optiarc. You may have heard of the company called Sony. Well, Sony owns Sony Optiarc. You will learn that
Quanta Storage sells almost no disc drives under its own brand name. It assembles the disc drives for Sony Optiarc.
          Now, Sony Optiarc helps Quanta Storage design the disc drives. Sony Optiarc puts its brand name on the
disc drive and then Sony Optiarc sells the disc drive to brand name computer companies, companies that you are
likely familiar with ‐‐ HP, Apple, Dell, for example."
 See also Digitimes, " Taiwan ODD sector, DIGITIMES Research ICT Report – 4Q 2008," February 2009; "Quanta
Storage Licenses Sony Patents for Slim DVD Burners," Digitimes, November 15, 2006.
83
   Commission of the European Communities, Case No COMP/M.4502 ‐LITE‐ON / PBDS, (Luxembourg: Office for
Official Publications of the European Communities), February 2007, p. 4.

                                                                                                                                                   29
very comparable to rates of quality‐adjusted price for the most innovative high tech products of the era,
like computer processors and memory chips.84

        The Bank of Japan constructs and publicly reports two producer price indexes for optical disk
drives manufactured in Japan after 2000. I can convert these to a common currency basis (dollars), and
use these as measures of price movements in global markets. These price indexes control for differences
in the mix of products being produced, and hold constant the quality and types of products being
produced, over time.

         One of the two Japanese producer price indexes holds the sales mix of products constant using
2005 market shares, and measures changes in the price of this 2005 “bundle” of ODDs from one time
period to the next (an earlier version started in 2000 and used year 2000 weights). A second Japanese
price index updates the weights from one year to the next, beginning from a 2005 base. The latter
calculation using "chain weights" is considered a better measure of price change for products like optical
disk drives which are undergoing rapid technological and quality change (and there is also an earlier year
2000 version of this index).

         In addition, there is also a Japanese producer price index for imported optical disk drives. As
with the PPIs for domestically produced ODDs, there is a 2000 base version of this index, and a 2005
base version of this index. Given our earlier discussion of the changing pattern of ODD production in
Japan, I interpret a post‐2000 domestic producer price index to be a product bundle made up
predominantly of “high end,” leading edge drives, while the import price index reflects pricing for more
mature, “commodity” ODD product types manufactured elsewhere in Asia.

        Differences in weights as they evolve over time are likely to create some differences in
movements between the two price indexes. Table 4 compares annual rates of change in these price
indexes, converted to a common dollar basis, over time. As expected, the chain weighted Japanese price
index shows price declines that are slightly greater, reflecting its more accurate reflection of movements
in market prices due to introduction of newer and more innovative products.




84
  See, for example, A. Aizcorbe, K. Flamm, and A. Khurshid, “The Role of Semiconductor Inputs in IT Hardware
Price Decline: Computers versus Communications,” in E. R. Berndt and C. Hulten, Ed., Hard‐to‐Measure Goods and
Services: Essays in Honor of Zvi Griliches, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 2007, Table 12.1, p. 361.

                                                                                                           30
                                          BoJ, Import                                   BoJ, Import
             BoJ PPI, 2000 BoJ, PPI, 2000 Price Index, 200 BoJ PPI, 2005 BoJ, PPI,      Price Index,
Yr           Chain-weighted Weights       Weights          Chain-weighted 2005Weights   2005 Weights   BoK ODD PPI
      1996                                                                                                 -60.2%
      1997                                                                                                 -41.2%
      1998                                                                                                 -45.3%
      1999                                                                                                 -20.7%
      2000                                                                                                 -16.5%
      2001        -29.2%         -28.9%         -14.4%                                                     -45.6%
      2002        -21.9%         -21.6%         -17.1%                                                     -23.9%
      2003        -24.6%         -23.6%         -10.8%                                                     -27.1%
      2004        -22.0%         -19.9%         -10.1%                                                     -28.6%
      2005        -27.5%         -20.3%         -17.6%                                                       -5.8%
      2006        -19.3%         -13.1%         -13.1%         -19.3%         -18.8%         -15.0%          -2.8%
      2007         -8.1%           -6.6%        -13.6%           -8.9%          -8.0%        -16.5%        -11.3%
      2008                                                        8.5%           9.7%        -14.6%        -29.8%
      2009                                                        5.1%           6.3%         -4.7%        -18.3%
      2010                                                       -4.6%          -5.6%         -1.8%          -1.5%

Table 4, Percentage Rates of Change from Previous Year, Various ODD Producer Price Indexes
Source: See text.

        Despite differences in index weights, the two indexes broadly display a remarkably consistent
picture of slowing innovation in optical disk drives. The various indexes seem to have considerable noise,
and show somewhat divergent changes from year to year, but broadly speaking, all of the indexes show
a notable trend toward diminishing rates of price decline in recent years.

        This is particularly evident if we simply graph these various producer price indexes. Figure 8
shows visible evidence of a trend toward slower rates of price decline in optical disk drives, particularly
during the second half of the first post‐millenial decade.




                                                                                                                     31
 10.0%
                          Percentage Change in ODD Price Index from Prior Year

  0.0%
          1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010



 ‐10.0%



                                                                                       BoK ODD PPI

 ‐20.0%                                                                                BoJ Chain Weighted ODD PPI, 2000 base
                                                                                       BoJ ODD PPI, 2000 base
                                                                                       BoJ Chain‐Wtd PPI, 2005 base
                                                                                       BoJ ODD PPI, 2005 Base
 ‐30.0%                                                                                BoJ ODD Imports, 2000 Base
                                                                                       BoJ ODD Imports, 2005 Base



 ‐40.0%




 ‐50.0%




 ‐60.0%



Figure 8 Annual Rates of Change in ODD Price Indexes

Sources: See text.

A Hedonic Price Analysis

        Data on optical disk drive pricing (as well as characteristics of optical disk drives) is difficult to
come by. With considerable effort, a database was constructed. This database consists of 862
observations on optical disk drive “bargains” from the second quarter of 2006 through 2011, harvested
from the website of deal aggregator bensbargains.net. Considerable characteristics data was generally
available for most of these drives. I estimated three models using this data. The first version is a
parsimonious log linear hedonic model, with log price as a linear function of the most significant
characteristics of the optical disk drive, using data for pairs of adjacent quarters, and including a
quarterly time shift indicator variable and a linear within‐quarter time trend variable (normalized so the
quarterly time shift indicator variable describes deviations from a price level for the middle month of the
quarter). This first model can be written as

     (I) Ln Pit = Xit’β + uit ,

where vector X’ includes time‐constant characteristics of a given model i of optical disk drive on sales
date t, including unit type indicator variables (CD writer, DVD‐ROM, DVD writer, Blu‐ray ROM, Blu‐ray
combi [DVD writer + Blu‐ray ROM], Blu‐ray writer), interaction terms between maximum speed with unit




                                                                                                                               32
type indicator variables85, interaction terms between unit type indicator and a binary indicator for dual
layer disc capability, a set of indicator variables for interface/internal/external type (PATA, IDE, SATA,
ESATA, USB, USB2, USB3), and indicator variables for form factor (half height or slim). In addition, there
are time‐varying trend variables capturing time trends in overall ODD prices: a binary time shift indicator
variable for the later quarter in the two adjacent quarters used in every regression, and a quarter‐
specific time trend variable equal to ‐1 in the first month of the quarter, zero in the middle month of the
quarter, and +1 in the last month of the given quarter, zero otherwise. The uit are mean zero random
disturbances that are assumed to be exogenous with respect to the included covariates.

         This latter assumption means that model (I) is effectively a “random effects” model, though I
will be estimating it using pooled ordinary least squares. The model effectively uses the “time dummy”
method of estimating a quarterly hedonic price index, using adjacent pairs of quarters, and implicitly
assumes that the coefficients of time‐constant characteristics in the hedonic function are approximately
constant within any pair of adjacent quarters.86 The quarterly time indicator variable measures the shift
in price from the middle month of one quarter to the middle month of the next quarter, holding all
model characteristics constant. The time trend variable lets monthly prices deviate from the quarter
midpoint in a linear way, and reflects the fact these types of high tech product prices can change
significantly within a quarter, in a systematic way, with the passage of calendar time—this linear
approximation to within quarter change is modeled somewhat flexibly, allowing for different slopes
within each of the pairs of adjacent quarters.

         The data set is unbalanced, with varying numbers of observations for any given model by
quarter, and with only a subset of product models having data extending across pairs of quarters.
Models contributing observations that are only observed in one quarter or the other contribute
indirectly to the estimate of the quarterly price index shift term by affecting the linear within quarter
price trend estimates, and the estimated coefficients on time‐invariant ODD characteristics.

        An alternative model relaxes the assumption that any unobserved heterogeneity (including
unmeasured but relevant characteristics of ODDs) is uncorrelated with the observed covariates. Instead
I assume that a product‐specific disturbance term is the sum of an idiosyncratic, exogenous, time‐
varying random disturbance plus a time‐constant linear function of the time‐averaged group means of
observed covariates, by product model (so a time‐invariant component of unobserved heterogeneity is
constant over time, but now is permitted to be correlated with observed covariates). This more flexible


85
   Maximum speed was CD write speed for CD writers, DVD read speed for DVD ROMs, DVD write speed for DVD
writers, read speed for Blu‐ray ROM and combi units, write speed for Blu‐ray writers.
86
   In principle, it is possible to let the coefficients vary from quarter to quarter and test their constancy across
quarters, or calculate a so‐called “full imputation” characteristics price index if they are not constant, but there are
insufficient observations to permit doing this reliably in the current version of the data set. With the log linear
hedonic model I am employing here, approximate constancy of characteristics coefficients across the two adjacent
time periods, assumed here, implies that the time dummy price index is identical to a full imputation price index.
See J. de Haan, “Hedonic Price Indexes: A Comparison of Imputation, Time Dummy and Other Approaches,”
(Statistics Netherlands), September 2007; J. Triplett, Handbook on Hedonic Indexes and Quality Adjustments in
Price Indexes, (OECD: Paris), 2004.

                                                                                                                     33
model has been dubbed the “correlated random effects” (CRE) model by Wooldridge87 and others, and
can be written as

     (II) Ln Pit = Xit’β +Ẍi’ξ + vit,

where the Ẍi’ are time averages for all time‐varying covariates. For time‐invariant covariates, the β are
now not identified without restrictions on ξ, since elements of the Xit’ that are time‐invariant are
perfectly collinear with their corresponding element in Ẍi’. Estimated coefficients for any time‐invariant
covariate will confound a structural effect β with determinant of unobserved heterogeneity ξ unless one
is willing to assume that specific time‐invariant covariate is uncorrelated with any unobserved
heterogeneity (i.e., that the element of ξ for that particular covariate equals 0).

Finally, we can estimate a so‐called fixed effects (FE) model,

     (III) Ln Pit = Xit’β +ci + vit,

where ci represents unobserved (but time invariant) heterogeneity that is correlated with the Xit, and vit
is an idiosyncratic error term. As is well known, by subtracting off time means from all variables and
estimating the resulting linear model in the time‐demeaned variables (for time‐varying variables only),
or equivalently, estimating (III) using dummy variables for the ci and dropping all time‐invariant
variables, consistent estimates of the β are produced.

          A useful result is that the estimates of β for time‐varying variable coefficients in the CRE model
(II) are exactly identical to the FE estimates of the β in model (III), and a test that the ξ are jointly equal
to zero for time‐varying variables in CRE model (II) is equivalent to a Hausman test for the “random
effects” hedonic null hypothesis embedded in model (I)—that the hedonic specification has controlled
for all relevant characteristics that affect price that might be correlated with other relevant but
unobserved characteristics‐‐against the fixed effects specification (III), which yields consistent estimates
of structural coefficients β even if unobserved and relevant time‐invariant characteristics are correlated
with the observed ones.

         Our initial focus of interest is on the β for the time‐varying coefficients (in this case, the
quarterly shift dummy for price, and the within‐quarter price time trend coefficients for the initial and
final quarters in our pair of quarters. The CRE hedonic model (II) can be estimated with robust standard
errors and a fully robust Hausman test for the basic (“random effects”) hedonic model (I) constructed by
test the joint hypothesis that coefficients on within product means of time‐varying variables are equal to
zero.

        Finally, in all three models, for t set equal to the middle month of a quarter (since all time trend
variables have a value equal to zero at the middle month of a quarter), we have

     (IV) Ln Pit ‐ Ln Pit‐3 = Ln (Pit / Pit‐3 ) = βD + (vit ‐ vit‐3) ,


87
  See J. M. Woodridge, “Correlated Random Effects Models with Unbalanced Panels,” (Michigan State University),
July 2009.

                                                                                                             34
where βD is the coefficient of the quarter shift indicator variable. Then exponentiating both sides, taking
conditional expectations, and taking advantage of exogeneity assumptions about idiosyncratic
disturbances, we have

     (V) E[Pit / Pit‐3 |X] = exp(βD ) E[exp(vit ‐ vit‐3)].

Since Pit / Pit‐3 ‐1 equals the mid‐quarter to mid‐quarter rate of change in our price index, an unbiased
estimate of the expression on the left‐hand side of (V), less one, yields an unbiased estimate of the
quarterly rate of price change.

         Unfortunately, simply exponentiating our estimate of βD and subtracting off one will give a
biased estimate of price change, since E[exp(v)] ≠ exp(E[v]) = exp(0 )= 1. Following Duan88, current
practice is to calculate a nonparametric transformation bias correction assuming idiosyncratic errors vit
are iid, which in this context implies

     (VI) E[exp(vit ‐ vit‐3)] = E[exp(vit) (1/exp(vit‐3)] = E[exp(v)] E[(1/exp(v)].

         With appropriate smoothness assumptions, these last two expectations can be estimated
consistently and non‐parametrically by simply calculating sample averages of exponentiated model
residuals, and inverse exponentiated residuals, respectively. Multiplying the exponentiated estimated
coefficient of the quarterly shift dummy variable by the product of these two sample averages of
functions of the estimated residuals, we have an unbiased estimate of price change from quarter to
quarter.

Empirical Results: Specification Tests

         Table 5 shows estimates of a robust Hausman test for the “random effects” model specification
(I). The null hypothesis is that coefficients on time‐averaged, time‐varying explanatory variables in the
CRE model are jointly zero.89 A robust estimated covariance matrix (allowing for heteroskedasticity by
observation, but assuming no correlation among disturbances across all observations) has been used
here. As can be seen, the null of uncorrelated heterogeneity is rejected in 8 of 21 quarters at the 10
percent level, and in 5 of 21 quarters at the five percent level, suggesting that in a substantial number of
quarters, a “random effects” specification (and the uncorrelated unobserved effects assumption) based
on the hedonic specification that can be readily estimated is not convincing.

         Table 6 again calculates robust Hausman tests, this time assuming the much more flexible
cluster robust covariance structure among the model disturbances in the CRE specification, i.e.,
permitting arbitrary correlation in disturbances across time by product model, but maintaining the
assumption of uncorrelated disturbances across models. The “random effects” specification cannot be

88
   See N. Duan, “Smearing Estimate: A nonparametric retransformation method,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, vol. 78, 1983; also, C. Cameron and P. Trivedi, Microeconometrics Using Stata, (College
Station: Stata Press), 2009, pp. 103‐104 for a pithy description of the procedure used to do this.
89
   Note that since there was only partial data available for the last quarter of 2011, only two –time varying
coefficients (not 3) were identified and available for use in a Hausman test in the last pair of quarters in my
sample.

                                                                                                                   35
rejected for most periods, but is still rejected in 4 out of 21 time periods at the 10 percent level, and 3
out of 21 at the 5 percent level, more than would be expected, on average, if the null was true for all
time periods at either of these significance levels.

           One potential problem in using cluster robust standard errors is that we have a relatively small
number of models, ranging from 16 to 37, depending on pairs of quarters. Models/clusters that
contribute directly to estimation of the quarterly shift dummy variable are even fewer in number,
ranging from 4 to 16, depending on which of the 21 quarter pairs is being used. Since the distribution of
our F‐test statistic is an asymptotically valid approximation, as the number of clusters gets large, the
properties of tests assuming large numbers of clusters, in this relatively small sample, are undoubtedly
poor. The much more restrictive assumption of uncorrelated but possibly heteroskedastic disturbances
across our entire sample, if true, would yield larger effective sample sizes and much more credible
approximations to correctly sized tests, but this is a much more restrictive assumption (though one that
is still consistent with the assumption that the vit in models (II) and (III) are iid, after controlling for any
time invariant contribution of product model to the unobserved heterogeneity). In any event, all of
these results point to the FE or CRE model as the only reasonable and safe choice, since our parameter
estimates would be still be consistent even if the estimated disturbance covariance matrix—and test
statistics—had poor finite sample properties.

Empirical Results: Rates of Change in a Hedonic Price Index for Optical Disk Drives

         Next, I review my estimates of quarter‐to‐quarter price change for an index of optical disk drive
prices. My starting point is Table 7, which shows point estimates of the coefficient of the quarterly shift
indicator variable, estimated in all 3 models using data for pairs of adjacent quarters. While the pooled
OLS model result is shown for completeness, note that this estimate is not consistent if the implicit
“random effects” assumption is not correct. Note also that the coefficients for CRE and FE models are
identical, and are also the same whether robust or cluster‐robust estimates of the standard error are
used. The standard errors shown are robust ones, and may be questionable if correlation in idiosyncratic
disturbances over time within products remains even after controlling for time shift terms in the
regression equation. But possible questions about quality of standard error estimates do not alter the
fact that the coefficient estimates remain consistent estimates of the underlying parameter.

          This coefficient would be a consistent and unbiased estimate of the log of the ratio of the price
levels in the two adjacent quarters, but as previously noted, we are interested in the untransformed
price relative, and simply exponentiating this coefficient yields a biased estimate of the ratio of price
levels in the two quarters. Instead, I adopt the procedure outlined in (VI) above, multiplying the
exponentiated coefficient by the sample averages of exponentiated residuals and inverse exponentiated
residuals. (This procedure maintains the hypothesis that the idiosyncratic disturbance terms in models
(II) and (III) are iid.)

       Table 8 shows the estimated rates of price change that are produced when adopting this
procedure, with the CRE and FE models. Note that although the CRE and FE models yield identical
parameter estimates before applying a bias correction, the bias‐corrected estimate of the rate of price


                                                                                                              36
change are not the same in the two models, since residual estimates of idiosyncratic errors in the two
models are not identical. 90 A common estimated coefficient multiplied by different estimates of the bias
correction yields different bias‐corrected estimates. I also show a geometric mean of the bias‐corrected
rates of price change for the two models.

       A price index based on these quarter to quarter price changes is trivial to construct. Table 9
summarizes third quarter to third quarter, annual rates of price decline, from Q3 2006‐2007, through Q3
2010‐2011. There seems to have been a relatively slower decline in prices in the period from 2006
through 2008, which then sped up again after the latter part of 2009. In 2010‐2011, our bias‐corrected
estimate of annual price decline for quality‐adjusted optical disk drive prices was about 33.6%.

         Figure 9 graphs quarter‐to‐quarter rates of decline in ODD prices over the Q3 2006 through Q4
2011 period. As just noted, on average, the earlier part of the period seems to have witnessed slower
rates of price decline than the latter years. The average rate of decline over 2006‐2010 of about 25.9%
annually, a significantly slower decline than the rates of price decline observed earlier, in the 1990s. But
these rates of quality‐adjusted price decline are substantially faster than those reported in the PPIs we
looked at earlier.

                Table 10 gathers together price index estimates from all sources discussed earlier for
the period from 2001 on. Overall, the impression is of a slower price decline in the second half of the
decade that ended in 2010. My hedonic price index falls at rates broadly similar to the Japanese import
price indexes around 2005, the base year for the product weights being used in these indexes. But my
hedonic index shows faster decline rates than this matched model in the latter part of this period (as
perhaps might be expected, since the measured product bundle is updated infrequently in the statistical
agency indexes, and may miss important elements of quality improvement—particularly speed and data
density—if a substitution method is used to replace rapidly changing models).

        It is also possible that my index—which covers only relatively inexpensive “consumer” ODDs
used in the PC marketplace, misses higher end ODD drives where price may have fallen at slower rates.
It may also simply reflect the fact that these are “bargain” disk drives, where selection as “bargains” is
perhaps related to the fact that their prices are falling at rates significantly faster than overall averages
for ODDs. My index, which only covers the second half of the 2000 decade, falls at a rate exceeding
twice the rate of the Bank of Japan’s import price index, and the Bank of Korea’s ODD producer price
index. My results are mute on the issue of whether the rate of price decline slowed overall for the
second half over decade, but the PPIs suggest that it did.




90
     The FE model was estimated using Stata’s “areg” procedure.

                                                                                                           37
Table 5

Robust Hausman Test for “Random Effects” Hedonic Model, with Robust Estimated Covariance

           # Constraints: df   Fval (#             p Value



                               constraints, df):
    2006.04 3             56   2.197               0.0985
    2007.01 3             47   0.774               0.515
    2007.02 3             45   3.276               0.0295
    2007.03 3             37   1.537               0.221
    2007.04 3             44   0.828               0.486
    2008.01 3             67   1.828               0.151
    2008.02 3             92   2.539               0.0613
    2008.03 3             96   1.992               0.120
    2008.04 3             88   1.416               0.243
    2009.01 3             85   1.296               0.281
    2009.02 3             66   5.532               0.00189
    2009.03 3             51   12.00               0.00000466
    2009.04 3             41   2.821               0.0506
    2010.01 3             55   1.990               0.126
    2010.02 3             77   0.261               0.853
    2010.03 3             85   1.104               0.352
    2010.04 3             73   0.847               0.473
    2011.01 3             64   0.776               0.512
    2011.02 3             55   1.471               0.233
    2011.03 3             54   3.117               0.0335
    2011.04 2             33   3.833               0.0319




                                                                                           38
Table 6

Robust Hausman Test for “Random Effects” Hedonic Model, with Cluster‐Robust Estimated Covariance




                                             Cluster robust Hausman test, Wald F test:
                                    N for    #            df    Fval (#           p Value
                           # Models Models
                  Models/ Spanning Spanning
           N      Clusters Quarters Quarters Constraints:       constraints, df):
    2006.04 68          22         9         45 3           21     1.348         0.286
    2007.01 59          24         4         19 3           23     0.662         0.584
    2007.02 57          18         6         35 3           17     2.477         0.0964
    2007.03 50          16         7         35 3           15     1.768         0.196
    2007.04 57          19         5         22 3           18     3.719         0.0306
    2008.01 82          24         6         39 3           23     1.110         0.365
    2008.02 109         22        13         93 3           21     1.134         0.358
    2008.03 116         28        10         66 3           27     1.556         0.223
    2008.04 108         27         7         54 3           26     1.623         0.208
    2009.01 103         21         9         84 3           20     1.437         0.262
    2009.02 85          20         8         64 3           19     13.80         0.0000516
    2009.03 70          22         6         33 3           21     9.795         0.000304
    2009.04 61          21         7         32 3           20     1.877         0.166
    2010.01 73          24         7         37 3           23     1.509         0.239
    2010.02 98          25        15         77 3           24     0.317         0.813
    2010.03 107         35        16         77 3           34     0.898         0.452
    2010.04 95          37        15         67 3           36     0.612         0.612
    2011.01 85          34        14         53 3           33     0.636         0.597
    2011.02 76          31         8         32 3           30     0.832         0.487
    2011.03 74          24         9         42 3           23     1.688         0.197
    2011.04 48          18         7         24 2           17     2.067         0.157




                                                                                             39
Table 7

Estimates of Quarterly Time Shift Coefficient, Various Models

(Robust Standard Errors Reported)



                         Pooled OLS                          CRE                      FE                      N
       2006.04           -0.0530      (0.0918)               -0.199*       (0.0755)   -0.199***    (0.0488)   68
       2007.01           -0.0624      (0.0968)               0.117         (0.140)    0.117*       (0.0543)   59
       2007.02           0.0132       (0.0447)               -0.0382       (0.0416)        -0.0382 (0.0274)   57
       2007.03           -0.155**     (0.0509)               -0.144***     (0.0316)   -0.144***    (0.0315)   50
       2007.04           0.0111       (0.0295)               -0.0372       (0.0377)        -0.0372 (0.0289)   57
       2008.01           -0.131***    (0.0216)               -0.109***     (0.0281)   -0.109***    (0.0250)   82
       2008.02           -0.0620***   (0.0170)               -0.0729***    (0.0178)   -0.0729*** (0.0150)     109
       2008.03           -0.0731***   (0.0154)               -0.0888***    (0.0147)   -0.0888*** (0.0154)     116
       2008.04           -0.146***    (0.0155)               -0.127***     (0.0186)   -0.127***    (0.0187)   108
       2009.01           -0.0249      (0.0195)               -0.0263       (0.0215)        -0.0263 (0.0222)   103
       2009.02           -0.0922***   (0.0206)               -0.104***     (0.0193)   -0.104***    (0.0199)   85
       2009.03           -0.0424      (0.0362)               -0.122***     (0.0185)   -0.122***    (0.0172)   70
       2009.04           -0.0801**    (0.0297)               -0.118***     (0.0254)   -0.118***    (0.0178)   61
       2010.01           -0.0856*     (0.0418)               -0.117**      (0.0423)   -0.117**     (0.0361)   73
       2010.02           -0.0590**    (0.0190)               -0.0524*      (0.0210)   -0.0524*     (0.0198)   98
       2010.03           -0.0912***   (0.0197)               -0.111***     (0.0182)   -0.111***    (0.0173)   107
       2010.04           -0.209***    (0.0295)               -0.183***     (0.0297)   -0.183***    (0.0286)   95
       2011.01           -0.0406      (0.0425)               -0.0809       (0.0593)        -0.0809 (0.0513)   85
       2011.02           -0.0163      (0.0379)               -0.0596       (0.0382)   -0.0596**    (0.0185)   76
       2011.03           -0.105**     (0.0327)               -0.117**      (0.0345)   -0.117***    (0.0227)   74
       2011.04           -0.126*      (0.0474)               -0.0764       (0.0445)   -0.0764*     (0.0288)   48
Standard errors in parentheses        * p<0.05   ** p<0.01   *** p<0.001




                                                                                                                    40
Table 8
Rates of Change in Price Indexes, With and Without Bias Correction




2 Quarters     Bias Correction
Ending in:     Based on:




     2006.03 Uncorrected          CRE      FE
     2006.04       ‐18.05%         ‐10.80% ‐17.50%
     2007.01        12.41%          19.60% 12.80%
     2007.02        ‐3.75%          ‐2.38%    ‐3.50%
     2007.03       ‐13.41%         ‐11.80% ‐12.90%
     2007.04        ‐3.65%          ‐2.94%    ‐3.19%
     2008.01       ‐10.33%          ‐9.86% ‐10.10%
     2008.02        ‐7.03%          ‐6.65%    ‐6.79%
     2008.03        ‐8.50%          ‐8.23%    ‐8.32%
     2008.04       ‐11.93%         ‐11.50% ‐11.60%
     2009.01        ‐2.60%          ‐2.05%    ‐2.14%
     2009.02        ‐9.88%          ‐9.56%    ‐9.59%
     2009.03       ‐11.49%         ‐11.10% ‐11.30%
     2009.04       ‐11.13%         ‐10.80% ‐10.90%
     2010.01       ‐11.04%         ‐10.50% ‐10.70%
     2010.02        ‐5.11%          ‐4.56%    ‐4.66%
     2010.03       ‐10.51%          ‐9.86% ‐10.20%
     2010.04       ‐16.72%         ‐15.50% ‐16.20%
     2011.01        ‐7.77%          ‐6.18%    ‐7.15%
     2011.02        ‐5.79%          ‐5.15%    ‐5.70%
     2011.03       ‐11.04%         ‐10.40% ‐10.80%
     2011.04        ‐7.36%          ‐6.70%    ‐7.16%

Table 9
Q3 to Q3 Annual Rates of Price Change
               Annual Decline,   Annual Decline,
               from Q3 of        from Q3 of
               previous year,    previous year, Geometric
               w/CRE             w/FE            Mean

     2007.03          -8.1%           -21.8%         -15.2%
     2008.03         -25.0%           -25.6%         -25.3%
     2009.03         -30.3%           -30.6%         -30.5%
     2010.03         -31.3%           -31.9%         -31.6%
     2011.03         -32.6%           -34.6%         -33.6%




                                                                     41
  20.0%
                                               Geo Mean, FE & CE
                        Percent change in hedonic price index from previous quarter, geometric mean of
                        bias corrected rates derived from correlated random effects and fixed effects models

  15.0%




  10.0%




   5.0%




   0.0%
                                                                                                               Geo Mean, FE & CE



  ‐5.0%




 ‐10.0%




 ‐15.0%




 ‐20.0%


Figure 9 Annualize Rate of Decline from Previous Quarter, Hedonic Price Index



Table 10
Averages of Annualized Rates of Change for Quality‐Adjusted ODD Prices, Various Periods
                    2001‐2006 2006‐2007 2006‐2010
chn‐wtd BoJ            ‐24.1%     ‐14.1%     ‐3.3%
imports, BoJ           ‐13.8%     ‐15.8%    ‐10.5%
ODD PPI, BoK           ‐22.3%      ‐7.1%    ‐12.8%
Flamm Bens                        ‐15.2%    ‐25.9%



Direct Measures of Product Innovation

        A second data set I constructed is comprised of prices and characteristics of ODDs harvested
from online data sources, primarily product reviews in online computer publications. Approximately 198
observations on price and characteristics for ODD models sold as retail products in U.S. markets were
harvested on the Web over the years 2000 through 2011. (A subset of these data was previously used to
chart improvement in CD transfer rates in Figure 3.)

                                                                                                                               42
        Using this data set, I was able to determine when I first observed a product review of a drive
model with some improvement in read or write speed characteristics, one of the principle metrics for
ODD product improvement. Figure 10 charts these improvements over the last decade. (Note that the
data transfer rate associated with ‘1X’ is significantly different from one type of drive to another, i.e., CD
vs. DVD vs. Blu‐ray data transfer rates.)

                                   100
  Multiples of Standard Speed, X




                                                                                                                                        max DVD read speed
                                                                                                                                        max DVD burn speed
                                   10
                                                                                                                                        max CD burn speed
                                                                                                                                        max CD read speed
                                                                                                                                        max Blu‐ray read speed
                                                                                                                                        max Blu‐ray burn speed




                                    1
                                    Jun‐98 Jun‐99 Jun‐00 Jun‐01 Jun‐02 Jun‐03 Jun‐04 Jun‐05 Jun‐06 Jun‐07 Jun‐08 Jun‐09 Jun‐10 Jun‐11
                                                                                Review Date



Figure 10 Improvements in ODD Data Transfer Speeds

        These data do give some impression that rates of improvement in read and write speeds may
have declined over time. (Slopes of these lines, equal to the time rate of change in maximum data
transfer speeds, have generally flattened over time. This chart should be contrasted as well with Figure
2.)

         Finally, there is some evidence that introductions of qualitatively new products have declined
over time. The following figure is derived from a Taiwanese university MBA thesis which attempted to
identify all major introductions of new technological changes in the optical disk drive industry over the
1997‐2005 period. The clustering of major innovations before 2003 is notable, as is the absence of
major new innovations with an impact on the industry since 2002.

                                                                                                                                              43
                                               Figure 11
                      ODD Technology Evolution, 1997-2005
                      Technology Introductions


ImprovedCapacity
CD-RW
DVD-RAM
DVD-R
DVD-ROM               DVD+RW
Optical Reading Head DVD-RW                                                                                   Blu-Ray
CD-R                  HD-DVD                Improved Dye         DVD-Multi                                    DVD-Dual
                1997                 1998                 1999                    2000                  2001               2002                                       2003                        2004            2005
                      Year
Source:
Derived from Jheng-Long Wu, The Study of Using Knowledge Discovery Organize Innovative Scenario-- The New Technique Adoption
Strategic Analysis for Optical Disk Drive Industry, MBA Thesis, Aletheia University, Taiwan, June 2009, Figure 5.1, p. 25.




         I have also created a figure, derived primarily from a recent (2009) technical history of optical
disk drive development commissioned by Philips, which takes a different tack by cataloging the first
introduction into the marketplace of players based on new ODD standards. As expected, the market
introductions depicted in the figure lag the technology development by some time. The pattern is very
consistent, however, with a large fraction of all new player introductions occurring prior to 2003, and
only two new players (players for the ill‐fated HD‐DVD standard, and Blu‐ray Java players) introduced
after 2003. A slackening in the pace of innovation, measured by the introduction of new disk player
products, seems to have occurred after 1999.
                                                              Figure 12
                   Market Introduction of Players for New DVD and HD Technologies




                                                        +RW
                                                        SACD
                                                        DVD-Audio
                                                        DVD-RAM 2.0
                                                        DVD-RW
                   DVD-R 1.0                            DVD-R General
DVD-Video          DVD-ROM             DVD-RAM 1.0      DVD-R Authoring                                   DVD+R                 DVD+R                Blu-Ray Disc                                               HD-DVD          BD-Java
            1996                  1997             1998               1999                         2000                  2001                 2002                  2003                   2004          2005            2006             2007
                                       Year
                   Source:
                   S.G. Stan, "Digital Versatile Discs," in H. Peek, J. Bergmans, J. Van Haaren, F. Toolenaar, and S. Stan, Origins and Successors of the Compact Disc
                   Contributions of Philips to Optical Storage, (Springer), 2009, Figures 5-2, 5-6.
                   J.A.M.M. van Haaren and M. Kuijper, "Blue Ray Disc," in in H. Peek, J. Bergmans, J. Van Haaren, F. Toolenaar, and S. Stan, Origins and Successors of the Compact Disc
                   Contributions of Philips to Optical Storage, (Springer), 2009.pp. 240-242.
                   M. Williams, "Timeline: HD DVD vs. Blu-ray Disc," PC World, Feb. 19, 2008.




Conclusion

        The impact of patent pools on the rate and direction of technological change is an open
question in both theoretical and empirical studies. Economic theory makes no unequivocal prediction.
By contrast, empirical studies of patent pools, to date, have largely concluded that patent pools have
been associated with reduced rates of technical innovation in the industries studied. This study differs
from previous empirical studies of patent pools by focusing primarily on direct measures of innovation
in product markets, rather than on indirect correlates of innovation (like patents), and by exploiting
variation over time in how pools were organized in the same technology area.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                    44
         The paper analyzed the economic history of two successive sets of patent pools organized in
substantially the same technological area—the use of optical discs in data storage peripherals connected
to computer systems. These two patent pool episodes differed significantly in their organizational and
institutional details. The first of these pools was arguably the first modern, postwar patent pool to
benefit from a 1970s‐era change in attitudes toward antitrust policy for patent pools. I showed that
different approaches to pool organization and licensing policies implemented in these two patent pool
examples were associated with very different outcomes.

        The analysis suggested that the economics of the licensing arrangements adopted by the CD
patent pool operated in a substantially different fashion from those later implemented in the DVD
patent pool. The first pool, the CD pool, adopted policies that on balance seem to have stimulated entry,
competition, and innovation, while the later DVD pool adopted policies that inhibited entry, increased
concentration, and coincided with a slowing rate of innovation.

        In particular, the shift from an ad valorem royalty, in the case of CD drives, to the maximum of
an ad valorem and a fixed, specific per unit royalty, with DVD drives, is notable. Combined with the
sharply and continuously declining manufacturing costs typically found in high tech electronics‐related
industries, and continuation of the prior practice of royalty‐free licensing within the CD disk drive patent
pools, this change in licensing policy seems to have favored dramatically increasing industrial
concentration in the optical disk drive industry. In addition, there is evidence that the rate of technical
innovation in optical disc drives subsequently slowed.

          The clear implication is that organizational details matter: no single conclusion is likely to fit all
cases. As theory seems to predict, the empirical effects of patent pools on innovation are likely to be
ambiguous, dependent on the historical and institutional particulars of the pool and the industry it
affects. Future analysis of other correlates of innovation in the optical disk drive industry may shed
further light on the nature of these complex relationships.




                                                                                                               45
