NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCE: FUNCTION MATTERS, NOT SIZE.
John H. Cochrane
Working Paper 18944
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18944
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013

I thank the CRSP for research support, and I thank the editors of the Journal of Financial Perspectives
for many helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by John H. Cochrane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Finance: Function Matters, not Size.
John H. Cochrane
NBER Working Paper No. 18944
April 2013
JEL No. G0,G2
ABSTRACT
I address the controversy over whether the financial services industry is “too big.” We should be asking
whether the finance industry is functioning properly instead. The facts suggest that demand for financial
services increased, perhaps temporarily, rather than suggesting a changing distortion within the industry.
The puzzling persistence of actively managed mutual funds is finally yielding to supply and demand
analysis, but the increasing preference for high-fee delegated management by sophisticated institutional
investors remains somewhat of a puzzle. Conventional alpha-beta analysis does not capture the rich
structure of risk premiums, which active management may be accessing. High-frequency information
trading and the price-discovery process remain a puzzle as well. Many “inefficiencies” and events
of the financial crisis suggest too little rather than too much active trading. The instability and regulation
of the US financial system are more important issues than its mere size.
John H. Cochrane
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
john.cochrane@chicagobooth.edu

Introduction
The US economy spends $170 billion a year on advertising, just to trick people into buying stuff
they don’t need. What a waste!
There are 2.2 people doing medical billing for every doctor that actually sees patients, costing
$360 billion—2.4 percent of GDP. Talk about an industry that is too big!
Wholesale and retail trade and transportation cost 14.6 percent of GDP, while all manufacturing
is only 11.5 percent of GDP. We spend more to move goods around than to make them!
My wife asked me to look at light fixtures. Do you know how many thousands of different kinds
of light fixtures there are? The excess complexity is insane. Ten ought to be plenty.
It’s ridiculous how much people overpay for brand names when the generic is so much cheaper.
People are pretty naive.
Business school finance professors are horribly overpaid. Ask an anthropologist! We get paid
almost a half a million bucks, and work a grand total of 10 weeks a year, all to teach students that they
can’t make money trading in the stock market.
It’s fun to pass judgment on waste, size, usefulness, complexity, naiveté, and excessive
compensation, isn’t it? But as economists, we have an analytical structure for thinking about these
questions. We start with supply, demand, and competition, and with the suggestion of the first welfare
theorem that these forces usually lead to socially beneficial arrangements. When outcomes seem puzzling
using this analysis, we embark on a three-pronged investigation. First, we work harder to find how supply
and demand might really operate, in the humble knowledge that initially puzzling institutions and
outcomes have often taken us years to comprehend. Second, maybe there is a “market failure”—an
externality, public good, natural monopoly, asymmetric information situation, or missing market—that
explains our puzzle. Third, we often discover a “government failure,” that the puzzling aspect of our
world is a consequence of laws or regulation, either unintended or the result of capture.
Only then can we begin to diagnose a divergence between reality and socially desirable
outcomes, and only then can we start to think of how to improve reality. “I don’t understand it” doesn’t
mean “it’s bad,” or “regulation will improve it.” And since that attitude pervades policy analysis in
general and financial regulation in particular, economists do the world a disservice if we echo it.
I belabor this point, because I do not offer a competing black box. I don’t claim to estimate the
socially optimal “size of finance” at, say, 8.267 percent of GDP. It’s just the wrong question. Hayek and
the failure of planning should teach us a little modesty: Pronouncing on socially optimal industry size is a
waste of time. Is the finance industry functioning well? Are there identifiable market or government
distortions? Will proposed regulations help or make matters worse? These are useful questions.
1

With a rather catastrophic failure behind us and other crises bubbling on the back burner, it also
seems a bit strange to be arguing whether 5 or 8 percent of GDP is the right “size” of finance, and
whether it needs to be nudged to become larger or smaller. Many of us might happily accept an additional
3 percentage points of GDP in the financial sector in return for a financial system that is not prone to runs
and crises. Our political system has accepted a big increase in resources devoted to financial regulation
and compliance, and a potentially larger reduction in the efficiency, innovation, and competitiveness of
financial institutions and markets, in the quest—misguided or not—for stability. The run-prone nature of
the U.S. financial system, together with its massive regulation, subsidies, government guarantees, and
regulatory capture, looks to be a more fertile fishing ground for trying to understand market and
government failures than does mere size.
Still, the size of finance represents a contentious issue, and my plea that we ask different
questions isn’t going to silence the debate, so let us think about it. Let us use size as an organizing
principle for studying function and dysfunction.
Greenwood and Scharfstein nicely review the key facts and ideas in their paper in this issue.
Their most basic story is: quantity increased a lot, but prices didn’t fall. This description suggests a simple
economic interpretation: The demand for financial services shifted out. People with scarce skills
supplying such services made a lot of money. A system with proportional fees, which is a common
structure in professional services, interacted with stock-price and home-price increases (a different surge
in demand) to produce increased financial sector revenue. Why demand shifted out, and why house and
stock prices rose (temporarily, it turns out) are good questions—but they don’t have much to do with the
structure of the finance industry. This story also suggests that, like the weather, if you don’t like the size
of finance, just wait a while. Finance has contracted rather dramatically since 2007.
Many puzzles remain, however, and the current academic literature paints an interesting and quite
novel picture of how the finance industry functions—and maybe does not function.

The Controversy over Active Management Fees

Management fees are a big part of the “size of finance.” Fees aren’t GDP, of course, but they are
much more easily measured. The large overall rise in fee revenue reflects several offsetting trends.
Individuals moved investments from direct holdings to mutual funds, and then to index funds or other
passive funds. This trend continues. New investors in defined contribution plans invest almost exclusively
in mutual funds or exchange-traded funds.

2

Mutual fund fee rates came down sharply, in part reflecting the slow shift to very low-fee index
and semi-passive funds, and in part reflecting competitive pressure. French (2008) reports that the average
actively managed equity mutual fund fee fell from 2.19 percent in 1980 to 1 percent in 2007. Greenwood
and Scharfstein (2012) report that average bond fund fees fell from 2.04 to 0.75 percent. Some index
funds charge as little as 0.07 percent. Fee-based advisers and wealth managers are lowering fees, and
bundling larger arrays of services, including tax and estate planning.
Funds are far more efficient vehicles for individual investors than holding individual stocks. The
measured GDP of the fund industry is at least in part a benefit rather than a cost, as it displaces inefficient
and unmeasured home production of financial management services. Hiring a (legal) house cleaner also
raises measured GDP.
Thus, mutual fund fee revenues reflect declining rates multiplied by a much larger share of assets
under management. This market does reflect sensible forces, if one is willing to grant a rather long time
span for those forces to affect industry structure. But after all, the moves to low-cost airlines and big-box
retailers took a while too.
However, at the same time that individuals were moving to passive funds and those funds were
expanding, high-wealth individuals and institutions (pensions, endowments, sovereign-wealth funds, and
so forth) moved their investments to hedge funds, private equity, venture capital, and other even higherfee and more-active investment vehicles. Hedge fund fee rates are reportedly stable over time, and
surprisingly large: Managers charge 1.5–2.5 percent of assets each year, and also 15–25 percent of profits.
This part of the market offers the more puzzling behavior.

The Traditional View

High-fee active management and underlying active trading have been deplored by academic
finance for a generation. French (2008) offers a comprehensive summary. French estimates that equity
investors in aggregate, between 1980 and 2006, paid 0.67 percent per year in active management fees,
whose present value he estimates to equal 10 percent of their investments. French eloquently conveys the
view that these investors wasted their money.
The standard analysis divides investment returns into “alpha” and “beta.” We run a regression of
a fund’s returns on the returns of a low-cost index, both returns in excess of the risk-free rate. Beta is the
slope coefficient. Beta times the index return is the component of the fund’s return that is earned for
passively shouldering systematic risk, and can be synthesized by the investor without paying fees. Alpha
is the intercept in this regression, and gives the mean of that part of the fund’s return that cannot be easily
3

replicated. Alpha is conventionally interpreted as the extra return that the fund earns, on average, from the
manager’s talent or superior information, and therefore potentially worth paying a fee to obtain. Both
alpha and beta are, conceptually, one’s best estimate of this decomposition of returns going forward, of
course. Estimated alphas from past history contain a great deal of luck.
The average alpha of all equity mutual funds, before fees, is very nearly zero. This result follows
almost by accounting, since the portfolio of equity mutual funds, taken as a whole, is almost exactly the
value-weighted market portfolio.
The evidence on hedge fund, private equity, venture capital, and other returns is complicated by
survivor bias (funds that perform badly tend to drop out of the data) and by difficulties of calculating
benchmarks that appropriately reflect the risks, time horizons, and illiquidity of these investments. But the
academic argument over whether such funds as a class provide substantial alpha ends up arguing over a
few percentage points one way or the other—hardly the promised gold mines.
Mediocre average results for actively managed investments might not be surprising. Entry into
the business is relatively free. The average artist isn’t that good, either.
But one might expect that, as in every other field of human endeavor, the good managers would
be reliably good. Michael Jordan’s past performance was a good forecast of what would happen in the
next game. Yet the nearly universal conclusion of the academic literature is that there are no reliably
“good” managers.
To evaluate this question, we must separate skill from luck. “Why did Warren Buffet earn so
much money?” is not a productive question. The classic technique is to examine rules by which one might
have chosen funds in the past, and then study the subsequent returns of all such funds. Study after study
finds no reliable rule that one can use to identify funds that will perform well in the future, after
controlling for betas. (Carhart 1997 is an excellent example.)
Fama and French (2010) pursue a clever measurement that does not require one to hypothesize
such a rule. They show that the distribution of estimated alpha across mutual funds is only very slightly
wider than what one would expect if sample alphas were just due to luck. Fama and French estimate (p.
1935) that the distribution of true alpha has a standard deviation of only 1.25 percent on an annual basis,
meaning that only about one-sixth of funds have true alphas (gross, before fees) of 1.25 percent or
greater—while another one-sixth have “true alphas” of negative 1.25 percent or worse. (True negative
alpha is a bit of a puzzling concept. You should not be able to reliably underperform the market, as all I
have to do is short what you buy.) And all of this before fees.

4

A Supply-and-Demand View of Active Management and Its Fees

It seems the average investor should save 60 basis points a year and just buy a passive index such
as Vanguard’s Total Stock Market Portfolio. It seems that the stock pickers should do something more
productive, like drive cabs. Active management and its fees seem like a total private, and social, waste.
Yet his hallowed view—and its antithesis—do not completely make sense. After all, active
management and fees have survived 40 years of efficient-market disdain. Economists who would dismiss
“people are stupid” as an “explanation” for a pricing anomaly that lasts 40 years surely cannot use the
same “explanation” for the persistence of active management. Economists who think the evidence favors
lots of “inefficiencies” in the market are even less well placed to deplore active management. They should
conclude that we need more, or at least better, active management to correct the market’s inefficiencies.
Their puzzle is the inability of existing managers to pick low-hanging fruit.
Progress is being made at last. Berk and Green (2004) have created a supply-and-demand
economic model that explains many of the basic facts of mutual fund performance, flows, and fees. (Berk
2005 offers a simple exposition.)
Suppose that some fund managers do have alpha. Alpha, however, has diminishing returns to
scale. Traders report that many strategies apply only to smaller stocks (see evidence in Fama and French
2006) or that prices move against them if they try to execute trades that are too large. As an example,
suppose that a manager can generate 10 percent risk-free alpha with $10 million in assets under
management. Suppose also that the manager’s fees are 1 percent of assets under management, and
suppose that the market does not go up or down. Then, in his first year, the manager makes $1 million
abnormal return. The manager pockets $100,000 and investors in the fund receive $900,000.
Seeing these good results, investors rush in. But the manager’s idea cannot scale past $10 million
of assets, so the manager invests extra money in an index. With $20 million under management, the
manager generates $1 million alpha on the first $10 million and nothing on the rest. The manager again
receives 1 percent of assets under management, which is now $200,000. But investors still get $800,000
alpha. More investors pour in.
The process stops when the manager has $100 million under management. The manager still
generates $1 million alpha, but now he collects $1 million in fees. His investors get exactly zero alpha,
the competitive rate of return. Everyone is acting rationally.
Berk and Green’s (2004) model is much more sophisticated than this simple example. They
include uncertainty in returns and a signal extraction problem for investors, which give rise to interesting
dynamics. A large literature has followed.
5

This model explains many puzzling facts: In equilibrium, returns to investors are the same in
active and passively managed funds. Funds earn only enough alpha to cover their fees. Good past fund
returns do not forecast good future returns. Investors chase managers with good past returns anyway,
seemingly irrational behavior and thus one of the most famous puzzles (for example, Chevalier and
Ellison 1997). Returns to investors do not measure alpha. Fees do. Managers with good track records get
paid a lot.
This model is the focus of the current debate. Fama and French (2010) complain that the average
alpha before fees is nearly zero and negative, not zero, after fees. Berk and Van Binsbergen (2012)
answer that Fama and French’s benchmarks are not tradeable, and skill should be measured as alpha times
assets under management, as 0.1 percent alpha on a billion dollars is a lot. Using these measures, they
find investors just about breaking even, and a good deal of positive skill using restricted benchmarks.
(Fama and French’s Table AI agrees.) The model needs to be brought to the data quantitatively: Does the
magnitude of fund flows following performance follow the model’s predictions? Does it describe fund
exit, the persistence of negative alpha, and the shift to passive management? Like all models, one can
explore deeper foundations. What is this alpha, anyway? Why are fees a flat percentage of assets under
management? If the manager could simply charge a $1 million fee to start with, the fund would not need
to expand.
And all that is how it should be. After 40 years, the research agenda is finally about how to fit the
facts into a supply and demand framework. Arguing about benchmarks, calibration, and optimal contracts
is a lot more productive than deploring the financial industry as folly, or declaring that if it survives,
markets must be working. The answer will surely not end up all on one side or another: Surely some
investors have overpaid for pointless trading. Surely there is some durable value in an industry that has
lasted so long. Surely there are some understandable distortions. On this path, we may finally understand
how this market works, and maybe, humbly, suggest some improvements. This is a great example of how
the economic framework operates—and a sobering reminder of how long it often takes to see that a
straightforward economic analysis is possible.

Is It Silly To Pay a Proportional Fee?

Much of the argument that “finance is too big” rests on the view that fees based on a proportion
of assets under management are a suboptimal contract. Assets under management went up, fees went up,
and managers laughed all the way to the bank. This is a big part of Greenwood and Scharfstein’s story in
this issue. On closer examination, this argument seems awfully strained.
6

First, we have seen in fact a substantial decline in many fees and migration to lower fee vehicles,
in mutual funds, exchange traded funds, and many wealth management services. Competition does seem
to be working, though more slowly than we may like.
Second, fee revenue is not a good measure of the “size” of finance. Fees are a transfer, like
gambling losses, not a measure of resources consumed or output produced. Policy may and obviously
does care a lot about transfers, but that is a conceptually different question than worrying about wasted
resources. Moreover, fees vary based on outcomes. If the fund gains or loses money, fee income rises and
falls as well. Hedge fund fees, usually 2 percent of assets and 20 percent of profits, vary enormously. The
same fees that were puzzlingly high in 2006 were a lot lower in 2008. Fees have much of the character of
a risk-sharing arrangement among co-investors, rather than an expense for professional services.
Third, if the fund doubles in value because everything else in the economy doubles—capital
stock, earnings, and so on—then surely by constant returns to scale, the value of investment management
(whatever that is) also doubles.
I’d like to see a specific claim what the alternative, realistic, and privately or socially optimal
contract is. Funds cannot bill by the hour, passing on “cost” as lawyers do (or rather, used to do), for
obvious monitoring and principal–agent reasons. Should we agree to pay a fraction of initial investment,
regardless of subsequent performance? It’s obvious why we don’t do that. Accounting for different
vintages of investment would be a nightmare. It would also violate the regulatory principle that all
investors must be treated equally.
Proportional fees seem inescapable in funds that allow investors to withdraw money and invest
freely. Suppose funds charge 1% for new money, but do not lower dollar fees after losses. Then, after a
fund has lost half its value, its investors face 2% fees going forward. They will quickly withdraw their
remaining money and give it to a new fund. Funds that lost money would quickly spiral out of existence,
or investors would undermine the fee by withdrawing and then reinvesting the next day as new money.
Venture capital, private equity, and some hedge funds do not allow free withdrawal, so for them, this
argument does not apply as strongly—and they have more complex fee structures.
Percentage fees pervade professional services. Real estate agents charge percentage fees, and do
better when house prices rise. Architects charge percentage fees. Contingency-fee lawyers take a
percentage of winnings. Salesmen get percentage commissions. Even corrupt officials often take
percentage bribes.
Perhaps the argument boils down to the claim that there is no alpha, so nobody should pay any
fees at all for active management. That’s a different question. If there is alpha or some other function of
active management, its optimal contract is a difficult (and much-studied, though I do not review it here)
7

principal–agent problem. Skill is hard to measure, and a fund’s actions are hard to monitor. It seems a big
jump to conclude that percentage fees came into existence and have persisted for decades, across a wide
range of industries, while inflicting important private and social costs, just because people are naive or
irrational in some unspecified way.

Are fee-payers naive?

Delegating active management and paying large fees is common and increasing among large,
completely unconstrained, and very sophisticated investors. For example, the Harvard endowment was in
2012 about two-thirds externally managed by fee investors, and was 30 percent invested in “private
equity” and “absolute return,” largely meaning hedge funds. 1 The University of Chicago endowment is
similarly invested 2 in private equity and “absolute return.” Apparently, whatever qualms some of its
curmudgeonly faculty express about alphas, fees, and active management are not shared by the
endowment. Its most recent annual report states: “The majority of TRIP’s [Total Return Investment
Portfolio] assets are managed by external managers specializing in a specific asset class, geography, or
strategy. These asset managers outperformed their respective benchmarks in every asset class, adding
over 500 basis points of performance versus the strategic benchmark.” Five hundred basis points! Put that
in your pipe and smoke it, efficient marketers. At least we know one active manager’s perception of what
they get for their fees.
These endowments’ approach to portfolio management is pretty much standard at endowments,
nonprofits, sovereign wealth funds, family offices, pension funds, and so forth—anywhere there is a big
pot of money to invest. These investors pay a lot of attention to allocation among name-based buckets, as
represented in the pie charts, “domestic equity,” “international equity,” “fixed income,” “absolute return,”
“private equity,” and the like. Then, they allocate funds in the buckets to groups of fee-based active
managers.
This approach bears no resemblance to standard portfolio theory, in which an investor pays
attention only to means and covariances, not buckets. And don’t even ask how often hedge fund manager
A is shorting what B is buying; what happens to fees when you give a portfolio of managers 2+20
compensation and half of them win and half lose; or why one would pay the manager of a growthoriented fund to buy the same stock that the manager of the value-oriented fund just sold.
1

See http://www.hmc.harvard.edu/investment-management.

2

See http://annualreport.uchicago.edu/page/endowment.
8

Why have these decision procedures become standard practice? Vague reference to “agency
problems” and “naivete” seem unpersuasive. Harvard’s endowment was overseen by a high-powered
board, including its president Larry Summers, possibly the least naive investor on the planet. The picture
that Summers and his board, or the high-powered talent on Chicago’s Investment Committee are simply
too naive to demand passive investing, or that they really want the endowments to be invested in the
Vanguard market index, but some “agency problem” with the managers they hire and fire with alacrity
prevents that outcome from happening, simply does not wash. (Yes, delegated portfolio management is a
classic principal-agent problem. But no, it’s hard to conceive that it produces this result.) Perhaps instead
we should admit that standard portfolio theory is not much help in situations of any real-world
complexity, try to understand what these rough and ready procedures achieve, and offer more helpful
advice.
As for “excessive” compensation, in the first layer of fees (fees to the manager who pays fees to
the other managers) Harvard endowment’s CIO Jane Mendillo was paid $4.7 million, most of which was
straight salary. 3 The University of Chicago’s Mark Schmid gets only $1.8 million, though our measly
$5.6 billion assets under management relative to Harvard’s $27.6 billion may have something to do with
it. If major nonprofit university endowments are paying this much, is it really a puzzle that pension funds
do the same thing?

Finding Alpha? Implications for Active Trading

To justify fees for active management, one must explain why active trading is worthwhile. The
average investor theorem is an important benchmark: The average investor must hold the value-weighted
market portfolio. Alpha, relative to the market portfolio, is by definition a zero-sum game. For every
investor who overweights a security or invests in a fund that earns positive alpha, some other investor
must underweight the same security and earn the same negative alpha. Collectively, we cannot even
rebalance. And each of us can protect ourselves from being the negative-alpha mark with a simple
strategy: hold the market portfolio, buy or sell only the portfolio in its entirety, and refuse to trade away
from its weights, no matter what price is offered. If every uninformed trader followed this strategy,
informed traders could never profit at our expense.

3

See “Chart: Top Paid CIOs of Tax-Exempt Institutions”
http://www.pionline.com/article/20111107/CHART04/111109905).
9

Alphas and Multiple Factors

Alpha seems a dicey proposition. But the last 20 years of finance research is as clear as empirical
research in economics can be: There is alpha relative to the market portfolio—there are strategies that
deliver average returns larger than the covariation of their returns with the market portfolio justifies—lots
of it, and all over the place. In Cochrane (2011), I provide a summary of this huge literature; I won’t
provide a separate citation for each fact here.
Examples of such strategies include value (stocks with low market value relative to accounting
book value), momentum (stocks that have risen in the previous year), stocks of companies that repurchase
shares, stocks of companies with accounting measures of high expected earnings, and stocks with low
betas. The “carry trade” in maturities, currencies and, credit—buy high-yield securities, sell low-yield
securities—and writing options, especially the “disaster insurance” of out-of-the-money put options, all
generate alpha. Expected returns on the market and most of the anomaly strategies vary predictably over
time, implying profitable dynamic trading strategies.
Many of these anomalies lead to new “factors,” new dimensions of “systematic” risk and rewards.
For example, if one buys a large portfolio of “value” (low-price) stocks, engineered to have zero
correlation with the market, thinking that one will reap the value-stock alpha and diversify away the risks,
one soon discovers the tendency of all value stocks to rise and fall together. The portfolio remains risky
no matter how many stocks one adds. In this way, pursuing the “value” alpha requires one to take on this
additional dimension of undiversifiable risk.
As formalized in Fama and French’s (1996) three-factor model and its larger successors, the
world appears to have many such “factors,” acting as the market return factor did in our early
understanding, each offering orthogonal dimensions of risk and a return premium to those investors who
are willing to take the risks. Those “factor premiums” capture most of observed “alpha” relative to the
market portfolio.
Large risk premiums opened up in the recent financial crisis, as prices of nearly identical
securities diverged. For example, corporate bonds traded at higher prices than their synthetic replication
by a Treasury bond and a credit default swap. The “covered interest parity” condition failed: You could
earn money by borrowing dollars, buying euros, investing in European money markets, and converting
back to dollars in the futures markets. If you could borrow dollars! These events and other price
movements in the crisis suggest to the researchers studying them “fire sales,” “financial constraints,”
“financial frictions,” “price pressure,” and “limits to arbitrage”—all of which are ways of saying that the
active managers of the time were insufficient to equalize prices of nearly identical securities, and active
10

traders could have made alphas. Similar pricing divergences and insufficient arbitrage appeared in the
trading frenzies of the Internet boom (for example, Lamont and Thaler 2003; Cochrane 2003).
These facts are not really under debate. Their interpretation is. These alphas might represent
imperfect risk sharing and (often temporary) market segmentation, or “sentiment,” irrational attachment
or aversion to broad categories of securities. They might also reflect a multidimensional and time-varying
nature of risk premiums in a fully-integrated and informationally-efficient market. They certainly look
less and less like “information” about individual securities that is somehow improperly reflected in prices.
These facts and interpretations lend a quite new color to our central questions: Is the financial
sector too large or too small? How should investors behave in a world with multiple dimensions of
systemic risk? What is the economic function of active management, and the economic value of
management fees?

Multidimensional Risk-Sharing

The conventional disdain of active financial management is based on a conventional perspective:
The market portfolio is the one and only source of “systematic” risk which generates a premium. It is
accessible through low-cost passive investments. The investor understands this opportunity and knows
how much market risk he or she wishes to take. Alpha represents the trader’s knowledge of information
not reflected in market prices.
But the dozens of semi-passive strategies, each of which produce alpha (relative to the market),
each of which exposes the investor to new dimensions of undiversifiable risk, and many of which are
poorly understood, changes the picture completely. Each investor needs to decide which of the many
sources of risk he or she is best able to bear, or needs to avoid despite their attractive premiums.
Investors need to consider the even larger set of asset market risks that do not bear premiums.
Before chasing alphas, investors should hedge the risks of their jobs, businesses, outside income streams,
real estate, or peculiar liability streams by setting up portfolios of assets whose returns are negatively
correlated with those risks. You should want a portfolio that rises when there is bad news about your
future income. Curiously, academic finance has done little to characterize these nonpriced risks and
prescribe hedging strategies.
One can see this process beginning. Many pension funds are moving towards bond-like
investments to match their liabilities. University endowments are beginning to recognize how their
liability streams affect investments. They thought of themselves as “long term” investors able to reap the
premiums of illiquid investments, and able to wait patiently through market downturns, until many in the
11

crisis realized they were supporting a bond-like liability stream in salaries of tenured professors and were
leveraged by bond-financed construction. They found themselves trying to sell illiquid assets at the
bottom like everyone else. Now, they are thinking about matching endowment funding to projects that
can bear risk. They are adapting portfolios to their cash flows, including the implicit beta that alumni
donations rise when stocks go up. Endowments are recognizing that their objectives include an important
tournament relative to other universities (Goetzmann and Oster 2012). The wealth-management arms of
big banks help to set up hedge portfolios for executives who have large unsaleable stock or option
positions, to help them come as close to shorting their own business as possible. Websites available to
individual investors are starting to emphasize intelligent and individual-specific choice of “style” rather
than promise generic “alpha.”
But none of this is easy. Merton (1971) described state-variable hedging demands 40 years ago.
Yet, with thousands of following papers, academic portfolio theory still really does not offer clear-cut
real-world advice (Cochrane forthcoming).
The nature and amount of multidimensional systematic risk one should take is also much more
nebulous and difficult to assess than the traditional question of how much market risk one should take.
Should you write put options, to earn the premium? Or maybe you should buy put options as disaster
insurance? Are you positioned to buy value stocks? To take on the credit risks of default? To take the risk
that high-interest rate foreign currencies depreciate against the dollar? Do the alpha premiums these
strategies offer compensate for the risks you will suffer when they lose money? The whole alpha/beta
definition is falling apart.
Even then, taking advantage of time-varying multidimensional risks requires technical
knowledge. Do you know how to write a credit default swap contract, how to make stock momentum
strategy work without drowning in transactions costs, how to take advantage of temporarily high put
option premiums in the euro-zone, or even how reliably to buy a “value” portfolio? Because such
questions are not easy, portfolio problems like this might certainly benefit from professional and
specialized management, and such management ought to be able to charge a fee.
Perhaps some of the puzzling features of investment practice might be understood as a rough and
ready way of adapting to this more realistic portrait of risks and returns. If so, some active management
and dynamic trading represents a form of socially beneficial insurance provision.
Hedge funds might make more sense in this investment world. They can move to and from asset
classes as risk premiums change, and by using leverage and derivatives they can alter overall exposures
quickly without incurring the transactions cost of buying and selling large portfolios.

12

Many of these alpha-generating strategies and new “factors” suggest needed
institutionaldevelopment. As a concrete and recent example, consider the “betting against beta” anomaly
reexamined by Frazzini and Pedersen (2011a, b). They document that low-beta stocks get higher average
returns than they should, and high beta stocks get lower returns than they should. Their interpretation is
that many investors want more risk than the market portfolio provides, yet leverage is costly to obtain.
These investors buy high-beta stocks instead of leveraging, driving up the prices of high-beta stocks, and
vice versa for low-beta stocks. In this setting, arbitrageurs cannot help. The problem is a price of risk,
needing wider risk-sharing, not an arbitrage (riskless profit) opportunity. To bring prices back to what
they should be, we need low-cost vehicles to bring leveraged low-beta investments to the part of the
investing public that wants them.
We have seen this kind of institutional development before. Small stocks were one of the first
prominent anomalies, generating (it appeared) higher average returns than their betas justified. But it was
hard for individual investors to hold a diversified portfolio of small stocks. Arbitrageurs could only do so
much, because small stocks move together, so a concentrated portfolio bears undiversifiable risk. Small
stock mutual funds were started, which allowed a mass of investors to participate. Fees and expenses of
those funds contributed to revenue and measured GDP, in a way that the activities of individual investors
holding small stocks did not. But they allowed the risk of small stocks to be widely shared and the small
stock premium to decline.
So far I have made no mention at all of informational inefficiency, exploiting mispricings,
superior information, or winning the zero-sum alpha game. I have not violated the average investor
theorem. Given the new facts of empirical finance, a large role for active management exists without any
of that at all. Of course, I do not claim that current portfolio practice, and especially hiring many different
high-fee hedge funds, is an optimal strategy. But it isn’t necessarily as “naive” or “agency conflicted” as
it otherwise seems.

Marketing

In the quest to explain the persistence of active management and its fees, one other analogy seems
worth pursuing: marketing. Marketing and advertising have long been a puzzle to economists, along with
readers of Consumer Reports and coupon-clippers everywhere. Why buy the brand name when the
generic is nearly identical, and costs a lot less?
The money-management industry is essentially a marketing industry. Its practitioners take generic
ingredients, package, label, advertise, and market them. Yes, it’s puzzling that people don’t buy the
13

generic at Vanguard. It’s puzzling that they don’t buy the pieces and assemble their own, with
E*TRADE. It’s puzzling that they pay so much for the slight differences in ingredients that the active
managers deliver. And it is equally puzzling that they pay for Coke, Clorox, Bayer, or bottled water; that
they shop at Macy’s not Target, Whole Foods not Costco, and a hundred other brand names.
This is not the place to digress into the “rationality” of marketing and advertising. Simply
dismissing centuries worth of branding and advertising as naiveté and folly seems, well, its own form of
naiveté. Perhaps by thinking of active fund management as an instance of this larger pattern, we may
make some progress to understanding how it actually works.

Information Trading and Price Discovery

Much trading and active management, however, is clearly aimed at bringing information to the
market, not at better sharing of time-varying and multidimensional risk. The first welfare theorem does
not clearly apply to information production, so we have little a priori reassurance that the quest for trading
profits produces the “right” amount—or, perhaps more importantly, the right kind—of information.
It is possible that not enough social resources are devoted to trading, because information is a
public good. As French (2008) wrote, despite deploring the private costs of alpha-chasing: “I offer no
evidence on whether society is buying too little or too much of this good. Price discovery, however, is an
externality—each active investor pays the full cost of his efforts but captures only a tiny slice of the
benefit—so there is no reason to think active investors purchase the optimal amount of price discovery.”
The common complaints “the financial crisis proves markets aren’t efficient,” or that tech and
mortgages represented “bubbles,” are at heart complaints that there was not enough active informationbased trading. All a more “efficient” market could have done is to crash sooner, by better expressing the
pessimist’s views. Remember, “efficiency” means that prices incorporate all available information, not
that markets are clairvoyant. The definition of “efficiency” is widely misunderstood. I once told a
newspaper reporter that I thought markets were pretty “efficient,” and he quoted me as saying markets are
“self-regulating!”
If information is not incorporated into market prices, and to such an extent that simple strategies
with big alphas can be published in the Journal of Finance, there are not enough arbitrageurs. If asset
prices fall in “fire sales,” only to rebound later, there are not enough buyers following the fire trucks. If
credit constraints are impeding the flow of capital, there is a social benefit to loosening those constraints.
The literature on short-selling is revealing on this point. Short sellers uncover far more financial
fraud than the Securities and Exchange Commission. Conversely, some of the biggest alphas and
14

“inefficiencies” occur when there is a technical or regulatory impediment to short seller’s activities.
Lamont (2012) finds 2.4 percent monthly alpha to a portfolio of short-selling-constrained stocks, of shortselling-constrained stocks, a large informational inefficiency. This is a concrete example of inadequate
(because constrained) information-based trading.
Information trading produces more informationally efficient prices, which are socially useful.
With better market signals, companies raise capital more easily for valuable projects, and are signaled not
to invest in poor projects or at poor times. True, the simple q theory, which predicts that corporate
investment should be a perfect function of stock price relative to book value, is formally rejected, but its
glass is also half full: There are strong correlations between stock prices and investment, over time
(through the tech boom and bust of the 1990s and through the financial crisis -- see Cochrane 1991, and
2011, Figure 10) and across industries (Google vs., say, GM). When issuing stock generates a lot of
money, companies do it, and build factories or websites. Those who view asset market booms and
following busts as “irrational” or “bubbles” point to the consequent investment booms and busts as
examples of the social costs of inefficient markets, thereby endorsing the social value of more efficient
markets.
Even without investment, more efficient prices provide better risk sharing. If the owner of an
apple tree and that of a pear tree hedge their risks by trading stock in the other tree, their risk-sharing
improves when stock prices are more efficient. (Hirshleifer’s 1971 famous analysis stating that

efficiency is only socially beneficial if production is involved did not consider such risk sharing.)
Information trading is central to “liquidity provision” and thus the success of markets for risk
sharing. Markets such as Consumer Price Index, GDP futures, or hurricane catastrophe options failed
because there was not enough information trading. This is an important external benefit. Indeed, in the
public forum, hedge funds and high-frequency traders primarily defend their activities by touting their
“market making” and “liquidity provision” for small investors. (Of course, they are also pandering to their
regulators’ tastes here.)

The Puzzle of Information Trading

Still, the cacophony of trading seems like a lot of effort for these goals. The classic theory of
finance predicts that information is perfectly reflected in prices, with no trading volume needed. Suppose
Apple is trading at $500 per share, but you know that the iPhone 6 will make Apple worth $1000 per
share. If you approach an uninformed investor with an offer to buy Apple at $600 per share, the index
investor should answer: “No, you must know something I don’t know. I only buy and sell the entire
15

index, so I don’t lose to people like you.” If you offer $700, the index investor answers: “I don’t think you
heard me. I only buy and sell the entire index.” You keep trying, bidding the price up all the way to
$1000 per share, at which point you give up. The price rises, reflecting your information, but no trade
occurred. This is a colloquial version of Milgrom and Stokey’s (1982) famous no-trade theorem.
The theory that prices reflect information with zero trading volume is of course dramatically at
odds with the facts. The classic theory also ignores costs. If information traders cannot earn positive
alpha, and, if producing information and trading on it takes any time and resources, the information
traders won’t bother, and nobody is left to make prices reflect information. For this reason, as Grossman
and Stiglitz (1980) wrote, informationally efficient markets are impossible.
The standard compromise model (Grossman and Stiglitz 1980, Kyle 1985, and a huge literature)
posits “informed” traders who receive a signal about a firm’s value, “liquidity” traders who for
unspecified reasons must trade, and “market makers” who intermediate, charging a bid-ask spread to
defend themselves against the informed traders.
Now, all current theories of trading rely on some sort of “irrationality” or other artificial
assumptions. “Liquidity traders” are the classic example. Other models, like Scheinkman and Xiong
(2003), posit slightly irrational dogmatic beliefs, so each information trader can believe he or she is
smarter than average. Many models, such as Acharya and Pedersen (2005), write down overlapping
generations of agents without bequests who die every week or so, forcing them to trade.
But these assumptions are convenient shortcuts for getting trading into the model for other
purposes, such as studying price discovery and liquidity. They are not there to describe microfoundations
of socially destructive trading that needs remediation by policy. The “irrationality” that breaks the notrade theorem, or the irrationality of the liquidity traders, is not typically deeply micro-founded in the
psychology literature, as in true behavioral finance. People live more than a week, and leave bequests.
The fact staring us in the face is that “price discovery,” the process by which information
becomes embedded in market prices, uses a lot of trading volume, and a lot of time, effort, and resources.
And we are only beginning to understand it.
The empirical literature offers tantalizing glimpses of this process. A very small taste of this vast
literature: The period after a news announcement often features high price volatility and trading volume,
in which markets seem to be fleshing out what the news announcement actually means for the value of the
security. For example, Lucca and Moench (2012, Figure 6) show a spike in stock-index trading volume
and price volatility in the hours just after the Federal Reserve announcements of its interest rate decisions.
The information is perfectly public. But the process of the market digesting its meaning, aggregating the
opinions of its traders, and deciding what value the stock index should be with the new information,
16

seems to need actual shares to trade hands.4 Perhaps the common model of information—essentially, we
all agree on the deck of cards, we just don’t know which one was picked— is wrong.
Securities such as “on the run” or benchmark bonds, where “price discovery” takes place, have
higher prices than otherwise identical securities. Traders are willing to suffer lower average returns in
order to participate in the information-trading game, in much the same way as money holders suffer lower
returns for the transactions services money provides (see Cochrane 2003 and references therein).
Similarly, “liquidity” seems to be extremely valuable to investors and has been so for a long time, even
though none of us feel the need to trade every 10 minutes.
Markets in financial securities are set up, and exist, almost entirely to be markets for information
trading, and high-frequency “liquidity provision,” that we find hard to fathom. They are not really
markets for the securities themselves. We could easily handle individual’s lifetime saving and dissaving
needs, and firms’ need to issue and retire equity, with orders-of-magnitude less volume, in much sleepier
bank-like institutions. Yes, we could each avoid being the negative-alpha part of price discovery by only
buying index funds. It’s a bit of a puzzle that we don’t. It’s also a good thing we don’t, or there would be
no traders making prices efficient.
But as with active management, perhaps we should work just a little harder before dismissing the
hundreds of years of trading activity, and the entire existence of the New York Stock Exchange, Chicago
Mercantile Exchange, and other markets, as monuments to human folly, or before advocating regulations
such as transactions taxes—the perennial favorite answer in search of a question—to reduce trading
volume whose size, function, and operation we do not understand. Are we sure that they should not be
transactions subsidies?
And before we deplore, it’s worth remembering just how crazy passive indexing sounds to any
market participant. “What,” they might respond, “would you walk in to a wine store and say ‘I can’t tell
good from bad, and the arbitrageurs are out in force. I sure won’t pay you 1% for recommendations. Just
give me one of everything’?”

High-Frequency Trading and Market-Making

It’s especially hard to see why high-frequency trading is needed. Price discovery every
millisecond doesn’t seem necessary to guide corporate investment or individual risk sharing and hedging.

4

Banerjee and Kremer (2010) and Kim and Verrecchia (1991) offer models in which such
disagreement about public information leads to trading volume.
17

High-frequency trading reminds us in the extreme that the amount of trading based on a wellunderstood or “fundamental” piece of information about a company’s cash flow is minuscule. Models in
which an informed trader possesses a “signal” about the value of a liquidating dividend just don’t describe
the vast majority of trading. High-frequency traders do not trade on earnings reports 20 milliseconds
ahead of the market.
Instead, high-frequency traders—and even most “low-frequency” day and week traders—look at
patterns of prices, volumes, and past trading activity, not “information” or opinion about firm
fundamentals.
They may describe their strategy as “statistical arbitrage,” removing the small predictability of
high-frequency price movements (and grossly misusing the term “arbitrage.”) Sometimes they defend
their social function as “market makers” or “liquidity providers.” If so, market making is a far more
dynamic process than simply posting bid-ask spreads, as the standard theory envisions! If you ask their
critics, they are artfully front-running demand from less-sophisticated investors, subtracting “liquidity,”
worsening “price impact,” choking bandwidth with quickly-canceled orders, and removing the economic
rewards to genuine information trading. Their activity may also answer the interesting question of how
information spreads from one informed trade to the whole market. Somebody has to notice the price
pattern and pile in.
However we come to understand these issues, the social costs and benefits of high-frequency
trading are clearly not at all related to the minor (as a fraction of GDP) resources devoted to them—the
cost of possibly useless fiber-optic cable, co-located servers, and the time of smart programmers who
could be developing better iphone games. The social question for high-frequency trading—like all of
finance, really—is whether it screws up markets or makes them more efficient and “liquid.”
There isn’t yet much evidence or theory on this point, but isolated events suggest doubts about
liquidity-provision and efficiency. For example, in the May 6, 2010, “Flash Crash,” the Standard and
Poor’s 500 fell 6 percent in a few minutes after a large sell order arrived, and promptly recovered in less
than an hour, only after a 5 minute trading halt. Kirilenko, Kyle, Samadi, and Tuzun (2011) who study
this event (see their Figure 1) document that high-frequency traders absorbed demand for about four
seconds before turning around and selling along with everyone else. On July 19, 2012, Coke, McDonalds,
IBM, and Apple saw price sawtooths: sharp rises exactly on each hour, reversed by the next hour. Vigna
and Lauricella (2012) offer some amazing graphs. 5 These movements were widely attributed to an

5

The website http://www.nanex.net/FlashCrash/OngoingResearch.html is devoted to weird
behavior in high-frequency markets.
18

algorithm placing big orders exactly on the hour—and other algorithms not picking up on the inefficient
signal abundantly obvious to the human eye. These palpable inefficiencies suggest a market with very
little “liquidity provision,” not the opposite.
The structure of markets, with design and regulation stemming from the days of human trading,
could be at fault. Prices must jump in discrete intervals—once 1/8 dollar, now 1 cent. Limit orders must
be filled in strict time priority: if order A arrives before order B, order A must be filled completely and B
gets nothing. Yet time is continuous. A’s order need only arrive a millisecond before B’s, and A wins the
pot. (Traders report that the ability to quickly cancel limit orders that are in the back of the line is another
advantage of very high speed.) You can see an arms race for speed emerge. It’s worth spending a lot on
computers to speed up trades by a few milliseconds.
If my hunch is correct, it suggests an obvious solution: Suppose that an exchange operated on a
discrete clock, as a computer does in order to let signals settle down before processing them. The
exchange could run a once-per-second, or even once-per-minute, matching process, with all orders
received during the period treated equally. If there are more buy than sell at the crossing price, orders are
filled proportionally. Such an exchange would eliminate extremely high-frequency trading, because there
would be no gain or loss from acting faster than a minute.
Would this system be an improvement to efficiency and liquidity? Would exchanges choose such
systems if they were allowed to do so? The Taiwan Stock Exchange already matches limit orders once
every 90 seconds (Barber, Lee, Liu, and Odean 2008). Is its performance atrociously worse? These are all
good questions! High-frequency trading is a ripe area of research.

Housing, Consumer Credit, and the Size of Regulated Finance

The growth of housing finance and consumer credit raises a different set of issues. It’s useful to
divide the mortgage business into three parts: mortgage origination, mortgage refinancing, and mortgagebacked securities.
The increase in fees for residential loan origination is easily digested as the response to an
increase in demand. The increase in housing demand may indeed not have been “socially optimal” (!)
There are plenty of government policies and perhaps a few market dislocations to blame. But it doesn’t
make much sense to criticize growth in the financial industry for responding to this increase in demand,
whatever its source, or for passing along the subsidized credit—which was and remains the government’s
explicit intention to increase—with the customary fee.

19

The large fees collected for refinancing mortgages are a bit more puzzling. US mortgages are
strangely complicated, predominantly featuring fixed rates, no penalty for prepaying when interest rates
fall, limited recourse, and a complex refinancing option. Other countries have gravitated to much simpler
contracts. The now-familiar structure of U.S. mortgages emerged after only the Great Depression, when
new Federal agencies started issuing them. Before the Great Depression, US mortgages lasted only five to
ten years and required only the payment of interest. The principal was due at the end of the loan, and was
typically refinanced. (See Green and Wachter 2005, p. 95). Today, the structure of mortgage contracts is
pretty much dictated by what the government agencies that dominate the market will buy and guarantee.
These observations suggest that such complex contracts are not a market necessity. However, a
glance at my cellphone contract and frequent flyer miles rules suggests to me that price discrimination by
needless complexity might be part of the story as well.
Still, collecting fees when interest rates decline or consumers refinance is not conceptually part of
GDP. They are state-dependent transfers dictated by the terms of an option contract. And we are unlikely
to see a lot of refinancing as interest rates eventually rise.
There was a lot of financial innovation in mortgage-backed securities, some of which notoriously
exploded. But here again, whether we spend a bit of GDP filling out forms or paying fees is clearly the
least of the social benefit and cost questions. The “shadow banking” system was prone to a textbook
systemic run, which happened. This fragility, not the size or fraction of GDP, is the important issue.
A good part of this innovation, such as creating off-balance-sheet, special-purpose vehicles and
tailoring securities in order to game credit ratings, was clearly designed to engineer around ill-conceived
regulations. That part counts as a regulatory failure needing reform, rather than a market failure needing
additional regulation.
Yet much of this financial innovation has the potential to be of large social benefit. Suppose that
mortgages were bundled into securities, intermediated by mutual funds whose values float, just like those
of equity mutual funds, and held around the world in retirement accounts, pension funds, and our
endowments’ portfolios, without government guarantees at every step. This would be a terrific financial
structure. Though mortgage-backed securities are a bit opaque, they are nowhere near as opaque as the
entire balance sheet of, say, Citigroup. Furthermore, such a structure would be immune to runs,
bankruptcies, and bailouts, thus requiring minimal regulation. And the fees required to fill out the
mortgage-backed security paperwork would surely be less than the bank and regulatory paperwork,
regulation, and compliance costs of the current system.

20

Concluding Remarks

The size and revenues of the finance industry increased because fee income for refinancing,
issuing, and securitizing mortgages rose along with the rise in housing transactions and house prices, and
because asset-management fee income rose along with a shift to professional management from “rollyour-own” portfolios and a rise in asset values. Compensation to employees with skills in short supply
increased. Fee schedules themselves declined a bit. These facts suggest “demand shifted out,” not
“something big changed in the structure of this industry.”
Demand that shifts out can shift back again. Demand for financial services evaporated with the
decline in housing and asset values in the 2008 recession and subsequent period of sclerotic growth.
Much of the “shadow banking system” has disappeared. For example, asset-backed commercial paper
outstanding rose from $600 billion in 2001 to $1.2 trillion in 2007—and now stands at $300 billion.
Financial credit market debt outstanding in the flow of funds rose from $8.6 trillion in 2000 to $17.1
trillion in 2008—and now stands at $13.8 trillion. Employment in financial activities rose from 7.7
million in 2000 to 8.4 million in 2007—and is now back to 7.7 million. Study of “why is finance so big,”
using data that stops in 2007, may soon take its place alongside studies of “why are internet stocks so
high” in 1999 or studies of “why is there a Great Moderation” in 2006.
An older literature on the size of the financial system, forgotten in the current debate, studies the
socially inefficient resources devoted to cash management in the face of positive interest rates, and
measuring social costs as the area under the money demand curve. Lucas (2000) concluded that finance
was about 1 percent of GDP too big by this measure. The fragility of those cash-management schemes
can now be added to the list of social costs. Zero interest rates have eliminated these costs for now, and if
the Fed continues to pay market interest on reserves, those costs can remain largely eliminated in the
future.
The size question for the finance industry going forward, under the Dodd-Frank regulatory
structure, is likely to be how many resources are devoted to regulation, regulatory compliance, lobbying
to influence those regulations, and the distortions they induce. The social cost question remains how to
create a financial system that is not prone to runs, crashes, and bailouts, even if that costs a few
percentage points of GDP. Unless sovereign debt bites us first.
Many puzzles remain in the structure of the finance industry. The persistence of high-fee active
management chosen by sophisticated institutional investors remains a puzzle. To some extent, as I have
outlined, this pattern may reflect insurance provision, that is, the dynamic and multidimensional character
of asset-market risk and risk premiums. To some extent, this puzzle also goes hand in hand with the
21

puzzle of why price discovery seems to require so much active trading, and whether and how information
trading provides valuable “liquidity.” It is possible that there are far too few resources devoted to price
discovery and market stabilization. In the financial crisis, we surely needed more pools of cash prepared
to pounce on fire sales, and more opportunities for negative long-term views to express themselves.
Surveying the current economic literature on these issues, it is certain that we do not very well
understand the price-discovery and trading mechanism, nor the economic forces that allowed high-fee
active management to survive so long.
Unless we adopt the arrogant view that what we don’t understand must be bad, it is clearly far too
early to make pronouncements such as “There is likely too much high-cost, active asset management,” or
“Society would be better off if the cost of this management could be reduced.” Such statements are not
supported by theory or evidence. Nor is their not-so-subtle implication that resources devoted to greater
regulation—by politicians and regulators no less naive than current investors, no less behaviorally-biased,
armed with no better understanding than academic economists, and with much larger agency problems
and institutional constraints—will improve matters. This proposition amounts to Samuel Johnson’s
dictum on second marriages, “the triumph of hope over experience.”

22

References
Acharya, Viral V., and Lasse H. Pedersen. 2005. “Asset Pricing with Liquidity Risk.” Journal of
Financial Economics 77(2): 375–410.
Alvarez, Fernando, and Franceso Lippi. 2009. “Financial Innovation and the Transactions Demand for
Cash.” Econometrica 77(2): 363–402.
Banerjee, Snehal, and Ilan Kremer. 2010. “Disagreement and Learning: Dynamic Patterns of Trade.”
Journal of Finance 65(4): 1269–1302.
Barber, Brad M., Yi-Tsung Lee, Yu-Jane Liu, and Terrance Odean. 2008. “Just How Much Do
Individual Investors Lose by Trading?” Review of Financial Studies 22(2): 609–632.
Berk, Jonathan B. 2005. “Five Myths of Active Portfolio Management.” Journal of Portfolio
Management 31(3): 27–31.
Berk, Jonathan B., and Richard C. Green. 2004. “Mutual Fund Flows and Performance in Rational
Markets.” Journal of Political Economy 112(6): 1269–95.
Berk, Jonathan B., and Jules H. Van Binsbergen. 2012. “Measuring Managerial Skill in the Mutual
Fund Industry.” NBER Working Paper 18184.
Carhart, Mark M. 1997. “On Persistence in Mutual Fund Performance.” Journal of Finance 52(1): 57–
82.
Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison. 1997. “Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response to
Incentives.” Journal of Political Economy 105(6): 1167–1200.
Cochrane, John H. 1991. “Production-Based Asset Pricing and the Link between Stock Returns and
Economic Fluctuations.” Journal of Finance 46(1): 207–234
Cochrane, John H. 2003. “Stock as Money: Convenience Yield and the Tech-Stock Bubble.” Chap. 12
in Asset Price Bubbles edited by William C. Hunter, George G. Kaufman, and Michael Pomerleano.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Cochrane, John H. 2011. “Discount Rates.” Journal of Finance 66(4): 1047–1108.
Cochrane, John H. Forthcoming. “A Mean-Variance Benchmark for Intertemporal Portfolio Theory.”
Journal of Finance.
Cutler, David M., and Dan P. Ly. 2011. “The (Paper)Work of Medicine: Understanding International
Medical Costs.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(2): 3–25.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. 1996. “Multifactor Explanations of Asset Pricing
Anomalies.” Journal of Finance 51(1): 55–84.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. 2006. “Dissecting Anomalies.” Journal of Finance 63(4):
1653–78.
23

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. 2010. “Luck versus Skill in the Cross-Section of Mutual
Fund Returns.” Journal of Finance 65(4): 1915–47.
Frazzini, Andrea, and Lasse Heje Pedersen. 2011a. “Betting against Beta.” Paper available at
http://www.econ.yale.edu/~af227.
Frazzini, Andrea, and Lasse Heje Pedersen. 2011b. “Embedded Leverage.” Paper available at
http://www.econ.yale.edu/~af227.
French, Kenneth R. 2008. “Presidential Address: The Cost of Active investing.” Journal of Finance
63(4): 1537–73.
Goetzmann, William N., and Sharon Oster. 2012. “Competition among University Endowments.”
NBER Working Paper 18173.
Green, Richard K., and Susan M. Wachter. 2005. “The American Mortgage in Historical and
International Context.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 19(4): 93–114.
Greenwood, Robin, and David Scharfstein. 2012. “The Growth of Modern Finance.” July, 2012.
http://www.people.hbs.edu/dscharfstein/Growth_of_Modern_Finance.pdf.
Grossman, Sanford G., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1980. “On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient
Markets.” American Economic Review 70(3): 393–408
Hirshleifer, Jack. 1971. “The Private and Social Value of Information and the Reward to Inventive
Activity.” American Economic Review 61(4): 561–74.
Kim, Oliver, and Robert E. Verrecchia. 1991. “Trading Volume and Price Reactions to Public
Announcements.” Journal of Accounting Research 29(2): 302–21.
Kirilenko, Andrei A., Albert S. Kyle, Mehrdad Samadi, and Tugkan Tuzun. 2011. “The Flash Crash:
The Impact of High Frequency Trading on an Electronic Market.”
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1686004.
Kyle, Albert S. 1985. “Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading.” Econometrica 53(6): 1315–36.
Lamont, Owen A. 2012. “Go Down Fighting: Short Sellers vs. Firms.” Review of Asset Pricing Studies
2(1): 1–30.
Lamont, Owen A., and Richard H. Thaler. 2003. “Can the Market Add and Subtract? Mispricing in
Tech Stock Carve-Outs.” Journal of Political Economy 111(2): 227–68.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 2000. “Inflation and Welfare.” Econometrica 68(2): 247–74.
Lucca, David O., and Emanuel Moench. 2012. “The Pre-FOMC Announcement Drift.”
http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports/sr512.html.

24

Merton, Robert C. 1971. “Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous Time Model.”
Journal of Economic Theory 3(4): 373–413.
Milgrom, Paul, and Nancy L. Stokey. 1982. “Information, Trade, and Common Knowledge.” Journal of
Economic Theory 26(1): 17–27.
Pensions & Investments. 2011. “Chart: Top Paid CIOs of Tax-Exempt Institutions.” November 7.
http://www.pionline.com/article/20111107/CHART04/111109905.
Scheinkman, Jose, and Wei Xiong. 2003. “Overconfidence and Speculative Bubbles.” Journal of
Political Economy 111(6): 1183–1219.
US Census Bureau. 2012. Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2012. Table 1279.
Vigna, Paul, and Tom Lauricella. 2012. “Sawtooth Trading Hits Coke, IBM, McDonald’s, and Apple
Shares.” Wall Street Journal, July 19. http://blogs.wsj.com/marketbeat/2012/07/19/sawtooth-trading-hitscoke-ibm-mcdonalds-and-apple-shares/.

25

