                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     PROCYCLICAL LEVERAGE AND VALUE-AT-RISK

                                            Tobias Adrian
                                           Hyun Song Shin

                                        Working Paper 18943
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18943


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2013




We are grateful to Viral Acharya, Mark Carey, Helmut Elsinger, Daniel Green, Nobuhiro Kiyotaki,
John Moore, Thomas Philippon, Matthew Pritsker, Rafael Repullo, Jean-Charles Rochet, Philipp Schnabl,
Martin Summer, Suresh Sundaresan and Pierre-Olivier Weill for comments on earlier drafts. We thank
the editor, Andrew Karolyi, and two referees for guidance. An earlier version of this paper was entitled
"Financial Intermediary Leverage and Value-at-Risk". The views expressed in this paper are those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the
Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Tobias Adrian and Hyun Song Shin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Procyclical Leverage and Value-at-Risk
Tobias Adrian and Hyun Song Shin
NBER Working Paper No. 18943
April 2013
JEL No. G21,G32

                                            ABSTRACT

The availability of credit varies over the business cycle through shifts in the leverage of financial
intermediaries.Empirically, we find that intermediary leverage is negatively aligned with the banks'
Value-at-Risk(VaR). Motivated by the evidence, we explore a contracting model that captures the
observed features.Under general conditions on the outcome distribution given by Extreme Value
Theory (EVT), intermediariesmaintain a constant probability of default to shifts in the outcome
distribution, implying substantialdeleveraging during downturns. For some parameter values, we
can solve the model explicitly, therebyendogenizing the VaR threshold probability from the contracting
problem.


Tobias Adrian
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Capital Market Research
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
tobias.adrian@ny.frb.org

Hyun Song Shin
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
hsshin@princeton.edu
1     Introduction

The availability of credit and how credit varies over the business cycle has been a subject

of keen interest, especially in the wake of the financial crisis. Some cyclical variation in

total lending is to be expected, even in a frictionless world where the conditions of the

Modigliani and Miller (1958) theorem hold. There are more positive net present value

(NPV) projects that need funding when the economy is strong than when the economy

is weak. Therefore, we should expect total credit to increase during the up-swing and

decline in the down-swing.     The debate about procyclicality of the financial system is

therefore more subtle. The question is whether the fluctuations in lending are larger than

would be justified by changes in the incidence of positive NPV projects.

    We examine the evidence on the procyclicality of lending and explore a possible mi-

crofoundation for the observed fluctuations in the availability of credit over the business

cycle. Our focus is on the way that credit supply fluctuates as a consequence of how fi-

nancial intermediaries manage their leverage in reaction to changing economic conditions.

Elsewhere (Adrian and Shin (2010)), we documented that the leverage of market-based

financial intermediaries was procyclical - that is, leverage is high during booms and low

during busts. Procyclicality of leverage is the mirror image of increased collateral require-

ments (increased “haircuts”) during downturns, and Geanakoplos (2009) and Gorton and

Metrick (2012) have examined how the risk bearing capacity of the financial system can

be severely diminished when leverage falls through an increase in collateral requirements.

    Here, we make two contributions.      First, we delve deeper into the reasons for the

procyclicality of leverage and document the important explanatory role played by mea-

sured risks through the firms’ disclosed Value-at-Risk. Value-at-Risk (VaR) is a quantile

measure on the loss distribution defined as the smallest threshold loss  such that the

probability that the realized loss turns out to be larger than  is below some fixed proba-

bility . If a bank were to manage its risk by maintaining Value-at-Risk to be no larger

                                             1
than its equity capital, the bank would ensure that it remains solvent with probability at

least 1 − . We find that the unit Value-at-Risk, defined as the Value-at-Risk per dollar

of assets, fluctuates widely over the financial cycle in step with measures of risk such as

the implied volatility of options on the banks’ traded shares.     However, in contrast to

the wide fluctuations in the risk environment through the VaR to asset ratio, there are

much more modest fluctuations in the firms’ VaR to equity ratio. The diﬀerence is ac-

counted for by the active management of leverage by intermediaries, especially the active

shedding of risks through deleveraging during times of market stress. Indeed, we show

that the evidence is consistent with the rule of thumb that Value-at-Risk normalized by

equity is kept constant over the cycle, even at the height of the crisis. The implication is

that intermediaries are shedding risks and withdrawing credit precisely when the financial

system is under most stress, thereby serving to amplify the downturn.

   Our second contribution is theoretical. Based on the evidence, we explore the extent

to which a standard contracting model can provide the microfoundations for procyclical

leverage driven by Value-at-Risk.    In order to keep our framework as close as possible

to the existing corporate finance literature, we explore perhaps the simplest possible

contracting model where a bank seeks funding from its creditors which it can channel to

its customers.

   We find that under fairly general conditions on the outcome distribution given by

Extreme Value Theory (EVT), a standard contracting framework with risk-shifting moral

hazard can generate an exact Value-at-Risk rule, where financial intermediaries keep their

book equity matched with their Value-at-Risk at some given confidence level. For some

cases, we can solve explicitly for the failure probability  in the VaR rule. In this way, we

are able to endogenize the threshold probability  used in the Value-at-Risk rule. The

statistical foundations underlying EVT provide some reassurance that our results are

applicable to a broad class of problems involving extreme outcomes.       Given how widely


                                             2
Value-at-Risk is used by financial intermediaries, our framework can thereby provide a

bridge between theory and practice.

   The implication of our theoretical finding is that the contracting frictions for financial

intermediaries can inject considerable procyclicality into the financial system. The out-

come of our contracting problem has the creditors imposing a leverage limit on the bank

that implies a fixed probability of failure of the bank, irrespective of the risk environment.

Since measured risk fluctuates over the cycle, imposing a constant probability of failure

implies very substantial expansions and contractions of the balance sheet of the bank for

any given level of bank equity. In other words, the contract implies substantial leveraging

and deleveraging over the cycle.

   Our findings are significant not only for the microfoundations of Value-at-Risk, but

also for the contrast with the implications from models that build on standard portfolio

choice. For instance, log preferences, which are widely used for their tractability in models

of financial intermediation and in applications in macroeconomics have the implication

that portfolio leverage increases during busts as investors are attracted by the high risk

premium that is available. We return to this issue in a later section. Relatedly, we also

discuss the distinction between leverage inherent in the portfolio of the bank (its book

leverage) from the market capitalization of the bank, which focuses on the enterprise value

of the bank. Since our concern is with the lending behavior of the bank via its portfolio

- i.e. with its assets, rather than its enterprise value, book leverage is the concept that

we focus on here.

   In a concluding section, we discuss the points of contact with the literature and high-

light the common threads, including the implications of our results for financial stability

analysis and for macro applications.      We begin in the next section by reviewing the

evidence on the role of Value-at-Risk as a driver in procyclical leverage of financial inter-

mediaries. We then explore the contracting environment and show the key comparative


                                              3
 Mode 1: Increased leverage due to equity buyback   Mode 2: Increased leverage due to fall in asset value   Mode 3: Increase borrowing to fund asset growth

      A        L                  A        L              A         L                                          A        L                   A        L
                                                                                        A         L
                                        Equity
             Equity                                              Equity                                               Equity                      Equity
    Assets                     Assets                  Assets                        Assets Equity          Assets
                                          Debt
             Debt                                                 Debt                          Debt                  Debt               Assets
                                                                                                                                                   Debt




Figure 1: Three modes of leveraging up. Mode 1 is through an equity buyback through a debt issue.
Mode 2 is through a dividend financed by asset sale. Mode 3 is through increased borrowing to fund new
assets. In each case the grey area indicates balance sheet component that is held fixed



statics result that leverage fluctuates in response to shifts in underlying risk.


2         Value-at-Risk and Leverage

In textbook discussions of corporate financing decisions, the set of positive net present

value (NPV) projects is often taken as being given, with the implication that the size

of the balance sheet is fixed. Instead, attention falls on how those assets are financed.

Leverage then increases by substituting equity for debt, such as through an equity buy-

back financed by a debt issue, as depicted by the left hand panel in Figure 1.

    Figure 1 shows two other modes of leveraging up. In each case, the grey shaded area

indicates the balance sheet component that remains fixed.                                                     The middle panel depicts

the outcome of a dividend payment funded by sale of assets, with debt held fixed. The

middle panel is also closest to the way that leverage fluctuates in Merton’s (1974) model

of long term debt where leverage fluctuates due to changes in the price of the assets, with

notional debt held fixed.

    However, the first two panels in Figure 1 turns out not to be a good description of the

way that the banking sector leverage varies over the financial cycle. For US investment

banks, Adrian and Shin (2010) showed that leverage fluctuates through changes in the

total size of the balance sheet with equity being the exogenous variable. Hence, leverage


                                                                             4
                                                          400
                                                          300




                    Change in debt and change in equity
                                                          200
                                                          100
                                                                              y = -0.0016x + 1.4
                                                            0



                              (billion dollars)
                                                          -100
                                                          -200
                                                          -300
                                                                                                                            Equity
                                                          -400                                                              Change
                                                          -500                         y = 1.0016x - 1.4
                                                          -600                                                              Debt
                                                          -700                                                              Change

                                                          -800
                                                                     2008Q4
                                                          -900
                                                              -900 -800 -700 -600 -500 -400 -300 -200 -100      0     100   200   300   400
                                                                                 Change in assets (billion dollars)



Figure 2: Scatter chart of changes in debt and equity to changes in assets of the US broker dealer sector
(1990Q1 - 2012Q2) (Source: Federal Reserve Flow of Funds)



and total assets tend to move in lock-step, as depicted in the right hand panel of Figure

1.

         Figure 2 is the scatter plot of the quarterly change in total assets of the US broker

dealer sector where we plot the changes in assets against equity, as well as changes in

assets against equity.1                                          More precisely, it plots {(∆  ∆ )} and {(∆  ∆ )} where

∆ is the change in total assets to quarter , and ∆ and ∆ are the corresponding

changes in equity and debt, respectively. We see from Figure 2 that US broker dealers

conform to the right hand panel (mode 3) of Figure 1 in the way that they manage their

balance sheets. The fitted line through {(∆  ∆ )} has slope very close to 1, meaning

that the change in assets in any one quarter is almost all accounted for by the change

in debt. The slope of the fitted line through the points {(∆  ∆ )} is close to zero,

indicating that equity is “sticky”.
     1
   The slopes of the two fitted lines sum to 1 due to the additivity of covariances in the regression
coeﬃcients and the balance sheet identity  =  + .




                                                                                               5
2.1    Assets versus Enterprise Value

The equity series in the scatter chart in Figure 2 is of book equity, giving us the diﬀerence

between the value of the bank’s portfolio of claims and its liabilities.     An alternative

measure of equity would have been the bank’s market capitalization, which gives the

market price of its traded shares.    Note that market capitalization is not the same as

the marked-to-market value of the book equity. For securities firms that hold primarily

marketable securities that are financed via repurchase agreements, the book equity of the

firm reflects the haircut on the repos, and is fully marked to market.

   Market capitalization is the discounted value of the future free cash flows of the secu-

rities firm, and will depend on cash flows such as fee income that do not depend directly

on the portfolio held by the bank. Focus on market capitalization leads naturally to the

consideration of the enterprise value of the bank, which is defined as


                     Enterprise value = market capitalization + debt                     (1)


In this sense, enterprise value is the analogue of the total assets of the bank when market

capitalization is considered as a liability. For investment decisions, corporate takeovers

or the sale of new ownership stakes, enterprise value is the appropriate value concept.

   However, our concern is with the availability of credit through the intermediary, and

hence with the lending decisions associated with the portfolio choice of the bank. Thus,

the appropriate balance sheet concept is the total assets of the bank, rather than its

enterprise value. The corresponding equity concept is book equity, and the appropriate

concept of leverage is the ratio of total assets to book equity.    This is because we are

interested in the leverage inherent in the portfolio held by the bank. Ideally, the book

value of equity should be marked-to-market, so that market values are used. The haircut

in a collateralized borrowing arrangement is the best example of book equity that is fully

marked to market.      But we should remember there may only be a loose relationship


                                             6
between the market capitalization of a firm and the marked-to-market value of the firm’s

book equity, as evidenced by the strong variation of market to book values over time even

for intermediaries that hold marketable securities.

      Figure 3 presents side by side the scatter charts for total assets and enterprise value

for the eight largest banks and broker dealers in the US. The group of eight firms includes

the (formerly) five largest investment banks (Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Lehman

Brothers, Merrill Lynch, and Bear Stearns) and the three commercial banks with the

largest trading operations (JP Morgan Chase, Citibank, and Bank of America).             All

eight of these institutions have been primary dealers of the Federal Reserve.2 Although

the three commercial banks have assets that are not marked to market (such as loans),

they also have substantial holdings of marketable securities. Ball, Jayaraman and Shiv-

akumar (2012) report the findings of a detailed investigation of the securities holdings

of commercial banks, and find that banks with larger holding of trading securities are

associated with share prices with larger bid-ask spreads.       In any case, the three com-

mercial bank have absorbed some of the largest formerly independent investment banks

(Citibank acquired Salomon Brothers in 1998, Chase acquired JP Morgan in 2000, and

Bank of America acquired Merrill Lynch in 2008), and their book equity reflects valuation

changes, albeit imperfectly. Institutions that we do not consider in the analysis are the

foreign banks, some of which also own substantial trading operations in the US.

       The left hand panel of Figure 3 plots the scatter chart for the change in assets with

changes in debt and (book) equity.        The left hand panel is therefore the analogue of

Figure 2, except that we include the banking assets of the three large commercial banks.

The pattern in the left hand panel of Figure 3 conforms to the shape in Figure 2, with

the slope of the change in debt with respect to assets being very close to 1.

      In contrast, the right hand panel of Figure 3 plots the scatter chart where we use
  2
      see http://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/pridealers current.html




                                               7
                                                                                                                                                                     8 Largest Broker-Dealers and Commercial Banks (1994Q1-2012Q2)
                                            8 Largest Broker-Dealers and Commercial Banks (1994Q1-2012Q2)                                              1000
                                1000




                                                                                                                       Change in Market Cap & Change in Debt
  Change in Equity & Change in Debt


                                                                                                                                                               500
                                      500

                                                         y = 0.002x + 9.45                                                                                      0            y = 0.086x - 8.76
                                       0




                                                                                                                                     (Billions)
              (Billions)




                                  -500                                                                                                                    -500

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Market Cap
                           -1000                                                                  Equity                                          -1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Debt
                                                             y = 0.998x - 9.45                                                                                                   y = 0.914x + 8.76
                           -1500                                                                  Debt                                            -1500


                           -2000                                                                                                                  -2000
                               -2000                 -1500       -1000           -500       0      500      1000                                      -2000                   -1500        -1000       -500           0            500               1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                *Enterprise Value is the sum of
                                                                   Change in Assets (Billions)                                                                                         Change in Enterprise Value* (Billions)   market capitalization and debt




Figure 3: The left panel shows the scatter chart of the changes in debt and book equity to changes in
assets for the largest eight US broker dealers and banks. The right panel is for the changes in market
capitalization and debt to changes in enterprise value. Enterprise value is the sum of market capitalization
and debt. The eight instutions are Bank of America, Citibank, JP Morgan, Bear Stearns, Goldman Sachs,
Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch and Morgan Stanley (Source: SEC 10Q filings) .



the enterprise value of the eight banks instead of their total assets. Note that the sum

of the slopes of the fitted lines in the right hand panel sums to 1 due to the identity

for enterprise value given in (1). When enterprise value is used instead of total assets,

we see that the scatter is more dispersed, with a significant portion of the changes in

the enterprise value being driven by changes in market capitalization.                                                                                                                                                    For takeovers

or investment decisions, such fluctuations in enterprise value are important.                                                                                                                                                         However,

enterprise value does not tell us everything about the lending decisions of the bank.

Total assets and the corresponding book value of equity is the appropriate focus for the

availability of credit. Given our interest in the availability of credit, in the remainder of

our paper we will confine attention to the book value of assets and book equity, on the

understanding that book values are fully marked to market.

2.2                                          Determinants of Leverage

Our modeling approach is motivated by the patterns observed in Figure 2, and we are

interested in the determinants of the bank’s leverage. For intermediaries that hold traded

securities, we are asking what determines the haircut on the firm’s collateralized borrow-

ing. We investigate how the notion of Value-at-Risk can help to explain banks’ behavior.


                                                                                                                   8
      For a bank whose assets today are 0 , suppose that its total assets next period is

given by a random variable . Then, its Value-at-Risk (VaR) represents the “approxi-

mate worse case loss” in the sense that the probability that the loss is larger than this

approximate worst case loss is less than some small, pre-determined level.           Formally,

the bank’s Value-at-Risk at confidence level  relative to some base level 0 is smallest

non-negative number  such that


                                 Prob (  0 −  ) ≤ 1 −                                 (2)


Banks and other financial firms report their Value-at-Risk numbers routinely as part of

their financial reporting in their annual reports and as part of their regulatory disclosures.

In particular, disclosures on the 10K and 10Q regulatory filings to the US Securities and

Exchange Commission (SEC) are available in electronic format from Bloomberg, and we

begin with some initial exploration of the data. We begin by summarizing some salient

features of the VaR disclosed by the major commercial and investment banks.3

      Figure 4 plots the asset-weighted average of the 99% VaR of the eight institutions,

obtained from Bloomberg.4        The VaRs are reported at either the 95% or 99% level,

depending on the firm. For those firms for which the 95% confidence level is reported,

we scale the VaR to the 99% level using the Gaussian assumption. We superimpose on

the chart the unit VaR (defined as the VaR per dollar of assets) and the equity implied

volatility. Both are measures of firm risk. While the unit VaR is the firms’ own assessment

of risk, the implied volatility is the market’s assesement of equity risk. The vertical scaling

is in units of the pre-2007 standard deviations, expressed as deviations from the pre-2007

mean.

      Figure 4 shows how the unit VaR compares to the implied volatility of the equity option
  3
    Bank of America, Citibank, JP Morgan, Bear Stearns, Goldman Sachs, Lehman Brothers, Merrill
Lynch and Morgan Stanley.
  4
    The Bloomberg code is ARDR TOTAL VALUE AT RISK.




                                               9
Figure 4: Risk Measures. The figure plots the unit VaR and the implied volatility for the eight large
commercial and investment banks. Both variables are standardized relative to the pre-crisis mean and
standard deviation. The measures are the lagged weighted averages of the standardized variables across
the eight banks, where the weights are lagged total assets. Unit VaR is the ratio of total VaR to total
assets. Implied volatilities are from Bloomberg. The grey shaded area indicates ±2 standard deviations
around zero.



prices as an alternative risk measure. Between 2001 and the beginning of 2007, the risk

measures were stable and moved within a tight band around their mean. However, with

the onset of the crisis, both measures spiked. The unit VaR increased over five standard

deviations relative to their pre crisis levels.        The run-up in implied volatility was even

more dramatic at nearly twenty standard deviations relative to the pre crisis level. These

series reflect the general mayhem in the markets at the time of the crisis. For our exercise,

we can interpret the unit VaR series as reflecting the risk environment of the recent past

which the firms take into account when they make decisions on how much risk exposure

to take on. Notice the time lag (at around six months) in the spiking of the Unit VaR

series relative to the implied volatility series. Whereas the implied volatility series spike

in December 2008, the Unit VaR series peaks in June 2009. The lag can be attributed to

the backward-looking nature of the VaR estimates, which are based on a window of past

data.



                                                  10
Figure 5: Risk and Balance Sheet Adjustment. This figure plots the unit VaR together with the
intermediary balance sheet adjustment variables VaR/Equity and Leverage. All variables are standardized
relative to the pre-crisis mean and standard deviation. The measures are the value weighted averages of
the standardized variables across the eight banks, where the weights are lagged total assets. Unit VaR is
the ratio of total VaR to total assets. VaR/Equity is the ratio of total VaR to total book equity. Leverage
is the ratio of total assets to total book equity. The grey shaded area indicates ±2 standard deviations
around zero.


    Value-at-Risk turns out to be informative in explaining the way that firms manage

their balance sheets. Consider the so-called Value-at-Risk (VaR) rule, which stipulates

that the financial intermediary maintains enough equity  to cover its Value-at-Risk. The

VaR rule can be stated equivalently as maintaining enough equity  so that the bank’s

probability of failure is kept constant, set to the confidence threshold associated with the

VaR measure used by the bank. When VaR is given by  , the rule can be written as


                                                 =                                                   (3)


so that the ratio of VaR to equity stays constant.               The idea is that the firm can cut

back its asset exposure when the environment becomes more risky thereby bringing its

Value-at-Risk back in line with this equity. Figure 5 is revealing in this respect. It plots

the following three series:

    • unit VaR

                                                    11
Table 1: Correlations of weighted average series. Each variable is the average weighted by lagged total
assets across banks. The * denotes significance at the 10 percent level, The ** denotes significance at the
5 percent level, the *** denotes significance at the 1 percent level.

                                                                Quarterly Leverage Growth
              Quarterly   VaR/E growth                                      0.03
              Quarterly   Unit VaR growth                                 -0.33∗∗
              Quarterly   CDS spread change                               -0.52∗∗
              Quarterly   implied volatility changes (lagged)             -0.31∗∗




    • the ratio of VaR to Equity

    • leverage (the ratio of total assets to equity)


    In other words, Figure 5 plots the leverage series together with the VaR normalized

by book equity.        It shows that the firms reacted to the spike in measured risks by

sharply reducing their leverage. While the average leverage across the banks increased

slightly until the Bear Stearns crisis in March 2008, it dropped by more than five standard

deviations between the second and the fourth quarters of 2008. At the same time, the

VaR to equity ratio barely changed. Thus, even as the unit VaR was fluctuating sharply,

the VaR to equity ratio was moving much less, giving weight to the Value-at-Risk rule as

a good approximation of the way that the firms were managing their risks. The evidence

is that the banks in our sample were shedding risk exposures very sharply over the crisis

period.

    The analysis based on normalized time plots in Figures 4—5 is further confirmed by the

correlation analysis of quarterly growth rates in Table 1. We see that leverage growth

is strongly negatively correlated with shocks to the risk measures (unit VaR growth,

and lagged implied volatility changes), but uncorrelated with the growth of the VaR to

equity ratio. The evidence is that leveraged financial intermediaries manage their balance

sheets actively so as to maintain Value-at-Risk equal to their equity in the face of rapidly

changing market conditions.

                                                    12
      Evidence at the individual firm level can be obtained through panel regressions. Table

2 presents evidence from the panel regressions for the five Wall Street investment banks,

although the panel is unbalanced due to the failure of Bear Stearns in March 2008, Lehman

Brothers in September 2008 and the merger of Merrill Lynch with Bank of America in

2008. The regressions examine the implication of the Value-at-Risk rule where leverage

 satisfies  =  = 1 so that


                                             ln  = − ln                                (4)


where  is unit VaR (Value-at-Risk per dollar of assets). When log leverage is regressed

on the log of the unit VaR, the VaR rule would predict that the coeﬃcient is negative

and equal to −1.

      In Table 2, the first column reports the simple OLS regression for the pooled sample.

Columns 2 to 4 are fixed eﬀects panel regressions, where columns 3 and 4 use clustered

standard errors at the bank level. Column 5 uses the GEE (generalized estimation equa-

tion) method5 for averaged eﬀects across banks described in Hardin and Hilbe (2003). The

GEE method attempts to estimate the average response over the population (“population-

averaged” eﬀects) when the error structure is not known. The parantheses report either

the  statistic (for columns 1 - 4) or the -score (column 5).

      We see that the coeﬃcient on log unit VaR is negative and significantly diﬀerent from

zero throughout, although they fall short of the predicted magnitude of −1. Neverthless,

the fact that the coeﬃcient is negative should be noted when comparing the predictions

that arise from standard portfolio choice problems. Translated in terms of risk premiums,

leverage is high in boom times when the risk premium (unit VaR) is low. The procyclical

nature of leverage is a feature that is at odds with many standard portfolio decision rules.

For instance, for an investor with log utility, the leverage of the investor is monotonic in
  5
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generalized estimating equation




                                                  13
Table 2: Panel regressions for leverage. This table reports regressions for the determinant of leverage
of the five US broker dealers. The dependent variable is log leverage. Column 1 is the OLS regression
for the pooled sample. Columns 2 to 4 are fixed eﬀects panel regressions. 3 and 4 use clustered standard
errors at the bank level. Column 5 uses the GEE (generalized estimation equation) method for averaged
eﬀects across banks (Hardin and Hilbe (2003)). t statistics are in parantheses in columns 1 to 4. Column
5 reports z scores.

                Dependent variable: log leverage ( or  stat in parantheses)
                                     1            2         3           4          5
                log unit VaR -0.479*** -0.384*** -0.384** -0.421** -0.426***
                                (-11.08)       (-9.2)   (-2.17)    (-2.99)     (-3.12)
                 implied vol                                         0.002       0.002
                                                                    (0.85)      (0.87)
                   constant      -1.089       -0.247     -0.247     -0.630      -0.689
                                 (-2.82)      (-0.66)   (-0.16)    (-0.53)     (-0.59)
                      2           0.40         0.32      0.32        0.34
                      obs          185          185       185         185         185
                          2
                    or          122.7         84.6      4.71       115.7       337.8
                 est. method      OLS           FE         FE         FE         GEE
                  clust. err                     N         Y           Y           Y
                *** and ** indicate significance at 1% and 5% levels, respectively


the Sharpe ratio of the risky security, so that leverage is high when the risk premium is high

(Merton (1969)). In other words, for investors with log utility, leverage is countercyclical.

Xiong (2001), He and Krishnamurthy (2013) and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2011) are

recent contributions that use the log utility formulation and hence which have the feature

that leverage is countercyclical. For macro applications or for the applications to runs

in the interbank market where capturing the cyclical nature of lending is crucial, the

procyclical nature of leverage plays a key role in determining the outcome. We return to

this issue later in our paper.

    For now, we explore another consequence of the VaR rule. Equation (4) implies that


                               ln  − ln −1 = − (ln  − ln −1 )                               (5)


so that the scatter chart of leverage changes against unit VaR changes should have slope

−1.    Figure 6 plots log changes in leverage against log changes in Unit VaR. We can see

two distinct regimes in the figure. During the financial crisis from the third quarter of

                                                  14
Figure 6: Shocks to Risk and Adjustments to Leverage. This figure plots the annual growth rate
in Unit VaR against the annual growth rate in Leverage. The variables are weighted by lagged total
assets. The diagonal line has slope −1. The red dots correspond to the quarters during the financial
crisis.



2007 through the fourth quarter of 2009, the slope of the scatter is close to −1, although

we do not fully capture the feature that the intercept should be zero. Bearing in mind

that these are annual growth rates, we can see from the horizontal scale of Figure 6 that

the deleveraging was very substantial, indicating large balance sheet contractions.

    Our findings point to the VaR rule being an important benchmark to consider in

how leverage is chosen by the financial intermediaries in our sample, at least as a first

hypothesis. We now turn to a possible theoretical rationale for the VaR rule based on a

standard contracting framework.


3     Contracting Framework

Having confirmed the promising nature of the Value-at-Risk rule as a rule of thumb for

bank behavior, we turn our attention to providing possible microfoundations for such

a rule.   Our approach is guided by the need to select the simplest possible framework

that could rationalize the behavior of the intermediaries in our sample, relying only on

standard building blocks. There should be no presumption that the approach developed

                                                15
below is the only such microfoundation. However, the spirit of the exercise is to start

from very familiar building blocks, and see how far standard arguments based on these

building blocks will yield observed behavior.

      Our approach is to consider the contracting problem between an intermediary and

uninsured wholesale creditors to the intermediary.          We may think of the intermediary

as a Wall Street investment bank and the creditor as another financial institution that

lends to the investment bank on a collateralized basis.            We build on the Holmström

and Tirole (1997) model of moral hazard but focus attention on the risk choice by the

borrower. We do not address why the contract takes the form of debt, and rely on other

formulations that argue for the optimality of debt (such as Innes (1990), Gale and Hellwig

(1985) or DeMarzo and Duﬃe (1999)). Instead, our focus is on the limits on leverage as

the constraint placed by the (uninsured) wholesale creditor on the intermediary, thereby

limiting the size of balance sheet for any given level of capital of the borrower.6

      With the application to credit availability in mind, we will formulate the framework

so that we can examine shifts in the payoﬀ parameters that mimic the shifts in economic

conditions over the business cycle. This entails examining a family of payoﬀ distributions

that are indexed by a parameter  that indicates the stage of the business cycle. High

 corresponds to boom times, while low  corresponds to busts. Our interest is on how

the leverage implied by the contracting outcome depends on .

      We find that under quite general conditions on the payoﬀ distribution that are ap-

propriate for extreme outcomes (such as the failure of financial intermediaries), we find

that the probability of default of the financial intermediary is invariant to shifts in . In

other words, the borrower (the bank) is induced to shrink or expand the balance sheet
  6
    This is a theme that is well-known in the banking literature on minimum capital requirements that
counteract the moral hazard created by deposit insurance (Michael Koehn and Anthony Santomero
(1980), Daesik Kim and Santomero (1988), Jean-Charles Rochet (1992)). Gabriella Chiesa (2001),
Guillaume Plantin and Rochet (2006) and Vittoria Cerasi and Rochet (2007) have further developed the
arguments for regulatory capital not only in banking sector, but in the insurance sector as well.




                                                 16
as part of the solution so that its failure probability is constant, irrespective of the risk

environment. In short, we find that the contracting outcome is that predicted by the

Value-at-Risk rule.

   In some special cases, we can even solve explicitly for the fixed probability of default

in the Value-at-Risk rule as a function of the underlying parameters of the contracting

problem. In this way, we provide a microfoundations of the behavior inherent in the VaR

rule from a standard contracting problem.

   It is worth reiterating that there should be no presumption that the microfoundation

oﬀered here is the only way to rationalize the Value-at-Risk rule. Nevertheless, we can

take some comfort in the familiarity of the framework that yields the main result. We re-

gard this result as being potentially an important step in understanding the procyclicality

of the financial system. When the economic environment is benign, the intermediary will

expand its balance sheet in accordance with its target probability of default. But when

overall risk in the financial system increases, the intermediary cuts its asset exposure in

order to maintain the same probability of default.

3.1    Set up

We now describe the contracting model in more detail.          There is one principal and

one agent.    Both the principal and agent are risk-neutral.       The agent is a financial

intermediary that finances its operation through collaterateralized borrowing. For ease of

reference, we will simply refer to the agent as the “bank”. The principal is an (uninsured)

wholesale creditor to the bank. A bank is both a lender and a borrower, but it is the

bank’s status as the borrower that will be important here.

   There are two dates–date 0 and date 1.         The bank lends by purchasing assets at

date 0 and receives its payoﬀs and repays its creditors at date 1. The bank starts with

fixed equity , and chooses the size of its balance sheet. We justify this assumption by

reference to the scatter chart encountered already in Figures 2 and 3. Denote by  the

                                             17
market value of assets of the bank. The notional value of the assets is (1 + ̄) , so that

each dollar’s worth of assets acquired at date 0 promises to repay 1 + ̄ dollars at date 1.

   The assets are funded in a collateralized borrowing arrangement, such as a repurchase

agreement.    The bank sells the assets worth  for price  at date 0, and agrees to

repurchase the assets at date 1 for price ̄. Thus, the diﬀerence ̄ −  represents the

promised interest payment to the lender and (̄) − 1 can be interpreted as the repo

interest rate. Equity financing meets the gap  −  between assets acquired and debt

financing. Let  be the value of equity financing. The balance sheet in market values

at date 0 is therefore


                                    Assets  Liabilities
                                   Assets  Debt                                       (6)
                                            Equity 

   The notional value of the securities is (1 + ̄) , and the notional value of debt is the

repurchase price ̄. Thus, the balance sheet in notional values can be written as


                                    Assets         Liabilities
                               Assets  (1 + ̄)    Debt ̄                             (7)
                                                   Equity ̄

where ̄ is the notional value of equity that sets the two sides of the balance sheet equal.

The bank has the choice between two types of assets–good securities and substandard

securities. For each dollar invested at date 0, the bank can buy notional value of 1 + ̄ of

either security. However, for each dollar invested at date 0 the good security has expected

payoﬀ

                                          1 + 

with outcome density  (). The bad security has expected payoﬀ 1 +  with density

 (). We assume that

                                         0                                        (8)

                                             18
so that investment in the bad security is ineﬃcient. We assume that the bank’s balance

sheet is scalable in the sense that asset payoﬀs satisfy constant returns to scale.

   Although the bad securities have a lower expected payoﬀ, it has higher upside risk

relative to the good project in the following sense.            Denote by  () the cumulative

distribution function associated with  and let  () be the cdf associated with  . We

suppose that  cuts  precisely once from below so that the distribution functions 

and  when adjusted for the mean can be ordered in the sense of second order stochastic

dominance (SOSD). Formally, there is  ∗ such that  ( ∗ ) =  ( ∗ ), and


                                  ( () −  ()) ( −  ∗ ) ≥ 0                                 (9)


for all . The bank’s initial endowment is its equity . The bank decides on the total

size of its balance sheet by taking on debt.           The debt financing decision involves both

the face value of debt ̄ and its market value . The optimal contract maximizes the

bank’s expected payoﬀ by choice of ,  and ̄ with  being the exogenous variable.

   The fact that  is the exogenous variable in our contracting setting goes to the heart of

the procyclicality of lending and is where our paper deviates from previous studies. Here,

our starting point is the evidence from the scatter charts (Figures 2 and 3) suggesting that

intermediaries’ equity is sticky even during boom times when leverage is expanding. The

reasons for the stickiness of equity is beyond the scope of our investigation here, although

it is closely related to the “slow-moving” nature of capital as discussed by Duﬃe (2010)

in his 2009 AFA Presidential address.7

3.2     Contracting Outcome

As noted by Merton (1974), the value of a defaultable debt claim with face value ̄ is

the price of a portfolio consisting of (i) cash of ̄ and (ii) short position in a put option
   7
     The classic papers of Myers and Majluf (1984) and Jensen (1985) discuss some of the frictions that
result in slow-moving capital. See also He and Krishnamurthy (2013) and Acharya, Shin and Yorulmazer
(2013).


                                                  19
                                                                        A1  r 
                                     Asset realization range
                           0

                                                                              Notional interest
                                                   D                          payment D  D
                       0
                                     Debt payoff            D

                    E                                      Equity payoff




                   D


Figure 7: Net payoﬀs of the bank (equity holder) and the creditor to the bank (debt holder). ̄ −  is
the interest payment received by the creditor



on the assets of the borrower with strike price ̄. The net payoﬀ of the creditor to the

bank is illustrated in Figure 7. The creditor loses her entire stake  if the realized asset

value of the bank’s assets is zero. However, if the realized asset value of the bank is ̄ or

higher, the creditor is fully repaid. We have ̄  , since the positive payoﬀ when the

bank does not default should compensate for the possibility that the creditor will lose in

the case of default.

   The borrower (i.e. the bank) is the residual claim holder, and its payoﬀ is illustrated

as the kinked convex function in Figure 7. The sum of the equity holder’s payoﬀ and the

creditor’s payoﬀ gives the payoﬀ from the total assets of the bank.

   The solution of the contracting problem involves both the face value of debt ̄ as

well as the market value of debt . The face value of debt has the interpretation of the

strike price of the embedded option in the debt contract, and enters into the incentive

compatibility constraint for the borrower (the bank), since the incentive constraint must

limit the option value of limited liability. For the lender, the interest payment is given by

̄ − , and so the participation constraint involves limiting the size of this gap. Given

̄, the participation constraint determines .


                                                       20
   Finally, once  is known, the scale of the investment given by  can be determined

from the balance sheet identity  =  +  and the exogenous .

3.3    Creditor’s Participation Constraint
             ¡     ¢
Denote by   ̄  the price of the put option with strike price ̄ on the portfolio

of good securities whose current value is .        We assume that the market for assets is

competitive, so that the option price satisfies constant returns to scale:

                                    ¡     ¢      ³      ´
                                   ̄  =   ̄
                                                   
                                                      1                               (10)

             ¡     ¢      ³     ´
Similarly,  ̄  =     1 , for portfolios consisting of bad securities. Define ¯
                            ̄


as the ratio of the promised repurchase price at date 1 to the market value of assets of

the bank at date 0

                                          ¯ ≡ ̄                                    (11)

Hence ¯ is the ratio of the notional value of debt to the market value of assets. Define:

                                       ¡ ¢     ¡ ¢
                                      ¯ ≡  
                                                ¯1

            ¡ ¢
so that   ¯ is the price of the put option on one dollar’s worth of the bank’s asset
                                                                          ¡ ¢
with strike price ¯ when the bank’s portfolio consists of good assets.  ¯ is defined

analogously for portfolio of bad securities.

   The creditor’s initial investment is , while the expected value of the creditor’s claim

is the portfolio consisting of (i) cash of ̄ and (ii) short position in put option on the

assets of the bank with strike price ̄. The (gross) expected payoﬀ of the creditor when

the bank’s assets are good is therefore

                                      ¡ ¢    ¡        ¡ ¢¢
                              ̄ −  ¯ =  ¯ −   ¯




                                               21
Since the creditor’s initial stake is , her net expected payoﬀ is

                                                    ¡ ¢
                               () = ̄ −  −   ¯                              (12)
                                         ¡            ¡ ¢¢
                                      =  ¯ −  −   ¯


where  ≡  is the ratio of the market value of debt to the market value of assets. The

participation constraint for the creditor requires that the expected payoﬀ is large enough

to recoup the initial investment . That is,

                                               ¡ ¢
                                   ¯ −  −   ¯ ≥ 0.                              (IR)


The term ¯−  is the promised interest payment to the creditor, so that the participation

constraint stipulates that the interest payment should be suﬃciently large to cover the

value of the put option that the creditor is granting to the borrower.

3.4    Bank’s Incentive Compatibility Constraint

The payoﬀ of the borrower is given by the diﬀerence between the net payoﬀs for the bank’s

assets as a whole and the creditor’s net payoﬀ, given by   in (12). Thus, the bank’s

payoﬀ is
                                       ¡   ¡      ¢   ¡ ¢¢
                              () =   − ¯ −  +  ¯
                            ¡ ¢ © ¡ ¢       ¡ ¢ ª
where  ∈ {   }, and  ¯ ∈  ¯    ¯  . The bank’s payoﬀ consists of the
                                        ¡ ¢
asset payoﬀ , the value of the option  ¯ minus the promised interest payment ¯ − .

The optimal contract maximizes   subject to the borrower’s incentive compatibility

constraint and the break-even constraint of the creditor.     The expected payoﬀ for the

bank when the asset portfolio consists of the good asset is

                                 ¡    ¡      ¢     ¡ ¢¢
                                  − ¯ −  +   ¯                               (13)




                                            22
                                                          ¡     ¡     ¢       ¡ ¢¢
while the expected payoﬀ from holding bad assets is   − ¯ −  +   ¯ , where
   ¡ ¢
  ¯ is the value of the put option on 1 dollar’s worth of the bank’s assets with strike

price ¯ when the bank holds bad assets. The incentive compatibility constraint is therefore

                                            ¡ ¢      ¡ ¢
                                −  ≥   ¯ −   ¯
                                                ¡ ¢
                                            = ∆ ¯                                       (IC)

        ¡ ¢                  ¡ ¢      ¡ ¢              ¡ ¢
where ∆ ¯ is defined as   ¯ −   ¯ . The term ∆ ¯ is analogous to the private

benefit of exerting low eﬀort in the moral hazard model of Holmström and Tirole (1997).

The bank trades oﬀ the greater option value of holding the riskier asset against the higher

expected payoﬀ from holding the good asset.              The incentive compatibility constraint

requires that the option value be small relative to the diﬀerence in expected returns.

   Note that the IC constraint does not make reference to the market value of debt ,
                                   ¯ This reflects the fact that the IC constraint is a
but only to the face value of debt .

condition on the strike price of the embedded option. In order to derive the market value

of debt (and hence market leverage), we must also use the IR constraint.

   Given our assumptions on the densities governing the good and bad securities, we have

the following preliminary result.


Lemma 1 The incentive compatibility constraint always binds, and there is a unique

solution ¯∗ for the notional value of debt.


Proof. From the result in option pricing due to Breeden and Litzenberger (1978), the

price of the Arrow-Debreu contingent claim that pays 1 at  and zero otherwise is given

by the second derivative of the option price with respect to the strike price evaluated at

. Since both the principal and agent are risk-neutral, the state price is the probability.

Thus, we have
                                        Z    
                             ∆ () =            ( () −  ()) 
                                         0



                                                  23
                                1




                                                                             FL
                                                                                  FH




                                                                z 
                                0
                                    0
                                                                         z             1 r



Figure 8: Private benefit in the moral hazard problem is the higher option value from limited liability
given by ∆ () when default takes place at .



as illustrated in Figure 8. Since  cuts  precisely once from below, ∆ () is increasing

initially, is maximized at the point  ∗ where  =  , and is then decreasing.                Using

integration by parts,8 we have
                                           Z     1+̄
                    ∆ (1 + ̄) =                ( () −  ()) 
                                             0
                                          Z 1+̄                    Z 1+̄
                                        =        (1 −  ())  −         (1 −  ()) 
                                           0                          0
                                          Z 1+̄              Z 1+̄
                                        =         ()  −         () 
                                             0                      0

                                        =  −                                                  (14)


In other words, ∆ () approaches  − from above as  → 1+̄. But from the notional
                                                                    ¯ Thus, ∆ () cuts
balance sheet (7), dividing all elements by  implies that 1 + ̄  .

 −  precisely once, and there is a unique solution ¯∗ to the incentive compatibility

constraint (IC). This proves the lemma.

       Lemma 1 gives the crucial leverage constraint for the bank arising from the haircut

implied by the collateral requirement set by the creditor. We will see shortly how the

leverage constraint changes to shifts in the parameters characterizing the distribution over

outcomes.
   8
       We are grateful to a referee for this proof.



                                                         24
3.4.1   Repo Interest Rate

The notional debt ratio ¯∗ that solves the bank’s incentive compability constraint. The

next step of the solution is to obtain the repo interest rate by using the break-even

constraint for the lender. The lender’s participation constraint (IR) is that the promised

interest payment ¯ −  is just suﬃcient to cover the value of the put option granted to

the borrower.
                                                      ¡ ¢
                                           = ¯ −   ¯                                 (15)

We can then solve for the market value of debt . Denoting by ∗ the market value of

debt that solves the contracting problem, we have

                                                       ¡ ¢
                                         ∗ = ¯∗ −   ¯∗                               (16)


where ¯∗ is the unique solution to the borrower’s incentive compability constraint guaran-

teed by Lemma 1. The right hand side of (16) is the payoﬀ of a creditor with a notional

claim of ¯∗ . Hence, we can re-write (16) as
                                     Z   1+̄      ©       ª
                                ∗
                                =              min ¯∗    ()                      (17)
                                     0


Clearly, ∗ is increasing in ¯∗ , so that the debt ratio in market values is increasing in the

notional debt ratio ¯∗ .

3.5     Balance Sheet Size

Having tied down the bank’s leverage through (16), the final step of the solution is to

determine the scale of the bank’s balance sheet given its initial equity . Note from (13)

that the bank’s expected payoﬀ is:

                                       ¡    ¡        ¢     ¡ ¢¢
                              () ≡   − ¯∗ − ∗ +   ¯∗                           (18)




                                                   25
The expression inside the brackets is strictly positive, since the bank extracts the full

surplus from the relationship. Hence, the bank’s payoﬀ is strictly increasing in , and it

maximizes the scale of the bank subject only to initial equity and the leverage constraint

(16). Let ∗ be the upper bound on leverage implied by ∗ , defined as

                                                1
                                       ∗ ≡                                            (19)
                                              1 − ∗

Then, the bank chooses total balance sheet size given by:


                                          = ∗                                       (20)


    We note the contrast between this feature of our model and the textbook discussion

that either treats the asset size as fixed, or as evolving exogenously.     Instead, in our

model, it is equity that is the exogenous variable. For given equity , total asset size 

is determined as ∗ × , where ∗ is the maximum leverage permitted by the creditors in

the contracting relationship. Thus, as ∗ fluctuates, so will the size of the bank’s balance

sheet. In the next section, we link ∗ to the Value-at-Risk, and will see that the model

gives rise to the empirical features we documented in section 2.


4     Value-at-Risk

We come to our core result.      With the application to credit availability in mind, we

examine a family of payoﬀ distributions indexed by a parameter  that indicates the

stage of the business cycle. High  corresponds to boom times, while low  corresponds

to busts, and show how leverage and the probability of default varies with shifts in .

    We now turn to the risk environment.           Since bank failure and the probabilities

associated with Value-at-Risk are inherently concerned with extreme events, a general

framework where all such extreme outcomes can be accommodated would provide an

appropriate overall setting for our investigation.


                                              26
   The key result in our context is the Fisher-Tippett theorem from extreme value theory

(EVT) that plays the benchmark role for extreme outcomes in the way that the central

limit theorem plays for the limit of sums of i.i.d. random variables. The Fisher-Tippett

theorem states if the maximum draw from a sequence of i.i.d. realizations of a random

variable has a non-denerate limit, then any such limiting distribution belongs to the family

of Generalized Extreme Value (GEV) distributions.

Fisher-Tippett Theorem. Suppose 1  · · ·   are i.i.d. with maximum realization

      . If there are ( ), ( ) such that
                                        µ                  ¶
                                         − 
                                 lim Pr         ≤             =  ()
                                →∞       

     for non-degenerate  (), then
                                        ( µ      µ     ¶¶− 1 )
                                                   −
                              () = exp − 1 +                                         (21)
                                                    
                                                     ¡ − ¢
     for parameters   ∈ R   0 where 1 +         
                                                               0

   The version of the Fisher-Tippett theorem given above is due to Gnedenko (1948), and

is discussed in Embrechts, Kluppelberg and Mikosch (1997, chapter 3). The distribution

function (21) is the GEV distribution. Thus, under quite general conditions on the payoﬀ

distribution that are appropriate for extreme outcomes (such as the failure of financial

intermediaries), the GEV distribution would be the appropriate parameterization of the

distributions  and  underlying our contracting problem. Thus, we parameterize 

and  as:
               n ¡                                      ½ ³                ´´− 1 ¾
                       ¡ ¢¢− 1 o                                ³
                                                                   −(−)
    () = exp − 1 +  −
                         
                                            () = exp − 1 +      
                                                                                        (22)


where   0 and   1. The location parameter  has the interpretation as the stage of

the business cycle with high  indicating booms and low  indicating busts. The outcome

distribution association with the choice of the bad action is shifted to the left by constant

                                                27
                          F(z)
                                 0.9

                                 0.8

                                 0.7

                                 0.6

                                 0.5

                                 0.4

                                 0.3

                                 0.2

                                 0.1

                                 0.0
                                       0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5    0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1.0
                                                                                                    z

Figure 9: Distribution functions  and  for  = 01,  = 05,  = 01,  = 005, and  = 14. The
dark line indicates  and the lighter line indicates  .



 and has a scaling parameter  0 =   .                                This formulation is consistent with our

assumption that the mean of  is lower, and has greater dispersion . Figure 9 plots

 and  for the parameters indicated. The main result of our paper can be stated as

follows.


Proposition 1 Suppose  and  are given by (22). Then, the solution to the con-

tracting problem entails probability of default  () that is invariant to .


   The proposition states that the probability of default by the bank is invariant to

shifts in .   In other words, the solution to the contracting problem entails the Value-

at-Risk rule, under which the bank’s leverage adjusts so as to leave the probability of

default constant.     Figure 10 illustrates the key invariance property of default over the

cycle, where the probability of default does not depend on .                                             In Figure 10, as the

location parameter shifts from  to ̂, the bank’s leverage falls leaving default probability

unchanged at , even though the underlying distribution functions have shifted.

   Steps in the proof of the Proposition are given in Appendix A.1, but we give the key

steps here. In Appendix A.1, we show that the temptation payoﬀ ∆ at  can be written

                                                               28
                                                                 FH ( z;ˆ)
                                         FL ( z;ˆ)                                 FL z; 



                                    (ˆ)                       
                                                                                     FH  z; 




                            0
                                0             dˆ                              d


Figure 10: Invariance of the probability of default . As the location parameter shifts from  to ̂, the
bank’s leverage falls leaving default probability unchanged at .



as
                                                               Z
                                                            ln(1())
                              ¡       ¢
                            ∆ ¯∗ () =  ×                                    −(1+) −         (23)
                                                      1                       −1
                                                  ((ln(1()))− + 
                                                                       
                                                                         )     


where  () is the probability of default by the bank in the contracting outcome at .

Next, the mean of the GEV distribution has the form  +  () where  () is a function

solely of .9 Hence


                          () −  () =  +  () − ( − ) −  ()

                                              =  − ( − 1)  ()                                     (24)


which is invariant to . Then the IC constraint defines an equation for the probability

of default  that is invariant to , given by

                                                             Z
                                                          ln(1())

                                constant =                                 −(1+) −              (25)
                                                1                         −1
                                                ((ln(1()))− + 
                                                                     
                                                                       )   



Thus, the location parameter  enters the solution solely through the probability of default

. Since (25) defines  implicitly, the probability of default is invariant to . This proves
     9
         See the wikipedia page http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generalized extreme value distribution


                                                           29
Proposition 1.

4.1    Closed Form Solution

The probability of default  in the VaR rule is determined by the fundamentals of the

contracting problem, and in some cases, we can obtain an explicit solution for . One

such case is when  = −1 and  → 1. Then, we have
                            ½         ¾                         ½                 ¾
                                −                                  − ( − )
              () = exp           −1           () = exp                   −1         (26)
                                                                        
                                     
and we have  (; )  (; ) =    1. The temptation payoﬀ can be written as
                                         Z   
                       ∆ (; ) =       ( (; ) −  (; )) 
                                         −∞
                                     ³     ´Z 
                                   =  −1
                                                    (; ) 
                                               −∞
                                     ³     ´
                                   =   − 1 ·  (; )                                  (27)

                         ¡       ¢
From the IC constraint ∆ ¯∗ ;  =  −  so that
                            ³      ´     ¡       ¢
                               − 1 ·  ¯∗ ;  =  −                                (28)


From (27) and (28), the probability of default  () is given by

                                      ¡       ¢         − 
                             () =  ¯∗ ;  =       ³      ´                           (29)
                                                        − 1

which is invariant to . What’s more, we can solve for  so that we can fully endogenize

the Value-at-Risk confidence level  = 1 −  in terms of parameters of moral hazard

problem. Together with the definition of  () as the probability of default,
                                                 ½ ¯∗     ¾
                           ¡       ¢               −        − 
                  () =  ¯∗ ;  = exp               −1 = ³      ´                     (30)
                                                             − 1

We thus have an explicit solution for the probability of default .           We can also solve




                                                 30
explicitly for the debt ratio ¯∗
                                                   µ                  ¶
                                                          − 
                              ¯∗ =  +  +  ln                                       (31)
                                                        ( − 1)

We see that ¯∗ is increasing in , so that leverage increases in boom times and decreases

in busts. Leverage is procyclical.

    As a cross check, we can verify that our closed form solution can be obtained from the

general solution given by (25). Note that when  = −1, we have

                                                Z
                                              ln(1)
                              − 
                                     =                   − 
                                
                                        −1 (ln(1)− 
                                                      
                                                        )
                                         ∙      ¸ln(1)
                                             −
                                       = −
                                                 −1 (ln(1)− 
                                                               
                                                                 )
                                           ³        −1    
                                                                   ´
                                       =  ()−    − 1                            (32)
                                         ³      ´
Then for  → 1, we have ( −  )  =    − 1 so that  has the closed-form

solution given by (30). We can thus fully endogenize the confidence level of the Value-

at-Risk constraint through the underlying moral hazard problem.


5     Concluding Remarks

In this paper, we have employed perhaps the simplest contracting model for the determi-

nation of leverage and balance sheet size for financial intermediaries, and have examined

the conditions under which the Value-at-Risk rule emerges from the contracting outcome.

Our framework provides one possible microeconomic foundation for the widespread use of

the Value-at-Risk rule among financial institutions. Our setup sheds light on the extent

to which leverage decisions are the constraints that creditors impose on debtors.

    The procyclical nature of leverage is a feature that is at odds with many standard

portfolio decision rules.    For instance, for an investor with log utility, the leverage of

the investor is monotonic in the Sharpe ratio of the risky security, so that leverage is

                                               31
                                               0.025
                                                                                    Log investor
                                                                                    VaR rule (1%)

                                                0.02




                         Default probability
                                               0.015




                                                0.01




                                               0.005




                                                  0
                                                       0   0.2   0.4          0.6   0.8             1
                                                                   Sharpe Ratio




Figure 11: The figure plots the probability of failure as a function of the Sharpe ratio for two types of
institutions. The blue line denotes an institution that is managed with log preferences. The black line
denotes an institution that is managed according the VaR rule. The procedure is given in the appendix.



high when the risk premium is high (Merton (1969)).                                       In other words, for investors

with log utility, leverage is countercyclical. Xiong (2001), He and Krishnamurthy (2013)

and Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2011) are recent contributions that use the log utility

formulation and hence which have the feature that leverage is countercyclical.

    When financial institutions are managed with log preferences, the probability of de-

fault varies systematically with the state of the economy, as illustrated in Figure 11. An

increase in the Sharpe ratio implies an increase in the default probability as institutions

with log preferences increase leverage.                          In contrast, institutions that are managed ac-

cording to the VaR rule exhibit a constant probability of default irrespective of economic

conditions.

    The details of the calculation behind Figure 11 is given in Appendix A2. The intution

is that for ordinary portfolio investors, the higher risk premium associated with greater

physical risk induces greater willingness to take risks.                                  For investors with log prefer-

ences, they are induced to increase leverage in downturns for this reason.                                  Leverage is

countercyclical, not procyclical as implied by the empirical evidence.



                                                                    32
   The diﬀerences between behavior implied by the VaR rule and log preferences matter

for macro applications that focus on the availability of credit. The supply of credit by

banks is about the portfolio of the banks - i.e. its asset book, rather than its enterprise

value, and so procyclical leverage has a direct impact on the supply of credit through

shrinking lending. Most macro models employ log preferences or standard CRRA pref-

erences for tractability reasons, but they may be importing features that depart from

how banks behave in practice. Nuño and Thomas (2011) is an exception in the macro

literature which takes seriously the procyclicality of leverage and show that they derive

quantitative conclusions that are closer to the empirical evidence.

   Our modeling framework provides microfoundations to the limits of arbitrage and the

fire sale literatures. Shleifer and Vishny (1992) provide an early model of fire sales, where

equilibrium asset values depend on the debt capacity of the sector of the economy that

invests in such assets. Shleifer and Vishny (1997) point out that the financial constraints

of financial intermediaries aﬀect equilibrium asset valuations. More recently, many stud-

ies have either implicitly or explicitly assumed a Value-at-Risk constraint in modeling the

management of financial institutions.    Our paper contributes to this literature by pro-

viding microfoundations for the pervasive use of Value-at-Risk type rules. Gromb and

Vayanos (2002) construct a model of intermediary capital, where constraints on the inter-

mediary can induce excessive risk taking, as intermediaries are not internalizing that their

fire sales tighten margin constraints of other arbitrageurs. Gromb and Vayanos (2010)

provide conditions when the presence of intermediaries stabilize or destabilize equilibrium

asset prices. Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) introduce margin constraints that follow

a Value-at-Risk rule, and stress the interaction of market and funding liquidity. Oehmke

(2008 and 2009) studies the speed and the spreading of price deviations when arbitrageurs

face Value-at-Risk or other risk management constraints.

   To be sure, showing that the VaR rule is the outcome of a contracting model says


                                             33
little about the desirability of the widespread adoption of such practices from the point

of view of macroeconomic eﬃciency.      Indeed, risk management tools such as Value-at-

Risk that solve bilateral incentive frictions can generate spillover eﬀects across financial

institutions. The leveraging and deleveraging cycle and associated fluctuations in market

risk premiums are likely to be influenced by the widespread adoption of risk management

rules (Shin (2010)).

   In a system context, fluctuations in leverage have far-reaching eﬀects. To the extent

that the financial system as a whole holds long-term, illiquid assets financed by short-term

liabilities, any tensions resulting from a sharp increase in risk will show up somewhere

in the system. Even if some institutions can adjust down their balance sheets flexibly

in response to the greater stress, there will be some pinch points in the system that will

be exposed by the distressed conditions.     In eﬀect, a generalized fall in the permitted

leverage in the financial system can lead to a “run” on a particular institution that has

funded long-lived illiquid assets by borrowing short. Developments of our techniques may

be useful in richer setting with more complex intermediation relationships.




                                            34
A       Appendix
A.1     Steps in proof of Proposition 1

Consider the Generalized Extreme Value (GEV) distribution given by
                                   ( µ      µ       ¶¶− 1 )
                                              −
                         () = exp − 1 + 
                                                

We would like the expression for the integral of the GEV distribution. As a first step,

consider the incomplete gamma function Γ ( ) defined as
                                            Z   ∞
                               Γ ( ) ≡           −1 − 
                                            


where


                               = −
                                  µ    µ     ¶¶− 1
                                         −
                               =  1+
                                          

Note that
                          µ     µ     ¶¶− 1 −1
                      1         −             
                    = −    1+                  ·
                                              
                          µ     µ     ¶¶− 1 µ      µ     ¶¶−1
                        1         −                 −
                    = −     1+                 1+
                                                     
                        1
                    = −  +1
                        

Hence

                                                   
                           Γ ( ) =     Γ ( ) ·
                                                 
                                                     µ        ¶
                                           −1 −       1 +1
                                    = −  · − 
                                                        
                                                    1
                                    =  −−1 − ·  +1
                                                   
                                      1 −
                                    =    
                                      
                                      1
                                    =     ()                                    (33)
                                      

                                            35
Hence the indefinite integral of  () is:

                        Z        n ¡     ¡ ¢¢− 1 o
                              exp − 1 +  −
                                           
                                                     = Γ ( ) + constant

Define  (  ) as
                                                          µ      µ     ¶¶− 1
                                                                   −
                                              (  ) ≡ 1 + 
                                                                    
Let  be the probability of default for the bank. Then
                                          ½ ³     ³ ∗ ´´− 1 ¾       ¯∗
                                                               = −( )
                                                   ¯
                                    = exp − 1 +   −

         ¡          ¢
so that  ¯∗    = − ln  = ln (1). Now, consider the expression for the temptation

payoﬀ for the bad action in the moral hazard problem for the bank.                                               The temptation

payoﬀ to risk-shifting is the additional option value given by the bad action .                                           The

option values of  and  are given, respectively, by
                Z                                        Z            n ¡
                     ¯∗                                     ¯∗              ¡ ¢¢− 1 o
                               ( )  =                       exp − 1 +  −
                                                                                
                                                                                         
                 0                                        −∞
                Z       ¯∗                              Z ¯∗        ½ ³      ³         ´´− 1 ¾
                                                                                 −(−)
                               ( )  =                       exp − 1 +      
                                                                                                  
                    0                                     −∞


where   1 and   0. The temptation payoﬀ in the moral hazard problem is given by
                              Z    ¯∗
       ∆ () =                          ( ( ) −  ( )) 
                               0
                                  ⎡                                       ⎤¯∗            ⎡                         ⎤¯∗
                 =  ⎣ Γ (−  (  −  )) ⎦                                  −  ⎣ Γ (−  (  )) ⎦
                                                                           −∞                                        −∞
                                  Z      ∞                                  Z     ∞
                 =                                   −(1+) −  −                         −(1+) − 
                                    (¯∗ −)                                (¯∗ )
                                  Z (¯∗ )
                 =                                   −(1+) −                                                        (34)
                                     (¯∗ −)

                         ¡          ¢
Meanwhile, we know that  ¯∗    = ln (1). Also, by re-arranging the expression:
                                                                   µ    µ             ¶¶− 1
                                   ¡               ¢                       − ( − )
                                   ¯∗   −   =               1+
                                                                              

                                                                     36
we have
                                                µ                 ¶− 1
                      ¡               ¢    1                    
                      ¯∗   −   =                 −
                                                 (ln (1)) + 
                                                                
Therefore, from (34), we have

                                                Z
                                              ln(1)

                         ∆ () =  ×                         −(1+) −                  (35)
                                      1                   −1
                                      ((ln(1))− + 
                                                        
                                                          )



We see from (35) that the temptation payoﬀ ∆ () is a function of  solely through its

eﬀect on the probability of default .

A.2       Probability of default for a log investor

Denote the conditional mean of excess returns to assets by , and their conditional volatil-

ity by . For a bank that manages its portfolio with log preferences, leverage is

                                                    
                                          lev =
                                                    2

The return to assets  is thus assumed to be conditionally Gaussian with volatility 

and conditional mean . Assume that notional debt ̄ can be approximated by market

debt , so that default happens when 1  , where 1 is the aset value next period.

The bank chooses its asset size today, denoted by .               The probability of default  is

given by


                             = Pr (1   − )

                                = Pr (  −)
                                     µ            ¶
                                               1
                                = Pr   −
                                              lev
                                     µ              ¶
                                                1
                                = Pr   −
                                               2
                                     µ                 ¶
                                        −        
                                = Pr          − −
                                                   
                                     µ        ¶
                                         
                                =  − −
                                         

                                               37
   Figure 11 plots  () and compares it to default probability from a bank following

the VaR rule with constant default probability of 1%.




                                          38
References
Acharya, V., H. S. Shin and T. Yorulmazer (2013) “Theory of Arbitrage Capital,” Review
of Corporate Finance Studies, 2 (1): 62-97.

Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin (2010) “Liquidity and Leverage,” Journal of Financial Inter-
mediation 19(3), pp. 418-437.

Ball, Ray, Jayaraman, Sudarshan and Shivakumar, Lakshmanan (2012) “Mark-to-Market
Accounting and Information Asymmetry in Banks” Chicago Booth Research Paper No.
12-35; LBS Working Paper, http://ssrn.com/abstract=1947832

Breeden, D. and R. Litzenberger (1978) “Prices of State-Contingent Claims Implicit in
Option Prices,” Journal of Business 51(4), pp. 621-651.

Brunnermeier, M. and L. Pedersen (2009) “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity,”
Review of Financial Studies 22(6), pp. 2201-2238.

Brunnermeier, M. and Y. Sannikov (2011) “The i-Theory of Money” working paper,
Princeton University.

Cerasi, V. and J.-C. Rochet (2007) “Solvency Regulation and Credit Risk Transfer,”
working paper, Toulouse University.

Chiesa, G. (2001) “Incentive-Based Lending Capacity, Competition, and Regulation in
Banking,” Journal of Financial Intermediation 10(1), pp. 28—53.

DeMarzo, Peter and Darrell Duﬃe (1999) “A Liquidity-based Model of Security Design”
Econometrica 67(1), 65—99

Duﬃe, Darrell (2010) “Presidential Address: Asset Price Dynamics with Slow-Moving
Capital” Journal of Finance, 64(4) 1237 - 1267

Embrechts, P., C. Kluppelberg, and T. Mikosch (1997) Modelling Extreme Events for
Insurance and Finance, Springer-Verlag, Berlin

Gale, Douglas and Martin Hellwig (1985) “Incentive-Compatible Debt Contracts: The
One-Period Problem” Review of Economic Studies 52 (4): 647-663.

Geanakoplos, John (2009) “The Leverage Cycle” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009,
In D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoﬀ and M. Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2009,
24, 1-65, University of Chicago Press, 2010.

Gnedenko, B. (1948) “On a Local Limit Theorem of the Theory of Probability,” Uspekhi
Matematicheskikh Nauk 3(3), pp. 187-194.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Metrick (2012) “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo”
Journal of Financial Economics, 104(3), 425-451.

                                         39
Gromb, D. and D. Vayanos (2002) “Equilibrium and Welfare in Markets with Financially
Constrained Arbitrageurs,” Journal of Financial Economics 66(2-3), pp. 361-407.

Gromb, D. and D. Vayanos (2010) “A Model of Financial Market Liquidity Based on
Intermediary Capital,” Journal of the European Economic Association P&P, pp. 456-
466.

Hardin, James and Hilbe, Joseph (2003). Generalized Estimating Equations, London:
Chapman and Hall

He, Z. and A. Krishnamurthy (2013) “Intermediary Asset Pricing,” American Economic
Review 103(2), pp. 1-43.

Holmström B. and J. Tirole (1997) “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the
Real Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(3), pp. 663-692.

Innes, R. (1990) “Limited Liability and Incentive Contracting With Ex-Ante Action
Choices,” Journal of Economic Theory 52, pp. 45-68.

Jensen, M. and W. Meckling (1976) “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency
Costs and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics 3(4), pp. 305-360.

Kim, D. and A. Santomero (1988) “Risk in banking and capital regulation,” Journal of
Finance 43(5), pp. 1219—1233.

Koehn, M. and A. Santomero (1980) “Regulation of bank capital and portfolio risk,”
Journal of Finance 35(5), pp. 1235—1244.

Merton, R. (1969) “Lifetime Portfolio Selection under Uncertainty: The Continuous-Time
Case” Review of Economics and Statistics 51, 247-257.

Merton, R. (1974) “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Structure of Interest
Rates,” Journal of Finance 29(2), pp. 449-470.

Modigliani, F. and M. Miller (1958) “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the
Theory of Investment,” American Economic Review 48(3), pp. 261-297.

Myers, S. and N. Majluf (1984) “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions when
Firms have Information that Investors do not have,” Journal of Financial Economics
13(2), pp. 187-221.

Nuño, Galo and Carlos Thomas (2012) “Bank Leverage Cycles” Bank of Spain working
paper 1222,
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract id=2084115

Oehmke, M. (2008) “Liquidating Illiquid Collateral,” working paper, Columbia University.


                                          40
Oehmke, M. (2009) “Gradual Arbitrage,” working paper, Columbia University.

Plantin, G. and J.-C. Rochet (2006) When Insurers Go Bust: An Economic Analysis of
the Role and Design of Prudential Regulation, Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Rochet, J.-C. (1992) “Capital Requirements and the Behavior of Commercial Banks,”
European Economic Review 36(5), pp. 1137—1178.

Shin, H. S. (2010) Risk and Liquidity, Clarendon Lectures in Finance, Oxford University
Press, Oxford.

Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny (1992) “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market
Equilibrium Approach,” Journal of Finance 47(4), pp. 1343-66.

Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny (1997) “The Limits of Arbitrage,” Journal of Finance 52(1),
pp. 35-55.

Xiong, W. (2001) “Convergence Trading with Wealth Eﬀects: An Amplification Mecha-
nism in Financial Markets” Journal of Financial Economics 62, 247-292.




                                          41
