NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE GEOGRAPHY OF TRADE AND TECHNOLOGY SHOCKS IN THE UNITED
STATES
David H. Autor
David Dorn
Gordon H. Hanson
Working Paper 18940
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18940

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013

Autor and Hanson acknowledge funding from the National Science Foundation (grant SES-1227334).
Dorn acknowledges funding from the the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (award JCI2011-09709
and grant ECO2010-16726). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Geography of Trade and Technology Shocks in the United States
David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson
NBER Working Paper No. 18940
April 2013
JEL No. F16,O3,R1
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the geographic overlap of trade and technology shocks across local labor markets
in the United States. Regional exposure to technological change, as measured by specialization in
routine task-intensive production and clerical occupations, is largely uncorrelated with regional exposure
to trade competition from China. While the impacts of technology are present throughout the United
States, the impacts of trade tend to be more geographically concentrated, owing in part to the spatial
agglomeration of labor-intensive manufacturing. Our findings suggest that it should be possible to
separately identify the impacts of recent changes in trade and technology on U.S. regional economies.

David H. Autor
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-371
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
dautor@mit.edu
David Dorn
David Dorn
CEMFI
Casado del Alisal 5
28014 Madrid
Spain
dorn@cemfi.es

Gordon H. Hanson
IR/PS 0519
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
gohanson@ucsd.edu

The U.S. and many European countries have experienced growing income inequality and
increasing employment polarization (i.e., concentration of employment in the highest and
lowest paid occupations) over the past several decades (David H. Autor, Lawrence F. Katz
and Melissa S. Kearney 2008; Christian Dustmann, Johannes Ludsteck and Uta Schönberg
2009; Maartan Goos, Alan Manning and Anna Salomons 2012). The two most prominent
potential causes for these “effects” are rapid technological change (e.g., the computer revolution) and expanding international trade (e.g., the rise of China). There is also a growing
sense that trade and technology are a unified force affecting labor markets. Commencing
with the work of Alan S. Blinder (2009), economists have posited that job tasks that are
suitable for automation may also be suitable for offshoring.1 However, not all work processes
are equally susceptible to trade and technology. Many labor-intensive tasks that have proved
challenging to automate can nevertheless be readily performed overseas. Consequently, substantial pieces of production chains have already moved to the developing world. But there
are many labor-intensive tasks, such as janitorial services and package delivery, that must be
performed in person or in close proximity to customers, and hence are not readily susceptible
to international trade. Thus, for example, while short order cooks at restaurants face little
competitive threat from overseas workers, it is now commonplace for grocery stores to carry
prepared meals that are cooked and packaged overseas.
The objective of this paper is to explore the geographic overlap of trade and technology
shocks in U.S. local labor markets. If the overlap is extensive, there would be a strong case
for viewing trade and technology as phenomena whose consequences cannot be distinguished.
However, if the evidence reveals only limited overlap, trade and technology may be playing
substantively different roles in shaping labor-market developments in the U.S. and other rich
countries. Focusing on Commuting Zones (CZs) that approximate U.S. local labor markets,
we examine whether the CZs that are most exposed to rising trade penetration are also
those most impacted by computerization. On the technology front, we follow Autor and
David Dorn (forthcoming) who use data on occupation mix by CZ and data on job tasks
by occupation to measure the degree to which CZs are specialized in routine job activities
well-suited to computerization. On the trade front, we follow Autor, Dorn and Gordon H.
Hanson (forthcoming) in identifying trade shocks using cross-industry and cross-CZ variation
in import competition stemming from China’s rapidly rising productivity and falling barriers
to foreign trade and investment.2
1
The reasoning here is that tasks that follow explicit codifiable procedures (what Autor, Frank Levy
and Richard J. Murnane 2003 call “routine” tasks) are both well suited to automation because they can
be computerized, and are well suited to offshoring because they can be performed at a distance without
substantial loss of quality.
2
While we focus on labor market exposure to computerization and goods trade, a number of papers
consider the roles of both computerization and offshoring (e.g., Autor and Dorn forthcoming; Goos, Manning

2

1

Measurement

Our concept for local labor markets is Commuting Zones (CZs) developed by Charles M.
Tolbert and Molly Sizer (1996), who use county-level data from the 1990 Census data to
create clusters of counties that are characterized by strong commuting ties within a cluster,
and weak commuting ties across clusters. The 722 CZs in our analysis cover the entire
mainland United States.
Following an extensive literature, we conceive of automation as taking the form of a
decline in the cost of computerizing routine tasks, such as bookkeeping, clerical work, and
repetitive production and monitoring activities, thereby potentially displacing the workers
performing these tasks. To measure the degree to which CZs were historically specialized in
these routine, codifiable job activities that were intrinsically amenable to computerization,
we proceed in two steps. Using data from the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (1977), we
create a summary measure of the routine task-intensity RT I of each occupation, calculated
as:






R
M
RT Ik = ln Tk,1980
− ln Tk,1980





(1)



A
− ln Tk,1980
,

where TkR , TkM and TkA are, respectively, the routine, manual and abstract task inputs in
each occupation k in 1980.3 This measure is rising in the importance of routine tasks in
each occupation and declining in the importance of manual and abstract tasks. To measure
cross-market variation in employment in routine-intensive occupations, we classify as routine
occupations those that fall in the top-third of the employment-weighted distribution of the
RT I measure in 1980. Using this classification, we then assign to each commuting zone a
routine employment share measure (RSHjt ) equal to the fraction of CZ employment at the
start of a decade that falls in routine task-intensive occupations:
RSHjt =

P

×

K
k=1 Ljkt

h

· 1 RT Ik > RT I P 66

−1
K
L
jkt
k=1

P

i

(2)

Here, Ljkt is the employment in occupation k in commuting zone j at time t, and 1 [·] is the
indicator function, which takes the value of one if the occupation is routine-intensive by our
and Salomons 2012; Sergio Firpo, Nicole M. Fortin and Thomas Lemieux 2012; Lindsay Oldenski 2012; Guy
Michaels, Ashwini Natraj and John Van Reenen forthcoming).
3
Tasks are measured on a zero to ten scale. For the five percent of microdata observations with the lowest
manual task score, we use the manual score of the 5th percentile. A corresponding adjustment is made for
abstract scores.

3

definition.
The rapid growth in U.S. imports from low-income countries since the early 1990s is
driven largely by China, whose transition to a market-oriented economy has yielded rapid
rates of productivity growth arising from massive rural-to-urban migration, industries gaining
access to long banned foreign technologies and inputs, and multinational enterprises being
permitted to operate in the country (Barry Naughton, 2007). Compounding the effects of
these internal reforms is China’s accession to the WTO in 2001, which further expanded the
country’s access to foreign markets.
Following the empirical specification derived by Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (forthcoming),
our main measure of local-labor-market exposure to import competition is the change in
Chinese import exposure per worker in a CZ, where imports are apportioned to the CZ
according to its share of national industry employment:
∆IP Wuit =

X Lijt ∆Mucjt
j

Lujt

Lit

.

(3)

In this expression, Lit is the start of period employment (year t) in CZ i and ∆Mucjt is the
observed change in U.S. imports from China in industry j between the start and end of the
period. The difference in ∆IP Wuit across local labor markets stems entirely from variation
in local industry employment structure at the start of period t. This variation arises from
differential concentration of employment in manufacturing versus non-manufacturing activities and specialization in import-intensive industries within local manufacturing. Differences
in manufacturing employment shares are not the primary source of variation, however; in a
bivariate regression, the start-of-period manufacturing employment share explains less than
25% of the variation in ∆IP Wuit .

2

Results

Are the CZs that are most exposed to rising trade penetration also those most impacted by
computerization? To explore this question, Figures 1a to 1c illustrate the geography of trade
and technology exposure at the Commuting Zone level. Each panel of the figure presents a
map of the 48 contiguous U.S. states with all 722 CZ boundaries outlined in gray. In Figure
1a, the interior of each CZ is shaded to indicate its quartile rank within the distribution of
CZs in the fraction of workers that were employed in routine task-intensive occupations in
1990.4 Darker colors correspond to higher quartiles of RSH, with the lightest color denoting
CZs in the lowest quartile and the darkest color denoting CZs in the fourth quartile.
4

Rankings are unweighted, and hence each quartile contains roughly one-fourth of the 722 total CZs.

4

Evident from this figure is that the CZs with the highest employment shares in routine
task-intensive occupations constitute a mixture of manufacturing-intensive locations (e.g.,
Cleveland, Detroit, Milwaukee and Minneapolis) and human-capital intensive population
centers, such as New York, Chicago, Dallas and Los Angeles. This pattern reflects the dual
sources of routine task-intensive occupations: blue-collar production occupations associated
with capital intensive manufacturing; and white-collar office, clerical and administrative support occupations associated with banking, insurance, finance and other information-intensive
sectors.
Figure 1a. Routine Employment Share by Commuting Zone in 1990

Figure 1b presents analogous information for exposure to import competition from China.
In this panel, the lightest shading indicates CZs in the lowest quartile of trade exposure
increase between 1990 and 2007 (measured as the change in real dollars of imports per
worker) and the darkest color indicates CZs that are in the highest quartile of trade
exposure increase. As expected, many manufacturing-intensive regions appear among the
most trade-exposed CZs, including substantial parts of the Northeast and South Central
U.S., where labor-intensive goods manufacturing, such as furniture, rubber products, toys,
apparel, footwear and leather goods, is concentrated.

5

Figure 1b. Trade Exposure by Commuting Zone, 1990-2007

A comparison of the first two panels of Figure 1 indicates both clear overlaps and
pronounced differences among the sets of CZs with high trade exposure and those with high
technology exposure. Most notable, however, is that trade exposure is geographically more
concentrated. A substantial fraction of the top quartile of trade-exposed CZs are located in
a small cluster of states, including Tennessee, Missouri, Arkansas, Mississippi, Alabama,
Georgia, North Carolina, and Indiana. By contrast, routine task-intensive CZs are more
dispersed throughout the U.S.

Table 1. Trade and Technolgoy Exposure by Census Division
I. Trade Exposure

II. Tech Exposure

Growth Imports per % Emp in Routine
Worker ($1,000s)
Occs
East South Central
Mid Atlantic
East North Central
New England
South Atlantic
West North Central
West South Central
Pacific
Mountain

4.00
2.55
2.37
2.28
2.15
1.60
1.56
1.21
0.62

29.76
30.85
31.31
29.70
29.80
27.51
27.39
27.87
26.51

Notes: The table shows unweighted averages of commuting zone technology
and trade exposure within Census divisions. Routine employment share is
averaged over 1990 and 2000, and 10-year equivalent growth in imports per
worker in real 2007 dollars (expressed in $1,000) is averaged over 1990-2000
and 2000-2007.

6

Table 1 highlights the contrasting geography of trade and technology exposure by
summarizing our two exposure measures for the eight major U.S. Census divisions that
comprise the contiguous U.S. states. Growth in import exposure per worker differs by a
more than factor of six across Census divisions, increasing, for example, by an average of
$4,000 per worker per decade in the East South Central division between 1990 and 2007
versus a relatively modest $620 per worker per decade in the Mountain division. The
geography of technology exposure is, by contrast, far less regionally concentrated; the most
and least exposed regions differ by only a few percentage points in their share of
employment in routine intensive occupations. This pattern does not, however, reflect a
paucity of geographic variation in the RSH. Indeed, among CZs with populations
exceeding 750,000, RSH varies by as much as 10 percentage points within the state of
California alone.
Figure 1c. The Joint Geographic Distribution of Trade and Technology Exposure

Figure 1c facilitates a direct comparison of exposure to technology and trade by dividing
CZs into three groups: those in the highest quartile of both trade and technology exposure;
those in the lowest quartile of both trade and technology exposure; and the remainder. If
trade and technology exposure were perfectly positively correlated across locations,
one-fourth of CZs would be found in each of the first two groups. If instead they were
uncorrelated, roughly six percent (one-sixteenth) of CZs would be in the high-high and
low-low groups, with remaining seven-ninths in the residual category. In reality, nine
percent of CZs are in the top quartile of both trade and technology exposure and 14
percent are in the bottom quartile of both trade and technology exposure. A simple
population-weighted correlation between the trade and technology exposure variables finds

7

that there is almost no relationship between the two: the correlation is −0.02 for the 1990
to 2000 period and 0.01 for the 2000 to 2007 period.
Table 2 contrasts employment patterns among the full sample of CZs and the CZs that are
in the top quartile of either technology or trade exposure. Highly trade-exposed and
technology-exposed CZs are substantially above average in their manufacturing
employment shares. However, these CZs differ substantially in their occupational
composition. Most notably, technology-exposed CZs exceed the nationwide average of
employment in “abstract” managerial and professional occupations and in “routine” clerical
occupations, whereas trade-exposed CZs fall below the national average in both of these
occupational categories. This pattern reflects the fact that CZs with high technology
exposure are variously specialized in a mixture of manufacturing and information-intensive
production activities (e.g., finance and insurance). By contrast, the U.S. manufacturing
industries that are most exposed to China trade, such as shoes, textiles and furniture, are
comparatively labor-intensive, and tend to employ few workers in abstract or in routine
clerical occupations.. In short, highly trade-exposed and highly technology-exposed CZs are
dissimilar both from average CZs and from one another.

Table 2. Industry and Occupation Composition of Commuting Zones with
High Technology or Trade Exposure
All CZ
(1)

Top Quartile Top Quartile
Technology
Trade
Exposure
Exposure
(2)
(3)

Share of Working Age Pop Employed in…
Manufacturing Industry
Non-Manufacturing Industry

11.8%
56.6%

16.2%
55.3%

17.5%
50.9%

Abstract Occupation
Routine Occupation, Clerical
Routine Occupation, Production
Manual Occupation

20.3%
14.1%
7.9%
26.1%

23.1%
16.3%
9.9%
22.3%

19.0%
13.7%
11.3%
24.5%

Notes: Column 1 shows unweighted statistics for the full sample of commuting zones.
Columns 2 and 3 show corresponding statistics for the quarter of CZs with highest
technology or trade exposure. "Abstract" occupations include managers, professionals,
technicians, financial sales, and public security occupations. "Clerical routine" occupations
include clerical and retail sales occupations, while "production routine" occupations include
precision production and operator occupations. "Manual" occupations include service,
transportation, repair, construction, and agricultural and mining occupations.

A summary answer to our question regarding the geography of trade and technology
exposure is that the sets of heavily trade-exposed CZs and of heavily technology-exposed
8

CZs are largely disjoint. This feature of the data facilitates the identification of the
independent contributions of trade and technology to local-labor-market outcomes. We do
not interpret the absence of overlap in the geography of trade and technology shocks to
mean that these two forces are unconnected. Multinational enterprises choosing how
pervasively to automate production would naturally consider offshoring to low-wage
countries as an alternative or even as a complementary strategy. At the regional level,
however, the perceived consequences of trade and technology are likely to be distinct. The
U.S. local labor markets that have born the brunt of import competition from China
appear to be quite different from those most subject to the computerization of the work
place. These differences in exposure likely matter for regional adjustment to trade and
technology shocks and may contribute to regional variation in changes in the structure of
employment and wages.

3

Conclusions

There is a wide agreement among economists that technological change and expanding international trade have led to changing skill demands and growing inequality or polarization
of labor market outcomes in the U.S. and in other rich countries. This paper highlights
important differences in the exposure of local labor markets to the impacts of technology
and trade. Regional exposure to technological change, as measured by specialization in routine task-intensive production and clerical occupations, is largely uncorrelated with regional
exposure to trade competition from China. While the impacts of technology are present
throughout the United States, the impacts of trade tend to be more geographically concentrated, owing in part to the strong spatial agglomeration of labor-intensive manufacturing.
Our findings suggest that it should be possible to separately identify the impacts of recent
changes in trade and technology on U.S. regional economies.

4

References

Autor, David H. and David Dorn. Forthcoming. “The Growth of Low Skill Service Jobs
and the Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market.” American Economic Review.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson. Forthcoming. “The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States.” American
Economic Review.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Melissa S. Kearney. 2008. “Trends in U.S. Wage
Inequality: Revising the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(2), 300-323.
9

Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane. 2003. “The Skill Content of
Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Investigation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
118(4), November, 1279-1333.
Blinder, Alan S. 2009. “How Many US Jobs Might Be Offshorable?” World Economics,
10(2), 41-78.
Dustmann, Christian, Johannes Ludsteck and Uta Schönberg. 2009. “Revisiting the
German Wage Structure.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(2), May, 843-881.
Firpo, Sergio, Nicole M. Fortin and Thomas Lemieux. 2012. “Occupational Tasks and
Changes in the Wage Structure.” Mimeo, University of British Columbia.
Goos, Maarten, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons. 2012. “Explaining Job Polarization
in Europe: The Roles of Technology and Globalization.” Mimeo, Katholieke Universiteit
Leuven.
Michaels, Guy, Ashwini Natraj, and John Van Reenen. Forthcoming. “Has ICT Polarized
Skill Demand? Evidence from Eleven Countries over 25 years.” Review of Economics and
Statistics.
Naughton, Barry. 2007. The Chinese Economy: Transitions and Growth. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Oldenski, Lindsay. 2012. “Export Versus FDI and the Communication of Complex
Information.” Journal of International Economics, 87(2), 312-322.
Tolbert, Charles M. and Molly Sizer. 1996. “U.S. Commuting Zones and Labor Market
Areas. A 1990 Update.” Economic Research Service Staff Paper No. 9614.
U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration. 1977. Dictionary
of Occupational Titles: Fourth Edition, Washington, D.C.

10

