NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSING BOOMS, MANUFACTURING DECLINE, AND LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES
Kerwin Kofi Charles
Erik Hurst
Matthew J. Notowidigdo
Working Paper 18949
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18949
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013

We thank John Bound, Tom Davidoff, Matt Gentzkow, Ed Glaeser, and Erzo Luttmer for their detailed
feedback, and we thank Hank Farber and Tom Lemieux for their comments as discussants. Additionally,
we thank seminar participants at Columbia, Duke, Harvard, Maryland, Northwestern, Princeton, Tulane,
University of British Columbia, University of Chicago, University of Illinois at Chicago, the AEA,
Einaudi Institute, the NBER Summer Institute (Macro Perspectives), and the Atlanta, Chicago, Cleveland,
and New York Federal Reserves for helpful comments. We are grateful to Loren Fryxell, David Toniatti,
and Dan Zangri for excellent research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge the Initiative on Global
Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business for financial support. Hurst thanks
the Peter Wall Institute for Advanced Studies at the University of British Columbia and Notowidigo
thanks the Einaudi Institute for both their financial support and hospitality while working on this project.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Kerwin Kofi Charles, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Housing Booms, Manufacturing Decline, and Labor Market Outcomes
Kerwin Kofi Charles, Erik Hurst, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo
NBER Working Paper No. 18949
April 2013, Revised April 2017
JEL No. E24,E32,J21
ABSTRACT
We study the extent to which manufacturing decline and local housing booms contributed to changes
in labor market outcomes during the 2000s, focusing primarily on the distributional consequences
across geographical areas and demographic groups. Using a local labor markets design, we estimate
that manufacturing decline significantly reduced employment between 2000 and 2006, while local
housing booms increased employment by roughly the same magnitude. The effects of manufacturing
decline persist through 2012, but we find no persistent employment effects of local housing booms,
likely because housing booms were associated with subsequent busts of similar magnitude. These
results suggest that housing booms “masked” negative employment growth that would have otherwise
occurred earlier in the absence of the booms. This “masking” occurred both within and between cities
and demographic groups. For example, manufacturing decline disproportionately affected older men
without a college education, while the housing boom disproportionately affected younger men and
women, as well as immigrants. Applying our local labor market estimates to the national labor market,
we find that roughly 40 percent of the reduction in employment during the 2000s can be attributed
to manufacturing decline and that these negative effects would have appeared in aggregate employment
statistics earlier had it not been for the large, temporary increases in housing demand.
Kerwin Kofi Charles
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kcharles@uchicago.edu
Erik Hurst
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
Harper Center
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
erik.hurst@chicagobooth.edu

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w18949

Matthew J. Notowidigdo
Northwestern University
Department of Economics
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
noto@northwestern.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
The share of the employed population has fallen sharply since the peak of the last business
cycle in 2007, with especially pronounced changes for those with less skill. For example,
between 2007 and 2011, employment rates for men aged 21-55 with four-year college degrees
fell from 89 percent to 84 percent, and decreased substantially from 83 percent to 74 percent for
men aged 21-55 without a four-year college degree. What accounts for these changes? A
number of recent papers have examined changes in employment outcomes since 2007, studying
the role of factors like de-leveraging associated with falling housing prices (Mian and Sufi
2012), policy uncertainty (Bloom et al. 2012), unemployment benefit extension (Rothstein
2012), the expansion of government transfer programs (Mulligan 2012), and spatial and industry
mismatch (Sahin et al. 2012). Yet, employment rates were actually decreasing throughout the
2000s, long before the start of the 2007-2010 recession. 1 Focusing on the two business cycle
peaks before 2006, employment rates for prime-aged men declined by 1 percentage point
between 1989 and 1999, and by an additional 2.5 percentage points between 1999 and 2006 -both massive decreases, involving millions of workers. 2 These trends suggest that current
patterns of employment may be partly attributable to economic forces that predate 2006, and
that understanding current employment patterns requires a focus on a period spanning, at least,
all of the 2000s.
This paper studies how employment during the entire 2000s was affected by two large
changes in the national economy during the 2000s: the continuing decline of the manufacturing
sector, and the national boom and bust in the housing market. We study both the separate effects
of these two phenomena and how they interacted to affect employment for different population
subgroups between 2000 and 2006 and over the entire 2000-2012 period. We focus on
manufacturing decline and the housing boom/bust partly because of how large these phenomena
were. In the two decades prior to 1999, U.S. manufacturing employment fell from roughly 18.2
million to 17.4 million. However, in the relatively short time between 1999 and 2006, U.S.
manufacturing employment fell by an additional 4 million jobs. The decline continued through

1

See Moffit (2012) for a discussion of this phenomenon.
All numbers in this section come from the authors' calculations using the Current Population Survey (CPS). The
sample was restricted to men between the ages of 21 and 55 (inclusive).

2

1

the 2006-2012 period, with an additional 2 million manufacturing jobs lost. 3 Changes in the
housing market were equally dramatic: between 1997 and 2006, after decades of being relatively
flat, housing prices surged by about 37 percent, before entirely collapsing over a couple of
years. 4
Beyond the scale of these changes, employment in manufacturing and in activities affected
by changes in the housing market have historically been particularly important for less skilled
persons – the sub-group experiencing the largest changes in employment since 2000. Figure 1
uses data from the Current Population Survey (CPS) to plot the share among all persons,
whether working or not, of men and women aged 21-55 (henceforth, "prime-aged") without a
four-year college degree (henceforth, "non-college") working in manufacturing and in
construction. Increased housing demand should stimulate changes in construction activity and
may also change demand for local labor services as household wealth increases from changes in
housing prices. The patterns in Figure 1 for construction employment thus likely represent a
lower bound on the total employment changes associated with changes in housing demand.
Panel A of Figure 1 shows that fully 37 percent of all non-college men worked in one or the
other of these sectors in 1977, and more than 20 percent of all such men continue to do so in
2012. Manufacturing employment for these men has declined sharply over time, falling from 27
percent in 1977 to 14 percent today. Construction employment among non-college men was
fairly constant at about 10 percent between 1977 and 1997, then surged during the housing
boom to 15 percent, before collapsing with the housing bust after 2006. Although lower than
rates for non-college men, employment in manufacturing among non-college women has
traditionally also been significant. These rates declined substantially during the early 2000s.
Very few non-college women have historically worked in construction, a pattern which was
unchanged over the course of the boom and bust in housing (Figure 1, Panel B).
Figure 1 offers suggestive hints that manufacturing decline and changes in the housing
market may have played an important role in the evolution of employment since 2000. For
example, the patterns suggest that between 2000 and 2006 the roughly five percentage point
3

Data for changes in manufacturing employment are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
There are two bodies of literature studying why these phenomena occurred -- something that is not the focus of
our paper. For manufacturing decline, see Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) for analysis of the role of import
competition from China in explaining recent U.S. manufacturing declines and Pierce and Schott (2016) for a related
analysis of the “surprisingly swift” decline in manufacturing employment coming from changes in trade agreements
with China. For housing, see Mayer (2011) and the citations therein for a discussion of why house prices changed
during the early 2000s and why they reverted during the late 2000s.

4

2

decline in the share of men working in manufacturing was roughly offset by the roughly five
percentage point increase in the share of men working in construction. After 2006, the share of
men working in either manufacturing or construction fell sharply as manufacturing continued to
decline and the construction share reverted to its pre-housing boom level. Second, changes in
construction employment during the 2000-2006 period did not offset the decline in the
manufacturing share for non-college women. This result suggests that if the housing boom
lifted the employment prospects of non-college women, it would likely be through sectors other
than construction.
Moving beyond suggestive time series evidence, this paper studies in detail the effect of
manufacturing decline and the temporary boom and bust in housing on employment, focusing
on the distributional consequences across cities and demographic groups. The empirical work
follows a local labor market strategy which exploits variation across metropolitan statistical
areas (MSAs) during the 2000s in both the size of the manufacturing decline and in the size of
the local housing demand change. To motivate this strategy, we develop a model of sectoral
choice, employment, and wages, in the spirit of Roy's (1951) classic framework. This model is
related to some of the sectoral models that have recently been developed to study discrimination
and inequality (Hsieh et al. 2016, Adao 2016, Burstein et al. 2016), and allows for arbitrary
number of sectors and demographic groups. The key insight from the model is that a shock in a
single sector will affect wages and employment in that sector but will also affect overall
employment (as workers move into non-working sector) as well as employment and wages in
other sectors, with the magnitude of these responses governed by comparative advantage and
structural of aggregate production function.
Turning to empirical implementation, to study manufacturing decline, we follow Bartik
(1991) and Blanchard and Katz (1992) and construct a measure of the predicted change in
manufacturing demand in an MSA given by the interaction between an MSA's initial industry
mix and national changes in industry employment within narrowly-defined manufacturing
industries.

5

The logic of this widely-used measure is that the national decline in the

manufacturing sector differentially impacted MSAs because of pre-existing differences in the
level and composition of manufacturing in the area and the fact that specific manufacturing
5

Bound and Holzer (1993) employ a very similar method in their work showing a relatively sharp negative
relationship between sectoral declines in manufacturing during the 1970s and 1980s and wage and employment
outcomes for men.

3

industries experienced different trends over time. This measure is therefore likely to be
systematically unrelated to any change specific to the MSA -- such as MSA-specific labor
supply shocks during the 2000s -- that may also affect labor market outcomes. Reassuringly, we
find that the measure of predicted local manufacturing change very strongly predicts actual
changes in MSA manufacturing employment from 2000-2006, suggesting that the measure
indeed captures changes in local manufacturing activity in our analysis.
To study changes in housing demand, we note that housing price changes were the most
dramatic manifestation of housing demand changes over the 2000s, but there were also almost
surely changes in the quantity (and/or quality) of housing which are less readily observed. Using
a simple demand/supply framework, we derive a measure of changes in local housing demand
that, in principle, captures both the price and quantity effect. Our predicted housing demand
measure is a function of the observed price change in the local area and the change in the
number of local building permits for new residential construction. We have used this measure in
related work studying the effect of local housing booms and busts on educational attainment
(Charles et al. 2016).
There is growing consensus that the large temporary changes in housing prices during the
2000s stemmed from factors like the expansion of credit to sub-prime borrowers, low interest
rates, the rise of securitization instruments for mortgages in the financial sector, and investor
speculative activity -- rather than from changes in household income, population, or
construction costs (Mayer 2011; Sinai 2012). This suggests that most of the observed changes in
housing demand during the 2000s may be independent of changes in traditional latent factors
that also directly affect MSA labor market outcomes. Consistent with this interpretation, we find
similar results from Two Stage Least Squares (TSLS) estimates where we instrument for the
change in predicted housing demand. To do this, we use an instrumental variable that exploits
structural breaks in the evolution in housing prices in an MSA, arguing that these "sharp," or
relatively discrete, jumps in housing prices are exogenous with respect to any changes in latent
confounds, like labor supply shocks or changes in labor demand, which likely evolve smoothly
over time. 6 Across all of our main specifications, we find broadly similar effects for estimated
housing demand changes in both the OLS and TSLS specifications, suggesting that variation in

6

This instrumental variable is introduced and discussed in much greater detail in Charles et al. (2016).

4

MSA housing prices between 2000 and 2006 was not substantially confounded by unobserved
labor supply shifts or other unobserved changes in labor demand.
We find that predicted 2000-2006 manufacturing decline in an MSA decreased
employment, lowered wages, and reduced MSA population. The effects for employment and
wages were substantial: a one standard deviation increase in the predicted decline in
manufacturing in an MSA decreased the overall employment rate for prime-aged individuals in
the MSA by 0.7 percentage points and reduced wages by 1.2 percent during the 2000-2006
period. The estimated effects on employment and wages were largest for non-college workers.
Additionally, we find that positive shocks to housing demand in an MSA during 2000-2006
increased employment and increased wages. In particular, a one standard deviation increase in
housing demand within an MSA increased the employment rate by 1.0 percentage points and
increased wages by 1.4 percent points for all prime-age workers. The effect of the housing
demand change was largest for non-college men and smallest for college women. Roughly twothirds of the increase in employment for non-college men in response to the local housing
demand increase was the result of increased employment in construction and FIRE (Finance,
Insurance, and Real Estate). Non-college women also experienced a large increase in
employment in response to the housing demand increase during the early 2000s, but virtually
none of it resulted from increased construction employment. Positive housing demand changes
increased employment of non-college women mainly through greater employment in the FIRE
sector and in the retail and service sectors (Charles et al. 2016).
We next look at average wages by sector, focusing on the manufacturing sector, the
construction and FIRE sectors (pooled together), and all other sectors. We find similar wage
consequences of manufacturing decline and housing demand changes across each group. This
implies that relative wages across sectors are not meaningfully affected by manufacturing
decline and/or shifts in housing demand. We show theoretically that this is consistent with a
general sectoral choice model that we develop to motivate our empirical analysis. In that model,
the specific functional form assumptions regarding comparative advantage across sectors and
regarding the aggregate production are sufficient to deliver a proposition which shows that
average wages in different sectors are invariant to sector-specific shocks.
Interestingly, over the entire 2000-2012 period, we find that the effect of a change in
housing demand in an MSA during the housing boom period was fairly small. This results from

5

the fact that almost all of the MSAs experiencing large house price increases from 2000-2006
experienced similarly large reductions in housing prices from 2006-2012. The housing boom
lifted local labor markets while the housing bust depressed them. These results contrast sharply
with those for manufacturing decline, for which we estimate consistently large effects over the
longer term.
According to our estimates, roughly 40 percent of the decrease in employment from 20002012 was attributable to declining manufacturing. 7 We show that a large portion of the
manufacturing effect on employment was due to an increase in being out of the labor force
rather than an increase in unemployment. Additionally, we find that most of our employment
effect occurred prior to recent recession; manufacturing decline post-2006 accounted for roughly
12 percent of the decrease in employment during the 2006-2012 period. We find that between
2000 and 2006 the U.S. housing boom reduced the employment rate by roughly 1 percentage
point. Over the 2000-2012 period, the housing boom explains very little of the change in
employment because the subsequent housing bust undid the employment gains from the
preceding housing boom.
Our results suggest that the temporary housing price boom during the 2000-2006 period
“masked” some of the adverse labor market effects of the sectoral decline in manufacturing, in
the sense that the large employment effects caused by that sectoral decline would have
otherwise been evident in the pre-recessionary period of 2000-2006. We emphasize three
distinct dimensions to this masking. First, there was significant "cross-MSA" masking: many of
the places experiencing large declines in manufacturing employment were different from the
places experiencing large, positive housing demand changes. Second, there was "crossindividual" masking, in the sense that the effects of these sectoral changes affected different
population sub-groups different (both within and between cities). For example, older workers
were much more adversely affected by the decline in manufacturing than were younger workers,
while younger workers were more likely to experience increased construction employment
following increases in housing demand. Lastly, in related work we have documented significant
"within-individual" masking, where the housing boom affects labor market outcomes of
7

As we discuss below, our results are not substantially affected by accounting for the estimated migration response
to the manufacturing and housing shocks when applying our local labor market estimates to a national context. We
argue that, if anything, allowing for a migration response as well as other relevant general equilibrium
considerations tends to increase the estimated importance of declining manufacturing in accounted for observed
changed in employment.

6

individuals directly affected by manufacturing decline. Using detailed data from the Displaced
Workers Survey (DWS), Charles et al. (2016) document that workers displaced from the
manufacturing sectors during 2000-2006 were significantly more likely to end up in
employment if they lived in a MSA in which housing demand increased sharply from 20002006. 8
Beyond providing new evidence about the effects of arguably two of the largest market-wide
phenomena of the past 20 years, our results speak to the ongoing debate about whether there is a
structural component to the current high levels of non-employment in the U.S. The finding that
the housing boom through 2007 masked systematically worsening labor market conditions from
manufacturing decline suggests that changes in employment since 2007, the focus of much
recent work, may overestimate the cyclical component in the U.S. labor market. Similarly, the
result that manufacturing decline accounts, by itself, for 40 percent of the decrease in
employment since 2000 suggests an important explanatory role for factors that are not purely
cyclical. It is worth emphasizing that our results do not imply that cyclical forces do not matter
importantly for high levels of employment. Indeed, the non-employment growth not accounted
for by our estimates may be due to cyclical forces, labor supply responses to changing
government policies, or to other structural forces such as spatial mismatch. Lastly, our results
focus on short-to-medium run effects, which may overstate or understate longer run effects of
manufacturing decline. For example, adverse employment effects of manufacturing decline may
be ameliorated over the longer term as workers make adjustments like acquiring more formal
human capital, training for new occupations, or moving to new locations.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section II we develop a model that uses
the classic Roy framework to study changes in employment and wages in the presence of
different sectoral shocks. We next discuss the empirical framework in Section III. Section IV

8

Some descriptive evidence on the role of housing and manufacturing on aggregate employment is presented in
Charles, Hurst, and Notowidigdo (2016). That paper presents time series evidence and cross-MSA regressions
which are consistent with the “masking” that we study in detail in this paper; however, that paper only focuses on
the employment of prime-age men without a college education, while this paper studies a broad range of
demographic groups, as well as additional labor market outcomes such as wages, unemployment, and labor force
participation. There are also several additional analyses in this paper that do not appear in Charles, Hurst,
Notowidigdo (2016): this paper focuses on estimating the causal effect of local manufacturing shocks and local
housing demand shocks using plausibly exogenous variation in manufacturing employment and local housing
demand, and also uses the local labor markets estimates to quantify the role of manufacturing and housing in
accounting for changes in aggregate employment (both overall and by demographic group).

7

discusses the data. Section V presents our main empirical results. In Section VI, we apply our
local labor markets estimates to the national labor market to try to account for some of the
national employment trends since 2000. We conclude in Section VII.

II.

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
In this section, we develop a model of sectoral choice, employment, and wages, in the spirit

of Roy's (1951) classic framework. This model is closely related to some of the sectoral models
that have recently been developed to study discrimination and inequality (Hsieh et al. 2016,
Adao 2016, Burstein et al. 2016). 9 The goal of the model is to provide predictions regarding the
effect of sectoral shocks on employment and averages wages, both overall and by sector.

Graphical Model
Before presenting the full model, which allows for many sectors and many demographic
groups, we begin with a simple graphical representation in the simplified case where there are
only three sectors and a single demographic group. We suppose that there are two sectors in
which workers can be employed: manufacturing, M, and housing-related sectors, H. Extending
the standard Roy framework, we assume workers have some reservation wage associated with
allocating their time to employment sector instead of the non-employment sector, N. Workers
with skill endowment es supply es efficiency units of labor in sector s. We assume that
individual-specific productivity is perfectly negatively correlated so that eH = (1 – eM). 10 A
worker chooses non-employment if his reservation wage is larger than his highest wage across
to two sectors; i.e., r > max{eM wM , eH wH } , and will be employed otherwise. Workers have
heterogeneous skill endowments and reservation wages, which are jointly distributed according
to the joint distribution F(eM, r).
Simplifying further, we assume that aggregate market output is given =
by Y AM LM + AH LH ,
where AM and AH are sector-specific shifters for M and H, and LM and LH are total labor supplies
9

The specific model developed in this paper is broadly similar to Hsieh et al. 2016, with the main difference that
there is no endogenous human capital and no discrimination in the labor market. Additionally, we provide
additional closed-form results in the case of a single demographic group.
10
Given this, eM represents the productivity of the worker in sector M relative to the worker's productivity in sector
H, so that the individual-specific productivity in each sector is perfectly negatively correlated. This is relaxed in the
more general model below.

8

in the two sectors, denominated in efficiency units. This implies that wages per efficiency unit
are pinned down by the demand shifters, so that wM = AM and wH = AH; i.e., relative wages do
not depend on relative supplies. Total labor supply across the two sectors is determined by the
endogenous self-selection of workers given the prevailing wages. With these assumptions, it is
straightforward to derive total labor supplies and population shares in sectors M and H, which
rely on a marginal worker with skill endowment eM* who is indifferent between working in
sector M and sector H at prevailing wages. 11
Both the equilibrium of this simple model and comparative statics can be illustrated
graphically. Figure 2 illustrates how workers, in equilibrium, self-select into sectors at all
possible combinations of skill endowment and reservation wages, for different values of the
productivity shocks. The y-axis in the figure is the reservation wage (r) and the x-axis is the
relative skill endowment in manufacturing (eM), with the entire plane representing all possible
(eM, r) combinations.
Panel A of Figure 2 depicts an initial equilibrium, with workers for whom eM > eM*
choosing to work in the manufacturing sector, M, as long as eM > r. Workers with s < s* and s
> r will work in housing-related sectors, H. Workers with a high reservation wage or who have
no relative skill advantage in either sector are more likely to be non-employed at any point in
time. Panel B of Figure 2 illustrates the effect of a negative shock to manufacturing such as that
studied throughout the paper. A negative manufacturing shock, represented by a fall in AM, is
predicted to lower the share of persons employed in manufacturing because of two margins of
adjustment. As the figure illustrates, some workers switch from the manufacturing sector, M, to
housing-related sectors, H, and other workers are predicted to leave manufacturing to enter nonemployment, as represented by the area M→N. Theory offers little guidance about the relative
magnitude of these two effects, as they depend on the distribution of reservation wages and skill
among workers. For example, if most workers have very low reservation wages, then a negative
11

The marginal worker indifferent between sector M and sector H is implicitly defined by following expression:
AM=
eM* AH (1 − eM* )
Total labor supplies in efficiency units are given by the following expressions:

=
LM′

1

eM AM

e*M

0

∫ ∫

e*M

(1− eM ) AH

0

0

∫ ∫

eM f (eM , r =
)drdeM LH′

(1 − eM ) f (eM , r )drdeM

Population shares in each sector are given by the following expressions:
1

LM =
∫*

eM

∫

eM AM

0

f (eM , r )drdeM

e*M

LH =
∫

0

∫

(1− eM ) AH

0

f (eM , r )drdeM

9

LN =−
1 LM − LH

shock to one sector will mostly generate switching into the other sector, with little change in
employment. This corresponds to a situation of inelastic labor supply, as in occupational choice
models such as that by Autor, Levy, and Murnane (2003), where sector-specific shocks
reallocate workers across sectors but do not change aggregate employment. Our various
empirical results above suggest, by contrast, that many workers (especially the less-skilled) have
reservation wages close to their market wages, since negative manufacturing shocks lead to
substantial changes in overall employment in the short-to-medium run, consistent with the
results from earlier decades reported in Bound and Holzer (1993).
Panel C and Panel D of Figure 2 illustrate the situation, such as what occurred in the early
2000s, where a negative manufacturing shock occurs simultaneously with a positive shock in the
housing-related sector. In Panel C, we highlight only the adjustments along the employment
margin. Panel D highlights the margin of substitution resulting from the movement of workers
across sectors without the potential for a non-employment spell. The key result from Panel C is
that the overall employment effect from a decline in manufacturing is attenuated, or “masked,”
for two reasons. First, there may be “within-person” masking. This is what occurs when
individuals who would have otherwise entered non-employment because of decline in
manufacturing are instead employed because of the temporary boom in housing. This area is
represented by the diamond area M->N->H. In Charles et al. (2016), we use individual-level
data from the Displaced Worked Survey to study the extent of within-person masking of
manufacturing decline from the 2000-2006 housing boom. Panel C also highlights “acrossperson” masking that operates across different people, even perhaps across different cities. With
this type of masking persons drawn out of non-employment because of growth in housing (N>H) are not the same as the persons who enter non-employment from manufacturing (M->N). In
this paper, we focus primarily on the distributional consequences across geographic areas and
demographic groups. This more aggregate notion of masking is a key input into our construction
of counterfactual national employment estimates in the absence of the national housing boom
and bust. 12

12

The model in this section can also be used to understand why it is empirically challenging to estimate the effects
of sectoral shifts on wages, since the model reveals compositional shifts induced by shock. As a result, any
observed change in wages will reflect both changes in wages for affected workers as well as composition effects.
This is the interpretation given in Autor et al. (2013) for the somewhat puzzling pattern of wage effects that they
estimate.

10

General Sectoral Choice Model
The graphical model has several limitations that make it difficult to use for empirical
analysis. First, it only has two work sectors (manufacturing and housing-related sectors), so it
does not allow us to study the other sectors that might be indirectly affected by manufacturing
shocks and housing demand shocks. Second, the structure of the aggregate production function
implies that wages are not affected by labor supplies, both at the sectoral level and in the
aggregate. As a result, a shock to the manufacturing sector will only affect manufacturing
wages, but not wages in other sectors. Since our empirical analysis will look separately at wages
overall as well as sectoral wages, we develop a more general model to understand how sectoral
shocks affect wages and employment overall and by sector. Lastly, we study outcomes for
several demographic groups (age, education, gender), causing the distributional consequences of
these shocks to vary both within and across groups. The more general model can accommodate
all of these forces.
In the general model, there are M sectors (such as manufacturing and housing-related
sectors) and G groups of individuals (which are intended to represent different demographic
groups such as age cohorts, education groups, and genders). The wage per efficiency unit of
labor supplied to sector m is given by wm, and it is the same across demographic groups. There is
a unit measure of individuals indexed by i, and individuals have sector-specific skills (measured
in efficiency units) given by eim. The share of individuals in group g is given by qg. Each
individual i in group g receives utility according in sector m according to log( wm z gm eim ) , where
zgm is a group-specific utility from working in occupation m. 13 This parameter captures
persistent difference in sectoral choices across different groups that are unrelated to sectoral
wage gaps.
Given this setup, individuals choose a potential work occupation based on the sector-specific
wage (per efficiency unit), their group-by-occupation-specific utility term, and their own
idiosyncratic comparative advantage efficiency terms. 14 Individuals then choose work or nonwork (with non-working sector capturing leisure choices and/or home production) based on an
individual-specific taste for non-work as well as a group-specific taste for non-work given by
13

Following Hsieh et al. (2016), this utility specification can be interpreted as arising from a utility function over
income and occupation choice given by U = log(cim) + log(zgm), where consumption, cim, is equal to income, wm*eim,
and the utility over the group-specific taste for sector m is given by zgm.
14
Formally, each individual solves the following maximization problem: mi*  arg max log( wm eim z gm ) .
m

11

comparing utility in most preferred potential work occupation. To economize on notation, we
label the non-working sector to be sector m = 0, and we normalize w0 = 1, so that the utility from
choosing this sector as log( w0 z g 0 ei 0 ) . The taste for non-work can also be interpreted as an
individual-specific reservation wage.
The distribution of the efficiency terms and reservation wage for each individual is drawn
from joint distribution, F (ei 0 , ei1 ,..., eim ,..., eiM ) . The joint distribution allows individuals to have
sector-specific comparative advantage. To highlight the role of self-selection, we assume that
these skill endowments are exogenous characteristics of the individual, ruling out endogenous
human capital investments as in Hsieh et al. (2016). Given these parameters and distributions,
we can define the probability of choosing occupation m as Pmg and the probability of choosing
work and non-working sector as PgW and 1 − PgW , respectively. 15
To complete the model, we assume an aggregate production function, Y = Y ( H1 , H 2 ,..., H M ) ,
and we assume that wages in each sector are equal to the marginal product of labor in each

∂Y / ∂H m ), where Hm is the total amount of labor (in efficiency units)
occupation (i.e., wm =
supplied to each occupation. 16 Given this setup, an equilibrium in this multi-sector labor market
is defined by the following conditions:
1. Individuals choose work or non-work to maximize utility, and if they choose to work then
they work in the occupation that gives them maximum utility, given market wages, groupspecific tastes for each sector, and their own idiosyncratic comparative advantage terms.
2. Wages are set equal to the marginal product of labor given the aggregate production function
and labor supplies defined by the previous step.
To make this general model tractable, we make several parametric assumptions on the
distribution of comparative advantage terms, the idiosyncratic taste for choosing non-working
sector (i.e., the reservation wages), and the aggregate production function. First, we assume that

15

Given this general notation, these probabilities are defined as follows:
M
M
P   m1 Pmg ; 1 PgW  1  m1 Pmg  P0 g
W
g

16

The total amount of labor (in efficiency units) supplied to occupation m is given by the following expressions:
G
H m   g 1 H gm ; H gm  qg  Pgm  E[eim | choosing m]

12

comparative advantage terms and reservation wages are joint distributed as indepdent Frechet
random variables, as follows:

 M −θ 
F (ei 0 , ei1 ,..., eim ,..., e=
)
exp
iM
 −∑ eim 
 m =1 
Note that this assumes a common shape parameter across each sector (including non-working
sector). This is a critical assumption to be able to derive closed-form expression for population
shares in each sector.
Second, we assume aggregate production function is CES with sector-specific demand
shifters Am and aggregate labor supplies (in efficiency units) as follows:

Y ( H1 , H 2 ,..., H M ) =  ∑ ( Am H m )
 m =1
M

σ
σ −1 σ −1
σ





With this setup, we derive closed-form expressions for labor supplies and equilibrium wages for
the case of a single demographic group (i.e., G = 1). 17 Using these expressions, it is
straightforward to prove the following proposition in the single-group case:

Proposition: In the case with a single group (G = 1) and arbitrary number of sectors (M > 1), a
negative shock to sector m (i.e., a reduction in Am) reduces employment and average wages in
sector m and increases the share of the population in the non-work sector and in the other work
sectors. The ratio of averages wages across sectors is not affected by the shock, meaning that
average wages in all sectors decline by the same proportion in response to any combination of
sectoral shocks.
Proof: See Appendix.

The Frechet assumption is a key condition behind this result. The sector m that receives
negative shock will experience individuals shifting out of that sector and into other sectors
(including non-working sector). As a result, wages in other sectors will fall due to increase in
labor supply in other sectors (besides the sector receiving the shock). Although we do not have a
formal proof and have not been able to find one in the literature, we believe that the Frechet
17

In the case of a single group (G = 1), the key parameter restrictions for the existence and uniqueness of an
equilibrium are that θ > 1 and σ > 0. This is similar to (but somewhat weaker than) the conditions σ > 0 and θ > σ +
1 in Eaton and Kortum (2002).

13

distribution is the unique distribution which satisfies the property where the overall wage effect
is the same as the wage effect in each sector (in proportional terms). As a result, relative wages
between occupations is not affected by sectoral shocks. 18
In the more general case of multiple groups and multiple sectors (G > 1 and M > 1), we
provide in the Appendix a proof for the same result regarding the ratio of average wages. Again,
a negative shock to sector m will reduce average wages in all sectors by the same proportional
amount. However, there is no longer an analogous result for employment shares. In numerical
simulations of our model, we generally find that the employment share decreases in sector m in
response to a negative for all groups and increases in the other unaffected sectors as long as the
group-specific tastes within a sector are fairly similar across groups. However, this need not
always be the case, and as a result, the clearest prediction from the model is that average wages
should fall similarly across sectors (both overall and by group), but the changes in employment
shares by sector and demographic group is ambiguous once there are multiple groups that have
different group-specific tastes. As a result, it becomes an empirical question how employment of
different demographic groups responds to sector-specific shocks.
In summary, the model provides the motivation for the empirical strategy described in the
following section which relates local declines in the manufacturing sector and changes in local
housing demand to changes in local labor market outcomes such as overall employment and
average wages, as well as employment and average wages by sector and by demographic group.

III.

EMPIRICAL FRAMEWORK
The empirical analysis focuses on comparisons across metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs),

which we index by k. We assume that changes in labor market outcomes in a given MSA, ∆Lk ,
are determined, in part, by labor demand changes arising in three sectors: manufacturing ( ∆Dk ),
M

the housing market ( ∆Dk ), and "other" sectors ( ∆Dk ). Labor market outcomes are also affected
H

O

by unobserved labor supply changes, which we denote ∆θ k . Observed changes in labor market
outcomes in a given MSA can thus be written as the general function. We seek to estimate the
18

Another key assumption behind this result is that wages must be set on the demand curve for each sector. This
may not be an accurate approximation in manufacturing sector which has a meaningful union membership share
and thus collective bargaining of wages.

14

M
effects of changes in the manufacturing sector ( d ∆Lk / d ∆Dk ) and the effects of changes in
H
housing demand ( d ∆Lk / d ∆Dk ).

To do this, we construct measures for changes in local manufacturing demand and local
housing demand. For local manufacturing demand changes, we use a variant of the widely-used
measures that follow Bartik (1991) and Blanchard and Katz (1992). 19 Specifically, we measure
sectoral shifts in local manufacturing using:

DkM =
∆
−∑ ϕ k , j ,2000 (υ− k , j ,2006 − υ− k , j ,2000 )
J

(2)

j =1

where ϕk , j ,2000 is the share of relevant population employed in industry j in city k in the year
2000 and υ− k , j ,t is the national employment of industry j excluding city k in year t. The set of
industries in J includes all 3-digit industries in manufacturing sector. Conceptually, this measure
presumes that a national decline in the manufacturing sector differentially affects local
manufacturing based on the importance and distribution of manufacturing employment in the
local market at some time preceding the national change.
To derive a measure for the change in housing demand, we assume that the log of housing
demand and housing supply in a market are given by the following expressions:
log ( H kD=
) ωkD − ηkD, H log ( Pk )
log ( H kS=
) ωkS + ηkS , H log ( Pk )

(3)

S
D
In (3), ωk and ωk are, respectively, shocks that affect the demand and supply of housing at a

given local housing price, Pk , while ηk

D,H

S ,H
and ηk are the price elasticities of housing demand

and supply, respectively. Log differentiating the equilibrium condition H kD ( Pk ) = H kS ( Pk ) and
letting Δ denote log differences, the effect of a shock to housing demand can be expressed as:
H
∆ω=
ηkD , H ∆Pk + ∆H kS .
k

(4)

This equation highlights that a change in housing demand produces two effects: a change in the
equilibrium housing price and a change in the quantity of housing units supplied in the market.
Both the effect on house prices and the change in the housing stock can affect local labor market
outcomes, perhaps to different degrees. In particular, house price changes affect household
19

See Autor and Duggan (2003), Luttmer (2005), and Notowidigdo (2012) for other examples of work using
variants of this "Bartik" measure.

15

wealth or liquidity and thus households' demand for goods and services produced in the local
market (Mian and Sufi, 2012). Changes in the amount (or quality) of housing necessarily
involves construction activity such as demolition, renovation, home improvements, or new
construction. Our analysis does not disentangle the separate effects of household wealth and
construction channels, but rather focuses on the combined effect of changes in housing demand.
Under the assumption of no unobserved shocks to housing supply, equation (4) thus suggests


∆
ωkD as a natural empirical measure of a housing demand change, where ∆
ωkD is computed

using observed changes in local house prices and changes in local housing supply, which we
proxy for using housing permits data following Charles et al. (2016).
Given this derivation, we create the following empirical specification:



∆L=
β 0 + β1 ∆
DkM + β 2 ∆
ωkD + α X h + ∆DkO + ∆θ k + ε k ,
k

(5)

O
where X k is a vector of observable controls, ∆Dk and ∆θ k are unobserved labor demand and

labor supply shocks, and ε k is a mean-zero regression error. The parameters β₁ and β₂ measure,
respectively, the direct effect of a predicted change in local manufacturing and of a change in
M
local housing demand, holding the other variables constant. The total effect of either ∆Dk or

∆DkH consists of the sum of their relevant direct effect, plus any indirect effect operating
through the effect of the variable in question on the other measure. We assume that changes in
local housing demand do not directly affect local manufacturing activity predicted off national
trends in manufacturing. The total effect of estimated housing demand changes on labor market

outcomes, or d ∆Lk / d ∆
ωkD , is thus simply β₂. By contrast, standard spatial equilibrium models,

such as (Roback 1982), suggest that housing demand is affected by changes in local labor
supply and by changes in labor demand in any local sector. It therefore follows that our estimate
of local housing demand changes may be written as:



∆
ωkD= δ 0 + δ1 ∆
DkM + f ( Z k ) + γ X h + ∆θ k +ν k ,

(6)

Equation (6) includes several of the same variables as equation (5), along with vk, which is a
mean-zero error term, and Zk, which represents factors that generate exogenous shocks to local
housing demand, such as speculative activity in the housing market. Equations (5) and (6)
jointly imply that the total effect of a manufacturing shock on labor market outcomes is
therefore d ∆Lk / d ∆
DkM =β1 + δ1β 2 . This combines both the direct effect of manufacturing on labor

16

market outcomes as well as the indirect effect coming from the fact that declining
manufacturing affects housing demand, which in turn affects local labor market.
In our main analysis, we report estimates of the total effect of changes in manufacturing and
housing demand based on estimation of the parameters β₁, β₂ and δ₁. Our baseline estimates of
these parameters are from a two-step OLS procedure. We first estimate (6) and retain the
estimate δ₁. We then estimate (5) to recover estimates of β₁ and β₂. This regression consistently
M

estimates the two direct effects so long as ∆Dk and ∆
ωkD are unrelated to any unobserved

changes in other sectors or to unobserved changes in local labor supply. One of the key
arguments justifying the use of the predicted manufacturing decline measure is precisely that a
M
measure like ∆Dk is likely to be orthogonal to changes in local confounds because it is

predicted off of national changes in manufacturing employment. By contrast, as (6) shows,
estimated local housing demand changes may depend on changes in unobservable factors that
also affect labor market outcomes. In addition, latent housing supply changes as well as
S
measurement error in either ∆Pk or ∆H k would introduce error into the measure of changes in

housing demand, which would cause attenuation bias.

To address the possibility of bias in estimates ∆
ωkD from endogeneity and measurement error,

we estimate equations (5) and (6) by Two Stage Least Squares (TSLS). To do this, we

instrument for ∆
ωkD in the second step of the two-step estimation procedure, using instrumental

variable Zk that measures the degree to which the quarterly time series of housing prices in an
MSA exhibited a sharply discontinuous structural break at some point between 2001 and 2005,
rather than evolve smoothly over time. The presence and size of these structural breaks strongly

predicts the predicted change in housing demand between 2000 and 2006 (i.e., ∆
ωkD ). As

discussed in more detail in Charles et al. (2016), the economic justification for this instrument is
that we are assuming that sectoral shocks or labor supply changes are smoothly incorporated
into housing price changes. However, other housing demand shocks, such as those that might
arise from speculative activity, can affect housing prices either smoothly or discontinuously. If
these structural breaks are orthogonal to the effect of other latent confounds, then they are valid
instruments for the change in housing prices in TSLS estimation of equation (5) and (6). As in
Charles et al. (2016), we show in Appendix Figure OA.1 that the instrumental variable is
uncorrelated with pre-existing levels and trends of a range of labor market variables. By

17

contrast, Appendix Figure OA.2 shows that the instrument is strongly correlated with growth in
the price-to-rent ratio and growth in the share of housing purchases made by “out of town”
buyers, as measured by Chinco and Mayer (2016). These results are consistent with the
instrumental variable primarily capturing variation across MSAs in speculative activity during
this time period.
Throughout the analysis, we cluster standard errors by state. The analysis is conducted in first
differences and thus implicitly accounts for time-invariant differences across MSAs. In most
specifications, the Xk vector includes controls for the share of employed workers with a college
degree, the share of women in the labor force, and the log of the MSA population. In the next
section, we discuss the data used in the analysis in greater detail.

IV.

DATA AND SUMMARY STATISTICS
The empirical analysis spans 2000-2012, which covers both the 2000-2006 housing boom

and the 2006-2012 housing bust. We create a panel of MSAs using data from the 2000 Census
and from various years of the American Community Survey (ACS) individual-level and
household-level extracts from the Integrated Public Use Microsamples (IPUMS) database
(Ruggles et al., 2004). Restricting attention to persons living in metropolitan areas, we compute
mean wages, employment shares, employment shares in various occupations, and total
population in each MSA. In 2000, these means are from the 2000 Census. For the 2006
numbers, we pool the ACS data from 2005 to 2007 to increase the precision of the MSA
estimates. Similarly, we pool the 2011-2013 ACS for the 2012 numbers. Because of the large
sample sizes, the various means can be reliably estimated for separate sex×education groups.
The primary sample consists of non-institutionalized persons aged 21-55. Much of the analysis
focuses on non-college men, but we also present results for non-college women and for collegeeducated men and women. We use 3-digit industry classifications for persons in the labor force
in the Census and ACS data to construct the predicted manufacturing decline measure.
We compute local house prices using data from the Federal Housing Finance Agency
(FHFA), which is a repeat-sales housing price index with data for most metropolitan areas. We

18

mapped the FHFA metro areas to the Census/ACS metro areas by hand. 20 To mirror the ACS
data, we construct average house price growth between 2000 and the average of house price in
the first quarter in 2005, 2006, and 2007. Similarly, when computing house price changes
between 2000 and 2012, we use the pooled FHFA data for 2011, 2012, and 2013. To compute

estimates of change in housing demand ( ∆
ωkD ), we combine the change in house prices and

change in housing permits, and we assume unitary elasticity of demand as in Charles et al.
(2015) to implement the housing demand measure given by equation (4) above. 21
Table 1 reports summary statistics of the housing market and manufacturing changes among
the 275 MSAs with non-missing labor market and housing market data that constitute the main
analysis sample. The top row of the table shows that over the boom period of 2000-2006, MSA
house prices rose by roughly 50 percent on average. This increase is not driven by a few outlier
MSAs. Prices rose sharply throughout the distribution, more than doubling at the 90th percentile
MSA and increasing by 5.4 percent even at the 10th percentile.
The next two entries in the table are summary statistics for the two measures used in the paper
to measure sectoral changes in housing and in manufacturing. As discussed earlier, housing
price changes alone do not capture changes in local housing demand since there will, in general,
be supply responses to these changes in demand. Our estimated housing demand measure is
meant to account for both the price and supply effect. The table shows that during the boom the
average MSA experienced a 60 percent increase in housing demand. The next entry in the table
shows summary statistics for the predicted manufacturing change measure. From 2000-2006, the
national decline in manufacturing was predicted to lower the share of all men and women
employed in manufacturing by 1.5 percentage points.
A natural question about the two measures used in the paper is whether they are, in fact,
strongly correlated with actual sectoral changes we contend they capture. Figure 3 shows that
the predicted manufacturing measure is strongly correlated with actual changes in the share of
the prime-aged population working in the manufacturing sector, suggesting that the predicted
measure does capture local manufacturing demand shocks. Similarly reassuring is the strong
20

See the Charles et al. (2016) for details of this matching procedure.
In Charles et al. (2016), we report similar results using the MSA specific housing supply elasticity measures from
Saiz (2010), who estimates local housing supply by MSA using detailed information on the amount of land
available for development. The local housing supply elasticity is a substitute for the local housing permit data,
because the observed change in price can be combined with local housing supply elasticity to construct an
alternative estimate of overall change in housing demand.
21

19

positive association in Figure 4 between our estimated housing demand measure and the fraction
of the total population in the MSA employed in construction -- an activity that would rise with
positive local housing demand shocks.

V.

MAIN RESULTS

Graphical Results
We begin our analysis of masking with some graphical evidence. We first characterize
MSAs that experienced especially large housing demand changes, as those in the top tercile

(one-third) of the distribution of the housing demand change measure, ∆
ωkD . We refer to these

MSAs as “housing boom MSAs.” We then plot the relationship between predicted decline
M
manufacturing between 2000 and 2006 ( ∆Dk ) in an MSA and the change in the share of non-

college men in non-employment during the same time period, separately by “housing boom
MSAs” and all other MSAs.
Figure 5 presents the 2000-2006 plots. In the figure, "housing boom MSAs" are represented
with triangles, and the remaining two-thirds of MSAs are shown with circles. The gray line is
the bivariate regression line for MSAs with housing price changes in the bottom 2/3 of the
sample. The large and precisely estimated negative slope coefficient (-1.19, s.e. 0.25) implies
that predicted manufacturing declines sharply increase non-employment among non-college
men. Most of the triangles in the figure lie below the regression line, implying that MSAs with
especially large housing demand changes experienced larger increases in employment rate
among non-college men than did other types of MSAs with similar predicted changes in
manufacturing. Formally, housing boom MSAs systematically had 2.4 percentage point higher
employment growth for any given manufacturing decline than non-housing boom MSAs
(standard error of the difference = 0.7 percentage points).
Figures 6 through 8 are analogous to Figure 5, with the change in non-employment replaced
with the change in construction employment, average wages, and manufacturing employment.
In Figures 6 and 7, the results show that housing boom MSAs had systematically higher
increases in construction employment and average wages. For manufacturing employment,
there is no clear difference between the housing boom MSAs and other MSAs (Figure 8). This

20

is consistent with the identifying assumption that there is no direct effect of housing boom on
manufacturing employment.
Lastly, in Figure 9 the change in employment for non-college men is defined over the 20002012 period. The results show that the temporary housing demand shock during 2000-2006 had
no lasting effects on employment over the entire 2000-2012 period. This can be seen from the
fact that "housing boom" MSAs are distributed evenly around the regression line for the other
MSAs. Formally, there is no difference in the intercept of the regression line based on the MSAs
that did and did not experience a housing boom between 2000 and 2006 (intercept difference = 0.001 with a standard error of 0.016).
Overall, these results suggest that there was significant masking during the 2000-2006 period
both within and between MSAs. In MSAs that experienced a large decline to manufacturing
demand, those that also experienced a large housing boom had smaller increases in employment
during the 2000-2006 period. The masking results were undone as the housing bust occurred.
Over the entire 2000-2012 period, MSAs that experienced a large decline in manufacturing had
similar levels of employment regardless of what happened to housing prices in that MSA during
the 2000-2006 period. These results focus on non-college men, but similar patterns can be seen
in analogous figures for other demographic groups (not shown).

Employment Estimates: 2000-2006
Panel A of Table 2 presents the OLS estimates of the joint estimation of equations (5) and (6),
using the two-step OLS estimator described in Section 3. To interpret the magnitudes, the rows
below the estimated coefficients are re-scaled to represent a one standard deviation change. 22
The point estimates in the first column of the top panel of Table 2 imply that a one standard
deviation larger predicted manufacturing decline decreased employment among non-college
men by 0.8 percentage points during 2000-2006. Likewise, over the same period, a one standard
deviation increase in housing prices increased the employment of non-college men by 1.7
percentage points. Column 2 presents results for college-educated men. The standardized effects
are quite small relative to those for non-college men -- less than half the size in the case of
predicted manufacturing decline and about one-fifth the size for estimated changes in housing

22

The coefficients are always standardized by the cross-city standard deviation in magnitude of the manufacturing
shock or the housing shock during the time period analyzed.

21

demand. As columns 3 and 4 show, whereas the effects of manufacturing and housing demand
shocks on employment for non-college women are comparable to the effects for non-college
men, there was little effect on the employment of college educated women. Employment effects
for the entire population of men and women aged 21-55 are shown in column 5. These results
are closer to the results for persons without a four-year college degree which is not surprising
given that this sub-sample is roughly two-thirds of the overall sample population.
How much of these changes in employment from housing demand increases can be attributed
to changes in construction employment? Panel B of Table 2 presents results analogous to those
in Panel A, but with the change in the share of individuals in the MSA working in construction
and FIRE as the dependent variable. The standardized effect of the housing demand change in
Panel B divided by the standardized effect of the housing demand change in Panel A measures
how much of the employment effect is from construction and FIRE. For example, a one standard
deviation increase in the housing demand for non-college men increased their construction and
FIRE employment by 1.1 percentage points, which accounts for roughly 70 percent (1.1/1.7) of
the decline in employment of non-college men in response to a housing demand. Notice that for
non-college women, roughly 30 percent of the reduction in employment to the housing demand
change comes from increased construction and FIRE employment. Most of this increase is due
to FIRE and not construction, suggesting that the effect of the housing boom on employment for
women operated through increased employment in sectors other than construction.
These results are broadly consistent with the aggregate time series patterns in Figure 1,
showing a large increase in construction employment for non-college men but none for noncollege women during 2000-2006. The estimates in Table 2 also illustrate the important
limitation of using only construction to measure the effect of housing demand increases on
employment during the 2000s. For non-college men, housing demand changes strongly affected
construction employment, but there were also employment effects outside of construction. For
non-college women, virtually none of the labor market response to the housing demand increase
occurred via increased construction employment. Through a local spillover mechanism, changes
in local housing demand affected employment through other channels -- most likely in local
retail and services. Panel B of Table 2 also highlights the local spillover effects of
manufacturing decline on employment in the construction sector. Across all individuals, a one

22

standard deviation decline in manufacturing demand reduced construction employment by 0.2
percentage points.
As manufacturing declines in a locality, housing demand also falls (Blanchard and Katz
1992). Given our joint estimation of (5) and (6), the effect of a manufacturing decline on
employment that we report includes both the direct effect as well as the indirect effect through
changes in local housing demand. Using all estimated parameters in the equations, the direct and
indirect effects can be reported separately, as shown in Appendix Table A.1. These results
suggest that a large share of the overall negative effect of manufacturing decline on employment
comes from indirect effect of declining housing demand. However, the direct effects are
economically significant for non-college men and women, although not precisely estimated for
non-college men. These results potentially provide a way to re-interpret the results of the recent
work studying manufacturing decline. For example, our results suggest that an important part of
the large negative employment effects of China trade in Autor et al. (2013) may come from the
indirect effects of manufacturing decline on housing demand, and are thus broadly consistent
with the large role of housing demand on overall employment estimated in Mian and Sufi (2012)
as well as the important role of construction employment in accounting for trends in aggregate
employment in both the United States and Germany (Hoffman and Lemieux 2016).

Effect on Different Sub-Populations: 2000-2006
One interesting question is whether the effects in Table 2 differ by other key demographic
traits. For example, one might imagine that a sectoral decline affects workers differently based
on their age, since industry-specific human capital grows as workers age. Table 3 presents
results for non-college men (columns (1) and (3)) and for all workers (columns (2) and (4))
separately by two age-groups: ages 21-35 and ages 36-55. 23 We find that changes in estimated
housing demand produced broadly similar employment effects for both older and younger
workers. By contrast, declines in manufacturing decreased employment among older workers by
nearly twice as much as was true for younger workers.
We also explored the degree to which the results -- particularly for housing -- differ across
native workers and immigrants. To this end, we have re-estimated the models in Table 2 only on
23

To conserve space, some of our future tables only highlight the results for non-college men and for all workers.
However, in the Online Appendix we provide analogous tables showing the effects for non-college women, college
men, and college women.

23

a sample of workers who were born in the U.S. These results are presented in the last two
columns of Table 3. Among native workers, the manufacturing results are very similar to those
reported in Table 2. However, the effect of the housing demand shock on employment is
roughly 40 to 60 percent smaller in the sample of native workers. For example, for native
workers, a one-standard deviation increase in housing demand increased employment of noncollege men by 1.0 percentage points, as opposed to 1.6 percentage points in the full sample.
This suggests that employment of immigrants was particularly responsive to changes in housing
demand during this time period.
In summary, the manufacturing and housing demand changes experienced during the 2000s
had differential effects across sub-groups based on gender, education, age, and immigrant status.
In particular, the manufacturing decline hit older workers harder than younger workers and
housing demand changes affected native workers somewhat less than immigrants. Both
manufacturing decline and the housing boom seem to have caused larger changes for noncollege workers (compared to college workers).

Effects on Average Wages, Overall and by Sector: 2000-2006
The model in Section 2 suggests that sectoral declines in manufacturing or increases in
housing demand affects labor market outcomes via changes in labor demand. If this reasoning is
correct, then falling labor demand in manufacturing sector in an MSA should be accompanied
by declining local wages. Likewise, housing demand increases in an MSA should be associated
with rising local wages. The wage effects should also be largest for those groups that had the
largest employment response to the sectoral shift.
The regressions in Panel A of Table 4 explores these ideas. These regressions are analogous
to the regressions in Tables 2 and 3, except that the dependent variable is now the growth in
average log wages in the MSA for a given group during a given time period. 24 As Table 4
shows, a one standard deviation manufacturing decline reduced wage growth for non-college
men between 2000 and 2006 by 2.1 percentage points. For all workers, the wage response
24

When computing mean wages within a MSA during a given time period, we start with the same samples
described in Section 3. However, we also impose the following restrictions to the individual data: (1) the individual
must be currently working at least 30 hours during a typical week at the time of the survey, (2) the individual's
income in the year prior to the survey must exceed $5,000, and (3) the individual must have worked at least 48
weeks during the prior year. With these restrictions, we then complete mean wages at the MSA level in each of the
time periods. Given these restrictions, our wage data should be considered for full-time workers with relatively few
employment spells.

24

between 2000 and 2006 to the manufacturing decline was smaller at 1.2 percentage points. With
respect to a one-standard deviation housing demand increase, the wage response between 2000
and 2006 was 2.0 percentage points and 1.4 percentage points for non-college men and all
individuals, respectively. These results are consistent with our interpretation that these sectoral
shifts affect local labor markets through their effect on labor demand.
The general model in Section 2 predicts that average wages by sector should not be
differentially affected by either of the sectoral shocks. We test this in Table 5 by replacing
average wages (overall, across all sectors) with average wages in specific sectors. We look at
manufacturing sector (all industries in manufacturing grouped together), housing-related sector
(which we continue to define as construction and FIRE, or Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate),
and a catch-all “other” sector. In each case, the change in average wages overall is very similar
to the sector-specific wages, consistent with the prediction from the general model in Section 2.
We are not able to statistically distinguish these wage responses. This suggests that the
reallocation of workers across sectors (and into non-employment) in response to manufacturing
and housing demand changes may be consistent with the patterns of comparative advantage
described by the model in Section 2. Of course, we would not necessarily expect this pattern to
hold everyone, but in our setting it appears that the standard sectoral choice model (in terms of
functional form for comparative advantage terms and aggregate production function) describes
the pattern of wage adjustment fairly accurately.

Longer Run Employment Effects: 2000-2012
The results in Tables 2 and 3 show the shorter run effect of the sectoral changes during the
2000-2006 period. How long-lasting were these effects? In Table 6, we examine the effect of
manufacturing and housing demand changes over the entire 2000s. Columns 1 and 2 re-display
the corresponding results for non-college men and all workers from panel A of Table 2. In
columns 3 and 4, we assess whether the 2000-2006 sectoral changes had persistent employment
effects over the entire 2000-2012 period. The results indicate that the effects of predicted
manufacturing decline during the 2000-2006 period for both non-college men and for the overall
population were, in fact, quite durable. Indeed, the standardized effects of the manufacturing
decline on employment growth between 2000 and 2012 were nearly identical to the standardized
effects shown in columns 3 and 4. The results for the employment effects of housing demand

25

changes, however, differed sharply over 2000-2006 and the longer 2000-2012 period. In
particular, we find that changes in estimated housing demand during the housing boom period
(2000-2006) had no significant long-term effect on employment of either non-skilled men or of
the entire population during the 2000-2012 period.
What accounts for this pattern? We believe that the key explanation has to do with the nature
of transitory housing price variation over the 2000s. Since there was a strong correlation
between the magnitude of a MSAs housing price growth during the housing boom and its
subsequent price decline during the years of the housing bust, for most MSAs there was little
change in estimated housing demand over entire decade. This point can be seen quite
dramatically in Figure 10. This figure plots a MSAs housing price reduction between 2006 and
2012, against its price increase from 2000 to 2006. The line in the figure is a 45-degree line. The
figure shows clearly that for the overwhelming majority of MSA, price increases during the
boom were nearly exactly offset by declines during the housing bust. Although not shown in
Table 6, we estimate that there was a very strong relationship between housing demand declines
during the housing bust of 2006-2012 and local labor market outcomes during the bust. The
estimated magnitudes were nearly identical to the estimates during the boom period. 25

Employment, Labor Force Participation, and Unemployment
The results in Tables 2 and 3 focused on the effects of housing demand changes and
manufacturing decline on the employment rate. In Table 7, we decompose the employment
effects of housing demand changes and manufacturing decline into changes in non-participation
and changes in unemployment. The results in Table 7 show that roughly half of the overall
estimated employment effect is accounted for by changes in non-participation for non-college
men, and this is similar for both housing demand changes and manufacturing decline. For noncollege women and for the overall sample of all prime-aged men and women, the estimates
show a similar pattern of results for manufacturing decline, but for housing demand change
estimates, there is a somewhat larger role for unemployment (relative to non-participation) in
accounting for overall change in employment.
25

This is consistent with changes in non-

Our results during the bust period are similar to recent research by Mian and Sufi (2012) and Midrigan and
Philippon (2011). Both papers show that during the recession, places with large house price declines had larger
increases in employment. Our results, however, suggest that in the pre-recessionary period, places that had housing
booms also had large declines in employment. Over the decade as a whole, the housing boom/bust cycle had very
little impact on local labor markets.

26

participation from housing booms as being relatively more important for non-college men than
other demographic groups.

Migration Effects
In Panel B of Table 8, we estimate whether local changes in manufacturing and housing result
in migration across MSAs. As one location receives a negative shock to labor demand, previous
work suggests that some individuals respond in part by migrating elsewhere (Blanchard and
Katz 1992; Notowidigdo 2013). We find that in response to a one standard deviation
manufacturing decline (housing demand increase) change during the 2000-2006 period, the
MSA population of prime age non-college men fell by 1.8 percentage points (increased by 1.6
percentage points) during that same period. The results are nearly identical for all prime age
men and women. The migration response to the manufacturing decline was actually larger over
the longer 2000-2012 period while the response to housing demand increases was smaller. This
is not surprising given that the 2000-2012 period witnessed the continuing decline in
manufacturing, and the growth and reversal of the housing boom.

Robustness to TSLS Estimation of Housing Demand Change
As expression (6) shows, the measure of housing demand changes may be endogenous in
OLS regressions. Additionally, since the housing demand change measure in empirical analysis
is constructed with the assumption that there are no housing supply shocks, it may be an errorridden version of true housing demand changes. We address both of these potential concerns
using Two Stage Least Squares (TSLS) analysis described above.
Table 8 reports TSLS results analogous to the main results in Table 2. 26 Across all five
columns, we consistently find that the estimated effects of house price booms during the 2000-

26

In Online Appendix Table OA.1, we report estimate of first stage behind instrumental variables estimates.
Columns 1 and 2 of the table show that the size of a structural break in a city's quarterly price series strongly
predicts the size of the city's 2000-2006 change in housing prices. The large and strongly statistically significant
point estimates are robust to the inclusion of the set of controls used previously and to controlling for the predicted
manufacturing decline measure. The final column in the table examines how employment in manufacturing among
non-college men is affected by the structural break variable. We find no relationship between these measures
suggesting that the instrument is orthogonal to changes in manufacturing demand. The results in the first two
columns of Table 7 are the first-stage estimates for a TSLS analysis that uses the estimated structural break as
instrument variables for housing demand changes. Importantly, the F-statistic on the structural break measure is
always around 30, which suggests that there is no "weak instrument" concern.

27

2006 period are similar to our OLS results. The point estimates are generally slightly larger than
the corresponding OLS results, which is consistent with the idea that either some of the variation
in house price changes was actually the result of changes in unobserved labor demand or labor
supply or that there is some measurement error in our housing demand estimates. However, the
broad similarity between the OLS and TSLS results suggests that most of the variation in
housing prices at the MSA level between 2000 and 2006 was not significantly confounded by
omitted variables or by housing supply shocks. In the Online Appendix, we present analogous
TSLS for all of the results Tables 2 through 8. Across all of these specifications, we consistently
find broad similarities between the OLS and TSLS results. In particular, we find broadly similar
distributional consequences across education, age, and immigrant status, and we continue to find
similar changes in sectoral wages to both manufacturing decline and changes in housing
demand.

VI.

AGGREGATE MASKING AND COUNTERFACTUAL EMPLOYMENT
ESTIMATES

In this section, we use the estimated effects of manufacturing and housing demand changes to
conduct counterfactual analyses of aggregate national employment during the 2000-2012 period.
This analysis also provides, in essence, an estimate of the sum of cross-individual and the
within-individual masking illustrated above.
To perform the counterfactual exercise, we combine the main point estimates from Table 2
with national time series changes in the employment rate, housing demand changes, and
manufacturing employment shares to compute the separate contributions of declining
manufacturing and housing demand changes on aggregate employment. Panel A of Table 10
reports the exercise for all prime age men and women. The share of all prime age men and
women employed in manufacturing declined by 3.2 percentage points between 2000 and 2006.
Using the estimates in column 5 of Table 2, this is predicted to decrease employment by 2.1
percentage points. 27 With respect to housing demand, the mean change over the 2000-2006
27

For the national trends in employment and manufacturing over the 2000-2006 period and the 2000-2012 period,
we use data from the CPS. These are the same data used in Figure 1. We use data from the CPS rather than the
Census/ACS because the employment rates in the 2000 Census are systematically high relative to both the 2000

28

period of 0.6 (see Table 1) and the point estimates in Table 2 imply a decline in employment of 1.1 percentage points. Together, the two types of shocks were thus predicted to decrease nonemployment for all prime aged men and women by 0.9 percentage points between 2000-2006.
The actual increase in non-employment for all prime age men and women was 1.9 percentage
points. Therefore, these two sectoral changes we study are estimated to jointly explain roughly
one-half of the observed changes in employment during the early-to-mid 2000s. Notice that we
would have predicted a 30 percent larger increase in employment during 2000-2006 had there
been no housing demand changes. This is thus a measure how much, in total, the temporary
housing demand changes masked the effect of manufacturing decline during the period. The
next row of Panel A examines the entire 2000-2012 period. The results show that the predicted
change in employment attributable to manufacturing decline is 3.0 percentage points, or 40
percent of the actual increase during the longer time period. As we have discussed at length,
housing demand changes explain none of the changes in employment over the longer term. The
results for non-college men in Panel B are broadly similar to the results in Panel A for all men
and women. In particular, while the estimated effects imply greater absolute increases in
employment for non-college men, the percentage of overall employment growth accounted for
by manufacturing decline and housing demand changes is very similar.
Collectively, the results indicate that a non-trivial portion of the decrease in employment of
both non-college men and all workers can be attributed to the continuing decline in the
manufacturing sector, suggesting that structural forces account in part for the recent weak
performance of the U.S. labor market. The results also imply that without the temporary boom
in housing, and the masking associated with it, 1.3 million prime age workers would have been
non-employed as early as 2006. The negative effects of structural manufacturing decline were
masked in aggregate statistics during the early to mid-2000s. Importantly, for both non-college
men and all workers, roughly two-thirds to three-quarters of effect of manufacturing decline predated the 2008 recession, as a comparison across rows in column 3 of Table 10 shows. Although
we argue that structural forces associated with manufacturing decline appear to have clearly
mattered importantly for employment, it should be emphasized that the results do rule out a key
role for cyclical forces.

CPS to the 2001 ACS. This fact has been carefully documented Clark et al. (2003). Using the CPS data guarantees
provides a more consistent time series trend.

29

While we find these counterfactual exercises useful to assess the role of manufacturing
decline and the housing boom on aggregate employment, there are various concerns associated
with applying "local" MSA-level estimates to the national labor market. One issue is migration.
In Table 8, we showed that one-standard deviation changes in manufacturing and housing
shocks generate migration responses of about 2 percentage points. Given that the two sectoral
changes both affect employment by roughly 1 percentage point it is possible to bound how much
endogenous migration could affect the counterfactual estimates. For one bound, we assume that
all of the migrants would have been non-employed had they not moved. In this case, the
aggregate employment rate in response to a one standard deviation manufacturing shock would
have increased by an additional 2 percentage points, from 1 to 3. The counterfactual estimates
above would thus be severely underestimated. If we assume instead that all migrants would have
been employed had they not moved, the estimated response to a one-standard deviation
manufacturing shock would fall by roughly 0.02 percentage points, from 1 to about 0.98. This
effect is so small because the number of people migrating out of the MSA in response to
manufacturing shock is very small relative to the number of people who are employed in the
MSA. Therefore, assuming that migrants are either more employable than the average nonmigrant or roughly similar to the average non-migrant has a negligible effect on our results. If,
however, the marginal migrant is much less employable, then our counterfactual estimates are
quite conservative.
A second potential concern is that the counterfactual results ignore potential general
equilibrium and feedback effects. For example, changes in house prices may have a direct effect
on U.S. manufacturing demand. Mian and Sufi (2011) show that households that experienced
large increases in housing prices increased their purchase of both local services and nondurable
expenditures because of either a wealth or liquidity effect. Local housing booms can thus affect
the national demand for manufacturing goods. As with migration, this type of feedback would
again cause us to underestimate the extent of masking during the 2000-2006 period, since the
decline in manufacturing in those years would have been even greater had there been no housing
boom in the U.S. which effectively "propped up" manufacturing demand. A similar type of
potential feedback is the possibility that manufacturing decline during 2000-2006 could have
been one of the proximate causes of the housing boom. This channel seems highly implausible,
since we find that local declines in manufacturing put downward pressure on local housing

30

demand. Any nationwide effect of manufacturing busts to housing booms would have to
overwhelm these local effects.
Finally, for reasons similar to the general equilibrium effects during the housing boom, our
analysis may overstate the effect of manufacturing decline during the housing bust period. If
falling housing prices dampened demand for manufactured goods during the 2006-2012 period,
the change in manufacturing between 2006 and 2012 on which the counterfactuals are based
would be too large. We do two things to address this concern. First, we redo our counterfactuals
assuming that the trend in manufacturing between 2000 and 2006 continued through 2012. This
assumption strikes us as reasonable, given the relatively steady, 40-year decline in
manufacturing in the U.S. Linearly extrapolating the trend in manufacturing through 2012, we
find nearly identical results to those in Table 10, since the actual decline in manufacturing
employment between 2006 and 2012 is very close to the linear extrapolation based on the 20002006 trend. Second, we re-estimate the model ignoring the decline in manufacturing during the
recession and focusing on the manufacturing decline before the recession. Again, we find
sizable effects of the manufacturing decline during 2000-2006 on current employment prospects
in the U.S.

VII.

CONCLUSION

This paper studies how manufacturing decline and housing booms affect labor market outcomes,
with a particular emphasis on employment among the two-thirds of workers without a college
degree. We estimate a variety of cross-MSA models which exploit the variation in both the
magnitude of the negative shock to manufacturing as well as the sudden and dramatic increases
in housing demand.
We find that roughly 40 percent of the decrease in employment during the 2000-2012 period
can be attributed to the decline in manufacturing. These employment effects were very large for
non-college men, but we find that local manufacturing shocks significantly decreased
employment for other groups as well, such as non-college women. The large adverse labor
market effects of manufacturing decline are present during the housing boom (2000-2006),
during the collapse in the housing market (2006-2012) and over the entirety of the 2000s, over
2000-2012. We also find that increases in housing demand sharply raised employment during

31

2000-2006, especially among non-college men and women. The reversal of the housing market
during 2006-2012 among cities experiencing unusually large increases in housing demand
during 2000-2006 implies that, over the entire 2000-2012 period, local housing booms did not
significantly contribute to longer run changes in labor market outcomes.
The results imply that the positive labor market effects of the temporary housing boom
"masked" the negative effect of sectoral decline in manufacturing that would have otherwise
been more evident in the mid-2000s. The collapsing of the housing market during 2006-2012
not only had an independent adverse effect on labor market outcomes for some sub-groups but
also "unmasked" the negative manufacturing effect that would have been seen earlier. A key
conclusion from our analysis is that there are important distributional consequences, with
different labor market effects by education, age, gender, and immigrant status. While we find
significant “masking” in the aggregate, there are meaningful differences across geographic areas
and demographic groups.
Sectoral booms and busts are often linked to aggregate business cycle dynamics. All else
equal, a sectoral boom will increase wages and employment during the expansion and result in
wages and employment falling during the contraction. Our results, however, highlight that
sectoral booms and busts have very different aggregate employment dynamics when another
sector in the economy is experiencing consistent, ongoing decline. In this case, negative labor
market effects are muted during the boom and very large during the bust. The behavior of the
employment rate since the early 1980s suggests the potential importance of a mechanism like
this in the U.S. labor market. Since 1980, the employment rate of men in the U.S. has been
relatively stable during expansions and has adjusted sharply around contractions. This point has
been emphasized recently by Jaimovich and Siu (2014), and our results suggest that booms and
busts in other sectors combined with a sectoral decline in manufacturing partly generate these
patterns.
Finally, we think that our results may inform the current policy debate about how best to
stimulate employment. The type of employment we have identified is the result of the longer run
sectoral decline in manufacturing. Temporary boosts to labor demand from hiring subsidies or
infrastructure investments are unlikely to have permanent effects on the employment prospects
of non-college individuals, since labor demand for these workers will remain depressed once
these subsidies expire because of the decline in the manufacturing sector. In this sense, our

32

paper documents a significant role for structural forces in explaining the current high level of
employment in the U.S. As noted above, over longer periods of time, non-employed workers (as
well as subsequent generations of workers) may find it beneficial to invest in human capital
accumulation. Therefore, addressing barriers to skill acquisition may have most lasting effect on
improving the employment prospects of those workers who leave the labor force as a result of
the ongoing decline in the manufacturing sector.

REFERENCES
Adao, Rodrigo (2016). “Worker Heterogeneity, Wage Inequality, and International Trade:
Theory and Evidence from Brazil,” Working Paper.
Autor, David, David Dorn, and Gordon Hanson (2013). "The China Syndrome: Local Labor
Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States," American Economic Review.
Autor, David and Mark Duggan (2003). "The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in
Unemployment", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), 157-206.
Autor, David, Frank Levy, and Richard Murnane (2003). "The Skill Content Of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
118(4): 1279-1333.
Bartik, Timothy (1991). "Who Benefits From State and Local Economic Development
Policies", W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research: Kalamazoo, Mich.
Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence F. Katz (1992). "Regional Evolutions," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 23(1): 1-76.
Bound, John and Harry J. Holzer (1993). "Industrial Shifts, Skills Levels, and the Labor Market
for White and Black Males," The Review of Economics and Statistics, 75(3): 387-96.
Burstein, Ariel, Eduardo Morales, and Jonathan Vogel (2016). “Changes in Between Group
Inequality: Computers, Occupations, and International Trade,” Working Paper.
Charles, Kerwin, Erik Hurst, and Matthew Notowidigdo (2015). “Housing Booms and Busts,
Labor Market Opportunities, and College Attendance,” NBER Working Paper #21587.
Charles, Kerwin, Erik Hurst, and Matthew Notowidigdo (2016). “The Masking of Declining
Manufacturing Employment by the Housing Bubble,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(2):
179-200.

33

Chinco, Alex and Christopher Mayer (2016). “Misinformed Speculators and Mispricing in the
Housing Market,” Review of Financial Studies, 29(2): 486-522.
Clark, Sandra Luckett, John Iceland, Thomas Palumbo, Kirby Posey, and Mai Weismantle
(2003). "Comparing Employment, Income, and Poverty: Census 2000 and the Current
Population Survey." Report for the Housing and Household Economic Statistics Division of the
U.S. Census.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2002). “Technology, Geography, and Trade,”
Econometrica, 70(5): 1741-1779.
Ferreira, Ferando and Joe Gyourko (2011). "Anatomy of the Beginning of the Housing Boom:
U.S. Neighborhoods and Metropolitan Areas, 1993-2009", NBER Working Paper 17374.
Hoffman, Florian and Thomas Lemieux (2016). “Unemployment in the Great Recession: A
Comparison of Germany, Canada, and the United States,” Journal of Labor Economics 34:S1:
S95-S139.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Erik Hurst, Chad Jones, and Peter Klenow (2016). “The Allocation of Talent
and U.S. Economic Growth,” Working Paper.
Jaimovich, Nir and Henry Siu (2014). “The Trend is the Cycle: Job Polarization and Jobless
Recoveries,” Working Paper.
Luttmer, Erzo (2005). "Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being", Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 120(3), 963-1002.
Mayer, Chris (2011). "Housing Bubbles: A Survey". Annual Review of Economics, 3, 559-577.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi (2012). "What Explains High Unemployment? The Aggregate
Demand Channel", University of Chicago Working Paper.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi (2011). "House Prices, Home Equity-Based Borrowing, and the U.S.
Household Leverage Crises", American Economic Review, 101, 2132-56.
Midrigan, Virgiliu and Thomas Philippon (2011). "Household Leverage and the Recession",
NBER Working Paper 16965.
Moffit, Robert (2012). "Th U.S. Employment-Population Reversal in the 2000s: Facts and
Explanations", Brookings Papers for Economic Activity, forthcoming.
Mulligan, Casey (2012). The Redistribution Recession: How Labor Market Distortions
Contracted the Economy. Oxford University Press, New York.

34

Notowidigdo, Matthew J. (2013). "The Incidence of Local Labor Demand Shocks", University
of Chicago Working Paper.
Rothstein, Jesse (2012). "Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession",
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Roy, A. D. (1951). "Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings," Oxford Economic Papers,
3, 135-46.
Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia
Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander (2004). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series.
Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center.
Sahin, Aysegul, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni Violante (2012).
Unemployment", New York University Working Paper.

"Mismatch

Saiz, Albert (2010). "The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply", Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 125(3), 1253-96.
Sinai, Todd M. (2012). "House Price Moments in Boom-Bust Cycles," NBER Working Paper
#18059.

35

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics for Changes in Housing Demand and Manufacturing Decline
2000-2006

Change defined across following years:

Percentiles
10th
50th
90th

N

Mean

Std.
Dev.

Change in Housing Prices (dP)
Change in Housing Permits (dQ)

275
275

0.475
0.130

0.388
0.227

0.054
-0.154

0.408
0.113

1.207
0.343

Change in Housing Demand (dP + dQ)

275

0.605

0.515

0.000

0.510

1.395

Predicted Change in Manufacturing Employment

275

-0.015

0.008

-0.024

-0.013

-0.007

Notes: This table reports the summary statistics for the baseline sample of 275 metropolitan areas (MSAs) studied
in the regressions that follow. The Housing Demand Change is constructed by adding the log change in housing
prices (from FHFA house price index) to the log change in the number of housing permits for new construction
(from Building Permits Survey). This procedure creates a proxy for the change in housing demand in an MSA.
The Predicted Change in Manufacturing Employment is the negatve value of the Manufacturing Decline variable
used in main regressions. It is constructed using the 2000 Census, the 2005-2007 American Community Survey,
and the 2011-2013 American Community Survey following the procedure in Bartik (1991) and described in more
detail in the main text. All of the reported sample statistics are computed using the 2000 population of prime-aged
men and women in the MSA (from Census) as weights, since these weights are used in the regressions that follow.

36

Table 2
Employment and Construction Employment Share Response to
Housing Demand Change and Manufacturing Decline
Sample:

Non-College
Men

College
Men

Non-College
Women

College
Women

All
Men and
Women

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Panel A: Dependent Variable is Change in Employment Rate, 2000-2006
Housing Demand Change

Manufacturing Decline

Standardized (1σ) effects:
Housing demand change
Manufacturing decline
R2

0.029

0.009

0.014

0.004

0.018

(0.008)
[0.000]

(0.004)
[0.013]

(0.002)
[0.000]

(0.003)
[0.271]

(0.003)
[0.000]

-0.747
(0.270)
[0.008]

-0.392
(0.125)
[0.003]

-0.769
(0.165)
[0.000]

-0.373
(0.149)
[0.016]

-0.657
(0.155)
[0.000]

0.017
-0.008

0.005
-0.004

0.008
-0.008

0.002
-0.004

0.010
-0.007

0.72

0.28

0.67

0.13

0.78

Panel B: Dependent Variable is Change in Share Employed in Construction and FIRE, 2000-2006
Housing Demand Change
0.020
0.007
0.004
0.004
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.001)
(0.003)
[0.000]
[0.028]
[0.000]
[0.140]
Manufacturing Decline

0.010
(0.002)
[0.000]

-0.438
(0.266)
[0.107]

-0.244
(0.143)
[0.095]

-0.153
(0.098)
[0.125]

0.128
(0.119)
[0.287]

-0.224
(0.141)
[0.119]

0.011
-0.005

0.004
-0.003

0.002
-0.002

0.002
0.001

0.006
-0.002

R2

0.45

0.12

0.19

0.07

0.45

N
Include baseline controls

275
y

275
y

275
y

275
y

275
y

Standardized (1σ) effects:
Housing demand change
Manufacturing decline

Notes: This table reports results of estimating equations (5) and (6) by OLS for various demographic groups. A 0.1 unit
increase in the Housing Demand Change represents a 10 log point increase in housing demand, while a 0.01 unit decrease in
Manufacturing Decline variable corresponds to a 1 percentage point decrease in predicted share of population employed in
manufacturing. The baseline controls include the initial (year 2000) values of the share of employed workers with a college
degree, the share of women in the labor force, and the log population in the MSA. The standardized effects rescale the
coefficient by a one standard deviation change using the cross-MSA standard deviation. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for
an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each state, are in parentheses and p-values are in brackets.

37

Table 3
Employment Response to Housing Demand Change and Manufacturing Decline,
by Age Group and Immigration Status
Dependent Variable is Change in Employment Rate, 2000-2006
Restriction:
Sample:

Housing Demand Change

Manufacturing Decline

Standardized (1σ) effects:
Housing demand change
Manufacturing decline
R2
Include baseline controls

Age 21-35

Age 36-55

Drop Immigrants

NonCollege
Men

All
Men and
Women

NonCollege
Men

All
Men and
Women

NonCollege
Men

All
Men and
Women

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(3)

(4)

0.031
(0.010)
[0.004]
-0.436
(0.215)
[0.048]

0.021
(0.003)
[0.000]
-0.433
(0.138)
[0.003]

0.027
(0.006)
[0.000]
-0.883
(0.226)
[0.000]

0.016
(0.004)
[0.000]
-0.774
(0.169)
[0.000]

0.018
(0.005)
[0.001]
-0.805
(0.135)
[0.000]

0.011
(0.003)
[0.002]
-0.743
(0.103)
[0.000]

0.017
-0.009

0.012
-0.007

0.015
-0.011

0.009
-0.006

0.010
-0.013

0.006
-0.009

0.61

0.71

0.71

0.74

0.63

0.70

y

y

y

y

y

y

Notes: N=275 in all columns. This table reports OLS estimates analogous to columns (1) and (5) in Table 2 for
alternative samples of either non-college men or all prime-aged men and women, using the same set of baseline
controls. See Table 2 for more details. The standardized effects rescale the coefficient by a one standard deviation
change using the cross-MSA standard deviation. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variancecovariance matrix for each state, are in parentheses and p-values are in brackets.

38

Table 4
Wage Response to Housing Demand Change and Manufacturing Decline
Sample:

Non-College
Men

College
Men

Non-College
Women

College
Women

All
Men and
Women

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Dependent Variable is Change in Average Wage, 2000-2006
Housing Demand Change

0.035
(0.005)

0.019
(0.010)

0.018
(0.005)

0.007
(0.007)

0.024
(0.005)

[0.000]

[0.066]

[0.001]

[0.305]

[0.000]

-2.009
(0.369)

-0.660
(0.433)

-1.064
(0.249)

-0.637
(0.304)

-1.209
(0.286)

[0.000]

[0.135]

[0.000]

[0.042]

[0.000]

0.020
-0.021

0.011
-0.007

0.010
-0.011

0.004
-0.007

0.014
-0.012

R

0.43

0.14

0.45

0.11

0.41

N
Include baseline controls

275
y

275
y

275
y

275
y

275
y

Manufacturing Decline

Standardized (1σ) effects:
Housing demand change
Manufacturing decline
2

Notes: This table reports results of estimating equations (5) and (6) by OLS for various demographic groups. A 0.1 unit increase
in the Predicted Housing Demand Change represents a 10 percent increase in housing demand, while a 0.1 unit change in
Predicted Manufacturing Decline variable corresponds to a 10 percentage point change in predicted share of population employed
in manufacturing. The baseline controls include the initial (year 2000) values of the share of employed workers with a college
degree, the share of women in the labor force, and the log population in the MSA. The standardized effects rescale the
coefficient by a one standard deviation change using the cross-MSA standard deviation. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an
arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each state, are in parentheses and p-values are in brackets.

39

Table 5
Sectoral Wage Responses to Housing Demand Change and Manufacturing Decline

Sample:

Housing Demand Change

Manufacturing Decline

Sectoral Wage Responses
All Other Sectors,
Manufacturing Construction and
Excl. Manuf. and
Only
FIRE Only
Construction/FIRE
(2)
(3)
(4)

Average Wage,
All Sectors
(1)

Panel A: Wage Responses for Non-College Men, 2000-2006
0.035
0.032
0.033

0.031

(0.005)
[0.000]

(0.006)
[0.000]

(0.005)
[0.000]

(0.006)
[0.000]

-2.009
(0.369)
[0.000]

-1.849
(0.403)
[0.000]

-2.013
(0.373)
[0.000]

-1.796
(0.399)
[0.000]

Standardized (1σ) effects:
Housing demand change

0.020

0.018

0.019

0.018

Manufacturing decline

-0.021

-0.019

-0.021

-0.019

0.43

0.42

0.40

0.38

R2

Panel B: Sectoral Wage Responses for All Men and Women, 2000-2006
Housing Demand Change
0.024
0.022
0.021
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.005)
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
Manufacturing Decline

0.020
(0.005)
[0.001]

-1.209
(0.286)
[0.000]

-1.151
(0.304)
[0.000]

-1.104
(0.306)
[0.001]

-1.025
(0.322)
[0.003]

0.014
-0.012

0.013
-0.012

0.012
-0.011

0.011
-0.011

R2

0.41

0.40

0.39

0.38

N
Include baseline controls

275
y

275
y

275
y

275
y

Standardized (1σ) effects:
Housing demand change
Manufacturing decline

Notes: This table reports results of estimating equations (5) and (6) by OLS for various demographic groups. A 0.1 unit
increase in the Predicted Housing Demand Change represents a 10 percent increase in housing demand, while a 0.1 unit
change in Predicted Manufacturing Decline variable corresponds to a 10 percentage point change in predicted share of
population employed in manufacturing. The baseline controls include the initial (year 2000) values of the share of employed
workers with a college degree, the share of women in the labor force, and the log population in the MSA. The standardized
effects rescale the coefficient by a one standard deviation change using the cross-MSA standard deviation. Standard errors,
adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each state, are in parentheses and p-values are in brackets.

40

Table 6
Employment Response to Housing Demand Change and Manufacturing Decline:
Longer Run Results
Dependent Variable is Change in Employment Rate
2000-2006

Change defined across following years:

2000-2012

NonCollege
Men

All
Men and
Women

NonCollege
Men

All
Men and
Women

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Predicted Housing Demand Change,
2000-2006

0.029
(0.008)
[0.000]

0.018
(0.003)
[0.000]

0.013
(0.013)
[0.350]

0.006
(0.006)
[0.318]

Predicted Manufacturing Decline,
2000-2006

-0.747
(0.270)
[0.008]

-0.657
(0.155)
[0.000]

-0.461
(0.415)
[0.273]

-0.481
(0.213)
[0.029]

0.017
-0.008

0.010
-0.007

0.007
-0.005

0.004
-0.005

0.72

0.78

0.55

0.62

y

y

y

y

Sample:

Standardized (1σ) effects:
Housing demand change
Manufacturing decline
R2
Include baseline controls

Notes: N=275 in all columns. This table reports OLS estimates analogous to columns (1) and (5) in Table 2 for
alternative sample periods for dependent variable (but keeping right-hand side variables the same). See Table 2 for
more details. The standardized effects rescale the coefficient by a one standard deviation change using the crossMSA standard deviation. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each
state, are in parentheses and p-values are in brackets.

41

Table 7
Decomposing Employment Responses into Non-participation and Unemployment
Dependent variable:

Sample:

Housing Demand Change

Manufacturing Decline

Standardized (1σ) effects:
Housing demand change
Manufacturing decline
R2
Include baseline controls

Change in
Employment,
2000-2006

Change in
Non-participation,
2000-2006

Change in
Unemployment,
2000-2006

NonCollege
Men

All
Men and
Women

NonCollege
Men

All
Men and
Women

NonCollege
Men

All
Men and
Women

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.029
(0.008)
[0.000]
-0.747
(0.270)
[0.008]

0.018
(0.003)
[0.000]
-0.657
(0.155)
[0.000]

-0.012
(0.004)
[0.003]
0.418
(0.136)
[0.004]

-0.009
(0.002)
[0.000]
0.316
(0.089)
[0.001]

-0.018
(0.005)
[0.001]
0.329
(0.195)
[0.098]

-0.009
(0.002)
[0.000]
0.341
(0.101)
[0.002]

0.017
-0.008

0.010
-0.007

-0.007
0.004

-0.005
0.003

-0.010
0.003

-0.005
0.004

0.72

0.78

0.49

0.57

0.69

0.73

y

y

y

y

y

y

Notes: N=275 in all columns. This table reports OLS estimates analogous to columns (1) and (5) in Table 2 for
alternative dependent variables, allowing the overall employment effect to be decomposed into a change in
unemployment rate and change in labor force participation rate. See Table 2 for more details. The standardized
effects rescale the coefficient by a one standard deviation change using the cross-MSA standard deviation. Standard
errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each state, are in parentheses and p-values
are in brackets.

42

Table 8
Population Response to Housing Demand Change and Manufacturing Decline
Sample:

Non-College
Men

College
Men

Non-College
Women

College
Women

All
Men and
Women

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Dependent Variable is Change in Population, 2000-2006
Housing Demand Change

0.029
(0.025)

0.057
(0.016)

0.020
(0.025)

0.059
(0.014)

0.036
(0.021)

[0.266]

[0.001]

[0.411]

[0.000]

[0.089]

-1.752
(0.744)

-1.484
(0.833)

-1.845
(0.737)

-1.374
(0.846)

-1.730
(0.718)

[0.023]

[0.082]

[0.016]

[0.112]

[0.020]

0.016
-0.018

0.032
-0.015

0.012
-0.019

0.034
-0.014

0.020
-0.018

R

0.11

0.15

0.20

0.22

0.13

N
Include baseline controls

275
y

275
y

275
y

275
y

275
y

Manufacturing Decline

Standardized (1σ) effects:
Housing demand change
Manufacturing decline
2

Notes: This table reports results of estimating equations (5) and (6) by OLS for various demographic groups. A 0.1 unit increase
in the Predicted Housing Demand Change represents a 10 percent increase in housing demand, while a 0.1 unit change in
Predicted Manufacturing Decline variable corresponds to a 10 percentage point change in predicted share of population employed
in manufacturing. The baseline controls include the initial (year 2000) values of the share of employed workers with a college
degree, the share of women in the labor force, and the log population in the MSA. The standardized effects rescale the
coefficient by a one standard deviation change using the cross-MSA standard deviation. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an
arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each state, are in parentheses and p-values are in brackets.

43

Table 9
Employment and Wage Response to Housing Demand Change
and Manufacturing Decline: Instrumental Variable Estimates using Magnitude of
Structral Break in House Prices
Sample:

Non-College
Men
(1)

College
Men
(2)

Non-College
Women
(3)

College
Women
(4)

Dependent Variable is Change in Nonemployment Rate, 2000-2006
Housing Demand Change
0.029
0.008
0.005
-0.002
(0.011)
(0.003)
(0.006)
(0.005)
[0.005]
[0.003]
[0.452]
[0.687]
Manufacturing Decline
-0.499
-0.323
-0.728
-0.389
(0.218)
(0.109)
(0.137)
(0.149)
[0.027]
[0.005]
[0.000]
[0.012]
Standardized (1σ) effects:
Housing demand change
0.017
0.005
0.003
-0.001
Manufacturing decline
-0.005
-0.003
-0.008
-0.004
Dependent Variable is Change in Average Wage, 2000-2006
Housing Demand Change
0.048
0.033
0.036
0.038
(0.012)
(0.015)
(0.008)
(0.015)
[0.000]
[0.031]
[0.000]
[0.010]
Manufacturing Decline
-1.602
-0.382
-0.761
-0.317
(0.322)
(0.396)
(0.264)
(0.381)
[0.000]
[0.340]
[0.006]
[0.409]
Standardized (1σ) effects:
Housing demand change
0.027
0.019
0.020
0.022
Manufacturing decline
-0.017
-0.004
-0.008
-0.003

All
Men and
Women
(5)

0.013
(0.005)
[0.005]
-0.549
(0.119)
[0.000]
0.007
-0.006

0.040
(0.011)
[0.000]
-0.870
(0.283)
[0.004]
0.023
-0.009

First stage F-statistic

28.40

28.40

28.40

28.40

28.40

N
Include baseline controls

275
y

275
y

275
y

275
y

275
y

Notes: N=275 in all columns. This table reports IV estimates analogous to Table 2 using the Instrumental Variable
in Table 7. The standardized effects rescale the coefficient by a one standard deviation change using the crossMSA standard deviation. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each
state, are in parentheses and p-values are in brackets.

44

Table 10
Accounting for the Effect of Housing Demand Change and
Manufacturing Decline on National Trends in Non-Employment

Actual
Change
(1)

Predicted Change
due to Housing
Demand Change
(2)

Predicted Change
due to
Manufacturing
Decline
(3)

Share of Actual
Change Explained
Residual Change, by Manufacturing +
(1) - (2) - (3)
Housing
(4)
(5)

Panel A: Accounting for National Nonemployment Trends for All Men and Women
2000-2006

0.019

-0.011

0.021

0.009

52.9%

2000-2012

0.073

0.000

0.030

0.043

40.5%

Panel B: Accounting for National Nonemployment Trends for Non-College Men
2000-2006

0.022

-0.018

0.036

0.004

82.6%

2000-2012

0.108

0.000

0.053

0.055

49.1%

Panel C: Accounting for National Nonemployment Trends for Non-College Women
2000-2006

0.027

-0.009

0.020

0.016

42.4%

2000-2012

0.081

0.000

0.031

0.050

38.0%

Notes: This table reports counterfactual estimates of predicted changes in aggregate non-employment for different
demographic groups. The coefficient estimates from Table 2 and Table 5 are used to compute the predicted values.
Actual changes in non-employment, housing prices, and manufacturing employment are taken from the CPS.

45

Figure 1: Trends in Employment in Manufacturing and Construction for Non-College Men and Non-College Women,
1977-2011

.3
.2
.1
0

Share of male population, 21−55

.4

Panel A: Non-College Men

1975

1980

1985

1990

Year

1995

2000

2005

2010

2005

2010

Construction employment share
Manufacturing employment share
Construction share + Manufacturing share

.15
.1
.05
0

Share of female population, 21−55

.2

Panel A: Non-College Women

1975

1980

1985

1990

Year

1995

2000

Construction employment share
Manufacturing employment share
Construction share + Manufacturing share

Notes: These figures use data from the March CPS. The sample includes all men and women without a four-year college
degree, age 21-55. All employment shares are calculated using individual-level survey weights.

46

Figure 2: Graphical Solutions of Sectoral Choice Model
Panel A: Initial Equilibrium

Panel B: Negative Shock to Sector M
r

r
AM

LN

AH

AM

LN

AH

M→N

LM

LH

LM

LH
M→H

eH = (1 – eM)

eH = (1 – eM)

eM

Panel C: Non-Employment Response to
Negative Shock to Sector M and
“Masking” Positive Shock to Sector H

eM

Panel D: Sectoral Switching Among
Employed Workers in Response to
Shocks in Panel C

r

r
AM

LN

AH

AM

LN

AH

N→H

M→N→H

LH

LM

LM

LH
M→H

eH = (1 – eM)

eH = (1 – eM)

eM

eM

Notes: These figures show the graphic solutions of the model. In Panel A, we show the initial equilibrium, which shows the
combination of eM and r) parameters determine how workers self-select into sectors (or into non-employment, N ). Panel B
shows how the equilibrium responds to a negative shock to sector M ; workers leave sector M for either sector H or enter
non-employment (sector N ), with the relative importance of these two channels depending on the mass of workers along
each margin. Lastly, Panels C and D show how the equilibrium responds a “masking” positive shock to sector H. In this
case, some workers who would have entered non-employment in Panel B instead remain employed and enter sector H (center
diamond in Panel C).

47

.02
0
−.02
−.04
−.06
−.08
−.1

Actual change in manufacturing employment share, 2000−2006

Figure 3: Predicted Manufacturing Decline and Manufacturing Employment, 2000-2006

−.07

−.06
−.05
−.04
−.03
−.02
−.01
Predicted change in manufacturing employment share, 2000−2006

0

Notes: This figure reports the correlation across cities between the predicted change in manufacturing employment and
changes in manufacturing employment between 2000 and 2006. The manufacturing decline variable is constructed following
Bartik (1991); see main text for details. The change in manufacturing employment is defined as the change in the share of
the total population of men and women age 21-55 employed in manufacturing. Each circle represents a metropolitan area,
and the size of the circle is proportional to the prime-age population in the metropolitan area as computed in the 2000
Census.

Change in construction employment share, 2000−2006
−.02 −.01
0
.01
.02
.03
.04
.05

Figure 4: Predicted Housing Demand Change and Construction Employment, 2000-2006

−.5

0

.5
1
1.5
2
Predicted Housing Demand Change, 2000−2006

2.5

3

Notes: This figure reports correlation across cities between the 2000-2006 change in share of population employed in construction and the change in housing demand over the same time period. Each circle represents a metropolitan area, and the
size of the circle is proportional to the number of prime-age men and women in the metropolitan area as computed in the
2000 Census.
48

.05
0
−.05
−.1
−.15

Percentage Point Change, 2000−2006

.1

Figure 5: Manufacturing Decline and Non-Employment of Non-College Men Across MSAs with Different Housing Demand
Shocks, 2000-2006

slope = −1.192 (0.252), shift = −0.024 (0.007)
−.07
−.06
−.05
−.04
−.03
−.02
−.01
0
Predicted Change in Share of Population Employed in Manufacturing, 2000−2006
Top 1/3 based on 2000−06 house demand change [Housing boom MSAs]
Bottom 2/3 [All other MSAs]

.05
0

slope = 0.381 (0.123), shift = 0.021 (0.004)
−.05

Percentage Point Change, 2000−2006

.1

Figure 6: Manufacturing Decline and Construction Employment of Non-College Men Across MSAs with Different Housing
Demand Shocks, 2000-2006

−.07
−.06
−.05
−.04
−.03
−.02
−.01
0
Predicted Change in Share of Population Employed in Manufacturing, 2000−2006
Top 1/3 based on 2000−06 house demand change [Housing boom MSAs]
Bottom 2/3 [All other MSAs]

Notes: These figures report the correlation across cities between the predicted change in manufacturing emplyoment and the
change in the non-employment rate and construction employment share of non-college men (age 21-55) between 2000-2006.
The sample is divided based on the Housing Demand Change in the metropolitan area between 2000 and 2006. The bottom
two-thirds of the metropolitan areas based on this residualized measure are shown in light-colored circles; the top one-third
are shown in dark-colored triangles. The solid line represents the OLS regression line that is computed based on the bottom
two-thirds sample. The slope of this line is reported along with the average difference between the regression line and the
top one-third “housing boom MSA” sample.

49

.05
0
−.05
−.1
−.15

Percentage Change, 2000−2006

.1

Figure 7: Manufacturing Decline and Average Wages of Non-College Men Across MSAs with Different Housing Demand
Shocks, 2000-2006

slope = 0.860 (0.275), shift = 0.024 (0.006)
−.07
−.06
−.05
−.04
−.03
−.02
−.01
0
Predicted Change in Share of Population Employed in Manufacturing, 2000−2006
Top 1/3 based on 2000−06 house demand change [Housing boom MSAs]
Bottom 2/3 [All other MSAs]

0
−.05
−.1

slope = 1.212 (0.119), shift = 0.007 (0.003)
−.15

Percentage Point Change, 2000−2006

.05

Figure 8: Manufacturing Decline and Manufacturing Employment of Non-College Men Across MSAs with Different Housing
Demand Shocks, 2000-2012

−.07
−.06
−.05
−.04
−.03
−.02
−.01
0
Predicted Change in Share of Population Employed in Manufacturing, 2000−2006
Top 1/3 based on 2000−06 house demand change [Housing boom MSAs]
Bottom 2/3 [All other MSAs]

Notes: These figures report the correlation across cities between the predicted change in manufacturing emplyoment and the
change in the average wage and manufacturing employment share of non-college men (age 21-55) between 2000-2006. The
sample is divided based on the Housing Demand Change in the metropolitan area between 2000 and 2006. The bottom
two-thirds of the metropolitan areas based on this residualized measure are shown in light-colored circles; the top one-third
are shown in dark-colored triangles. The solid line represents the OLS regression line that is computed based on the bottom
two-thirds sample. The slope of this line is reported along with the average difference between the regression line and the
top one-third “housing boom MSA” sample.

50

.1
0

slope = −1.548 (0.367), shift = −0.001 (0.016)
−.1

Percentage Point Change, 2000−2012

.2

Figure 9: Manufacturing Decline and Non-Employment of Non-College Men Across MSAs with Different Housing Demand
Shocks, 2000-2006

−.07
−.06
−.05
−.04
−.03
−.02
−.01
0
Predicted Change in Share of Population Employed in Manufacturing, 2000−2006
Top 1/3 based on 2000−06 house demand change [Housing boom MSAs]
Bottom 2/3 [All other MSAs]

Notes: These figures report the correlation across cities between the predicted change in manufacturing emplyoment and the
change in the non-employment rate of non-college men (age 21-55) between 2000-2012 (i.e., this figure is sample as Figure
5 exception that non-employment rate change is extended beyond 2000-2006). The sample is divided based on the Housing
Demand Change in the metropolitan area between 2000 and 2006. The bottom two-thirds of the metropolitan areas based
on this residualized measure are shown in light-colored circles; the top one-third are shown in dark-colored triangles. The
solid line represents the OLS regression line that is computed based on the bottom two-thirds sample. The slope of this line
is reported along with the average difference between the regression line and the top one-third “housing boom MSA” sample.

51

House price growth, 2006−2012
−1
−.5

0

Figure 10: House Price Growth, 2006-2012 versus 2000-2006

−1.5

45−degree line

0

.2

.4
.6
.8
1
House price growth, 2000−2006

1.2

1.4

Notes: This figure shows the correlation between the change in house prices in 2000-2006 and the change in house prices in
2006-2012 for the 275 MSAs in our baseline sample. The dotted line is a 45-degree line (i.e., slope of -1).

52

