                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENT IN 205 ECONOMIES, 1960 TO 2010

                                              Martin Čihák
                                          Asli Demirgüč-Kunt
                                               Erik Feyen
                                              Ross Levine

                                         Working Paper 18946
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18946


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2013




The findings, interpretations, and conclusions in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. The
paper benefited from comments by Thorsten Beck, Sergio Schmuckler, Roberto Rocha, Stijn Claessens,
Augusto de la Torre, Norman Loayza, and Tunc Uyanik and participants several seminars. Amin Mohseni,
Mauricio Pinzon Latorre, and Subika Farazi provided research assistance. Katie Kibuuka, Diego Sourrouille,
Ed Al-Hussainy, Haocong Ren, and Andrea Coppola helped with compiling parts of the dataset. All
remaining errors are those of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Martin Čihák, Asli Demirgüč-Kunt, Erik Feyen, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Development in 205 Economies, 1960 to 2010
Martin Čihák, Asli Demirgüč-Kunt, Erik Feyen, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 18946
April 2013
JEL No. G00,G01,G10,G20,O16

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper describes our construction of the Global Financial Development Database and uses the
data to compare financial systems around the world. The database provides information on financial
systems in 205 economies over the period from 1960 to 2010 and includes measures of (1) size of
financial institutions and markets (financial depth), (2) degree to which individuals and firms can and
do use financial services (access), (3) efficiency of financial intermediaries and markets in intermediating
resources and facilitating financial transactions (efficiency), and (4) stability of financial institutions
and markets (stability).


Martin Čihák                                         Erik Feyen
The World Bank                                       The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW                                    1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433                                 Washington, DC 20433
mcihak@worldbank.org                                 efeijen@worldbank.org

Asli Demirgüč-Kunt                                   Ross Levine
The World Bank                                       Haas School of Business
1818 H Street                                        University of California at Berkeley
Washington, DC 20433                                 545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)
ademirguckunt@worldbank.org                          Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
                                                     and NBER
                                                     Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
                                                                                                  1


Introduction

       A growing body of evidence suggests that financial institutions (such as banks and

insurance companies) and financial markets (including stock markets, bond markets, and

derivative markets) exert a powerful influence on economic development, poverty alleviation,

and economic stability [Levine (2005)]. For example, when banks screen borrowers and identify

firms with the most promising prospects, this is a key step that helps allocate resources

efficiently, expand economic opportunities, and foster growth. When banks and securities

markets mobilize savings from households to invest in promising projects, this is another crucial

step in fostering economic development. When financial institutions monitor the use of

investments and scrutinize managerial performance, this is an additional ingredient in boosting

the efficiency of corporations and reducing waste and fraud by corporate insiders. But, that is

not all. When equity, bond, and derivative markets enable the diversification of risk, this

encourages investment in higher-return projects that might otherwise be shunned. And, when

financial systems lower transactions costs, it facilitates trade and specialization—fundamental

inputs to technological innovation [Smith (1776)].

       But, when financial systems perform these functions poorly, they tend to hinder

economic growth, curtail economic opportunities, and destabilize economies. For example, if

financial systems simply collect funds with one hand and pass them along to cronies, the

wealthy, and the politically-connected with the other hand, this slows economic growth and

prohibits many potential entrepreneurs from even attempting to realize their economic

dreams. And, if financial institutions fail to exert sound corporate governance over the firms

that they fund, this makes it easier for managers to pursue projects that benefit themselves
                                                                                                  2


rather than the firm and the overall economy. When financial institutions create complex

financial instruments and sell them to unsophisticated investors, this might boost the bonuses

of the financial engineers and executives associated with marketing the new-fangled

instruments while simultaneously distorting the allocation of society’s savings and impeding

economic prosperity [Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2006, 2012)].

       Although the evidence on the role of the financial system in shaping economic

development is substantial and varied, there are serious shortcomings associated with

measuring the central concept under consideration: the functioning of the financial system.

Researchers do not have good cross-country, cross-time measures of the degree to which

financial systems (1) enhance the quality of information about firms and hence the efficiency of

resource allocation, (2) exert sound corporate governance over the firms to which they funnel

those resources, (3) provide effective mechanisms for managing, pooling, and diversifying risk,

(4) mobilize savings from disparate savers so these resources can be allocated to the most

promising projects in the economy, and (5) facilitate trade. Instead, researchers have largely—

though not exclusively—relied on measures of the size of the banking industry as a proxy. But,

banking sector size is not a measure of quality, or efficiency, or stability. And, the banking

sector is only one component of financial systems.

       The major contribution of this paper is the construction of improved measures of the

functioning of financial systems in 205 economies from 1960 to 2010. We call the resultant

database the “Global Financial Development Database.” It is available at

www.worldbank.org/financialdevelopment and http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/global-

financial-development.
                                                                                                      3


       To quantify the functioning of financial systems, we develop several measures of four

broad characteristics of financial institutions and markets: (1) the size of financial institutions

and markets (financial depth), (2) the degree to which individuals can and do use financial

institutions and markets (access), (3) the efficiency of financial institutions and markets in

providing financial services (efficiency), and (4) the stability of financial institutions and markets

(stability). These four characteristics are measured both for (1) financial institutions (mostly for

banks, which are the major financial institution in most economies, but also for insurance

companies and other financial institutions) and (2) financial markets (equity and bond markets),

thus leading to a 4x2 matrix of financial system characteristics. The paper then uses these

measures to characterize and compare financial systems across countries and over time.

       In focusing on these four characteristics of financial institutions and markets, we seek to

provide empirical shape and substance to the complex, multifaceted and sometimes

amorphous concept of the “functioning of financial systems.” We recognize that financial

depth, access, efficiency, and stability might not fully capture all features of financial systems.

But they reflect features on which much of the empirical literature has been concentrating. We

make these new and improved measures of financial development available so that others can

use them to benchmark national financial systems and test particular hypotheses.

       The analyses presented in this paper, together with the underlying datasets, highlight

the multi-dimensional nature of financial systems. Deep financial systems do not necessarily

provide high degrees of financial access; highly efficient financial systems are not necessarily

more stable than the less efficient ones, and so on. The paper illustrates that financial systems
                                                                                                  4


come in different shapes and sizes, and they differ widely in terms of the 4x2 matrix of

characteristics.


       The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. It starts with a discussion on the role

of the financial system in economic development. Then it proceeds to examine the

measurement of key features of the financial system, namely financial depth, access to finance,

the efficiency of financial systems, and the stability of financial systems. Measured for both

financial institutions and financial markets, this yields the so-called 4x2 measurement

framework, which is presented as a strategy for empirically characterizing financial systems

around the world and tracing their development over time. The 4x2 measurement framework

and the Global Financial Development Database are then used to examine and compare 205

financial systems around the world.



The concept of financial development and its links to economic development


       There has been a considerable debate among economists on the role of financial

development in economic growth and poverty reduction, but the balance of theoretical

reasoning and empirical evidence suggests that finance has a central role in socio-economic

development [Levine (1997, 2005)]. Economies with higher levels of financial development

grow faster and experience faster reductions in poverty levels. This section introduces the

concept of financial development and provides a brief review of the literature on the linkages

between financial development, economic growth, and poverty reduction.
                                                                                                   5


       Markets are imperfect. It is costly to acquire and process information about potential

investments. There are costs and uncertainties associated with writing, interpreting, and

enforcing contracts. And, there are costs associated with transacting goods, services, and

financial instruments. These market imperfections inhibit the flow of society’s savings to those

with the best ideas and projects, curtailing economic development and retarding improvements

in living standards.

       It is the existence of these costs—these market imperfections—that creates incentives

for the emergence of financial contracts, markets and intermediaries. Motivated by profits,

people create financial products and institutions to ameliorate the effects of these market

imperfections. And, governments often provide an array of services—ranging from legal and

accounting systems to government owned banks—with the stated goals of reducing these

imperfections and enhancing resource allocation. Some economies are comparatively

successful at developing financial systems that reduce these costs. Other economies are

considerably less successful, with potentially large effects on economic development.

       At the most basic, conceptual level, therefore, financial development occurs when

financial instruments, markets, and intermediaries mitigate – though do not necessarily

eliminate – the effects of imperfect information, limited enforcement, and transactions costs.

For example, the creation of credit registries tended to improve acquisition and dissemination

of information about potential borrowers, improving the allocation of resources with positive

effects on economic development. As another example, economies with effective legal and

regulatory systems have facilitated the development of equity and bond markets that allow

investors to hold more diversified portfolio than they could without efficient securities markets.
                                                                                                  6


This greater risk diversification can facilitate the flow of capital to higher return projects,

boosting growth and enhancing living standards.

       Defining financial development in terms of the degree to which the financial system

eases market imperfections, however, is too narrow and does not provide much information on

the actual functions provided by the financial system to the overall economy. Thus, Merton

(1992), Levine (1997, 2005), Merton and Bodie (2004), and others have development broader

definitions that focus on what the financial system actually does.

       At a broader level, financial development can be defined as improvements in the quality

of five key financial functions: (1) producing and processing information about possible

investments and allocating capital based on these assessments; (2) monitoring individuals and

firms and exerting corporate governance after allocating capital; (3) facilitating the trading,

diversification, and management of risk; (4) mobilizing and pooling savings; and (5) easing the

exchange of goods, services, and financial instruments. Financial institutions and markets

around the world differ markedly in how well they provide these key services. Although this

paper sometimes focuses on the role of the financial systems in reducing information,

contracting, and transactions costs, it primarily adopts a broader view of finance and stresses

the key functions provided by the financial system to the overall economy.

       Economists have long debated the role of the financial sector in economic growth. Lucas

(1988), for example, dismissed finance as an over-stressed determinant of economic growth.

Robinson (1952, p. 86) quipped that "where enterprise leads finance follows." From this

perspective, finance responds to demands from the non-financial sector; it does not cause

economic growth. At the other extreme, Miller (1988, p.14) argued that the idea that financial
                                                                                                    7


markets contribute to economic growth “is a proposition too obvious for serious discussion.”

Bagehot (1873) and others rejected the idea that the finance-growth nexus can be safely

ignored without substantially limiting the understanding of economic growth.

       Recent literature reviews, such as Levine (2005) and Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine (2008),

conclude that the preponderance of evidence suggests a positive, first-order relationship

between financial development and economic growth. In other words, well-functioning

financial systems play an independent role in promoting long-run economic growth: economies

with better-developed financial systems tend to grow faster over long periods of time, and a

large body of evidence suggests that this effect is causal.

       Moreover, research sheds light on the mechanisms through which finance affects

growth—the financial system influences growth primarily by affecting the allocation of society’s

savings, not by affecting the aggregate savings rate. Thus, when financial systems do a good job

of identifying and funding those firms with the best prospects, not those firms simply with the

strongest political connections, this improves the capital allocation and fosters economic

growth. Such financial systems promote the entry of new, promising firms and force the exit of

less efficient enterprises. Such financial systems also expand economic opportunities, so that

the allocation of credit—and hence opportunity—is less closely tied to accumulated wealth and

more closely connected to the social value of the project. Furthermore, by improving the

governance of firms, well-functioning financial markets and institutions reduce waste and

fraud, boosting the efficient use of scarce resources. By facilitating risk management, financial

systems can ease the financing of higher return endeavors with positive reverberations on living
                                                                                                      8


standards. And, by pooling society’s savings, financial systems make it possible to exploit

economies of scale—getting the biggest development bang for available resources.


The 4x2 framework for benchmarking financial systems


        To capture the key features of financial systems, one would ideally like to have direct

measures of how well financial institutions and financial markets (1) produce information ex

ante about possible investments and allocate capital; (2) monitor investments and exert

corporate governance after providing finance; (3) facilitate the trading, diversification, and

management of risk; (4) mobilize and pool savings; and (5) ease the exchange of goods and

services. So, if measurement was not an issue, one would like to be able to say that in terms of

producing information about possible investments and allocate capital, the financial sector in

Country A, for example, scores 60 on a scale from 0 to 100, while Country B’s financial sector

scores 75; in terms of monitoring investments and exerting corporate governance after

providing finance, Country A scores 90, while Country B scores only 20 on a scale from 0 to 100,

and so on. But, researchers have so far been unable to obtain such direct measures of these

financial functions.

        The goal of this paper is to construct measures of four important characteristics of

financial systems: (1) depth; (2) access; (3) efficiency, and (4) stability. These financial system

characteristics are proxies of the services provided by the financial system. For example,

“financial depth” is not a function in itself, but it is a proxy of the overall extent of services

provided by the financial system. Similarly, our measures of “access” do not directly measure

how well the financial system identifies good investments, regardless of the collateral of the
                                                                                                                      9


individual; but it provides an (imperfect, ex post) approximation of the breadth of use of

particular financial institutions and instruments.

         For each of the four characteristics, this paper presents measures for both financial

institutions and financial markets. The resulting 4x2 matrix of financial system characteristics

(Table 1), which builds on a large literature seeking to compare financial systems empirically,

illustrates the multi-dimensional nature of financial systems. 2

         The resulting database that we construct—Global Financial Development Database—

builds on, updates, and extends previous efforts, in particular the data collected for the

“Database on Financial Development and Structure” by Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2000,

2010). The database also incorporates data from the Financial Access Survey (fas.imf.org), the

Global Findex (www.worldbank.org/globalfindex).




2
  In each of the cells in the 4x2 matrix, Table 1 shows several variables. In some cases, the variables in the same cell
are complementary (for example, total assets of banks to GDP and total assets of non-bank financial institutions to
GDP are expressed in the same units and complement each other, so they can be summed up to approximate total
assets of financial institutions to GDP). In other cases, the variables measure similar concepts in different ways,
with different degrees of comprehensiveness. For example, private credit to GDP and total assets of financial
institutions to GDP are both proxies for financial institutions’ size. Private credit to GDP covers a sub-set of assets
but is available for a larger number of economies. In Table 1, variables with the highest country coverage are
highlighted in bold. The competing indicators tend to be highly but not perfectly correlated. For example, the
correlation coefficient for private credit to GDP and banking sector’s total assets to GDP is 0.9.
                                                                                                   10


       Financial depth

       As regards financial depth, the variable that has received much attention in the

empirical literature on financial development is private credit to GDP. More specifically, the

variable is defined as domestic private credit to the real sector by deposit money banks as

percentage of local currency GDP. The private credit, therefore, excludes credit issued to

governments, government agencies, and public enterprises. It also excludes credit issued by

central banks.

       Private credit to GDP differs widely across countries, and it correlates strongly with

income level. For example, private credit to GDP in high-income countries is 103 percent in

high-income countries, more than 4 times the average ratio in low-income countries (Table 2).

Based on this measure, economies with deep financial systems include many of those in

Europe; Canada, Australia, and South Africa are also among those in the highest quartile in

terms of private credit to GDP (Figure 1). China’s financial system is also in the highest quartile

in terms of this measure, higher than other major emerging markets such as Russia, Brazil, and

India. The United States’ financial system, while above average, is not as deep as China’s. This

reflects in part the more market-based nature of the U.S. financial system.

       Financial depth, approximated by private credit to GDP, has a strong statistical link to

long-term economic growth; it is also closely linked to poverty reduction [see, for example,

Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine (2008)]. To illustrate, Table 3 summarizes the relationship between

per capita GDP growth and various measures of financial intermediary depth. The reported

cross-country growth regressions update the earlier analyses by King and Levine (1993b) by

enhancing and extending their data. Figure 2 provides a basic empirical illustration of the link
                                                                                                                11


between financial depth, approximated by the ratio of private sector credit to gross domestic

product, and income inequality, approximated by changes in the Gini coefficient. The figure

illustrates that higher levels of financial development are associated with declines in inequality.

These observations are in line with more in-depth empirical research based on microeconomic

data.3

         Nonetheless, a high ratio of private sector credit to GDP is not necessarily a good thing.

Indeed, all the 8 countries with the highest ratios of private sector credit to GDP as of 2010

(Cyprus, Ireland, Spain, Netherlands, Portugal, United Kingdom, Luxembourg, and Switzerland,

going from the highest to the lowest) had a banking crisis episode since 2008. 4

         An alternative to private credit to GDP is total banking assets to GDP, a variable that is

also included in the Global Financial Development Database. It is arguably a more

comprehensive measure of size, because it includes not only credit to private sector, but also

credit to government as well as bank assets other than credit. However, it is available for a

smaller number of economies and has been used less extensively in the literature on financial

development. In any case, the two variables are rather closely correlated (with a correlation

coefficient of about 0.9 over the whole sample).




3
  For example, evidence suggests that access to credit markets increases parental investment in the education of
their children and reduces the substitution of children out of schooling and into labor markets when adverse
shocks reduce family income (Belley and Lochner 2007). Better-functioning financial systems stimulate new firm
formation and help small, promising firms expand as a wider array of firms gain access to the financial system.
Moreover, better-functioning financial systems will identify and fund better projects, with less emphasis on
collateral and incumbency. Not only do they allow new, efficient firms to enter, they also force old, inefficient
firms to leave, as evidenced by data (Kerr and Nanda 2009).
4
  Hong Kong SAR, a jurisdiction that is not a country but reports data on a separate basis, would rank between
United Kingdom and Luxembourg in terms of the variable.
                                                                                                                 12


         Despite the literature’s focus on banks, the recent crisis has highlighted issues in non-

bank financial institutions (NBFIs). The coverage of NBFIs by data is much less comprehensive

than that of banks. Nonetheless, to acknowledge this point, the Global Financial Development

Database includes total assets of NBFIs to GDP, which includes pension fund assets to GDP,

mutual fund assets to GDP, insurance company assets to GDP, insurance premiums (life) to

GDP, and insurance premiums (non-life) to GDP.

         For financial markets, earlier work by Levine and Zervos (1998) indicates that the trading

of ownership claims on firms in an economy is closely tied to the rate of economic

development. In the database, financial market depth is approximated using a combination of

data on stock markets and bond markets. To approximate the size of stock markets, a common

choice in the literature is stock market capitalization to GDP. For bond markets, a commonly

used proxy for size is the outstanding volume of private debt securities to GDP. The sum of

these two provides a rough indication of the relative size of the financial markets in various

countries.

         There is substantial variation among countries, by size and by income level (Table 4). For

example, over the 2008-2010 period, the world-wide average value of this ratio was 131

percent, but individual country observations ranged from less than 1 percent to 533 percent.

The average for developed economies was 151 percent, while the average for developing

economies was about a half, at 76 percent. Also, in bigger countries, financial markets tend to

play a relatively larger role relative to the size of the economy. 5 Countries in the highest quartile


5
 In Table 4, this is illustrated by the fact that the world-wide median is only 49 percent, while the weighted
average (with nominal GDP as weight) is 131 percent.
                                                                                                    13


of the world-wide distribution include not only the United States, Canada, Japan, and other

major developed economies, but for example also China and Malaysia (Figure 2).

       The size of financial institutions relative to the size of financial markets is central to the

study of ‘financial structures’ – [Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine (2001), Demirgüç-Kunt, Feyen, and

Levine (2012)]. The literature on financial structures seeks to assess whether and under which

conditions the mixture of financial institutions and financial markets in an economy exerts an

influence on economic development that is independent of the overall level of financial

development. Does the mixture of financial institutions and markets matter? We find that

financial structure differs markedly across economies. Over the full sample period, the annual

average value of the financial structure ratio is 279. Countries such as Australia, India,

Singapore, and Sweden have this ratio at or below 2.35 (10th percentile), while Bolivia,

Bulgaria, Serbia, and Uganda are examples of countries where this ratio is over 356 (90th

percentile).

       Financial access

       Better functioning financial systems allocate capital based more on the expected quality

of the project and entrepreneur and based less on the accumulated wealth and social

connections of the entrepreneur. Under many conditions, therefore, better functioning

financial systems that overcome market frictions will more effectively identify and fund the

most promising firms and not just funnel credit to large companies and rich individuals. Thus, to

develop informative proxies of financial development, it is useful to move beyond financial

depth and also include indicators of financial access—the degree to which the public can access
                                                                                                   14


financial services. As with the other measures, both financial institutions and financial markets

are examined.

       As regards access to financial institutions, a common proxy variable is the number of

bank accounts per 1,000 adults. Other variables in this category include the number of bank

branches per 100,000 adults (commercial banks), the percentage of firms with line of credit (all

firms), and the percentage of firms with line of credit (small firms). When using these proxies,

one needs to be mindful of their weaknesses. For example, the number of bank branches is

becoming increasingly misleading with the move towards branchless banking. The number of

bank accounts does not suffer from the same issue, but it has its own limitations. In particular,

it focuses on banks only, and does not correct for the fact that some bank clients have

numerous accounts.

       Much of the data for the financial access dimension of the Global Financial Development

Database come from the recently established Financial Access Survey database (fas.imf.org),

which is based on earlier work by Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt and Martínez Pería (2007) and currently

contains annual data for 187 jurisdictions for the period 2004 to 2011. A portion of the financial

access data is from the newly constructed Global Financial Inclusion Indicators, or “Global

Findex” dataset [Demirgüç-Kunt and Klapper (2012)]. The Global Findex is the first public

database of indicators that consistently measures individuals’ usage of financial products across

economies. It can be used to track the potential impact of global financial inclusion policies and

facilitate a deeper and more nuanced understanding of how adults around the world save,

borrow and make payments. It is based on detailed interviews with at least 1,000 people per
                                                                                                     15


economy in some 150 economies about their financial behavior through the Gallup World Poll

survey.

          Table 5 illustrates the wide dispersion in access to finance across countries, using the

provider-side data. World-wide, there were about 1.34 bank accounts per adult in 2008-2010,

but the observations ranged from less than 0.01 to 7.19 accounts per adult. The average for

developing economies was 0.69 accounts per adult, a mere fraction of the 3.76 per adult in

developed economies.

          Figure 4 provides an additional illustration, based on the user-side data. Here, the focus

is on account penetration, that is, the percentage of adults that have at least on account at a

formal financial institution. Again, account penetration differs enormously between high-

income and developing economies. While it is near universal in high-income economies, with

89 percent of adults reporting that they have an account at a formal financial institution, it is

only 24 percent in low income economies. Globally, more than 2.5 billion adults do not have a

formal account, and a majority of this group resides in developing economies. In several

economies (such as Cambodia, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Guinea, the Kyrgyz Republic,

Turkmenistan, and the Republic of Yemen) less than 5 percent of adults have a formal account.

          Data on access to financial markets are relatively more scant. To approximate access to

stock and bond markets, measures of market concentration are used, the idea being that a

higher degree of concentration reflects greater difficulties for access for newer or smaller

issuers. The variables in this category include the percentage of market capitalization outside of

top 10 largest companies, the percentage of value traded outside of top 10 traded companies,
                                                                                                   16


government bond yields (3 month and 10 years), ratio of domestic to total debt securities, ratio

of private to total debt securities (domestic), and ratio of new corporate bond issues to GDP.

       Table 6 provides a summary for one of these measures of access to financial markets

contained in the Global Financial Development Database, namely the share of market

capitalization that is outside of the top ten largest issuers. Interestingly, the difference between

developed economies and developing economies is not as large as for some of the other

indicators in the database. This suggests that in this case, other factors than income level play

important roles. One of the other factors may be size: some large developing economies, such

as China and India, have very dispersed financial markets (Figure 5), scoring in the top quartile

of this proxy for financial market access.

       Financial efficiency

       For intermediaries, efficiency is primarily constructed to measure the cost of

intermediating credit. Efficiency measures for institutions include indicators such as overhead

costs to total assets, net interest margin, lending-deposits spread, non-interest income to total

income, and cost to income ratio (Table 1). Closely related variables include measures such as

return on assets and return on equity. While efficient financial institutions also tend to be more

profitable, the relationship is not very close. For example, an inefficient financial system can

post relatively high profitability if it operates in an economic upswing, while an otherwise

efficient system hit by an adverse shock may generate losses.

       Table 7 summarizes the key statistics for the lending-deposit spreads. The weighted

average for developed economies is 2.2 percent, compared to 7.3 percent in developed

economies, for a world-wide weighted average of 6.9 percent. There are relatively large
                                                                                                    17


disparities among regions, with Latin America and Caribbean reporting the highest spreads, at

16.9 percent. Figure 6 illustrates that even within the same region, there are wide disparities,

so Latin America and Caribbean contains both countries with very high spreads (such as Brazil)

and those with low spreads (such as Colombia). Similarly, while Sub-Saharan Africa reports

generally high spreads (12.8 percent on average), Ethiophia (3.3 percent) is an example of

country with very low spreads.

       Lending-deposit spreads are relatively crude measures of efficiency. For some

economies, it is possible to calculate efficiency indices based on more sophisticated measures .

For example, Angelidis and Lyroudi (2006) apply data envelopment analysis and neural

networks to measure efficiency in the Italian banking industry. However, the data required for

this type of analysis are available only for a small sub-set of economies.

       For financial markets, a basic proxy for efficiency in the stock market is the turnover

ratio, that is, the ratio of stock market’s annual turnover to its capitalization. The logic of using

this variable is that higher turnover means more liquidity, which in turn allows the market to be

more efficient. In the bond market, the most commonly used variable is the tightness of the

bid-ask spread (with the United States and Western European markets showing low spreads,

and Vietnam, Peru, Qatar, Dominican Republic, and Pakistan reporting high spreads) and the

turnover ratio (although the measurement of the latter often suffers from incomplete data).

       A range of other proxies for efficiency in financial markets has been used in empirical

literature (Table 1). One of them is price synchronicity, calculated as a degree of co-movement

of individual stock returns in an equity market. The variable aims to capture the information

content of daily stock prices, as a market operates efficiently only when prices are informative
                                                                                                    18


about the performance of individual firms. Another proxy variable for efficiency is private

information trading, defined as the percentage of firms with trading patterns that arise from

trading conducted through privately obtained information. This calculation is based on the

examination of daily price-volume patterns, and helps indicate the prevalence of trading in a

stock based on private or privileged information. Finally, efficiency can be approximated by the

real transaction cost. Based on daily return data of the listed stocks, this variable attempts to

approximate the transaction costs associated with trading a particular security. This variable

helps determine the barriers to efficiency in the market. All these indicators are constructed by

compiling and statistically processing firm-level data from a variety of market sources.

       Table 8 summarizes the results for the stock market turnover ratio, illustrating the wide

dispersion across countries and regions, as well as by income groups. The world-wide weighted

average of the turnover ratio is 198 percent, but the country-by-country observations range

from less than 1 percent to 343 percent. Developing economy average is 127 percent,

compared to developed economy average of 218 percent. Among the regions, East Asia and

Pacific scores the highest, at 167 percent, and Sub-Saharan Africa the lowest, at 62 percent.

Again, country size is a helpful factor, as illustrated by the world map (Figure 7). The countries

scoring highly include not only the developed economies of Europe and North America, but also

China, India, Russia, Turkey, and Saudi Arabia, among others.

       Financial stability

       A common measure of financial stability is the z-score. It explicitly compares buffers

(capitalization and returns) with risk (volatility of returns) to measure a bank’s solvency risk.

The z-score is defined as z ≡ (k+µ)/σ, where k is equity capital as percent of assets, µ is return as
                                                                                                     19


percent of assets, and σ is standard deviation of return on assets as a proxy for return volatility.

The popularity of the z-score stems from the fact that it has a clear (negative) relationship to

the probability of a financial institution’s insolvency, that is, the probability that the value of its

assets becomes lower than the value of its debt [see, for example, Boyd and Runkle (1993);

Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, Levine (2006); Demirgüç-Kunt, Detragiache, and Tressel (2008); Laeven

and Levine (2009); Čihák and Hesse (2010)]. A higher z-score therefore implies a lower

probability of insolvency.

        The z-score has several limitations as a measure of financial stability. Perhaps the most

important limitation is that the z-scores are based purely on accounting data. They are thus

only as good as the underlying accounting and auditing framework. If financial institutions are

able to smooth out the reported data, the z-score may provide an overly positive assessment of

the financial institutions’ stability. Also, the z-score looks at each financial institution separately,

potentially overlooking the risk that a default in one financial institution may cause loss to other

financial institutions in the system. An advantage of the z-score is that it can be also used for

institutions for which more sophisticated, market based data are not available. Also, the z-

scores allow comparing the risk of default in different groups of institutions, which may differ in

their ownership or objectives, but face the risk of insolvency.

        For other indicators, such as the regulatory capital to risk-weighted assets and

nonperforming loans to total gross loans, the Global Financial Development Database cross-

refers to financial soundness indicator database available on IMF’s website (fsi.imf.org).

Variables such as the nonperforming loan ratios may be better known than the z-score, but

they are also known to be lagging indicators of soundness [Čihák and Schaeck (2010)].
                                                                                                     20


        One alternative indicator of financial instability is “excessive” credit growth, with the

emphasis on excessive. A well-developing financial sector is likely to grow. But very rapid

growth in credit is one of the most robust common factors associated with banking crises

[Demirgüc-Kunt and Detragiache (1997) and Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999)]. Indeed, the IMF

(2004) found that about 75 percent of credit booms in emerging markets end in banking crises.

The credit growth measure also has pros and cons: Although it is easy to measure credit

growth, it is difficult to assess ex-ante whether the growth is excessive.

        Interestingly, there is not much of a difference between the reported measures of

financial stability in different groups of countries (Table 9 and Figure 8). For example, the

reported z-scores in developed economies and developing economies appear identical (Table

9). This is in line with the global financial crisis experience: financial instability occurred both in

developed economies and in developing economies. The distinguishing factors were other

things (such as quality of the regulatory and institutional framework) rather than the level of

development.

        For financial markets, the most commonly used proxy variable for stability is market

volatility, although other proxies are also included in the database (Table 1). One of these

variables is the skewness of stock returns, because a market with a more negative skewed

distribution of stock returns is likely to deliver large negative returns, and likely to be prone to

less stability. Another variable is vulnerability to earnings manipulation, which is derived from

certain characteristics of information reported in the financial statements of companies that

can be indicative of manipulation. It is defined as the percentage of firms listed on the stock

exchange that are susceptible to such manipulation. In the United States, France, and most
                                                                                                    21


other high-income economies, less than 10 percent of firms have issues concerning earnings

manipulation; in Zimbabwe, in contrast, almost all firms may experience manipulation of their

accounting statements. In Turkey, the number is close to 40 percent. Other variables

approximating volatility in the stock market are the price-to-earnings ratio and duration, which

is a refined version of the price-to-earnings ratio that takes into account factors such as long-

term growth and interest rates.

       Table 10 and Figure 9 provide a summary of the measures of asset price volatility in

2008-2010. Developing economy markets show a relatively higher volatility than developed

economy markets but the difference is not significant (it is smaller than the cross-country

standard deviation). Also a comparison across regions does not show a clear pattern, suggesting

that all regions were affected by the increased volatility during the global financial crisis.


Selected findings


       Overall comparisons by levels of development and by region (Table 11) confirm that

while developing economy financial systems tend to be much less deep, somewhat less

efficient, and provide less access, their stability has been comparable to developed economy

financial systems. Table 11 summarizes the recent data from the Global Financial Development

Database (2008–10) for the 8 key characteristics of financial systems.



       For the purpose of these calculations, we provide “winsorized” and “rescaled” variables.

To prepare for this, the 95th and 5th percentile for each variable for the entire pooled country-

year dataset are calculated, and the top and bottom five percent of observations are truncated.
                                                                                                    22


Specifically, all observations from the 5th percentile to the minimum are replaced by the value

corresponding to the 5th percentile, and all observations from the 95th percentile to the

maximum are replaced by the value corresponding to the 95th percentile. To convert all the

variables to a 0-100 scale, each score is rescaled by the maximum for each indicator, and the

minimum of the indicator. The rescaled indicator can be interpreted as the percent distance

between the ‘worst’ (0) and the ‘best’ (100) value of the respective financial system

characteristic, defined by the 5th and 95th percentile of the original distribution.



       Financial systems are multidimensional.

       One basic, yet important, observation highlighted by the Global Financial Development

Database is that the four financial system characteristics are far from closely correlated across

countries (Figure 10 and Figure 11). This underscores the point that each dimension captures a

very different, separate facet of financial systems. In other words, looking only at financial

depth would not be sufficient. Similarly, focusing only on financial stability or on access or on

efficiency would not suffice. The same applies both to financial institutions and to financial

markets.

       Moreover, attempts to run a more rigorous “horse race” among the indicators from the

four dimensions tend to end in a tie: that is, none of the indicators is clearly superior to the

others in explaining long-term growth or poverty reduction.

       There are massive disparities in financial systems around the globe.
                                                                                                  23


       A comparison at the regional level shows major differences in financial systems among

the key regions (Table 11). The results are by and large in line as one could expect, with Sub-

Saharan Africa scoring the lowest on average on most of the dimensions, and high income

economies scoring the highest on most dimensions. A remarkable number is the relatively low

score of Middle East and North Africa on access to finance (Table 11, upper panel). This

resonates with the complaints heard during the unrest in the region in 2011.

       Much of the differences among regions are correlated with differences in income levels.

Countries that have lower income tend to also show lower degrees of financial development as

approximated by the 4x2 framework (Table 11, lower panel).

       Behind these regional and peer group averages are vast differences among individual

countries. For example, the largest financial system in the sample is more than 34,500 times the

smallest one. Even if the financial systems are re-scaled by the size of the corresponding

economies (that is, by their gross domestic product), the largest (deepest) financial system is

still some 110 times the smallest (least deep) one. And even if the top and bottom 5 percent of

this distribution are taken out, the ratio of the largest to the smallest is about 28 – a large

degree of disparity, considering that these are not raw figures but ratios relative to the size of

economy. Similar orders of magnitude are obtained for the other characteristics of financial

systems. To put this in a more anthropomorphic perspective, the tallest adult person on Earth is

less than 5 times taller than the smallest person (www.guinessworldrecords.com). In other

words, when one examines country-level data, there are vast differences in financial system

characteristics.
                                                                                                    24


       The cross-country differentiation along the key characteristics of financial systems can

be seen from the scatter plots in Figure 10 and Figure 11 as well as from cartograms such as the

one shown for illustration in Figure 12. The scatter plots and the cartogram underscore the

large cross-country differences. The measurement framework underscores that financial

sectors in jurisdictions such as the United States and Korea exhibit a relatively great financial

market depth, as one would expect. United States have less deep financial institutions,

reflecting a less bank-centric (and more market-based) nature of the U.S. financial system.

Several European countries exhibit relatively great financial depth.



       Financial systems have converged somewhat during the crisis.



       The most notable changes during the global financial crisis include large declines in the

stability index, which in turn reflects the increased volatility in returns by financial institutions

in some countries and in most financial markets. But the charts also illustrates that stability has

not been the only dimension in decline and that to some extent it has been accompanied also

by difficulties along other characteristics, such as reduced depth and access to finance and in

some cases also reductions in efficiency, particularly in financial markets.



       Overall, financial system disparities have somewhat subsided during the crisis, as

financial sectors in many medium- and low- income countries were relatively more isolated

from the global turmoil, and therefore less affected by the global liquidity shocks. In addition,

financial institutions on average rebounded faster than markets, showing improvements in
                                                                                                  25


depth and efficiency after the crisis. This seems to have been the case so far for example for

Brazil and other Latin American countries [de la Torre, Ize, and Schmukler (2011)], China, and

many Sub-Saharan African countries [see, for example, World Bank (2012)]. The medium-term

effect of the crisis on financial systems still remains to be seen.



Conclusions


       This paper has presented the Global Financial Development Database, an extensive

dataset of financial system characteristics around the world since 1960s. The database is a one-

stop, cleaned-up database that builds on previous efforts, in particular the data collected and

the categorization of variables proposed by Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2000, 2010).

       The dataset can be used to illustrate cross-country and time-series patterns in financial

systems. The data can be used to better assess linkages between finance and economic

development and to assess the efficacy of different financial policies and regulations. The

database can be used to analyze financial sector development and trends in 205 jurisdictions

around the world. The Global Financial Development Database goes back some 50 years (to

1960), although some of the variables (such as the only recently defined financial stability

indicators) go back only to the 1990s.

       The database and this paper highlight the multidimensional nature of financial systems.

Focusing on only one characteristic—say, financial stability—means missing important

characteristics of financial systems. And, focusing only on financial institutions, or just on banks,

misses important components of the overall financial system as equity and bond markets are

crucial components in many economies.
                                                                                                 26


       This paper illustrates that financial sectors come in different shapes and sizes, and they

differ widely in terms of their performance. The paper also emphasizes a need for humility, and

for further research. Despite the remarkable progress in gathering data and intelligence on

financial systems around the world in recent years, researchers and practitioners still do not

have precise measures of the functioning of financial systems.

References

Angelidis, Dimitrios and Katerina Lyroudi, 2006, “Efficiency in the Italian Banking Industry:
       Data Envelopment Analysis and Neural Networks,” International Research Journal of
       Finance and Economics.

Bagehot, Walter, 1873, Lombard Street, Richard D. Irwin Publishers, Homewood, IL.

Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine, 2006, Rethinking Bank Supervision and
        Regulation: Until Angels Govern, Cambridge University Press, NY.

Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine, 2012, Guardians of Finance: Making Regulators
        Work for Us, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Maria Soledad Martínez Pería, 2007, ”Reaching Out:
       Access to and Use of Banking Services Across Countries,” Journal of Financial Economics
       85(1), pp. 234–66.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine, 2000, “A New Database on the Structure
       and Development of the Financial Sector,” World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 14, No. 3,
       pp. 597-605.

Beck, Thorsten, Aslı Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine, 2007, "Finance, Inequality and the Poor,"
       Journal of Economic Growth 12(1), pp. 27–49.

Beck, Thorsten, Aslı Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine, 2010, “Financial Institutions and Markets
       across Countries and over Time,” World Bank Economic Review 24(1), pp. 77–92.

Belley, Philippe and Lance Lochner, 2007, “The Changing Role of Family Income and Ability in
        Determining Educational Achievement,” NBER Working Paper No. w13527.

Boyd, John H., and David E. Runkle, 1993, “Size and Performance of Banking Firms: Testing the
       Predictions of Theory,” Journal of Monetary Economics 31, pp. 47–67.
                                                                                               27


Čihák, Martin, and Heiko Hesse, 2010, "Islamic Banks and Financial Stability: An Empirical
       Analysis", Journal of Financial Services Research, Volume 38, Numbers 2-3 (2010), 95-
       113,

Čihák, Martin, and Klaus Schaeck, 2010, "How Well do Aggregate Prudential Ratios Identify
       Banking System Problems?" Journal of Financial Stability, vol. 6(3), pp. 130–144.

de la Torre, Augusto, Alain Ize, Sergio L. Schmukler, eds, 2011, Financial Development in Latin
        America and the Caribbean: The Road Ahead, Washington, DC: World Bank.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Aslı and Enrica Detragiache, 1997, "The Determinants of Banking Crises in
      Developing and Developed Countries," IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 45, pp. 81–109.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Aslı and Leora Klapper, 2012, “Measuring Financial Inclusion: The Global
      Findex,” Policy Research Working Paper 6025, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Aslı, and Ross Levine, 2008, “Finance, Financial Sector Policies, and Long Run
      Growth,” M. Spence Growth Commission Background Paper, No 11, World Bank,
      Washington, DC.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Aslı, and Ross Levine, 2009, "Finance and Inequality: Theory and Evidence,"
      Annual Review of Financial Economics 1, pp. 287–318.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Aslı, Enrica Detragiache, and Thierry Tressel, 2008, "Banking on the Principles:
      Compliance with Basel Core Principles and Bank Soundness," Journal of Financial
      Intermediation 17(4), pp. 511–42.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Aslı, Erik Feyen, and Ross Levine, 2012, “The Evolving Importance of Banks and
      Securities Markets,” World Bank Economic Review, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Kaminsky, Graciela, and Carmen Reinhart, 1999, “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and
      Balance of Payments Problems,” The American Economic Review 89 (3), pp. 473–500.

Kerr, William, and Ramana Nanda, 2009, “Democratizing Entry: Banking Deregulations,

Financing Constraints, and Entrepreneurship.” Journal of Financial Economics 94 (1): 124–49.

King, Robert, and Ross Levine, 1993a, "Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right,"
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 103, August, pp. 717-737.

King, Robert, and Ross Levine, 1993b, "Finance, Entrepreneurship, and Growth: Theory and
       Evidence," Journal of Monetary Economics 32(3), December, pp. 513-542.

Laeven, Luc and Ross Levine, 2009, “Bank Governance, Regulation, and Risk Taking” Journal of
      Financial Economics 93(2), pp. 259-275.
                                                                                            28


Levine, Ross, 1997, "Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda," Journal
       of Economic Literature 35 (2), pp. 688-726.

Levine, Ross, 2005, "Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence," Handbook of Economic
       Growth, in: Philippe Aghion & Steven Durlauf (ed.), Handbook of Economic Growth,
       edition 1, volume 1, chapter 12, pp. 865–934.

Levine, Ross and Sara Zervos, 1998, “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth,” American
       Economic Review 88, pp. 537–58.

Lucas, Robert, 1988, "On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary
       Economics, 22, pp. 3–42.

Merton, Robert, and Zvi Bodie, 2004, “The Design of Financial Systems: Towards a Synthesis of
      Function and Structure,” NBER Working Paper Number 10620.

Merton, Robert, 1992, "Financial Innovation and Economic Performance,” Journal of Applied
      Corporate Finance, 4, pp. 12–22.

Miller, Merton, 1998, "Financial Markets and Economic Growth," Journal of Applied Corporate
        Finance, 11, pp. 8–14.
                                                                                                                       29

             FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS                                  FINANCIAL MARKETS
             Private credit to GDP                                   Stock market capitalization plus outstanding domestic
             Financial institutions’ assets to GDP                   private debt securities to GDP
             M2 to GDP                                               Private debt securities to GDP
DEPTH



             Deposits to GDP                                         Public debt securities to GDP
             Gross value-added of the financial sector to GDP        International debt securities to GDP
                                                                     Stock market capitalization to GDP
                                                                     Stocks traded to GDP
             Accounts per thousand adults (commercial banks)         Percent of market capitalization outside of top 10 largest
             Branches per 100,000 adults (commercial banks)          companies
             % of people with a bank account                         Percent of value traded outside of top 10 traded
ACCESS




             % of firms with line of credit (all firms)              companies
             % of firms with line of credit (small firms)            Government bond yields (3 month and 10 years)
                                                                     Ratio of domestic to total debt securities
                                                                     Ratio of private to total debt securities (domestic)
                                                                     Ratio of new corporate bond issues to GDP
             Net interest margin                                     Turnover ratio (turnover/capitalization) for stock market
             Lending-deposits spread                                 Price synchronicity (co-movement)
             Non-interest income to total income                     Private information trading
EFFICIENCY




             Overhead costs (% of total assets)                      Price impact
             Profitability (return on assets, return on equity)      Liquidity/transaction costs
             Boone indicator (or Herfindahl or H-statistics)         Quoted bid-ask spread for government bonds
                                                                     Turnover of bonds (private, public) on securities exchange
                                                                     Settlement efficiency
             Z-score (or distance to default)                        Volatility (standard deviation / average) of stock price
             capital adequacy ratios                                 index, sovereign bond index
             asset quality ratios                                    Skewness of the index (stock price, sovereign bond)
STABILITY




             liquidity ratios                                        Vulnerability to earnings manipulation
             other (net foreign exchange position to capital etc.)   Price/earnings ratio
                                                                     Duration
                                                                     Ratio of short-term to total bonds (domestic, int’l)
                                                                     Correlation with major bond returns (German, US)

Table 1: The 4x2 matrix of financial system characteristics
Note: This matrix contains a subset of the measures of financial development for of the categories defined by the
4X2 matrix. In bold, we highlight those measures within each category that are the most widely available. Private
credit to GDP is domestic private credit to the real sector by deposit money banks to GDP. Accounts per thousand
adults (commercial banks) is the number of depositors with commercial banks per 1,000 adults. For each type of
institution, this is calculated as the (reported number of depositors)*1,000/adult population in the reporting
country. The net interest margin is the accounting value of bank's net interest revenue as a share of its average
interest-bearing (total earning) assets. The Z-score (or distance to default) is (ROA+equity/assets)/sd(ROA), where
ROA is average annual return on end-year assets and sd(ROA) is the standard deviation of ROA. Stock market
capitalization plus outstanding domestic private debt securities to GDP is defined as the value of listed shares to
GDP plus amount of outstanding domestic private debt securities to GDP. Percent of market capitalization outside
of top 10 largest companies is the market capitalization outside of top ten largest companies to total market
capitalization. Turnover ratio (turnover/capitalization) for stock market is the ratio of the value of total shares
traded to market capitalization. Volatility (standard deviation / average) of stock price index is the standard
deviation of the sovereign bond index divided by the annual average of that index.
Table 2: Depth—financial institutions, 2008–2010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Note: Domestic private credit to the real sector by deposit money banks as percentage of local currency GDP.
Data on domestic private credit to the real sector by deposit money banks is from the International Financial
Statistics (IFS) line 22D published by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Local currency GDP is also from
IFS. Missing observations are imputed by using GDP growth rates from World Development Indicators (WDI).
Arithmetic average of annual observations for 2008-2010.
a. To calculate the group averages, country-by-country observations are weighted by nominal GDP.
                                                     31




Figure 1: Depth—financial institutions, 2008–2010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Note: Domestic private credit to the real sector by deposit money banks as percentage of local currency GDP.
Data on domestic private credit to the real sector by deposit money banks is from the International Financial
Statistics (IFS) line 22D published by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Local currency GDP is also from
IFS. Missing observations are imputed by using GDP growth rates from World Development Indicators (WDI).
Arithmetic average of annual observations for 2008-2010.
                                                     32




Dependent Variable                                  Depth             Bank             Privy
Real per Capita GDP Growth                          2.4**             3.2**            3.2**
                                                    (0.007)           (0.005)          (0.002)
R2                                                  0.50              0.50             0.52
Real per Capita Capital Growth                      2.2**             2.2**            2.5**
                                                    (0.006)           (0.008)          (0.007)
R2                                                  0.65              0.62             0.64
Productivity Growth                                 1.8**             2.6**            2.5**
                                                    (0.026)           (0.010)          (0.006)
R2                                                  0.42              0.43             0.44

Table 3: Financial depth and economic growth, 1960-2010
Source: Authors’ update on King and Levine (1993b), Table VII, using the Global Financial Development
Database.
Notes: King and Levine (1993b) define 2 percent growth as 0.02; here, 2 percent growth is 2.00.
* significant at the 0.10 level, ** significant at the 0.05 level, p-values in parentheses, Observations: 77
Variable definitions: DEPTH = Liquid Liabilities/GDP, BANK = Deposit bank domestic credit/(deposit bank
domestic credit + central bank domestic credit), PRIVY = Gross claims on the private sector / GDP
Productivity Growth = Real per capita GDP growth - (0.3)*(Real per capita Capital growth)
Other explanatory variables included in each of the nine regression results reported above:
logarithm of initial income, logarithm of initial secondary school enrollment, ratio of government consumption
expenditures to GDP, inflation rate, and ratio of exports plus imports to GDP.
                                                                         33




 Change in Gini
 coefficient
  0.03            UGA




                                         NGA
 0.02

                                   ZMB
                        ROM                         ECU
                                              GTM
 0.01                      GHA     NER                              CHL             HKG
                                                     LSO
                                                                     PAN
                                       SLE     ARG        CIVNZL BRA
                                                            URY                USA
                                                     DOM SLV               SGP
                                                         IRNVENTTO
                                                                GBR
                                                                 BOL
                                                               HND
                                                              COL
                                                  LKA CRI MEX
                                                             PHL       KOR
                                                                         THA
    0                                     IND       MDG      DNK
                                                 HUNPERIDN              TUN
                                                        EGY
                                                       JAM
                                                     BEL            CAN MYS
                                         NPL BGD     CMR AUS           JORPRT
                                                                        ESP
                                                       GRC                        JPN
                                                                       LUX
                                 TZA               PAK                     NOR
                                         ETH TUR                  ITA
                                                                                 CHE
 -0.01
                                                                     IRL     SWE
                                                                             NLD
                                                                   FIN FRA
                                                              SEN
                                                       MUS          AUT
 -0.02




 -0.03
         -3             -2               -1                0            1                 2
                                         Private credit to GDP


Figure 2. Financial depth and income inequality, 1960-2010
Source: Authors’ update on Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2007), using data from the Global Financial
Development Database.
Note: The Gini coefficient is on a scale from 0 (total equality) to 1 (maximum inequality). The chart is a partial
scatter plot, visually representing the regression of changes in the Gini coefficient between 1960 and 2010 on
the private credit–to-GDP ratio (logarithm, 1960–2010 average), controlling for the initial (1960) Gini
coefficient. Variables on both axes are residuals. The abbreviations next to some of the observations are the
three-letter country codes as defined by the International Organization for Standardization.
                                                     34




Table 4: Depth—financial markets, 2008–2010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Note: Stock market capitalization plus the amount of outstanding domestic private debt securities as
percentage of GDP. Market capitalization (also known as market value) is the share price times the number of
shares outstanding. Listed domestic companies are the domestically incorporated companies listed on the
country's stock exchanges at the end of the year. Listed companies does not include investment companies,
mutual funds, or other collective investment vehicles. Data is from Standard & Poor's, Global Stock Markets
Factbook and supplemental S&P data, and is compiled and reported by the WDI. Amount of outstanding
domestic private debt securities is from Table 16A (domestic debt amount) of the Securities Statistics by Bank
for International Settlements. The amount includes all issuers except governments. Arithmetic average of
annual observations for 2008-2010.
a. To calculate the group averages, country-by-country observations are weighted by nominal GDP.
                                                     35




Figure 3: Depth—financial markets, 2008–2010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Note: Stock market capitalization plus the amount of outstanding domestic private debt securities as
percentage of GDP. Market capitalization (also known as market value) is the share price times the number of
shares outstanding. Listed domestic companies are the domestically incorporated companies listed on the
country's stock exchanges at the end of the year. Listed companies does not include investment companies,
mutual funds, or other collective investment vehicles. Data is from Standard & Poor's, Global Stock Markets
Factbook and supplemental S&P data, and is compiled and reported by the WDI. Amount of outstanding
domestic private debt securities is from Table 16A (domestic debt amount) of the Securities Statistics by Bank
for International Settlements. The amount includes all issuers except governments. Arithmetic average of
annual observations for 2008-2010.
                                                     36




Table 5: Access—financial institutions, 2008–2010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Note: Number of depositors with commercial banks per 1,000 adults. For each type of institution the
calculation follows: (reported number of depositors)*1,000/adult population in the reporting country. Number
of commercial bank depositors is from the Financial Access Survey (fas.imf.org). Adult population data is from
WDI. Arithmetic average of annual observations for 2008-2010.
a. To calculate the group averages, country-by-country observations are weighted by total adult population.
                                                     37




Figure 4: Access—financial institutions, 2008–2010
Source: Global Findex (Demirgüç-Kunt and Klapper 2012)
Note: Adults with an Account at a Formal Financial Institution
Note: Number of depositors with commercial banks per 1,000 adults. For each type of institution the
calculation follows: (reported number of depositors)*1,000/adult population in the reporting country. Number
of commercial bank depositors is from the Financial Access Survey (fas.imf.org). Adult population data is from
WDI. Arithmetic average of annual observations for 2008-2010.
                                                     38




Table 6: Access—financial markets, 2008–2010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Note: Ratio of market capitalization outside of top ten largest companies to total market capitalization. The
World Federation of Exchanges provides data on the exchange level. This variable is aggregated up to the
country level by taking a simple average over exchanges. Arithmetic average of annual observations for 2008-
2010.
                                                     39




Figure 5: Access—financial markets, 2008–2010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Note: Ratio of market capitalization outside of top ten largest companies to total market capitalization. The
World Federation of Exchanges provides data on the exchange level. This variable is aggregated up to the
country level by taking a simple average over exchanges. Arithmetic average of annual observations for 2008-
2010.
                                                      40




Table 7. Efficiency—financial institutions, 2008–2010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Note: Lending rate minus deposit rate. Lending rate is the average rate charged by banks on loans to the
private sector and deposit interest rate is the average rate paid by commercial or similar banks for demand,
time, or savings deposits. Both lending and deposit rate are from IFS line 60P and 60L, respectively. Arithmetic
average of annual observations for 2008-2010.
a. To calculate the group averages, country-by-country observations are weighted by nominal GDP.
                                                      41




Figure 6: Efficiency—financial institutions, 2008–2010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Note: Lending rate minus deposit rate. Lending rate is the average rate charged by banks on loans to the
private sector and deposit interest rate is the average rate paid by commercial or similar banks for demand,
time, or savings deposits. Both lending and deposit rate are from IFS line 60P and 60L, respectively. Arithmetic
average of annual observations for 2008-2010.
                                                      42




Table 8: Efficiency—financial markets, 2008–2010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Note: Stock market turnover ratio, calculated as total value of shares traded during the period divided by the
average market capitalization for the period. Average market capitalization is calculated as the average of the
end-of-period values for the current period and the previous period. Data is from Standard & Poor's, Global
Stock Markets Factbook and supplemental S&P data, and is compiled and reported by the WDI. Arithmetic
average of annual observations for 2008-2010.
a. To calculate the group averages, country-by-country observations are weighted by nominal GDP.
                                                      43




Figure 7: Efficiency—financial markets, 2008–2010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Note: Stock market turnover ratio, calculated as total value of shares traded during the period divided by the
average market capitalization for the period. Average market capitalization is calculated as the average of the
end-of-period values for the current period and the previous period. Data is from Standard & Poor's, Global
Stock Markets Factbook and supplemental S&P data, and is compiled and reported by the WDI. Arithmetic
average of annual observations for 2008-2010.
                                                    44




Table 9: Stability—financial institutions, 2008–2010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Note: Z- Score weighted average from Commercial Banks is estimated as (ROA + Equity / Assets)/(Standard
Deviation of ROA). Return of Assets (ROA), Equity, and Assets are from Bankscope. The standard deviation of
ROA is estimated as a 5-year moving average. Arithmetic average of annual observations for 2008-2010.
a. To calculate the group averages, country-by-country observations are weighted by nominal GDP.
                                                    45




Figure 8: Stability—financial institutions, 2008–2010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Note: Z- Score weighted average from Commercial Banks is estimated (ROA + Equity / Assets)/(Standard
Deviation of ROA). Return of Assets (ROA), Equity, and Assets are from Bankscope. The standard deviation of
ROA is estimated as a 5-year moving average. Arithmetic average of annual observations for 2008-2010.
                                                                        46




Table 10: Stability—financial markets, 2008–2010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Note: Annual standard deviation of the price of a 1-year sovereign bond divided by the annual average price of the 1-year sovereign bond (both based on end-
month data). Arithmetic average of annual observations for 2008-2010.
a. To calculate the group averages, country-by-country observations are weighted by nominal GDP.
                                                     47




Figure 9: Stability—financial markets, 2008–2010
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Note: Annual standard deviation of the price of a 1-year sovereign bond divided by the annual average price of
the 1-year sovereign bond (both based on end-month data). Arithmetic average of annual observations for
2008-2010.
                                                      48




Table 11. Financial System Characteristics: Summary
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Note: Financial Institutions—Depth: Private Credit/GDP (%); Access: Number of Accounts Per 1,000 Adults,
Commercial Banks; Efficiency: Net Interest Margin; Stability: z-score. Financial Markets—Depth: (Stock Market
Capitalization + Outstanding Domestic Private Debt Securities)/GDP ; Access: Percent Market Capitalization
Outside of the Top 10 Largest Companies (%); Efficiency: Stock Market Turnover Ratio (%); Stability: Asset
Price Volatility. The summary statistics refer to the winsorized and rescaled variables (0–100). To prepare for
comparisons across the proxy variables, all the key development indicators are Winsorized, truncating the top
5 and bottom 5 percent of the distribution, i.e, for each variable (1) the 95th and 5th percentile over the
whole sample are calculate, (2) all observations below the 5th percentile are replaced by the value
corresponding to the 5th percentile, and (3) all observations above the 95th percentile are replaced by the
value corresponding to the 95th percentile. Finally, we rescale each individual score by the maximum for each
indicator, 〖max〗_i and the minimum of the indicator. The rescaled indicator can be interpreted as the percent
distance between "worst" and "best" practice.
                                                                                                                                                         49



                                                                         Depth vs Access
             150                                                              Correlation=0.79*
Private Credit to GDP (%)




                                                                  ESP                 ITAAUT         MYS NLD                                       PRT    MLT
                                                                                                                                                          GRC
                  100




                                                                                                                       SGP                                JPN
                                                                                                                                                          KOR
                                                                               THA
                                                                              ISR                                EST


                                                                   LBN
                                                                     ZAF                                               CHL
                                                           MAR
                                                                        BLZ                                                                               UKR
                                                                                 MDV
      50




                                                          NAM      BIH
                                              BGD               SAU                    MNG
                                                                QATKAZ OMN           TUR
                                    DJI       KEN        GEO                     MDA            SYC
                                    KHM            PHL
                                  LAO PNGSYR     PER  ARM
                                                    BWA
                                    AGO TGO
                                          PAK     SWZ  URY
                                 AZE
                                   COM
                                     TZA                                             MEX
                                             DZA
                                            GHA
                                        UGALSO
                                             HTI         ARG
                                  MDG
                                   CMR
                                     GNQ
                                CAFGABSLE
                                 TCD
                                COG YEM
             0




                            0                           1000                   2000                                                                 3000
                                               Accounts Per Thousand Adults, Commercial Banks
                                  High Income               Low Income                 Lower Middle Income                    Upper Middle Income

                            *Indicates a significant correlation coefficient at the 5% level or better




                                                                      Depth vs Efficiency
                                                                              Correlation=0.46*
             150
Private Credit to GDP (%)




                                                                                                                       LCA              HKG        CHN
                                                                                                                                                   AUSMYSVNM
                                                                                                                                                     CHE  NZL
                  100




                                                                                                                   GRD                SGP                 JPN
                                                                                                                                                          KOR
                                                                                                                             ESTBRB    THA
                                                                                                                                         SVN       ISR
                                                                                               MUS                                      PANKNA            BHS
                                                                                                                  ATG
                                                                                                                    BHR       VUT                        LBN
                                                                                                           HRV                     ZAF
                                                                                                                                     CHL
                                                                                                                  DMAJOR
                                                                                                                                       KWT
                                                                                                                   BLZ UKR
                                                                                                                 VCT
                                                                                                                ABW
                                                                                                                 MDV MAC NPL
                                                                                                                 CPV
      50




                                BRA                                                                                 SRB    NAM
                                                                                                                           BIH
                                                                                                    HND MNG
                                                                                                         WSM         BGD                 FJI
                                                                                     CRI                                     QAT OMN MKDBLR
                                                                                                           TON ROM         RUS
                                                                                                                          BRN
                                            STP                                                                  ALB
                                PRY                                                                  BOL
                                                                GEO                               DJI MDA TTO
                                                                                                KEN                   COL EGY              IRN
                                                                                  GUY    NGA NICSYC MRT                SUR   PHL
                                              PER                      JAM               SLB ARM PNG              IDN
                                                                                                                MOZ                LKA
                                 LAO                                                                     GTM         BWA         SYR
                                                                      FSM                       AGO COM TZA DOM URY  PAK
                                                                                                                     SWZ       MEXVEN
                                MWI                 HTI                          GMB
                                                                                 UGA         TMP AZE       LSO    DZA                      ARG
                                MDG                                       ZMB     SLE
                                ZAR                                                                                               LBY
                                                                                              LBR                        YEM
                                                                                                                          MMR
             0




                            0                       20                40           60            80                                                   100
                                                           Inverse of Lending-Deposit Spread (%)
                                  High Income               Low Income                 Lower Middle Income                    Upper Middle Income

                            *Indicates a significant correlation coefficient at the 5% level or better




                                                                        Depth vs Stability
                                                                              Correlation=0.10
             150
Private Credit to GDP (%)




                                  IRL
                                LCA       GRC CHE
                                              NLD
                                                NZL                  AUSMLTGBRAUT FRA
                                                                 VNMLUX                                ESPPRT CHN
                                                                                                      HKG      MYS                    ITA    CYP
                                         ISLDEU
                  100




                                                 JPNGRD            KOR                                                                       SGP
                                  EST          BEL FIN  ISR SVN                    THA
                                                                          BRB         ARE
                                      KNA
                                                  PANMUS           BHS
                                ATG
                                                             BHRVUT                                                                          LBN
                                             CHL          JOR           ZAF
                                                                      HRV           TUN
                                        DMA                                                                                                  MAR
                                                                                      KWT
                                BLZ
                                ABW
                                VCT       UKR
                                CPV     MDV                            USA                                               MAC
                                                                         NPLBRA
     50




                                                                     SRB                                                 BIH                 NAM
                                FJI                    MNG    BGD   HND                                   SVK    IND         WSM
                                           BTN                      CRI
                                                                    TUROMNMKD                                                                SAU
                                                      RUS
                                                     BLR                                                                                     QAT
                                                                                                                                             KAZ
                                STP           ROM BRN                             SLV
                                                ALB BOL       PRY
                                IRN
                                DJI SYCGEO     MDA          EGY   TTO
                                                                    KEN                                                                      NIC
                                                                                                                                             COL
                                           NGAKHM                       PHL ECU SUR                                                          GUY
                                                                                                                                             MRT
                                                              LKA
                                                        ARM SEN
                                                       MOZ             PNG    IDN                                 JAM                  PER
                                     BWA
                                   URY    LAO   GTM
                                                BDI
                                          TGO SWZ              SYR         DOM      PAK                                                      BEN
                                MLI        AZE       VEN       AGOMEX                                                                        FSM
                                GMB                      CIV       DZA        TZA                                            BFA
                                ERI         MWI        GHA
                                                      ARG
                                                      UGA         LSO                                                          NER           HTI
                                GNQ SLE  MDGCMR
                                           ZMB                             SDN
                                CAF
                                LBY
                                GNB            GAB ZAR
                                TCD
                                  COG
                                YEM
                                LBR                                                                                                          MMR
             0




                            0                                 50                  100                                                                150
                                                    Z-Score - Weighted Average Commercial Bank
                                  High Income               Low Income                 Lower Middle Income                    Upper Middle Income
                                                                                                                                                                                    50


                                                                                             Access vs Efficiency

  Accounts Per Thousand Adults, Commercial Banks
                                                                                                       Correlation=0.46*

                                      3000
                                                                                                                                                                UKR                       KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                          JPN
                           2000


                                                                                                                                                                SGP             CHL
                                                                                                                                                      EST
                                                                                                                                                    BGR


                                                                                                                                 SYC                                                MYS

                                                                                                                                          MNG
                                                                                                                                            LVA
                                                                                                                                        MDA              MDV            MEX
                 1000




                                                                                                                                                                  THA       ISR
                                                                                                                                                                              HUN
                                                                                                                                                          BLZ             OMN
                                                                                                                                                                          ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                  BIH           LBN
                                                                                                                                                                    QAT
                                                                                          GEO                                                                                             ARG
                                                                                                                            ARM                           URY     NAM
                                                                                                                                                           WBG
                                                                                                                                                            BWA                        NOR
                                                                         PER                                                                                SWZ     PHL
                                                                                                                                 KEN                        BGD
                                                                               HTI                                                         LSO            DZA
                                                                                                                                  RWA                       PAK           SYR
                                                       KGZ                                                    UGA
                                                                                                               SLE                   PNG TZA
                                                        LAO
                                                       MDG                                                                       AGO
                                                                                                                                   DJI COM                      YEM
                                                                                                                                     AZE
        0




                                                   0                           20                40           60            80                                                      100
                                                                                      Inverse of Lending-Deposit Spread (%)
                                                         High Income                   Low Income                  Lower Middle Income                   Upper Middle Income

                                                   *Indicates a significant correlation coefficient at the 5% level or better




                                                                                                Access vs Stability
  Z-Score - Weighted Average Commercial Bank




                                                                                                       Correlation=0.11
                                      150




                                                                     HTI             NAM
                                                                                       MAR   LBN
                                                                                         SAUKAZ
                                                                                         QAT                                                       SGP
                                                                           PER                                  ITA

                                                                                             BIH
                           100




                                                                                                                            MYS
                                                                                                                                                                              PRT
                                                                                           ESP

                                                                   PAK                                  THA
                                                                                                UZB                  AUT
                                                             TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                       MLT
                50




                                                               PNG        PHL                     OMN
                                                                                                 ZAF
                                                                      KEN
                                                                     DZA                                      TUR                                                                      KOR
                                                                   LSO                                        MEX
                                                           AGO SYR     BGDNOR
                                                           ETH               ARM                       ISR
                                                               UGA GHA          ARG                                MNG                       BGR
                                                               KGZ
                                                           KHMRWA
                                                           GAB           SWZ                                 MDA                                                                       JPN
                                                                                                                                   NLD             CHL
                                                          CMRTGO
                                                        AZE
                                                         LAO                                           HUN                                                                             GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                       UKR
                                                         MDG                    GEO                          MDV
                                                               SLE                                             LVA
                                                                           BWAURY                                          SYC               EST
                                                       COG
     0




                                                        TCD
                                                       CAF YEM
                                                           DJI
                                                            GNQ                                  BLZ


                                                   0                                1000                   2000                                                                 3000
                                                                           Accounts Per Thousand Adults, Commercial Banks
                                                         High Income                   Low Income                  Lower Middle Income                   Upper Middle Income




                                                                                            Efficiency vs Stability
  Z-Score - Weighted Average Commercial Bank




                                                                                                       Correlation=0.04
                                      150




                                                                               HTI              FSM           GUY          NIC         MRT                       NAM
                                                                                                                                                            COLSGP
                                                                                                                                                                MMRQAT                LBN
                                                                         PER
                                                                                                                                             WSM
                                                                                                                                                                MAC
                                                                                                                                                                  BIH
                           100




                                                                                                JAM
                                                                                                                                                                              CHNMYS

                                                                                                                                                                 HKG

                                                                                                                                                                       KWT
                                                                                                                                                     PAK THA
                                                                                                                                                       SUR
                                                                                                                                             TZA  IDN                   CAN
                                                       BRA                                                                                         DOM
                                                                                                                                                    BRB                  MKD
                50




                                                                                                                                PNG                          NPL OMN
                                                                                                                                                            PHL    ZAF
                                                                                                                           KEN HND HRV              SRB             AUS
                                                                                                                 CRI                      LSO
                                                                                                                                         TTO      DZA         MEX
                                                                                                                                                          CZEVUT          BHS
                                                                                                                                                                            KOR
                                                                                                                            AGO                                            VNM
                                                                                                                                                                           NOR
                                                       PRY                                                                                           BGD
                                                                                                                                                    BHR     SVN SYRLKA
                                                                                                                                                          EGY
                                                                                                             UGA      MUS
                                                                                                                         ARM          MNG BGR   MOZ JOR RUS          ISR
                                                                                                                                                                            ARG
                                                       ZAR
                                                       KGZ                                                                        BOL      GRD           BRN     VEN        BLR
                                                                                                                             RWA MDA GTM                   PAN              JPN
                                                                                                                                                                            NZL
                                                                                                                                                 ALB
                                                       MWI                                                                                     ROM SWZ                 CHE
                                                                                                                                                                     CHL
                                                                                                                                                                       HUN
                                                        LAO                                           ZMB            NGA        AZE
                                                       MDG                               GEO                  SLE                                  DMA UKR
                                                                                                                                                  MDV
                                                                    TJK                                                                  LVA         BWA       KNA
                                                                                                                           SYC                  ESTURY           LTU
     0




                                                                      STP                                    GMB          LBR DJI       CPV
                                                                                                                                       ABW  LCA VCT
                                                                                                                                          ATG      BLZ YEM        LBY       IRN
                                                                                                                                                                          FJI


                                                   0                           20                40            60                                          80                    100
                                                                                            Lending-Deposit Spread (%)
                                                         High Income                   Low Income                  Lower Middle Income                   Upper Middle Income




Figure 10. Correlations among financial system characteristics-financial
institutions
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Notes: see Table 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  51


                                                                                                                                        Depth vs Access
(Stock Market Capitalization + Outstanding Domestic Private Debt Securities)/GDP
                                                                                                                                             Correlation=0.36*
                                                                                   200                          LUX
                                                                                                                                                               CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                       CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                      MYS                ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CAN
                                                                                   150


                                                                                                                                                                                                              GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ESP
                                                                                                                                IRL

                                                                                                                                               JOR                                                           JPN
                                                                                   100




                                                                                                                                                                                        THA                                CHN
                                                                                                                                                            NOR        BRA ISR                                          IND


                                                                                                                                       MAR             AUTSAU                              PHL
                                                                                                                               COL                                                      DEU
                                                                                                                                                       PERITARUS            MUS
                                                                                                                                                     MEX
                                                                                                                                                        GRC                                  AUS
                                                                                   50




                                                                                                                                                                       NZL                    IDN
                                                                                                                                                                         POL           TUR LKA
                                                                                                                                                                                          EGY
                                                                                                                HUN     CYP SVN
                                                                                                                                               ARG                                                  IRNHKG
                                                                                                                MLT
                                                                                   0




                                                                                         0                               20                                  40                               60                                  80
                                                                                                                       Percent Market Capitalization Out of the Top 10 Largest Companies (%)


                                                                                                High Income                  Low Income                Lower Middle Income                         Upper Middle Income

                                                                                         *Indicates a significant correlation coefficient at the 5% level or better




                                                                                                                                      Depth vs Efficiency
(Stock Market Capitalization + Outstanding Domestic Private Debt Securities)/GDP




                                                                                                                                             Correlation=0.44*
                                                                                   200




                                                                                                                MYS    ZAF               DNKCHE        SWE                                                      USA
                                                                                              LUX         CHL
                                                                                                                                                     SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                                              KOR
                                                                                                                                         CAN
                                                                                                                                                               NLD
                                                                                   150




                                                                                                                                                                GBR
                                                                                                                                               ESP
                                                                                              BRB                       FRA IRL
                                                                                              KNA
                                                                                                              JOR BEL                                 JPN
                                                                                   100




                                                                                                                                                  THA                                                       CHN
                                                                                                                PRT            ISR IND
                                                                                                                               BRA        NOR
                                                                                                       QAT        KWT
                                                                                              BHR ISL     PHL               SAU
                                                                                                       MAR                           AUT
                                                                                                     COL                                      FINDEU
                                                                                                 PER
                                                                                                  MUS                                   RUS                                                                     ITA
                                                                                              TTO            MEX
                                                                                                                                GRC       AUS
                                                                                   50




                                                                                                         NZL          IDN
                                                                                               JAM
                                                                                              FJI  KEN      ARE           BGD
                                                                                                KAZ
                                                                                                HRV
                                                                                              PAN          LKA        POL                                                                             TUR
                                                                                                        OMN   CZE   EGY
                                                                                              CIV
                                                                                              NPL
                                                                                              MKD UKR LBN
                                                                                               SVN
                                                                                                BWA
                                                                                              MWI
                                                                                               SRB   NGA
                                                                                                    CYP                                     HUN
                                                                                                       TUN       PAK
                                                                                                ARG
                                                                                              BOLROM
                                                                                                  MNG     IRN                                                                                VNM
                                                                                                 LTU
                                                                                               BGR   EST                      HKG
                                                                                                GHA
                                                                                                SVK
                                                                                              NAM
                                                                                              MLT
                                                                                              GEO
                                                                                                ECU
                                                                                              LVA
                                                                                               CRI
                                                                                              VEN
                                                                                              ARM KGZ
                                                                                   0




                                                                                         0                               50                                 100                              150                                  200
                                                                                                                                             Stock Market Turnover Ratio (%)

                                                                                                High Income                  Low Income                Lower Middle Income                         Upper Middle Income

                                                                                         *Indicates a significant correlation coefficient at the 5% level or better




                                                                                                                                       Depth vs Stability
(Stock Market Capitalization + Outstanding Domestic Private Debt Securities)/GDP




                                                                                                                                             Correlation=-0.09
                                                                                   200




                                                                                                                 MYS                     USA
                                                                                                                                       CHE                  DNK        ZAF                   SWE
                                                                                                                                     CHL                               LUX
                                                                                                                                           SGP
                                                                                                                                                                             KOR
                                                                                                                                                               CAN
                                                                                                                                                              NLD
                                                                                   150




                                                                                                                                                           GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                 ESP
                                                                                                                                                                     FRA                            IRL

                                                                                                                        JOR            JPN                     BEL
                                                                                   100




                                                                                                                                                           THA
                                                                                                                                                             CHN
                                                                                                                        ISR                                PRT          IND            BRA                NOR
                                                                                                            KWT                               QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                             ISL
                                                                                                BHR                                   SAU PHL
                                                                                                                        MAR                 COL                    DEU         FIN
                                                                                                                                            MUS                               ITA        PER                          RUS
                                                                                                                                                                  MEX
                                                                                                                                                                    AUS                                               GRC
                                                                                   50




                                                                                                                                                     NZL              IDN
                                                                                                      JAM                       KEN                                                  ARE
                                                                                                PAN                                                                                   TUR KAZ                POL
                                                                                                                              OMN                      LKA        EGY HRV
                                                                                                                                                                        CZE
                                                                                                             LBN                                                     MKD                                                          UKRHUN
                                                                                                           BWA                   SVN                 NGA
                                                                                                                                               SRB PAK                                                                  CYP
                                                                                                    TUN
                                                                                                                                                MNG                            ARG            VNM        ROM
                                                                                                                                       HKG              LTU
                                                                                                                                                       BGR
                                                                                                                      MLT                               SVK EST                                        NAM
                                                                                                                                CRI                                          LVA                                            TZA
                                                                                   0




                                                                                         10                            20                              30                               40                              50
                                                                                                                                                  Asset Price Volatility

                                                                                                High Income                  Low Income                Lower Middle Income                         Upper Middle Income
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    52


                                                                                                                            Access vs Efficiency
                                                                                                                                   Correlation=0.48*
  Percent Market Capitalization Out of the Top 10 Largest Companies (%)
                                                                          80                                                      CAN                                                               CHN
                                                                                                              ZAF                   IND SGP                                                           USA
                                                                                                                                                        GBR                                           KOR
                                                                                                                                                                    JPN
                                                                                                    MYS                      HKG        ESP
                                                                          60


                                                                                                 IRN             IDN
                                                                                                  LKA
                                                                                                 PHL                                            AUS
                                                                                                               EGY                                        THA
                                                                                                                                                         DEU
                                                                                              CHL                                                                                               TUR

                                                                                      MUS                           POL         ISR
                                                                                                 NZL                            BRA
                                                                          40




                                                                                                                            SAU   CHE RUS                                                             ITA
                                                                                     PER                                       GRC AUT NOR
                                                                                                    MEX
                                                                                     ARG             JOR
                                                                                             MAR
                                                                                                                      IRL
                                                                          20




                                                                                    SVN    COL
                                                                                          CYP

                                                                                    LUX
                                                                                    MLT                                                            HUN
                                                                          0




                                                                               0                                50                                100                                   150                         200
                                                                                                                                   Stock Market Turnover Ratio (%)

                                                                                     High Income                    Low Income                 Lower Middle Income                          Upper Middle Income

                                                                               *Indicates a significant correlation coefficient at the 5% level or better




                                                                                                                             Access vs Stability
                                                                                                                                   Correlation=-0.21
                                                                          80
   Percent Market Capitalization of Top 10 Largest Companies (%)




                                                                                                                                                    CHN
                                                                                                                                                      CAN      ZAF
                                                                                                                                  USA
                                                                                                                                    SGP                         IND
                                                                                                                                                GBR                   KOR
                                                                                                                                JPN
                                                                                                        MYS                      HKG                                        ESP
                                                                          60




                                                                                                                                               LKA      IDN
                                                                                                                                                      AUS
                                                                                                                                   PHL
                                                                                                                            CHL                 THA EGY
                                                                                                                                                     DEU                        TUR

                                                                                                               ISR                      MUS                                                           POL
                                                                                                                                          NZL                                     BRA
                                                                          40




                                                                                                                              CHE                                                                            RUS
                                                                                                                             SAU                                      ITA                           NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                      PER                   GRC
                                                                                                                                                       MEX
                                                                                                               JOR                                                        ARG
                                                                                                               MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                              IRL
                                                                          20




                                                                                                                          SVN           COL
                                                                                                                                                                                                              CYP

                                                                                                             MLT                                               LUX                                                    HUN
                                                                          0




                                                                               10                              20                              30                                 40                          50
                                                                                                                                           Asset Price Volatility

                                                                                     High Income                    Low Income                 Lower Middle Income                          Upper Middle Income




                                                                                                                            Efficiency vs Stability
                                                                                                                                       Correlation=0.23*
                                   200
     Stock Market Turnover Ratio (%)




                                                                                                                                   USA                                ITA
                                                                                                                                                                      KOR
                                                                                                                                                    CHN
                           150




                                                                                                                                                                                TUR

                                                                                                                                                                                        VNM


                                                                                                                                JPN
                   100




                                                                                                                                                 THA
                                                                                                                                                 GBRNLDDEU
                                                                                                                                                                          FIN                                         HUN
                                                                                                                                                           AUS                                      NOR
                                                                                                                                        SGP                                             SWE                 RUS
                                                                                                                                 CHE                                IND     ESP
                                                                                                                ISR                                DNKCAN                         BRA                       GRC
                                                                                                                                 HKG
                                                                                                                                SAU
           50




                                                                                                                                                                                              IRL
                                                                                                                                                          IDN                                         POL
                                                                                                                                                     EGYFRA
                                                                                                                                                    BEL    ZAF
                                                                                                       KWT                                   PAK
                                                                                                                                               PRT
                                                                                                         MYS    JOR                                  MEX    CZE
                                                                                                                                       PHL NZLLKA                  ARE
                                                                                            TUN    LBN     OMN CHL
                                                                                                         MAR                               QAT
                                                                                                                                         COL   NGA      EST              ISL                                  CYP
                                                                                                             KEN                         MUS
                                                                                                                                          MNG      LTU MKD                                        ROM               UKR
                                                                                          PAN JAMBWA
                                                                                          BHR                 CRI
                                                                                                              SVN                        SRB      SVK
                                                                                                                                                 BGR       HRV   ARG
                                                                                                                                                           LUX LVA     PER
                                                                                                                                                                        KAZ                     NAM
                                                                          0




                                                                                                       MLT


                                                                               10                              20                        30                                       40                          50
                                                                                                                                   Asset Price Volatility
                                                                                      High Income                   Low Income                  Lower Middle Income                         Upper Middle Income

                                                                                *Indicates a significant correlation coefficient at the 5% level or better




Figure 11. Correlations among financial system characteristics-financial
markets
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Notes: see Table 1.
                                                       53




Figure 12. The uneven sizes of financial systems
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Global Financial Development Database.
Notes: The map is for illustration purposes only. Country sizes are adjusted to reflect the volume of financial
sector assets in the jurisdiction, measured in U.S. dollars at the end of 2010. The image was created with the
help of the MapWindow 4 and ScapeToad software.
