                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       LARGE BLOCK SHAREHOLDERS, INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS, BOARDS
         OF DIRECTORS AND BANK VALUE IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY

                                          Howard Bodenhorn

                                         Working Paper 18955
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18955


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2013




I thank Henry Hansmann and Mariana Parglender for sharing an early draft of their 2012 working
paper. Eric Hilt and Danielle Zanzalari offered helpful comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Howard Bodenhorn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Large Block Shareholders, Institutional Investors, Boards of Directors and Bank Value in
the Nineteenth Century
Howard Bodenhorn
NBER Working Paper No. 18955
April 2013
JEL No. G3,N21

                                              ABSTRACT

Share prices of modern corporations are influenced by the size and structure of boards of directors,
large individual and institutional investors, and shareholder voting rights, among other governance
features. It is not clear whether the same features mattered historically, given recent research suggesting
that the principal concern in the nineteenth century was neither managerial self-dealing nor majority
shareholder expropriation that might reduce the returns to common shareholders. Rather, at many
nineteenth-century corporations, common shareholders were also customers and shareholding offered
preferential access to the firms’ goods and services. Using modern empirical tools in a study of banks,
this study finds evidence supporting the shareholder-as-customer model. Bank values responded positively
to the presence of large-block individual shareholders (those more concerned with access to loans)
and negatively to large-block institutional investors (those more concerned with dividend returns than
access). Moreover, firm value declined as directors consumed larger fractions of a bank’s loans, which
reduced the bank’s ability to extend credit to other shareholders.


Howard Bodenhorn
John E. Walker Department of Economics
College of Business and Behavioral Science
201-B Sirrine Hall
Clemson University
Clemson, SC 29634
and NBER
bodenhorn@gmail.com
      Large Block Shareholders, Institutional Investors, Boards of Directors and

                             Bank Value in the Nineteenth Century




1. Introduction

         Which governance characteristics of a firm influences its value? The modern finance literature

identifies board size and composition, large institutional investors, large block indivdual shareholders,

CEO power and share voting rights, among others, as governance features that influence firm value.

Although the literature provides insights into contemporary connections between corporate

governance practices, firm policies and market value, our understanding of the history of corporate

governance remains rudimentary. It is not yet clear that historical corporate governance operated like

its modern counterpart. It is also not yet clear whether historical market actors assessed and reacted

to governance features like their modern counterparts. Conceptions of the corporation as political and

economic organizations have evolved over the past two centuries, so it is likely that governance policies

have evolved as well.

         This study contributes to an incipient literature that investigates how applicable modern

approaches to corporate governance are to the early days of the corporation.1 Using newly constructed

data on the governance features at early US banks, I find some parallels between historical and

contemporary corporate governance and its effects on bank performance. One historical feature – the

number of members of the board of directors – has comparable historical and modern effects. Larger

         1
         Principal contributors to the literature include Freeman, Pearson and Taylor (2012),
Guinnane et al (2007), Harris (2009), Hilt (2008), Hansmann and Parglender (2012), Lamoreaux
(2009) and Musacchio (2009).

                                                  -2-
boards are associated with lower nineteenth-century bank value (measured by Tobin’s Q). Firm size and

free cash flow influence bank value in predictable ways. Any parallel between the historical and modern

firm breaks down, however, when considering the influence of large block individual and institutional

shareholders. Nineteenth-century bank value is predicted to increase when an individual holds at least

a 5% stake in the firm, a finding consistent with the Shleifer and Vishny (1986) contention that large

block shareholders monitor and discipline management. But historical bank value declines in the

presence of a 5% block institutional shareholder. That the effects of large individual and institutional

shareholdings influence bank value in opposite ways suggest that the historical connection between

large shareholdings and firm value do not have straight-forward modern parallels.

        Freeman, Pearson and Taylor (2012) and Hansmann and Parglender (2012) contend that the

nineteenth-century bank was less profit-oriented firm concerned primarily with maximizing shareholder

wealth and more of a loan club or mutual organization. Shareholders owned shares in anticipation of

dividends or capital gains, of course, but the principal motivation behind owning bank shares was that

ownership conferred preferential access to credit. Share prices moved with changes in the benefits of

access. Issues of endogeneity inevitable arise and several estimation techniques are used to address

endogeneity and identify causal effects. Estimates are robust to the inclusion of additional controls and

to the endogenizing of some variables treated as exogenous in the baseline results. The results are

consistent with the contention that historical corporate governance features influenced bank value, but

not necessarily in the same way that they influence outcomes in the modern world.

        The data used in this study are from mid-nineteenth century Massachusetts so questions of

representativeness inevitably arise. The institutional milieu in which Massachusetts’ banks operated

make them a suitable and useful laboratory for exploring the connection between bank governance

structures, portfolio choices, dividend policies, and firm value in the nineteenth century. Massachusetts


                                                  -3-
banks, while not representative of banking generally in the nineteenth century US, was representative

of banking in the Northeastern and Middle-Atlantic regions, which was the most financially developed

region of the county at that time. Massachsuetts bank law, too, was relatively liberal and it chartered

banks freely (Sylla, Wallis and Legler 1987). State law afforded banks substantial leeway in several

governance features, such a board size and dividend policies, that were mandated by corporate charter

in other states. Massachusetts law, for example, provided that banks have between five and 13 directors.

In short, Massachusetts banks were provided relatively wide latitude in operating policies, which

provides sufficient variation to capture the consequences of choices. The latitude afforded its banks

in several important dimensions of governance policy makes it a useful laboratory to investigate their

historical import.



2. Investors, monitors and other determinants of firm value

2.1 Large investors

         A world in which ownership and control are separated and in which managers fail to maximize

profits (and firm value) is a world in which profit opportunities exist for an effective monitor to take

control of a firm and replace existing managers with ones whose preference for profits align with the

monitor’s. Small shareholders do not have a large enough stake in a firm to bear the costs of

monitoring and disciplining management. Outsiders who might be able to monitor and discipline are

dissuaded from buying enough shares to implement their plans because small shareholders demand a

price for their shares that reflects expected increases in firm profitability. The disciplinarian, therefore,

captures only a fraction of the increase in firm value attributable to her activities. The fundamental issue

then, as Shleifer and Vishny (1986) present it, is that a plan for improving corporate performance is

a public good, which is under-provided by the market.


                                                         -4-
        Can the under-provision of monitoring and discipline problem be overcome? Or, are

corporations characterized by separation of ownership and control doomed to underperform? Shleifer

and Vishy (1986) argue that the public goods problem is partly overcome if shareholders already

holding a large fraction of a firm’s shares (hereafter “blockholders”) provide some of the public good.

Monitoring and discipline remain under-provided relative to a theoretical optimum, but the extent of

self-serving managerial behavior is mitigated. This capacity for blockholders to improve corporate

profitability explains, in part, why blockholding is common (Demsetz and Lehn 1985; Shleifer and

Vishny 1986; Bethel, Liebeskind and Upler 1998).

        Replacing underperforming managers is no simple matter, however. Jarrell, Brickley and Netter

(1988) discuss the many defensive measures that can be raised against corporate takeovers and Shleifer

and Vishny (1986, p.477) simplify the disciplinarian role by assuming that one or more current passive

blockholders may become activist if managerial self-dealing pushes firm profitability below some

threshold. Corporate takeover is not the only disciplinary mechanism; blockholders may be able to

engage in proxy fights and oust incumbent managers without buying additional shares. If the

blockholder can seat enough directors sympathetic to her concerns, management can be changed.2

        A further complication arises if not all blockholders have the same incentives. Brickley, Lease

and Smith (1988) identify affiliated blockholders, or those with existing or potential business ties with

the firm, and unaffiliated blockholders, or those without. Because affiliated blockholders expect the value


        2
          In the case of nineteenth-century banks, a proxy fight was probably not much of a fight.
In 1860s Massachusetts an average of 15 shareholders attended the annual meeting and voted fewer
than 540 shares, or just 12% of outstanding shares. Moreover, 12% percent of a bank’s shares
represented less than 12% of the votes due to so-called graduated voting rules that restricted the
number of votes allotted to blockholders (Hilt 2008; Bodenhorn 2012). Mounting a successful
proxy fight would not have required forming a large coalition of like-minded shareholders.
Staggered boards were not used as a defense mechanism. Massachusetts banking law required every
director to stand for annual election. See Bebchuk and Cohen (2005) and Duru, Wang and Zhao
(2013) for discussion of the economics of staggered boards.

                                                   -5-
of an existing business tie to decline in the face of managerial turnover, they are more likely to side with

current management than with an activist blockholder looking to replace management and change

policy.3

           Affiliated blockholding was a real issue at nineteenth-century banks. Lamoreaux (1994) and

Lamoreaux and Glaisek (1991) find that New England banks often extended the lion’s share of their

loans to founders, directors and other blockholders. Lamoreaux considers the practice to have been

economically benign, if not efficient, in that insiders were often related by kinship ties, were well

informed about each other’s business abilities and prospects, served to check excessive lending, and

limited each other’s risk-taking (see also Meissner 2005). Such extensive affiliated lending presumably

affected firm value positively or negatively depending on the perceived quality of loans made to the

firm’s investors/borrowers and the extent to which large blockholders might monopolize a bank’s

lending at the expense of minority shareholders. Pargendler and Hansmann (2012), Hansmann and

Pargendler (2012) and Freeman, Pearson and Taylor (2012), in fact, contend that the principal

corporate governance issue of the era was not that of blockholders expropriating minority owners or

managerial shirking, but of blockholders monopolizing a bank’s credit at the expense of minority

shareholders. Banks were more loan clubs (or mutuals) than modern commercial banks. The model

shareholder was a customer, though the customer base usually extended beyond shareholders.

           Two questions present themselves. First, were banks really loan clubs? Lamoreaux’s research

suggests that banks, while not pure loan clubs per se, were financial arms of extended kinship business

networks, the financial enterprises of New England mercantile and manufacturing keiretsus.

Shareholders and other insiders took up a large fraction of the banks’ loans. Freeman, Pearson and



           3
           Borokhovich et al (2006) further separate blockholders into activist and passive (or non-
activist) types. Activist blockholders are those who seek to alter managerial policy.

                                                    -6-
Taylor (2012, 118) find the same for Britain, where bank bylaws sometimes set explicit caps on

shareholder borrowing equal to a fraction of the value of the shares they held. The wisdom of this

practice was widely debated at the time, mostly because bank promoters needed to assuage third party

stakeholders, notably depositors and noteholders, concerned with the security and liquidity of their

debt. If shareholders were to be customers, it was important to attract the right kind of shareholders.

        Second, how would the share prices of loan clubs differ, if at all, from share prices of

commercial banks? If bank shareholders were investors in the classic sense, then share prices would

be determined by Gordon’s (1959) dividend discount model: or

        P=d /(r-g)

where P is the current price; d is the value of the next (or most recent) dividend; r is the constant cost

of equity; and g is the expected permanent constant growth rate in dividends. For simplicity assume

the growth rate is zero, which is consistent with the empirical regularity that mature banks tended to

smooth dividends over time (Bodenhorn 2003).

        If nineteenth-century banks were loan clubs in the sense that shareholders and other insiders

received credit on preferential terms, then the motive for ownership was different and dividends may

not have been the driving force behind share prices. If preferential credit access has any meaning, it is

that for given loan characteristics the loan club offers loans to members at lower rates than insiders

would expect to receive from an arm’s-length lender. That is, for a loan L(F) of size L and risk

characteristics F, the club member pays an interest rate ilc < i*, where i* represents the market rate. The

club member’s benefits of share ownership are then any dividend received plus the expected interest

savings (i* - ilc) × L(F), so the share price of a loan club bank is then determined by:

        P = [ d + (i* - ilc) × L ] / r

assuming for simplicity that the growth rate of dividends and interest rates are both zero. Pargendler


                                                   -7-
and Hansmann (2012) contend that governance policies, notably shareholder voting rights, in early

nineteenth century were designed so that loan club members did not have to fret over the possibility

that the bank would fall under the control of one or more majority shareholders that would

monopolize the bank’s credit. Graduate voting rights also reduced the likelihood that the bank would

fall under the control of unaffiliated investors more interested in dividends than credit access. The fact

is that nineteenth-century banks were hybrid institutions, part loan club and part profit-oriented

corporations. Shareholders borrowed, but not every shareholder borrowed in every period. Moreover,

banks paid regular, non-trivial dividends.

        It is reasonable to think that shareholders with a bank-as-loan-club preference did not want to

tie up their capital in bank shares. The loan-club model in fact presupposes that these shareholders

could not self-finance their market activities at their preferred scale. It was incumbent on loan-club

shareholders then to raise outside capital, presumably from shareholders who would not compete with

them for the bank’s credit. Otherwise, internal competition between shareholder-customers would have

driven internal interest rates to the market rate. But to attract unaffiliated shareholders, the shareholder-

customers were forced to pay dividend that yielded a competitive, risk-adjusted return on the investor’s

capital. This meant that loan-club members paid more than the marginal cost (=average variable cost)

of credit and/or, the loan-club extended enough loans to nonshareholders at market rates to generate

profits that could be distributed as dividends to unaffiliated shareholders.

        Affiliated shareholders thus had to offer a market return in dividends to unaffiliated

shareholders while maintaining a credit cost savings for themselves sufficient to reimburse the

opportunity cost of capital invested in bank shares. At any time an existing blockholder might turn

dividend-seeking activist, support the election of one or more board members, threaten to replace

management and transform the loan club into a commercial bank. Loan club members would not


                                                    -8-
necessarily suffer a capital loss from the takeover, and certainly not if the transition increased the share

price, but they would then borrow at rates closer to market rates. As Hansmann and Pargendler (2012)

note, governance provisions that are often interpreted as investor protections may be better viewed

as consumer protections in the case of investor-consumer loan clubs. A share voting rule, for example,

that limited or capped the number of votes cast by blockholders (votes < shares) protected club

members from loss of credit privileges.

        It is less clear what effects a transition from loan club to profit seeking (and dividend paying)

would have on share prices and firm value. Increased dividends would attract investors which, all else

equal, would drive share prices up. But club members, having lost access to credit, would sell out to

invest in another loan club. If club members sell en masse, share prices decline. Absent a strong logical

prior, determining the net effects of investor blockholders and individual blockholders on firm value

is then an empirical question explored below.



2.2 Institutional investors

        Since the 1980s, institutional investors – most notably mutual funds and pension funds such

as CREF and CALPERS – have become large, if not the largest investors in US corporations, which

has led scholars to better understand the consequences of concentrated institutional ownership (Gillan

and Starks 2000; Chen, Harrod and Li 2007). Because institutional investors differ from atomistic

individual investors in their ability to collect and analyze information and monitor managers, they are

thought capable of altering corporate governance and corporate behaviors. Theoretically, institutional

investors adopt one of three roles: they actively monitor management, they passively monitor, or they

cooperate with management.

        Under the active-monitoring scenario, large institutional investors have incentives and the


                                                    -9-
expertise to monitor managers, do so at a lower cost than atomistic shareholders, improve firm

performance and, therefore, firm value (Shleifer and Vishny 1986; Woidtke 2002; Chen Harrod and Li

2007). Because they hold a large fraction of a firm’s shares they can influence a firm’s actions. And,

if institutional investments are durable and stable, investors have more incentives and more

opportunities to learn about the firms they invest in (Elyasiani and Jia 2010). Because stable institutional

investors have long horizons, their interest in the value of and returns on their own portfolios

encourage them to discipline management more so than short-horizon traders. Large institutional

investors are thought to enhance firm value.

        The leading institutional investors in nineteenth-century bank shares were insurance companies

and savings banks who purchased bank shares less for the value of becoming affiliated and gaining

access to credit than to earn a return through dividends. Insurance companies invested client premiums

as reserves against future claims; savings banks invested deposits in securities to provide small

depositors with a safe haven for their money and a modest return.4

        Although directors at insurance companies and savings banks may have leveraged their

directorships at these firms into a preferred customer relationship with a bank, dividend returns were

the principal motivation behind share holdings and insurance companies held diversified share

portfolios. In 1858 each of Massachusetts’s 90 insurance companies held an average of 1418.8 shares

in 14.3 banks. They also invested in railroad shares (306.0 shares in 3.3 railroads on average, with a

mode of 0 shares in 0 firms), railroad bonds, manufacturing company shares, and made secured and


        4
          Rules governing insurance company investments were fairly lax: insurers could generally
“purchase, hold and convey any estate, real or personal, for the use of the company.” Savings banks
were given similarly wide latitude in their investments. The deposits of the Institute for Savings in
Roxbury, for example, were to be “used and improved to the best advantage of the owners
thereof;” and in 1825 Boston’s Provident Institution for Savings charter was amended so that its
directors could subscribe shares in any newly incorporated bank (Private and Special Acts 1837, 260-
263).

                                                   -10-
unsecured loans to borrowers. In 1860 bank shares made up 21.4 percent of Massachusetts’s savings

banks’ total assets.5 Savings banks relied on dividends from bank shares to diversify the risks of

personal lending and to pay competitive returns to their depositors.

        Although some individual shareholders viewed the nineteenth-century bank as a loan club,

institutional investors considered them dividend-generating entities. As the principal institutional

investors, insurance companies and savings banks held bank shares for the expected returns from the

shares. If disagreements emerged among classes of shareholders over bank practices and policies, they

were likely to have arisen between individual and institutional shareholders. Evidence of different

objectives and the tensions they created for directors in balancing the demands of customers and

investors is likely to appear in different effects of large institutional shareholdings and large individual

shareholdings on firm value. Different objectives among broad classes of shareholders may have played

out in the selection and retention of directors, but the sources do not afford an investigation of this

possibility. The sources, however, allow for an investigation of how institutional and individual

blockholders influenced board size, a feature of concern in modern corporate governance studies.



2.3 Board size and structure

        The modern literature identifies five basic responsibilities of boards of directors: (1) they select,

evaluate, and replace the bank’s president, CEO, and other managers; (2) they review and approve

strategic decisions; (3) they provide advice and counsel to management; (4) they establish election


        5
         Unlike the insurance reports, which listed the number of shares of individual banks held
by each insurance company, the annual savings bank reports provided only aggregate dollar values
of shares held. Loans on mortgage and other collateral made up the bulk of the savings banks’
earning asset portfolios. Savings bank investments afforded their depositors a competitive return.
Of the 39 savings banks reporting in 1860, 33 reported that they paid a 5 percent or greater
dividend the previous year; 17 reported having returned an average 7 percent or greater dividend
over the previous five years.

                                                   -11-
procedures for successors; and (5), they review compliance with laws and regulations (Linck, Netter and

Yang 2008). Nineteenth-century bank boards were expected to provide the same functions. In

Massachusetts, bank charters and general banking laws laid down the basic rules for boards consistent

with responsibilities (1), (2), (4) and (5). The State Bank of Boston’s 1811 charter, for example,

provided that the directors would “choose one of their own number to act as President” and establish

his salary. The directors would also choose the cashier (CEO and COO), demand from him a bond

with appropriate sureties, and determine his compensation (Massachusetts General Court 1812). Every

six months the directors determined the amount of the semi-annual dividend, if any. Each year the

board was to advertise the place and time of the annual, stockholders meeting and supervise the

election of the next year’s directors. Every six months the directors were to transmit a balance sheet

to the legislature and governor and they were personally liable if the bank’s managers violated certain

regulations.

        With respect to the third listed responsibility (advice and counsel), nineteenth-century bank

directors were also much more engaged in the firm’s daily operations than many modern directors.

Board meetings to consider loan requests were held as often as three days each week. At the typical

board meeting the cashier read the names of the applicants, the amounts requested, and whether the

applicant “kept a good, middling, or small account” at the bank (Wainwright 1953, 19). Boards usually

imposed limits on loan sizes based on average account balances, and rationed credit based on each

applicant’s reputation. The latter influence was so important, in fact, that board members were usually

chosen based on their knowledge of local businessmen’s characters, activities, prospects and abilities.

Some bank bylaws required unanimous consent of a quorum of the board; some instituted black ball

systems to preserve anonymity in loan approvals; some allowed the cashier to make small, run-of-the-

mill loans and reserved for themselves prior approval of large loans or loans to unfamiliar applicants.


                                                 -12-
        In addition to their regular duty of approving loans, board committees were regularly appointed

to inspect the books, count the monies in the vault, and meet with representatives from other banks

to discuss such wide-ranging topics as the value at which foreign coins or banknotes would be accepted,

how to prosecute counterfeiting, and the terms under which new entrants would be allowed into

existing clearing arrangements. Nineteenth-century bank boards worked hard, but they were typically

not directly compensated for their time. Instead, it was understood that board members, like other

shareholders, would receive preferential credit terms and nineteenth-century bank board members

borrowed, often substantial amounts (Lamoreaux 1994).

        Given the workload expected of them and the nature of the remuneration, bank boards

influenced firm value. The quality and influence of individual members provided signals to informed

investors about a bank’s prospects, but the most easily observed board characteristic for most investors

was its size. There is no general equilibrium theory of board size and structure, but there is consensus

in the literature that optimal board size and structure is based on the costs and benefits of the board’s

monitoring and advising roles (Pathan and Skully 2010). Acting in their role of monitor, boards

supervise and restrain managers from self-serving behaviors. Acting in their advising role, boards

provide strategic guidance.

        Following Yermack (1996), most studies posit that, ceteris paribus, larger boards are less

effective than smaller ones. Compared to smaller ones, large boards may be subject to shirking, face

greater coordination costs, provide less timely advice, monitor less effectively, or become dysfunctional

in other dimensions. Larger boards are generally associated with lower firm value (Yermack 1996).

Smaller may not always be better, however. Complex firms, large firms, and those with greater debt-

equity ratios place greater advising demands on directors and may be better served by larger boards.

Coles, Daniel and Naveen (2008) find that smaller boards are value enhancing for small, simple firms


                                                  -13-
and larger boards are value enhancing for large, complex firms.6

        Two issues are investigated here. The first is the extent to which firm characteristics, including

the extent of individual and institutional blockholdings, influenced board size. The second, and more

pertinent issue, is whether board size affected firm value. There are two principal channels through

which board size influenced bank value. Larger boards may have been subject to the shirking and

coordination problems. It is well known, for example, that boards regularly failed to conduct business

for lack of a quorum, which points toward shirking (Gras 1937). One solution was smaller boards, but

many banks simply opted to reduce the number needed for a quorum. For the loan-club bank, board

size had further salience because larger boards meant more men expecting to be compensated for their

time with loans. The larger the board, ceteris paribus, the larger the share of a bank’s resources tied up

in meeting the board’s rather the other shareholders’ demands. Larger boards then possibly reduced

firm value, controlling for firm size, complexity and other relevant features.



3. Data and methodology

3.1 Sample

        The population studied here includes Massachusetts banks operating between 1858 and 1862

(see Data Appendix for the details), and the sample is an unbalanced panel of 206 bank-years

(approximately four years for 50 banks) drawn from a larger population of 441 bank-years.

Massachusetts’ bank commissioners conducted biennial on-site inspections for each bank in the state

and published detailed reports on their findings. Between 1858 and 1862 their annual reports provide

a consistent series of balance sheets, as well as information on the number of shares held by the largest



        6
         Adams, Hermalin and Weisbach’s (2010) parsimonious model shows that the Coles et al
(2008) result holds under certain, fairly general conditions.

                                                  -14-
shareholder, shares held by the directors, loans to directors, overdue loans, and loans in default and

unlikely to be repaid, among other items. Between 1860 and 1862 the annual reports provided

additional information on the number of directors, the number of shares owned by directors, the

number of shareholders attending, as well as the number of shares voted at the most recent

shareholders’ meeting. Some of the variables found in the later reports but not reported in the earlier

reports, such as the number of directors and semi-annual dividends, were located in other sources (see

Data Appendix).

       Information on institutional shareholdings were taken from four annual reports of

Massachusetts insurance commissioners. These reports provided detailed information on shares held

in each bank at the end of each year, as well as the market price of each bank’s shares at the time of

the insurance company’s reports. The insurance reports are invaluable sources because they provide

information on the share prices of banks outside Boston, which are otherwise rarely observed. When

the insurance commissioners’ reports failed to report a share price for a Boston bank, it was determined

from sources discussed in the Data Appendix. Three-quarters (177 of 235) of the dropped observations

are dropped because no current market share price was found. Another 30 observations were dropped

because the number of shares held by the largest shareholder was the same as the number of shares

held by the largest insurance company shareholder. Because, in these instances, it was likely that the

largest shareholder was the largest shareholding insurance company rather than an individual, the

observations are dropped. The inclusion of these observations would confound estimates of individual

and institutional blockholding.



3.2 Endogenous variables

       The principal endogenous variable of interest is firm value, measured by Tobin’s Q, which is


                                                 -15-
defined as:

        Q = (book value assets - book value capital + market value capital)/ (book value assets)

This is an approximation of Q, but it is highly correlated with actual Q.7 Chung and Pruitt’s (1994)

proxy, on which this definition is based, is highly correlated with more sophisticated calculations, and

is the proxy most often used in the literature (Demsetz and Villalonga 2001; Coles et al 2008; Ruiz-

Mallorquí and Santana-Martin 2011). Q greater than one implies that the market value exceeds the

replacement (book) value of the firm, which implies that the market values some unmeasured asset,

such as goodwill, knowledge or human capital, proprietary technology or other intangible assets that

are likely to generate future economic profits. Q less than one, then, points to a firm in decline or one

for which value might be enhanced through changes in policies or management or both.

        A second variable of interest is board size, specifically the effects of board size on firm value.

As discussed previously, modern studies identify board size to be a powerful predictor of firm value.

But endogeneity is an issue. If shareholders are free to adjust board size in response to deviations from

maximum firm value, standard empirical designs that regress firm value on board size will not be

informative. Logic says that, after including suitable control variables in a regression, no observable

relation between board size and firm performance will emerge if shareholders are free to adjust board

size in response to deviations from maximum firm value. The problem, of course, is that endogeneity

will bias the board-size coefficient toward zero so that a (near) zero coefficient may or may not be

evidence of value-maximizing behavior.

        The interesting case occurs if (when) boards of nonoptimal size persist, due perhaps to the

costs of revising bylaws or other regulations concerning the number of directors. In Massachusetts the



        7
         Tobin (1969) originally defined Q as the ratio of the market value to replacement cost
(book value) of the firm or its physical capital.

                                                  -16-
earliest corporate charters mandated a specific number of bank directors for each bank, but later

revisions to the state’s banking laws allowed banks to choose any number between 5 and 13 directors.

Moreover, the number of directors could be changed from year to year. There is some annual variation

in the observed number of directors, but that variation appears to be driven more by short-term

exigencies – death or illness, or a director being removed for failure to attend meetings – than by

efforts to influence firm value through changes in board size.

        Governance within nineteenth-century banks operated across several other margins as well.

Freeman, Pearson and Taylor (2012), for example, note that firms could manipulate the attractiveness

of individual and institutional blockholdings through various choices. They contend that bank founders

might alter the balance between loan club and commercial banking through its choice of location, size

and the initial par value of the shares. Locating in Boston, for example, might provide access to a larger

capital market, but it might also bring in dividend-preferring investors. Larger banks, whether measured

by assets or initial capitalization, would typically attract more investors and, perhaps, a larger fraction

of dividend-preferring investors. Finally, they argue that larger par values signaled an intent to attract

a certain type of shareholder. Smaller par values attracted “a very inferior constituency” and one more

interested in speculating in shares than in the solidity and permanency of the institution (Freeman,

Pearson and Taylor 2012, 68). Location and par values were not easily altered, but they were choices

made in an effort to influence the firm’s type and its value.

        Several empirical strategies present themselves as possible solutions to the endogeneity

problem. In the case of board size, fixed effects techniques that exploit variation in board size seem

reasonable, but fixed effects estimation does not have much statistical power when time-series

variations are small compared to cross-sectional differences. The common solution to the endogeneity

and simultaneity problems is to estimate simultaneous equations, either two-stage instrumental variables


                                                   -17-
(2SLS-IV) regressions when appropriate instruments are available or three-stage least squares (3SLS)

when one or more endogenous regressands appear as regressors in a system of simultaneous equations.

Because no empirical approach is above criticism, it is reasonable to offer alternative tests to investigate

potential correlations, if not causal factors.

        The central conclusions drawn from the data are derived from the following simultaneous

equations system estimated by three-stage least squares (3SLS):



(1a)    Qit = $0 + $1 ln(Directorsit) + $2 Individual Blockit + $3 Institutionit + $4 Xit + ,it

(1b)    ln(Directorsit) = "0 + "1 Qit + "2 Individual Blockit + "3 Institutionit + "4 Wit + <it

(1c)    Individual Blockit = (0 + (1 Zit + .it

(1d)    Institutionit = 60 + 61 Yit + 0it



For comparative purposes, I also report OLS, median and bank-level fixed-effects results for the firm

value (Q) equation (1a), as well.



3.3 Control variables

        The literature on blockholding, board size and governance provides guidance on which variables

to include in a regression to control for confounding effects. Q, for example, is found to be positively

associated with firm size, measured as the natural logarithm of total assets. A literature dating to Jensen

(1986) also finds that firm value is associated with free cash flow. Firms that hold cash in excess of that

needed to fund currently profitable projects have lower Q, most likely because firm managers or others

can direct these resources to serve their own purposes rather than enhance shareholder value (Vogt

and Vu 2000). Dividends, too, limit insider expropriation (Faccio, Lang and Young 2001). Two


                                                   -18-
variables are included in the regression to capture the free cash flow effect – the last dividend payment

as a percentage of par value of shares and retained earnings to capital. Both variables are subject to

control by the board and are not, strictly speaking, exogenous, but the data do not offer control

variables that allow for endogenizing dividends or retained earnings. To the extent these variables are

endogenous, regression coefficients will be biased toward zero and the likely effect is under-estimated.

        Empirical studies of the connection between board size (or structure) and firm value control

for firm complexity, size, and age. Firm size is included in the regressions as the natural logarithm of

total assets. Age is measured as a quadratic in years since establishment. Cubic and higher order

specifications did not improve the fit. Firm complexity is measured in the central results as the loan-to-

asset ratio. Loans are opaque, idiosyncratic assets relative to alternative assets such as government

bonds and the more opaque or idiosyncratic the loan portfolio, the greater the demands placed on

board decision making.8 Coles et al (2008 ) find that Q is higher for complex firms with larger boards,

and the loan-asset ratio is included as a measure of bank complexity.

        Table 1 provides the summary statistics for the endogenous and exogenous variables. Mean

Q is 1.021, so that the typical bank was valued at about 2 percent more than the market’s estimate of

the cost to reproduce the book value of its assets. Given that banks exist to overcome information

asymmetries and specialize in lending on opaque assets, nineteenth-century markets did not place a

large premium on any proprietary information.


        8
           As a robustness check, I also include a measure of the banks’ involvement in the exchange
market. Nineteenth-century banks loaned on either locally payable promissory notes or bills of
exchange payable at some distant location. Exchange markets differed from note markets in risk
and liquidity. Bills were secured by goods in transit, which made them more secure than notes, but
they were payable at a distant location, which meant that a bank needed a reliable agent to collect
and remit funds. Bills were also more liquid than notes; there was an active secondary market for
bills, especially in larger commercial cities. Banks with more extensive bill operations may have
relied more on directors’ judgment. Results are not reported, but they are consistent with results in
Tables 3 and 4. They are available from the author.

                                                  -19-
        Table 1 also reveals basic information about early bank governance structures and

blockholdings. The average board of directors had just less than eight members. Massachusetts law

allowed any number of directors between 5 and 13. Eight banks had the minimum; none had 13,

though a handful had 12 directors. The mean largest individual blockholder held 7.4% of a bank’s

shares and 56.3% of banks had a blockholder who held at least 5% of their shares. The mean largest

institutional investor held 2.4% of its shares. Nearly 11% of banks had an institutional investor that held

5% of their shares. Directors, too, were invested in the banks they managed. All directors combined

held, on average, 6.9% of a bank’s shares; and 53.3% of banks were managed by boards that together

owned at least a 5% stake.

        The average bank in the sample was 24 years old, controlled more than $807,000 in assets, paid

a 3.5% semi-annual dividend, kept a retained earnings-to-asset ratio of about 10%, slightly less than 4%

of its loans were non-performing (past due but not yet considered bad), and 24% were in Boston.

Dropping observations without observable share prices has a small impact on the mean characteristics

of the sample. The mean age for the population of Massachusetts banks was 23 years; 23.2% were in

Boston; they paid an average semi-annual dividend of 3.6%, had 8.02 directors and controlled, on

average, $719,200 in assets. Thus, the banks in the final sample are larger than the population mean,

but they are otherwise representative of Massachusetts’s banks.



4. Results

4.1 Univariate tests

        Table 2 reports Q values for firms with characteristic values above and below the median value

of the stated characteristic. That is, the first row reports the Q value for firms with above and below

the median number of directors (8). The last column provides a simple t-test of differences in the mean


                                                   -20-
value of Q for firms below and above the median number of directors. Thus, firms with fewer than 8

directors have a Q ratio of 1.017, while firms with more than 8 directors have an average Q ratio of

1.034. The difference is statistically significant at the 3% level.

        Tests of differences between most of the relevant variables are statistically significant. Most

studies find that larger firms have higher Q ratios than small firms; that feature holds for

Massachusetts’s banks. Banks with a large, unaffiliated institutional investor have higher Q ratios on

average. Having a large individual shareholder holding more than the median fraction of shares is not

associated with a higher Q ratio, however. This result may signify that large shareholders did not

effectively monitor and discipline; or it may be indicative of the tension between investor-shareholders

and consumer-shareholders discussed above. Banks that paid higher dividends had notably higher Q

ratios, suggesting that at least some shareholders viewed bank shares as dividend-generating investments

rather than loan clubs. Of course, even loan club members valued dividends for a given savings on

loans. Finally, managers’ and directors’ business decisions also influenced bank value. Firm value was

higher for banks with above-median levels of retained earnings relative to capital. Although free cash

concerned some investors because it provided the wherewithal for self-interested managers to consume

perquisites, retained earnings also provided banks with the wherewithal to pay dividends in future

periods and insulated management from shareholder discontent following a temporary period of poor

earnings. One source of poor earnings were nonperforming loans and Q ratios were higher for banks

with below-median proportions of bad loans.



4.2 Multivariate tests

        Univariate tests provide some insights into differences in Q values for banks with different

characteristics, but they fail to account for endogeneity, simultaneity, or other confounding factors.


                                                    -21-
Table 3 reports the results on regressions explaining bank value using four different approaches.

Column 1 reports coefficient estimates from an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression of observable

bank characteristics on bank value. All else constant, Q increased in bank size, with the presence of an

individual investor holding at least 5 percent of the bank’s shares, when directors as a group held at

least 5 percent of a bank’s shares, and with higher retained earnings-to-capital ratios. Firm value

declined in board size, in the presence of a large unaffiliated investor, in dividend payments, and in the

proportion of nonperforming loans. Median and bank-level fixed-effects regressions generate

coefficient estimates of similar sign and magnitude.

        The problem with OLS, median and fixed-effects estimates, of course, is that several of the

independent variables are endogenous so that OLS and median regressions coefficients on the

potentially endogenous variables will be biased toward zero. Fixed-effects models do not have much

statistical power because, for example, board size and dividends do not exhibit much temporal variation

and fixed-effects estimates rely on within-firm variation to identify a causal effect (Coles, Daniel and

Naveen 2008; Larmou and Vafeas 2010). Board size and dividends varied more across firms at a

moment in time than within firms across time. The fixed-effect estimates ignore that cross-sectional

variation.

        The standard approach to endogeneity in the literature is to estimate a system of equations

through three-stage least squares (3SLS) in which each potentially important explanatory variable is

endogenized. I follow Coles, Daniel and Naveen (2008), Linck, Netter and Yang (2008), Jiao (2010) and

Larmou and Vafeas (2010) and endogenize board size because estimates that regress firm value on

board size will not be informative if shareholders are free to adjust boards to maximize bank value.

Interesting cases occur when boards are of potentially non-optimal size because some friction or

transaction cost impedes timely adjustments. Over the longer horizon, it may take time for shareholders


                                                  -22-
to approve changes in board size if doing so requires an amendment to the bylaws; over a shorter

horizon, it may take time to identify, appoint and seat a replacement for a seat vacated due to death or

resignation. In these instances it is possible that board size may be non-optimal given other bank

characteristics.

         Studies of modern corporations find that board size is related to Q, firm size, complexity, age

and ownership structure (Linck, Netter and Yang 2008; Pathan and Skully 2010). Firm size is measured

as the natural logarithm of total assets. Firm complexity is measured as the loan-asset ratio. Compared

to government bonds, the principal alternative investment in a bank portfolio, bank loans are

idiosyncratic, informationally opaque to outsiders, and difficult to price to market. Studies have found

that firm value increases in board size for more complex firms, so it is expected that larger boards will

enhance the value of more complex banks. Bank age enters as a quadratic in years since the original

corporate charter was secured. Two variables – the presence of a 5% individual blockholder and the

presence of a 5% institutional blockholder – capture ownership structure.9 The board size equation is

well specified (see Appendix Table A1): most of the coefficients have the expected signs and are

individually significant; and the chi-squared statistic (36.4) for joint significance has a p-value less than

0.001.

         Ownership structures, too, are endogenous to bank characteristics. They are endogenized and

separate equations are included in the 3SLS system for the presence of an individual blockholder with

at least a 5% stake and for the presence of an institutional blockholder with at least a 5% stake.

Freeman, Pearson and Taylor (2012) argue that nineteenth-century blockholdings were associated with

firm location (city or town), firm size, and the initial par value of shares. The equation specification


         9
        It is standard practice in the empirical literature is to impose the 5% demarcation on
blockholdings (Borokhovich 2006). This standard is relaxed and alternative specifications as
robustness checks. The results are discussed in Section 5 below.

                                                    -23-
follow from Freeman, Pearson and Taylor’s finding and are well specified: the explanatory variables take

on the expected signs, and are individually and jointly significant (see Appendix Table A1).

        The last column of Table 3 presents the 3SLS estimates of the determinants of bank value

(Tobin’s Q), several features of which are notable. First, the 3SLS estimates tend to be larger in

absolute value than the OLS, median or fixed-effects estimates, which is consistent with the concern

that OLS estimates will be biased toward zero in the presence of endogenous regressors. Second, the

signs and the magnitudes of the estimates are generally consistent with studies of modern firms, which

suggests a degree of timelessness to some issues of corporate governance. Firm value, for instance,

increased in firm size. A one standard deviation increase in the log of firm size (0.81) is associated with

a 2.2 standard deviation increase in Q. Bank value decreased in board size; increasing the average board

size by two-thirds of a member (= one standard deviation in predicted ln(Directors)) decreases Q by

about 27 percent. The magnitude of the estimated effect suggests that deviations from optimal board

size had substantial market effects.

        The central concern here is the association between blockholdings and firm value, and the 3SLS

results are broadly more consistent with the shareholder-customer than the shareholder-investor

hypothesis. The coefficient on the 5% Individual blockholder variable is 0.336, but the coefficient

cannot be interpreted to mean that Q is 34% higher for banks with an individual 5% blockholder, all

else constant. Rather, the regression estimates a coefficient for the predicted probability of having an

individual 5% blockholder, not the presence of such a blockholder. Thus, bank value is 34% higher for

a bank predicted to have a 5% blockholder with certainty than for a bank predicted not to have a 5%

blockholder with certainty. Given the implausibly large effect associated from a change in predicted

probability from zero to one, Becker, Cronqvist and Fahlenbrach (2011) suggest multiplying the

coefficient by the interquartile range of the distribution of predicted probabilities to obtain a more


                                                   -24-
realistic effect. A bank moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile of predicted probabilities of having

a 5% blockholder would have experienced an increase in Q of 0.097 (=0.336 × 0.39), which is about

twice the interquartile difference in Q or about equal to the 90th - 10th percentile difference in Q. Large

blockholders had a large positive predicted influence on bank value.

        Among the potential explanations for the 5% blockholder effect are the Shleifer and Vishny

(1986) contention that large block shareholders have incentives to monitor and discipline bankers,

which increases bank value. An alternative blockholder-as-customer explanation holds that the

blockholder effect works through the blockholder’s ability to ward off attempts by investors with a

preference for dividends to change policy away from preferential credit access for owner-customers

to a more profit-oriented policy. To the extent that blockholders can deflect shareholder-investor

demands for dividends, shareholder-customers will bid up the price of shares and increase Q. Absent

other information, it would be difficult to unravel the investor and customer hypotheses. But two other

pieces of evidence point toward the blockholder-customer interpretation. First, when the board of

directors are predicted to jointly control at least 5% of the shares, Q increases by 6.3% or about 1.4

standard deviations in Q. Because they were compensated mostly through the preferential access to

credit afforded board members, the effect of 5% board ownership is consistent with boards supporting

the shareholder-customer model of banking.

        Additional evidence in support of the shareholder-customer model is seen in the negative effect

of dividend-preferring, nonaffiliated institutional blockholding on Q. Alhough statistically insignificant,

the coefficient on 5% insurance shareholding works in the opposite direction of the blockholder effect.

Because the 5% insurance-owner coefficient also captures the predicted probability of such ownership,

it is interpreted like the 5% individual blockholder coefficient; thus, multiplying the coefficient by the

interquartile range of predicted probabilities of institutional ownership implies a modest 0.6% decline


                                                   -25-
in Q. Further, the coefficient on the last dividend payment is small and insignificant. A one standard

deviation increase in dividend yield implies an equally modest 0.6% decline in Q. This last effect is

consistent with the hypothesis that bank shareholders were more interested in low-cost credit than

dividend yield.

        Although the estimates cannot be interpreted as causal effects, bank portfolio choices are also

associated with bank value. Banks with boards with a poor track record in loan decisions had lower

market values. A one standard deviation increase in the ratio of nonperforming loans to loans is

associated with a 1.3% decline in Q. Free cash flow, on the other hand, is associated with higher bank

values. A standard deviation increase in the retained earnings-to-asset ratio is associated with a 1%

increase in Q.     Jensen (1986) argues that free cash flow provided self-serving managers with

opportunities for perquisite consumption at the expense of shareholders. Nineteenth-century investors

did not negatively react to free cash holdings at bank, probably because retained earnings provided a

buffer against below average earnings in the short term, which allowed banks to meet the dividend

expectations of unaffiliated investors.



5. Robustness checks

5.1 Alternative threshold and linear blockholder specifications

        Because the monitoring power and influence of individual and institutional investors may be

subject to threshold effects, it is important to investigate alternative linear and nonlinear measures of

shareholdings (Chen, Harford and Li 2007). Many studies find a threshold effect around 5%

blockholding and estimate regressions, like those reported above, that use the 5% blockholding cutoff.

Imposing the 5% threshold on historical data may not, however, be justified if the threshold proportion

of ownership at which blockholders influenced corporate policy was systematically different. To


                                                  -26-
investigate the possibility of different historical thresholds, the system of equations was re-estimated

using either 3% or 7% blockholder thresholds, as well as a specification that allows the blockholder

shares to enter linearly.

        Table 4 provides the results of these tests. Using either a 3% or 7% threshold does not alter the

basic interpretations discussed in Section 4. The certain predicted presence of a 3% or 7% individual

blockholder increases bank Q values. Large predicted institutional 3% or 7% blockholdings and actual

dividends decreased Q. It is important to recall that the estimated coefficients reflect the predicted

effect of a change from zero predicted probability to a certainty of a the relevant blockholding.

Multiplying the coefficient by the interquartile (or other) range generates large, but plausible effects.

Both of these specifications are consistent with the shareholder-customer model of nineteenth-century

bank shareholding.

        The third column of Table 4 reports the estimated effects when blockholdings enter the 3SLS

system specifications linearly. The predicted effect of either a one standard deviation increase in the

log number of directors (-20.0%) or an interquartile increase in the log number of directors (-20.0%)

are substantial and suggest powerful negative consequences of non-optimal board size. The predicted

effects of individual and institutional blockholders using the linear specification are similar to those

generated using the 5% thresholds. The estimated change in Q resulting from a one standard deviation

change in the predicted share of the largest individual blockholding (*Q/*Individual = 6.6%), in the

predicted fraction of shares held by largest institutional blockholding (*Q/*Institution = 0.3%), and

in the actual combined director blockholding (*Q/*Director = 3.8%) are consistent with the

shareholder-customer hypothesis. Multiplying the coefficients by the interquartile range of predicted

individual blockholding (11.8%) and institutional blockholding (0.8%) are also large but plausible in

magnitude. The negative, though small coefficient on the last dividend suggests that directors satisfied


                                                  -27-
investor demands while maintaining the shareholder-customer preference for loans at below-market

rates.



5.2 Endogenizing director preferences

         To this point the analysis assumes that directors have similar tastes for on-the-job and take-

home income, which may not be the case (Demsetz 1983). Different types of directors may have

different tastes. It is well known, for example, that some men took on the task of directorship because

it gave them preferential access to bank credit. One concern is that director-borrowers might not be

as disciplined as non-borrowing directors. That is, in order to insure their own access, some directors

might approve low expected return (bad) loans from fellow directors in a “I vote for yours, if you vote

for mine” agreement. Merchants seeking this kind of preferential access may have gravitated toward

share ownership and directorship in certain banks. In effect, they were willing to trade lower capital-

gains or dividend returns on their investments for greater access to credit. Sharing profits provides

some incentives to voluntarily limit self-dealing; it does not eliminate such incentives.

         Imagine then two banks; one chooses a high-monitoring regime in which shareholders, through

various means, restrict directors’ access to credit; and, a second bank that chooses a low-monitoring

regime in which directors are reasonably free to self-deal. The former bank will attract

shareholder/directors whose utility is increased more by increases in capital gains or dividend income

than through preferential access to loans. Directors at this type of bank do not allow their fellows to

self-deal and lend large amounts to themselves. The low-monitoring regime bank, on the other hand,

attracts shareholder/directors whose utility is increased more by preferential access to loans than by

increases in capital gains or dividend income. A greater proportion of the loans made at the low-

monitoring regime bank are, therefore, made to directors and other insiders. If high-monitoring regime


                                                  -28-
banks are those with large blockholders, we should observe a negative relationship between the share

of a bank’s loans made to directors and the extent of large blockholding. Even those shareholders with

a preference for low-interest loans place a lower value on banks with heavily self-dealing directors than

banks without. Moreover, given the preference of shareholder/directors for take-home income in the

high-monitoring regime banks, Q should be inversely related to either the absolute value or share of

a bank’s loans going to directors.

        Massachusetts’ bank commissioners collected information on loans to directors as principals.

It is well known that the official bank statements understate the true extent of director self-dealing

because board members could and did approve loans to family members, business partners and others

with whom they had outside business relationships (Lamoreaux 1994) . The reports, though less than

fully informative concerning insider lending, may have provided information that shareholders and

others responded to. To the extent that the official bank statements under-report insider lending, any

estimates of its effects are biased downward.

        To investigate the possibility that director self-lending influenced bank value, a fifth equation:



(1e)    (Director loan %)it = B0 + B1 Individual Blockit + B2 Institutionit + B3 ln(Directorsit) + B4 Vit

        + Lit



is added the 3SLS system described in Section 3. The results of two alternative specifications of bank

value (Q) and director loan share regressions are reported in Table 5.10 Coefficients reported in the

first column make use of the 206 observations included in the previous regressions. Bank Q increases



        10
           The equations for ln(Directors), Individual Block, and Institutional shareholding are
similar to those reported in Table A1 and are not reported here.

                                                  -29-
in bank size, free cash and the predicted probability of an individual blockholder with at least 5% of the

bank’s shares; it declines in non-performing loans, the last dividend, and predicted board size. The

principal difference between this specification and the baseline result in Column 4 of Table 3 is that

effect of the predicted probability of an institutional blockholder switches sign and becomes statistically

significant. The estimated coefficient suggests that an interquartile increase in the predicted probability

of an institutional investor holding at least 5% of a bank’s shares will increase Q by about 0.3%, which

is consistent with the institutional investors having a modest disciplinary effect on board choices and

bank policy.

        Coefficients reported in the second column make use of a smaller number of observations using

only those reports in which the bank commissioners stated the number of shares voted at the last

general shareholders’ meetings. Including this variable halves the number of observations, but provides

some information about how shareholders responded to director self-dealing. If shareholders viewed

such self-dealing negatively, the share of loans taken up by directors should be negatively related to

shareholder activism. This regression is better specified (significantly larger P2 statistic) than the larger

sample regression in Column 1, but the coefficients are comparable. Two notable effects of shareholder

activism are: when more shares are voted, directors take up a smaller fraction of a bank’s loans; and,

firm value declined markedly in the predicted share of a bank’s loans taken up by a bank’s directors. An

interquartile increase in the predicted fraction of loans to directors decreases Q by 19.3%. This is a

powerful effect, though it reflects in part the substantial variation across banks. The mean predicted

fraction of loans taken is just 1.3% whereas the predicted median is 17.7%, with an interquartile range

of 29.1%, which is more than three times the interquartile range in the raw data. Multiplying the

estimated coefficient by the actual interquartile range in the fraction of loans taken by directors still

implies a decrease in firm value of a nontrivial 6.9%.


                                                    -30-
        Although the available measure underestimates its extent, the market responded negatively to

increased director self-dealing. Based on published reports alone, shareholders could not know the true

extent of insider lending. Three responses are evident in the data, however. Less self-dealing occurred

at banks with large institutional shareholders and at banks with more active shareholders. And, the

market bid down share prices at banks with more director self-dealing. This last result is consistent

with the shareholder-customer hypothesis because when directors took up a large fraction of a bank’s

loans, there were less loanable funds available for other shareholders and outsiders. Shareholder-

customers paid less in expectation of smaller or fewer loans, and shareholder-investors anticipated

lower dividend yields. Both would bid down the price of bank shares.



6. Conclusions

        Organized markets for corporate shares in the mid-nineteenth century were thin, some firm’s

shares traded only rarely, shares of others were not even listed on organized exchanges, and timely

information about a company’s performance was often difficult to acquire. These four features of the

market for early American corporate shares justifiably lead to questions concerning the ability of

shareholders and other market participants to monitor and discipline firms and their managers. The

threat of activist shareholders or corporate raiders ousting under-performing management seems an

unlikely disciplinary mechanism. Further compounding the difficulties of outside discipline, some states

limited the number of shares an individual or institutional shareholder could legally hold.11 Other states,

Massachusetts included, limited the power of large shareholders by placing limits on the number of

votes they could cast at shareholder meetings. The potential for managerial or majority shareholder self-


        11
          The charters of several of Connecticut’s earliest banks capped the number of shares any
individual or partnership could own. It was possible to work around the caps by splitting shares
among family members, but this increased the cost of exercising corporate control.

                                                   -31-
serving in such an environment appear enormous.

        Despite the potential for corporate governance to break down in the era, there is little evidence

that it did. While the ability of shareholders to control corporate policy was imperfect, Hilt (2008) and

Freeman, Pearson and Taylor (2012), among others, show that shareholders could and did discipline

managers and influence corporate policies. This study adds to the literature. Evidence from one

important mid-nineteenth century banking market shows that the presence of individual and

institutional blockholders influenced firm value. Because people conceived of the corporation

differently then and because corporations solved a different set of problems in the nineteenth century,

the channels of influence work in ways more consistent with the corporation of its own time than of

ours. Any assessment of corporate performance must come to terms with the connection between the

corporation as an historical entity, but modern conceptions of the corporation are not without merit

in studying the institution.




7. Data Appendix

        Bank balance sheet data. These data were found in the annual reports of the Massachusetts

bank commissioners. The same basic balance sheet data was published in each year between 1858 and

1862. Each annual reports included information on the principal assets, namely, loans, specie, real

estate, and amounts due from other banks. The principal liabilities were banknote circulation, deposits,

amounts due to other banks, capital and retained earnings.

        Blockholdings. Large block individual holdings were reported in the annual reports. In the

ancillary information provided with the balance sheets was a statement of the number of shares held

by the largest shareholder, whether individual or corporation. Large block institutional share holdings


                                                  -32-
were found in the annual reports of Massachusetts insurance commissioners. The insurance reports

included each insurance company’s holdings of individual stocks in bonds in their fourth, sixth, seventh

and eighth annual reports. This information was used to construct institutional holdings. When the

number of shares held by the largest shareholder described in the bank commissioners’ reports was the

same the number of shares held by the largest insurance company shareholder, the observation was

dropped because it is likely that the largest shareholder was the insurance company and not an

individual.

        Number of directors. With the exception of 1858, the number of directors was included in the

ancillary information attached to the balance sheet. The number of directors in 1858 was taken from

the Massachusetts Register, which listed the names of bank board members in that year.

        Share prices. The annual reports of the insurance commissioners provided both the par and

market price of shares in those years. The sixth annual report noted that the market price for all shares

was on one day in October. No mention of the source of the market price is provided in the other

three years, so it is unclear whether it a recent price or an average price over some interval. In the years

in which no insurance report was available or no market price was provided, prices for Boston banks

are available in Martin’s Seventy-Three Years’ History.




8. Data Sources

Adams, Sampson & Co. 1858. The Massachusetts Register, Containing a Record of the Government and Institutions

        of the State. Boston: Damrell & Moore, Printers.

Martin, Joseph G. 1871. Seventy-Three Years’ History of the Boston Stock Market. Boston: published by the

        author.


                                                    -33-
Massachusetts. General Court. 1858. Annual Report of the Bank Commissioners. Boston: William White,

         State Printer.

Massachusetts. General Court. 1859. Annual Report of the Bank Commissioners. Public Doc. No. 6. Boston:

         William White, State Printer.

Massachusetts. General Court. 1859. Fourth Annual Report of the Insurance Commissioners of the Commonwealth

         of Massachusetts. Public Document No. 8. Boston: William White, State Printer.

Massachusetts. General Court. Annual Report of the Bank Commissioners. Public Doc. No. 10. Boston:

         William White, State Printer.

Massachusetts. General Court. 1861. Annual Report of the Bank Commissioners. Public Doc. No. 8. Boston:

         William White, State Printer.

Massachusetts. General Court. 1861. Abstracts of Returns from the Banks and from the Institutions for Savings

         in Massachusetts. Public Document No. 9. Boston: William White, State Printer.

Massachusetts. General Court. 1861. Sixth Annual Report of the Insurance Commissioners of the Commonwealth

         of Massachusetts. Public Document No. 12. Boston: William White, State Printer.

Massachusetts. General Court. 1862. Annual Report of the Bank Commissioners. Public Document No. 8.

         Boston: Wright & Potter, State Printers.

Massachusetts. General Court. 1862. Seventh Annual Report of the Insurance Commissioners of the

         Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Boston: Wright & Potter, State Printers.

Massachusetts General Court. 1863. Eighth Annual Report of the Insurance Commissioners of the Commonwealth

         of Massachusetts. Public Document No. 10. Boston: Wright & Potter, State Printers.



9. References

Adams, Renée B., Benjamin E. Hermalin, and Michael S. Weisbach. 2010. “The Role of Boards of


                                                    -34-
       Directors in Corporate Governance: A Conceptual Framework and Survey.” Journal of Economic

       Literature 48.1, 58-107.

Bebchuk, Lucian A. and Alma Cohen. 2005. “The Costs of Entrenched Boards.” Journal of Financial

       Economics 78, 409-433.

Becker, Bo, Henrik Cronqvist, and Rüdiger Fahlenbrach. 2011. “Estimating the Effects of Large

       Shareholders using a Geographic Instrument.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46.4,

       907-942.

Bethel, Jennifer E., Julia Porter Liebeskind, and Tim Opler. 1998. “Block Share Purchases and

       Corporate Performance.” Journal of Finance 53.2, 605-634.

Bodenhorn, Howard. 2003. State Banking in Early America: A New Economic History. New York: Oxford

       University Press.

Bodenhorn, Howard. 2012. “Voting Rights, Share Concentration and Leverage at Nineteenth-Century

       US Banks.” NBER working paper.

Borokhovich, Kenneth A., Kelly Brunarski, Yvette S. Harman, and Robert Parrino. 2006. “Variation

       in the Monitoring Incentives of Outside Stockholder.” Journal of Law & Economics 49.2, 651-680.

Brickley, James, Ronald Lease, and Clifford Smith. 1986. “Ownership Structure and the Voting on

       Antitakeover Amendments.” Journal of Financial Economics 20, 267-291.

Chen, Xia, Jarrad Harford, and Kai Li. 2007. “Monitoring: Which Institutions Matter?” Journal of

       Financial Economics 86.2, 279-305.

Chung, Kee H. And Stephen W. Pruitt. 1994. “A Simple Approximation of Tobin’s q.” Financial

       Management 23.3, 70-74.

Coles, Jeffrey L., Naveen D. Daniel and Lalitha Naveen. 2008. “Boards: Does One Size Fit All?” Journal

       of Financial Economics 87.2, 329-356.


                                                 -35-
Demsetz, Harold. 1983. “The Structure of Ownership and the Theory of the Firm.” Journal of law and

        Economics 26.2, 375-390.

Demsetz, Harold and Kenneth Lehn. 1985. “The Structure of Corporate Ownership: Causes and

        Consequences.” Journal of Political Economy 93.6, 1155-1177.

Demsetz, Harold and Villalonga. 2001.

Duru, Augustine, Dechen Wang, and Yijiang Zhao. 2013. “Staggered Boards, Corporate Opacity and

        Firm Value.” Journal of Banking and Finance 37, 341-360.

Elyasiani, Elyas and Jia Jingyi. 2010. “Distribution of Institutional Ownership and Corporate Firm

Performance.” Journal of Banking & Finance 34, 606-620.

Faccio, Mara, Larry H. P. Lang, and Leslie Young. 2001. “Dividends and Expropriation.” American

        Economic Review 91.1, 54-78.

Freeman, Mark, Robin Pearson, and James Taylor. 2012. Shareholder Democracies? Corporate Governance in

        Britain & Ireland before 1850. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gillan, Stuart L. And Laura T. Starks. 2000. “Corporate Governance Proposals and Shareholder

        Activism: The Role of Institutional Investors.” Journal of Financial Economics 57.2, 275-305.

Gordon, Myron J. 1959. “Dividends, Earnings, and Stock Prices.” Review of Economics and Statistics 41.2,

        99-105.

Gras, N. S. B. 1937. The Massachusetts First National Bank of Boston, 1784-1934. Cambridge: Harvard

        University Press.

Guinnane, Timothy W., Ron Harris, Naomi R. Lamoreaux, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. 2007. “Putting

        the Corporation in its Place.” Enterprise & Society 8.3, 687-729.

Harris, Ron. 2009. “Law, Finance, and the First Corporations.” In Global Perspectives on the Rule of Law.

        Edited by James J. Heckman, Robert L. Nelson and Lee Cabatingan. Routledge.


                                                  -36-
Hansmann, Henry and Mariana Parglender. 2012. “The Evolution of Shareholder Voting Rights:

       Separation of Ownership and Consumption.” Yale Law School working paper.

Hilt, Eric. 2008. “When Did Ownership Separate from Control? Corporate Governance in the Early

       Nineteenth Century.” Journal of Economic History 68.3, 645-685.

Jarrell, Gregg A., James A. Brickley and Jeffry M. Netter. 1988. “The Market for Corporate Control:

       The Empirical Evidence since 1980.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 2.1, 49-68.

Jensen, Michael C. 1986. “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and Takeovers.”

       American Economic Review 76.2, 323-329.

Jiao, Yawen. 2010. “Stakeholder Welfare and Firm Value.” Journal of Banking & Finance 34, 2549-2561.

Lamoreaux, Naomi R. 1994. Insider Lending: Banks, Personal Connections, and Economic Development in

       Industrial New England. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Lamoreaux, Naomi R. 2011. “Scylla or Charybdis? Some Historical Reflections on the Two Basic

       Problems of Corporate Governance.” Business History Review 83.1, 9-34.

Lamoreaux, Naomi R and Christopher Glaisek. 1991. “Vehicles of Privilege or Mobility? Banks in

       Providence, Rhode Island during the Age of Jackson.” Business History Review 65.3, 537-557.

Larmou, Sofia and Nikos Vafeas. 2010. “The Relation between Board Size and Firm Performance in

       Firms with a History of Poor Operating Performance.” Journal of Management Governance 14, 61-

       85.

Linck, James S., Jeffrey M. Netter, and Tina Yang. 2008. “The Determinants of Board Structure.”

       Journal of Financial Economics 87, 308-328.

Massachusetts. General Court. 1812. The Law of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts from February 28, 1807

       to February 29, 1812. Vol 1. New Series. Boston: Thomas & Andrews.

Meissner, Christopher. 2005. “Voting Rules and the Success of Connected Lending in Nineteenth


                                                     -37-
        Century New England Banks.” Explorations in Economic History 42.4, 509-528.

Musacchio, Aldo. 2009. Experiments in Financial Democracy: Corporate Governance and Financial Development

        in Brazil, 1882-1950. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Private and Special Statutes of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Vol. VI. 1837. Boston: Dutton &

        Wentworth, State Printers.

Parglender, Mariana and Henry Hansmann. 2013. “A New View of Shareholder Voting in the

        Nineteenth Century: Evidence from Brazil, England and France.” Business History

        (forthcoming).

Pathan, Shams and Michael Skully. 2010. “Endogenously Structured Boards of Directors in Banks.”

        Journal of Banking & Finance 34, 1590-1606.

Ruiz-Mallorqui, Maria Victoria and Domingo J. Santana-Martin. 2011. “Dominant Institutional Owners

        and Firm Value.” Journal of Banking & Finance 35, 118-129.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny. 1986. “Large Shareholders and Corporate Control.” Journal of

        Political Economy 94.3, 461-488.

Sylla, Richard, John J. Wallis and John B. Legler. 1987. “Banks and State Public Finance in the New

        Republic, 1790-1860.” Journal of Economic History 47.2, 391-403.

Tobin, James. 1969. “A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory.” Journal of Money, Credit,

        and Banking 1.1, 15-29.

Vogt, Stephen C. And Joseph D. Vu. 2000. “Free Cash Flow and Long-Run Firm Value: Evidence

        from the Value Line Investment Survey.” Journal of Managerial Issues 12.2, 188-207.

Wainwright, Nicholas B. 1953. History of the Philadelphia National Bank: A Century and a Half of Philadelphia

        Banking, 1803-1953. Philadelphia: William F. Fell, printer.

Woidtke, Tracie. 2002. “Agents Watching Agents? Evidence from Pension Fund Ownership and Firm


                                                    -38-
      Value.” Journal of Financial Economics 63.1, 99-131.

Yermack, David. 1996. “Higher Market Valuation of Companies with a Small Board of

      Directors.” Journal of Financial Economics 40, 185-211.




                                                 -39-
                                                 Table 1
                                             Summary statistics
             Variable name                            Mean             Std Dev
Q                                                     1.021             0.046
Directors                                             7.995             1.544
% shares largest shareholder                          0.074             0.058

5% owner                                              0.563             0.497
% shares all insurance companies                      0.056             0.056
% shares largest insurance company                    0.024             0.018

5% insurance owner                                    0.107             0.309

% shares owned by directors                           0.069             0.051
5% director ownership                                 0.533             0.500


log Assets                                            13.211            0.809

Last dividend (%)                                     0.036             0.007
Retained earnings/assets                              0.107             0.053

Nonperforming loans/loans                             0.039             0.052
Bank age (yrs)                                        24.038           15.081

Boston                                                0.243             0.429




Sources: author’s calculations from data described in Data Appendix.




                                                      -40-
                                                 Table 2
                                        Univariate tests of Q ratio
Variable                  Median             Average Q                    Average Q          t-test
                           value         below median firms           above median firms   (p-value)



Directors                    8                   1.017                      1.034             2.17
                                                                                            (0.030)
ln(Assets)                 13.00                 1.009                      1.045            3.95
                                                                                           (>0.001)

% shares largest           0.055                 1.021                      1.022            0.19
shareholder                                                                                 (0.85)
% shares largest           0.024                 1.018                      1.040             2.40
insurance company                                                                           (0.017)
Last dividend (%)           3.50                 1.005                      1.054            4.11
                                                                                           (>0.001)
Retained earnings /        0.010                 1.013                      1.046            3.64
capital                                                                                    (>0.001)

Nonperforming              0.024                 1.039                      1.020             2.06
loans / loans                                                                               (0.040)




Source: Author’s calculations from data described in Data Appendix.




                                                      -41-
                                               Table 3
                                Determinants of firm value (Tobin’s Q)
                               OLS                   Median              Fixed-effects               3SLS
log Assets                     0.023                   0.019                  0.019                   0.124
                            (0.004)***              (0.004)***               (0.022)               (0.034)***

log Directors                 -0.027                 -0.006                  -0.013                  -0.428
                             (0.016)*                (0.014)                 (0.015)               (0.162)***
5% Individual                  0.015                  0.009                   0.010                   0.336
Owner                        (0.007)**               (0.005)*                (0.008)               (0.121)***
5% Insurance                  -0.011                 -0.006                  -0.004                 -0.106
Owner                         (0.010)                (0.008)                 (0.006)                (0.098)

5% Director                    0.011                  0.002                  -0.002                   0.063
Ownership                     (0.008)                (0.007)                 (0.010)               (0.023)***
Last Dividend (%)             -0.011                  0.021                   0.028                 -0.008
                              (0.019)                (0.01)**               (0.012)**               (0.008)
Nonperforming                 -0.125                 -0.067                  -0.043                  -0.256
loans                         (0.084)                (0.059)                 (0.062)               (0.121)**

Retained earnings              0.257                   0.172                  0.006                  0.193
                            (0.074)***              (0.063)***               (0.090)                (0.105)*


R-squared                      0.23                    0.23               0.33 (within)
F-statistic                   7.44***                                       4.48***

Chi-square                                                                                           22.46
Notes: 206 observations. Dependent variable is Q. *** implies p<0.01; ** implies p<0.05; and * implies p<0.10.
Robust standard errors clustered on bank in parentheses.
Sources: Authors calculation from data described in Data Appendix




                                                      -42-
                                        Table 4
                                   Robustness checks
                                Determinants of firm value
                              3% owners             7% owner    Large owner %
log Assets                       0.108                0.160          0.143
                              (0.017)***            (0.081)**     (0.414)***
Log Directors                   -0.007                -0.801        -0.420
                                (0.139)              (0.448)*     (0.179)**

Last dividend                   -0.003               -0.004        -0.003
                                (0.005)              (0.009)       (0.009)
Nonperforming loans /           -0.070                -0.339       -0.069
loans                           (0.092)             (0.162)**      (0.116)

Retained earnings / capital      0.106                0.147         0.299
                                (0.106)              (0.118)      (0.139)**
3% Individual Owner              0.721
                              (0.167)***

3% Insurance Owner              -0.267
                              (0.074)***
3% Director Owner                0.017
                                (0.020)
7% Individual Owner                                   0.298
                                                     (0.179)*

7% Insurance Owner                                   -0.225
                                                     (0.402)
7% Director Owner                                     0.127
                                                     (0.068)*

Largest Individual Owner                                             3.457
(%)                                                               (1.006)***

Largest Insurance Owner                                             1.583
(%)                                                                (1.549)
Director Owner (%)                                                  0.761
                                                                  (0.324)**
Constant                         -0.987               0.419        -0.370
                               (0.465)**             (0.284)       (0.438)

Chi-square                     116.8***               13.3*        21.3***




                                           -43-
                                                Table 4
                                           Robustness checks
                                        Determinants of firm value
                                    3% owners                     7% owner                   Large owner %

Notes: 206 observations. Dependent variable is Q. *** implies p<0.01; ** implies p<0.05; and * implies p<0.10.
Robust standard errors clustered on bank in parentheses.
Sources: Authors calculation from data described in Data Appendix




                                                      -44-
                                                 Table 5
                              3SLS estimates – Tobin’s Q and Director Loans


                                                          Dependent variable = Tobin’s Q

ln (Assets)                                        0.029                                 0.040
                                                  (0.027)                              (0.020)**

ln (Directors)                                    -0.139                                   -0.055
                                                  (0.124)                                  (0.128)
5% Individual Owner                                0.092                                 0.123
                                                  (0.102)                             (0.048)***

5% Insurance Owner                                 0.160                                0.207
                                                 (0.076)**                             (0.115)*
Loans to directors / Loans                        -0.933                                -0.771
                                                (0.281)***                            (0.225)***
Last dividend (%)                                 -0.010                                 -0.017
                                                  (0.007)                              (0.007)**

Nonperforming loans / loans                       -0.312                                   -0.025
                                                (0.110)***                                 (0.131)
Retained earnings / capital                        0.087                                   -0.009
                                                  (0.145)                                  (0.133)
Constant                                           1.012                                 0.692
                                                (0.285)***                            (0.220)***


                                                 Dependent variable = Loans to directors / Loans

5% Individual Owner                               -0.092                                 0.296
                                                  (0.159)                             (0.108)***
5% Insurance Owner                                 0.003                                -1.239
                                                  (0.156)                             (0.277)***

ln (Assets)                                       -0.062                                 -0.073
                                                 (0.033)*                              (0.037)**

ln (Directors)                                     0.201                                    0.257
                                                  (0.173)                                  (0.183)
Boston                                             0.040                                 0.250
                                                  (0.067)                             (0.086)***
% Shares votes at last meeting                      --                                  -0.150
                                                                                       (0.089)*


                                                   -45-
                                             Table 5
                          3SLS estimates – Tobin’s Q and Director Loans


Constant                                              0.571                                  0.418
                                                    (0.279)**                               (0.373)

Observations                                           206                                    115

Notes: *** implies p<0.01; ** implies p<0.05; and * implies p<0.10. Robust standard errors clustered on bank in
parentheses.
Sources: Authors calculation from data described in Data Appendix




                                                      -46-
                                        Appendix Table A1
                 3SLS estimates – Board Size, Individual and Institutional Investors
                        5% owners          3% owners              7% owners                Large owners (%)
                                               Dependent variable = ln(directors)

Loans / assets                0.556               0.243                  -0.365                 0.435
                            (0.269)**            (0.563)                 (0.286)              (0.226)**

ln (assets)                  -0.029              -0.485                   0.081                 0.088
                             (0.062)             (0.337)                 (0.053)              (0.035)**
Boston                        -0.316             -0.156                  0.379                  -0.276
                            (0.129)**            (0.125)                (0.222)*              (0.076)***

Individual owners             -0.855              -4.471                  1.033                 -4.768
                            (0.388)**           (2.034)**              (0.392)***             (1.470)***
Insurance company             -0.790              1.487                  -6.562                 -9.415
                             (0.457)*            (0.794)*              (1.003)***             (4.437)**
Bank age                      -0.020             -0.006                  -0.005                 -0.010
                            (0.006)***           (0.005)                 (0.005)              (0.003)***

Bank age squared              0.0003             0.00007                 0.00002                0.0001
                           (0.00008)***         (0.00008)               (0.00008)            (0.00006)**
Tobins Q                       3.413              6.102                  -2.158                 1.248
                            (1.052)***           (3.808)*              (0.665)***              (0.801)
Constant                     -0.597               5.868                   3.262                 0.050
                             (1.087)            (2.696)**              (1.059)***              (0.981)

                                          Dependent variable = individual blockholder
Boston                       -0.146               0.041                  -0.371                -0.180
                             (0.116)             (0.049)               (0.112)***              (0.013)

ln (Par $ share)              -0.184             -0.030                  -0.080                 -0.025
                            (0.071)***           (0.059)                 (0.108)              (0.009)***
ln (Assets)                   -0.119              -0.120                 -0.011                 -0.013
                             (0.062)*           (0.029)***               (0.060)               (0.007)*

Constant                       2.999               2.639                  0.963                  0.359
                            (0.838)***          (0.447)***               (0.928)              (0.098)***

                                          Dependent variable = institutional blockholder
Boston                        0.143               0.071                   0.031                 0.008
                             (0.077)*            (0.106)                 (0.034)               (0.004)*
ln (Assets)                   -0.087              0.013                  -0.021                -0.002
                            (0.041)**            (0.058)                 (0.019)               (0.002)


                                                  -47-
                                     Appendix Table A1
              3SLS estimates – Board Size, Individual and Institutional Investors
                       5% owners               3% owners              7% owners                Large owners (%)

Constant                       1.220                  0.085                   0.286                  0.045
                             (0.529)**               (0.745)                 (0.238)                (0.031)




Notes: 206 observations. *** implies p<0.01; ** implies p<0.05; and * implies p<0.10. Robust standard errors
clustered on bank in parentheses.
Sources: Authors calculation from data described in Data Appendix




                                                      -48-
