                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        JOB CHARACTERISTICS
                         AND HOURS OF WORK



                         Joseph G. Altonji

                        Christina H. Paxson




                       Working Paper No. 1695




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 1986




This paper was written while Altonji was visiting the Industrial
Relations Section, Princeton University, which provided excellent
research support and a very stimulating environment. The project
was partially funded under contract number USDL J-9--M-0171 from the
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy, U.S. Department of
Labor, which is not responsible for the contents of the paper. We
owe a special debt to Todd Idson for permitting us to use his
working files for the Quality of Employment Survey. We also thank
Rebecca Blank, David Card, John Ham, Shelly Lundberg, John
Pencaval, three anonymous referees and seminar participants at
r.olumbia, Michigan, Princeton, Yale and the NBER Summer Institute
   bor Studies) for helpful comments. A previous draft was pre-
   ted at the Fifth World Congress of the Econometric Society in
  dust 1985. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
  search program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
  ose of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
  onomic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #1895
                                             April 1986




                 Job Characteristics and Hours of Work




                                ABSTRACT



     This paper provides evidence that hours of work are heavily influenced by
the particular job which a person holds. The empirical work consists of a
comparison of the variance in the change in work hours across time intervals
containing a job change with the variance in the change in hours across time
periods when the job remains the same. To the extent that workers choose
hours and these hours choices are influenced by shifts in individual
preferences and resources, the variance in the time change of hours should not
depend upon whether the worker has switched jobs. The desire to reduce or
increase hours could be acted upon in the current job. On the other hand, if
hours are influenced by employer preferences or if job specific
characteristics dominate the labor supply decision, then hours changes should
be larger when persons change jobs than when they do not. Using the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics and the Quality of Employment Survey, we find that
hours changes are typically two to four times more variable across jobs than
within jobs. This result holds for both men and women and for both quits and
layoffs, is obtained for weeks per year, hours per week, and annual hours, and
is not sensitive to the use of controls for a set of job characteristics
(including the wage) which might influence the level of hours persons wish to
supply. The findings are also inconsistent with the view that workers may
costlessly adjust hours by changing jobs.

     The finding that the job has a large influence on work hours suggests
that much greater emphasis should be given to demand factors and to job
specific labor supply factors in future research on hours of work. The
overwhelming emphasis upon the wage and personal characteristics in
conventional labor supply analyses of work hours may in part be misplaced.




Joseph G. Altonji                                 Christina H. Paxson
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
Columbia University                               Columbia University
New York, NY 10027                                New York, NY 10027
(212) 280—4190
                                     —1—


                               1.   Introduction
     Most empirical studies of hours of work, and virtually all based upon

micro data, have assumed that observed hours represent the labor supply

decisions of workers. In a conventional labor supply framework work hours are

determined as the quantity of labor the worker chooses to sell given

preferences, wages, and non—labor income in current and future periods. The

focus upon the labor supply model is due in part to intense interest in the

responsiveness of hours to wages and taxes and to lack of micro data on firm

characteristics. Many refinements of the basic labor supply model and

improvements in econometric techniques have been made during the past fifteen

years. But despite these advances, the recent surveys by Ashenfelter (1984)

and Pencavel (1984) conclude that (1) there is considerable variation across

studies in estimates of the response of hours to wages, nonlabor income, and

demographic characteristics emphasized in the studies and (2) existing labor

supply models explain little of the variation in hours across workers and very

little of the variation in hours over time for a given worker.1

     One obvious response to the current shortcomings of the literature is to

continue to refine labor supply models and estimation techniques and, perhaps

most importantly, to obtain more comprehensive and reliable data on hours,

budget parameters, and personal characteristics. A second response,

complementary to the first, is to explore the possibility that non—wage

characteristics associated with specific jobs, such as working conditions,

commuting time, and job hazards, are key determinants of labor supply

preferences. In this view, empirical labor supply studies are basically on

the right track but have emphasized the wrong set of variables. A third

response, which is attracting growing support among labor economists, is to
                                   —2—

conclude that the labor supply model is fundamentally inadequate as a model of

hours determination, and to emphasize the role of employer preferences in the

determination of hours. The second and third responses are very different,

but both involve a shift in emphasis from worker characteristics to job

specific characteristics as the key determinants of work hours. This paper

examines the extent to which hours are in fact influenced by (non—wage)

characteristics of the job which affect the labor supply preferences of the

worker and/or are influenced by employer preferences for hours.

     To set the stage for the analysis, a brief discussion of existing studies

of the importance of job specific labor supply and labor demand considerations

in hours determination is in order. The comprehensive surveys by

Killingsworth (1983) and Pencavel (1984) cite few studies which have examined

the influence on hours of job characteristics (other than wages and fringe

benefits such as pensions)which might be expected to affect labor supply.

Atrostic (1982) shows that an index of job attributes plays a significant role

in a demand system for work hours, job attributes, and nonlabor income.2 Her

results suggest that job attributes do affect the form of the labor supply

function and consequently influence the hours chosen given the level of

nonlabor income and the wage. However, Atrostic does not examine whether the

job attributes have much explanatory power. A number of cross section studies

have added occupation or industry variables to standard labor supply models as

partial controls for job attributes. These variables play a significant role,

although they are subject to demand as well as supply interpretations and may

capture the effects of omitted personal characteristics which happen to be

associated with occupation or industry.

     Casual empiricism suggests that firms have strong preferences about

employee hours. These preferences arise in part from technological
                                    —3--


considerations such as hiring and training costs which are fixed per employee

and the costs of coordinating the activities of workers who work different

numbers of hours.3 Also, due to start—up costs and fatigue, productivity per

hour may be low both for employees who only work a few hours a week and for

employees who work a large number of hours. Furthermore, fringe benefits and

government mandated payroll taxes which are assessed on a per worker basis

introduce nonlinearity in the relationship between hours and compensation. If

the preferences of employees and/or the hours required by employers vary over

time, and if mobility costs prevent workers from quickly moving to firms which

offer the hours level workers prefer, then observed hours do not represent

points on a labor supply function and consequently may be difficult to explain

with a labor supply model.

     The implications of employer preferences for the analysis of labor supply

and hours of work have been explored in a number of recent empirical

studies. Rosen (1976), Moff it (1983), and Lundberg (1984) are among a handful

of papers which have estimated labor supply models in which the worker faces a

nonlinear schedule relating the wage rate to hours of work. Abowd and

Ashenfelter (1981) and a subsequent study by Topel (1983) examine the idea

that firms offer workers hours—wage packages in the context of studies of

compensating differentials for unemployment risk. Ehrenberg and Schumann

(1984) use a similar framework to investigate compensating differentials for

mandatory overtime. Ashenfelter (1980), Ham (1982, 1986) and a number of

other recent studies have examined whether unemployment is best interpreted as

a constraint on choice of hours.4 Finally, hours—wage packages have been the

subject of much theoretical speculation in the implicit contracts literature.5

    While an important beginning has been made, research on the empirical

implications of hours—wage packages is in an early stage of development. It
                                      —4—


is   unclear whether employer preferences for hours determinants play a

quantitatively significant role in hours determination. Even less is known

about the importance of job related labor supply determinants, aside from the

effect of the wago rate and fringe benefits such as pensions. To guide

research on structural labor supply, labor demand, and contracts models of

hours, it would be useful to provide an empirical assessment of whether or

not job characteristics are a dominant influence on hours.

      We shed light on the issue by establishing the following fact about the

structure of hours: a large fraction of the variance of work hours is

associated with jobs.6 Specifically, we compare the variance of the change in

hours across time periods when people switch jobs with the variance in the

change in hours across time periods when the job does not change. Shifts in

job specific hours requirements will be larger when the job changes than when

it does not. Shifts in job specific labor supply characteristics are also

likely to be larger when the job changes than when it does not. For these

reasons, one would expect hours to be more variable across jobs than within

jobs if hours requirements and/or job specific labor supply determinants are

important. On the other hand, if workers may freely vary hours on a given job

and labor supply depends largely on personal characteristics rather than job

characteristics, then the magnitude of observed hours shifts (controlling for

the effects of wage changes) should not be sensitive to whether or not the job

changes.

      Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and the Quality

of Employment Survey (QES), we find that the variance of the hours change is

between two and four times as large for those who have switched jobs as for

those who are in the same job. This result holds for both men and women, is

obtained for weeks per year, hours per week, and annual hours, and is not
                                    —5—

sensitive to the use of controls for a detailed set of job characteristics

which might influence the workerTh desired hours. Furthermore, the results do

not appear to arise from heterogeneity in the underlying variance in desired

hours for workers who change jobs frequently relative to workers who do not.

     We also investigate whether the findings are consistent with a model in

which hours in a given job are determined by employer preferences, but each

worker may cheaply locate and move to firms which offer hours equal to the

desired hours level. In such a model, hours choices would still reflect the

preferences of workers, who would simply change jobs when they wish to make

large adjustments in hours. By analyzing quits and layoffs separately, we are

able to reject such a model.

     Our results show that characteristics of jobs play a very important role

in the determination of hours. We wish to emphasize, however, that they do

not establish whether the job characteristics represent constraints on hours

imposed by the firm, unobserved job characteristics which influence hours

desired by the worker, or a combination of the two. There is of course a big

gap between the data analysis in the paper and a satisfactory structural

analysis of hours determination. However, our finding that the job has a

large influence on work hours suggests that structural models of hours of work

should give much more emphasis to demand factors and to job specific supply

factors.

     The paper procedes as follows. Section 2 provides motivation for the

empirical work by discussing the implications of alternative models of hours

determination for the variance in hours within and across jobs. Section 3

discusses the data used in the analysis and a variety of econometric issues.

Section 4 presents the empirical results. The paper concludes with a brief

summary of the findings and their implication for future research on hours of
                                      —6--


work.



2. Implications of Models of Hours Determination for the Variance of Hours

                          Changes within and Across Jobs



        Let       denote the change in the log of hours between period t and t—k for

individual i when the same job was held in both periods. Let           denote

the hours change for individual i if a job change occurred. Let Var(.) denote

the variance function. The empirical work in the paper focuses primarily on

comparisons Var(H) with Var(tHt).
        Although the paper focusses on comparison of hours changes within and

across jobs, no formal model of mobility is presented. The implicit view

underlying our work is that workers weigh many job attributes in making

mobility decisions, including wages, promotion possibilities, working

conditions, fringe benefits, and locational preferences, To the extent that

hours cannot be chosen on the job, the shifts in hours requirements of a job

relative to individual labor supply preferences may play a key role in job

mobility. The extent of mobility and the ability of heterogenous workers to

locate job packages which are most suitable to them along all dimensions is

influenced by search costs and mobility costs. Finally, a substantial

fraction of mobility arises exogenously through layoffs and is not related to

hours preferences of the worker.

        In the remainder of this section , we discuss four alternative models of

hours determination, and derive their implications for the difference in the

variances of hours changes across and within jobs. We refer to the models as

LS—PC, LS—JC, LD—IM, and LD—PM.

        Model LS—PC is a conventional labor supply model in which employers
                                    —7—

permit workers to freely choose work hours at a parametric wage and personal

characteristics are key labor supply determinants. Model LS—JC is a

conventional labor supply model in which workers may choose hours but hours

preferences are heavily influenced by job—specific characteristics, in

addition to personal characteristics. Model LD—IM is a "labor demand—

imperfect mobility" model N which hours on a given job are determined by

employer preferences, and mobility costs and imperfect information prevent

workers from avoiding hours constraints through costless job mobility. Model

LD—PM is a "labor demand—perfect job mobility" model in which hours in a given

job are determined by employer preferences, but workers may costlessly locate

and move to firms offering hours which are equal to the desired hours level.

     Suppose that workers are free to choose hours within jobs, and hours

choices are influenced primarily by the wage rate, individual (i.e. non—job—

related) preferences and resources, as in model LS—PC. Then the variance of

the change in hours should depend on whether or not the job has changed only

to the extent that the wage varies more across jobs than within jobs. To take

the simplest example, suppose an individual faces the same wage in all jobs.

Then, since individuals may freely choose hours, the desire to reduce or

increase hours could always be acted on within the current job. Conversely, a

change of job, all preferences being equal, would result in no change of

hours. Of course, there is evidence (Cline (1979), and Freeman (1980)) that

wages do vary across jobs, and that the variance of the wage change is higher

when the job changes than when it does not. This implies that the variance of

hours changes will be higher across jobs than within jobs. However, under LS—

PC, the component of the desired supply of hours which is not related to the

wage should have the same variance within and across jobs. In sum, if LS—PC

Is correct, and if one first adjusts hours to account for the effect of the
                                   —8—

wage rate on labor supply, then Var(H) should be similar to Var(LH).

     On the other hand, both LS—JC and LD—IM imply that Var(H1) will

exceed            even when the wage is controlled for. However, LS—JC and

LD—IM involve very different sources of the underlying variance of hours. If

LD—IM is correct, differences across firms in the demand for hours will cause

the variability of hours to be greater when the job changes than when it does

not. If LS—JC is correct, differences across firms in characteristics

affecting labor supply may cause Var(LHt) to exceed Var(LHit) .      This

would be the case if many non—wage labor supply determinants, such as working

conditions and travel time, vary more when the job changes than when it does

not. Thus, to distinguish between LS—JC and LD—IM one must first adjust hours

measures for the effects of job—related labor—supply determinants and then

compare the variances of these adjusted measures within and across jobs.

     Model LD—PM also implies that Var(Ht) will exceed Var(1Hjt). Model

LD—PM is a demand model in the sense that observed hours are always in accord

with the employers preferences. However, the assumption that mobility costs

are low and information about job openings is very rich implies that workers

simply change jobs when they wish to change work hours. In the LD—PM model

employer preferences for hours influences job selection but not work hours.

For purposes of conducting labor supply analysis, LD—PM is similar to LS—PC

(although LD—PM has very different implications for mobility).7 However,

under LD—PM the fact that workers must change jobs to change hours implies

that Var(LH'jt) will exceed Var(H±t) even if hours are determined entirely

by worker preferences.

     In sum, a finding that Var(H±t) exceeds Var(AHjt) (after controlling

for the effects of wages on hours) would provide evidence against LS—PC.

However, the finding would not permit one to distinguish among the other three
                                    —9—

models. It could be that job—specific labor supply preferences, employer

preferences, or even, in the case of LD—PM, individual specific labor supply

preferences are the underlying source of the higher cross job variance of

hours changes. In Section 2.1 we provide a more formal discussion of the

issues involved in discriminating between LS—JC and LD—IM, under the

assumption that LD—PM is not correct. In Section 2.2, we suggest a method for

testing whether LD—PM is a reasonable explanation for the excess variance of

hours across jobs.



2.1. Distinguishing between the Labor Supply—Job Characteristics and Labor

Demand—Imperfect Mobility Models.

     Assume that mobility and search costs are substantial, so that LD—PM is

incorrect. Models LS—JC and LD—IM may be tested by adjusting for the effects

of job—specific labor supply determinants. If LS—JC is correct, then the

variance of hours changes after controlling for the effects of job—specific

labor supply determinants should not depend on whether or not the job has

changed. A finding that the variance of hours changes across jobs exceeds the

variance of hours changes within jobs even after adjusting hours for job—

specific labor supply determinants provides evidence in favor of LD—IM.

     The importance of using adjusted hours measures when drawing inferences

about LS—JC and LD—IM from Var(zH..) and Var(H1.), and the appropriate

adjustment to hours may be demonstrated using the following simple model of

hours determination. The model is general in nature, and is little more than

a framework for measurement. By imposing restrictions on the coefficients of

the model, one can obtain a model in which hours are supply determined, demand

determined, or some combination of both. Since in this paper we do not

attempt to estimate structural models of hours determination, there is little
                                                   — 10 —



point      in presenting the underlying optimizations (on the part of firms and

workers) which would yield such models of hours determination. However, in

Appendix 1, we work through a specific example and show that the model in the

text nests intertemporal labor supply models similar to those used by MaCurdy

(1981) and Altonji (1986) and others, demand models such as those discussed by

Lewis (1971) and Rosen (1969), and contracts models of hours determination of

the type discussed by Rosen (1985) and Abowd and Card (1985a,b).

       The equation for the supply of hours is

(1)         H. = Z.                + bw.
             iJt  ijt                  ijt



       In (1),               is the log of the number of hours individual i wishes to

work in job j at time t. To simplify the presentation only one dimension of

hours is considered in the model, although the empirical work is conducted

using hours/week, weeks/year, and hours/year.8 The vector                     is a set of

labor supply determinants, which may be partitioned as
=
    {z.,
      1
           z.
            it,
                  z.
                   13
                       .,   z.
                             ljt
                                   }. The subvector z.1 contains variables which are

constant over time and affect labor supply to all jobs. This vector includes

fixed determinants of current and future wages and labor supply preferences in

all jobs, such as education and race. The subvector zj contains time—varying

variables which affect wages and labor supply preferences on all jobs, and

includes variables such as marital status, number of children, and non—labor

income. The vector z1 contains variables which are fixed over time and

affect the supply of labor to job j, such as travel time and work

environment. The vector                      consists of job—specific time—varying supply

determinants, such as transitory aspects of the work environment. The

variable wU is the log of the real wage, which for ease of presentation we

assume does not vary with hours of work.9
                                                    — 11 —



       The demand for hours per worker by firm j is

(2)          Bw.            + D
       ljt       ]jt            jt,



where Djt is a vector of factors affecting labor demand.                                is partitioned

into D. = {d.,             d. }, .      The subvector d. is a set of variables which are
      jt             •j     jt                              J

fixed over time for job j and characterize aspects of the firn(s technology

and/or compensation system (such as set up costs and firm—specific training

per worker and payroll taxes and fringe benefits) which affect desired hours

per worker. The subvector                      consists of time varying determinants of

employer preferences for hours, such as productivity shocks, shifts in product

demand, or changes in the stock of workers due to random changes in quits and

hiring success.

       How is the log of hours (H1t) actually determined? A simple rule which

allows for various alternatives is that Hjjt is a linear function of the

determinants of both labor supply and labor demand, as in (3).

(3)          =                 + 8D. +



The vector of parameters                 and     can be partitioned conformably with Z1 and

Dit such that              =                        and         =
                                      p2 113 114}
       For a variety of econometric reasons, it is convenient to work with the

changes in hours rather than the levels. (In practice, we discuss results for

both.) From (3) we have:

(4a)     H1jt =           U2[zj
                                  —
                                      Zit_k]   + I14[z.. —                + 2[d —                  + Y[wi —
                                                                ziit_k]                 djt...k]


(4b)             =                — zit_k]     + ii3[z1 —              + 114[zijt —
                                                                z1_1                  Zjj_t..k]
        + 1Ed —                   + 2[d —
                           dJ                   dj_t_kl   + 1[w— Wjj_t...kl
                                                    — 12 —



A "prime" on the job subscript in t—k (i.e., j) signifies that the job has

changed between t and t—k. Note that if hours are demand determined, as in

LD—IM, u=O and y=B. If hours are supply determined as in LS—JC, then =O and

'y'=b.    For model LS—PC, =O, 1.13O                114O and ib. Of course, it is possible
that hours are determined both by employer and employee preferences. For

example, an implicit contracts model in which the marginal utility of income

is equated with the marginal product of labor will result in hours which are

determined by a weighted average of firm and worker preferences. (See the

Appendix.)

         Given that the wage rate, job related labor supply determinants, and

labor demand determinants in (4b) are all likely to vary more when the job

changes than when it does not, LS—JC, LD—IM, and even LS—PC (because of the

wage rate in the case LS—PC) are potentially consistent with an excess of

var(Hjt) over var(LHt). Suppose, however, that we adjust the changes in

hours measures to take into account the effects of the wage rate and job

related labor supply determinants. Assume, for the moment, that w1t and all

elements of Z.                  are observed. Then, define ih.                and h                ,    the adjusted
                       ljt                                             ijt                 iit
hours measures, to be:



               =
                    Hjjt
                            —
                                          Z..tk}         1[w — WI
                   =            — p [z. —   z.     — p            —   z.ij         1 —   i{w.ijt       —   wij         I

         ljt            ijt        3 ij     ij           4 [z.
                                                            ljt              t—k                                 t—k



implying that:

                                      Zit_ki + 2[d — djt_kI
                       =            —
  (5a)                     U2[z
                        =            — Zit_ki + 1[d —     + 2[d —
  (5b)
                                                             dJ                          dj_t..k]

Thus, under the null hypothesis that hours are determined by workers (either
                                            — 13   —




LS—PC    or LS—JC, with =O),           =
                                           hjjt and         var(h) —
                                                                           var(h1)       = 0.

        Assume that the fixed demand components d and d_ are unrelated to the

time varying demand components. Then under the alternative hypothesis that

hours are employer determined:

(6) var(h..) —                   =                     —   cov(d.,
                     var(Ah..)       212[var(d.)
                                 + 222[cov(d., ditk) —               cov(d.,   dj_tk)]


It is reasonable to assume that the autocovariance of time varying demand

determinants is larger within the same job than across jobs, in which case

cov(d, djt_k) —      cov(d,    dj-t_k) is positive. Furthermore,

var(d)_ cov(d, d3-) is necessarily positive, which follows from the Cauchy

Schwartz inequality since var(d) and var(d_) are the same. This leads to

the conclusion that if hours are employer determined, the difference between

the variances of adjusted hours changes within and across jobs should be

positive, whereas if hours are employee determined this difference should be

equal to 0. Thus, by adjusting hours measures one may in principle isolate

the importance of employer preferences in hours variation.

        We have assumed, so far, that all elements of                 are observed.

Although our data sets contain several personal and job related labor supply

determinants, they provide little information on expectations of wages and

nonlabor income in future periods, the work environment, travel time, job

security, and other personal and job related non—wage factors which influence

labor supply. To account for the fact that many labor supply determinants are

not observed, we modify equation (3) in the following way. Partition

into                                                         contains only observed labor
               Sj}, where Xj={x, Xit,
supply determinants, and         =
                                     {s1,    s,            st}   are the unobserved

counterparts to {x, x, Xjj xj.}.               Also partion i into Ccx,t5}
                                                             — 14 —



where        {a1,c2,cz3,c4} corresponds to the elements of

and o=1,2,ô3,64} corresponds to the elements of                                                      Then




(7) H1i =
                  [x1]               +                +        ÷



Proceeding as above, one may take the first difference of (7) and adjust 11ijt

and               for all observed job—related labor supply determinants. This

yields the following expressions for                                    and hjjt


         =
              c2[x.
                                 —
                                     xitk]        +
                                                      2[s. — sit-k'      +                 —    S         k1
                                                                                                               +
                                                                                                                   2[d. — djtk]

 h. *        =           [x.it   —   x.it—k   I   + cS [s. — s.
                                                      2 it     it—k ]
                                                                         +5
                                                                              3[s.
                                                                                iJ
                                                                                       —       s.   ._]   +
                                                                                                               4 {s.ijt
                                                                                                                          —   s.13 t—k
      ijt            2                                                                          13
                 +
                         1[d.
                                  —
                                      d_I         + 2[d. — dj_tkl

Under the null hypothesis LS—PC, 64=2=53=1=O and var(h1t) —                                                     var(ht)
equals 0, but under the null hypothesis LS—JC,

                                                  =                  —       coy
 var(h..) —                 var(hi.)                  232[var(s..)                              s_)]
                                                                                   —
                                                  +
                                                      242[cov(s..,                     cov(s                   ijt—k
where we have assumed that the fixed job specific supply components                                                        and

s— are unrelated to the time varying components 5 and 5ijt in all

periods. That is, the difference in the variance of hours changes across and

within jobs may be positive if there are unobserved job—related factors

affecting labor supply. The difference would arise in part from the variance

across jobs in the unobserved permanent determinants of labor supply to a

particular job, and in part from the fact that the autocovariance of time—

varying job specific labor supply determinants is likely to be larger within
                                         — 15 —



jobs   than across jobs.

       The implications of the above model for the empirical analysis below may

be summarized as follows. First, if LS—PC is correct (hours are supply

determined and non—wage job characteristics have little effect on labor

supply), then the difference between the variance of adjusted hours changes

across and within jobs should still be 0 despite the presence of unobserved

personal characteristics. Thus, a finding that var(Lth..) —           var(h..)      is

substantially larger than 0 is evidence against this simplest model of

hours.'° Second, if LS—JC is correct, var(h..) —           var(h..)      may be

positive if unobserved job—related labor supply determinants are important.

Thus, the finding that the variance of hours changes is much larger across

jobs than within jobs provides evidence in favor LD—IM over LS—JC only insofar

as we have been able to control for all relevant labor supply determinants. A

final interpretation of our results will await development and estimation of

structural hours models incorporating both job spec-if ic labor supply

determinants and labor demand determinants.



2.2. Testing the Labor Demand—Perfect Job Mobility Model

       The LD—PM ("labor demand—perfect job mobility") model is a fourth

possible model of hours determination. In this model, hours worked in a

particular job are dictated by the firm in accordance with (2), but workers

may costlessly exercise their labor supply preferences by moving across jobs

even though they cannot vary hours within jobs. Given no search or mobility

costs the worker will change jobs when H.. -      * H. ,   and so the worker will
                                         lit        ljt

                                    it
almost always be in a firm with D. such that H. =
                                -                  ljt
                                                           H.
                                                            ljt.
                                                                   Even though hours

are determined by the demand equation (2), the characteristics Dt of the job

chosen by the worker will implicitly depend upon the workers labor supply
                                   — 16 —



preferences. The term var(LHj) is likely to be larger
than var(H1.), since workers must change jobs to change hours. However,

labor supply preferences, rather than firm preferences, would underlie the

difference between var(tHjt) and var(iHt). Furthermore, the excess of

var(Hjt) over var(1Hjjt) would arise even if labor supply preferences were

not affected by job characteristics.

     Of course, if mobility and information costs are literally 0, then from

the workers point of view there is no meaningful distinction between varying

hours within a firm and varying hours across firms. In fact, the substantial

length of time workers spend on jobs, the evidence of substantial dispersion

in wages across jobs offering similar characteristics, and the significant

amount of time workers spend in job search suggests that mobility costs and

information costs are substantial. In this situation observed hours—wage

combinations will not necessarily lie on the labor supply function. Workers

will choose the best combination of hours, wage income, and other job

characteristics available at a particular time, and employer preferences will

have an independent influence on work hours. In summary, LD—PM is not

plausible as a full explanation for a large difference between var(Ht) and

var(H). However, it may be a partial explanation.
     To help discriminate the LD—PM model from LD—IM and LS—JC, we compare

Var(H) for the subset of job changes resulting from layoffs with

Var(AHjt). In making this comparison we assume that the occurrence of

layoffs are not correlated with changes in labor supply preferences. If this

assumption is correct and LD—PM is correct, then workers who experience a

layoff will pick new jobs offering an hours level similar to their old job,

and so Var(H') should be similar to Var(iH1t). (Hours are measured such

that hours of unemployment directly associated with layoffs should not affect
                                   — 17 —



the hours change measures.) If LD—IM is correct, then the best new job that
the worker is able to find after a layoff may require an hours level different

from hours on the previous job, in which case Var(H1t) will exceed

Var(H1t). If mobility and search are costly and LS—JC are correct, then the

wage and non—wage characteristics of the laid off workers best offer may

induce a change in the workerTh supply of hours. As a result, Var(H)

will also exceed Var(H).



                        3. Data and Econometric Issues

3.1 Data

     The major data source is the first fourteen waves (1968—1981) of the

Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID, Survey Research Center (1982)).

Observations for a particular year were included only if the individual was

between the ages of 18 and 60, inclusive, was not retired, and worked positive

hours in that year. Observations were excluded from the sample if total

annual hours worked on all jobs exceeded 5,000. The sample sizes for the

procedures are reported in the tables below. They vary considerably due to

differences in the availability of data for men, unmarried women, and married

women, which we analyze separately, and due to missing data on particular

variables.

     The second data source, the Quality of Employment Survey (QES, Quinn and

Staines (1979)), consists of two waves (1973 and 1977). After exclusions due

to missing data our QES sample contains 280 white males between the ages of 17

and 64. The QES contains more information on characteristics of the job which

may affect labor supply than does the PSID, although the small size of the QES

sample is a disadvantage.

     Most of the variables used are self—explanatory and are listed in Table
                                      — 18 —



1.   The PSID measures of annual work hours on the main job, weeks/year worked

on the main   job,   and hours/week on the main job require discussion. Since we

wish to distinguish between changes in hours worked which occur within and

between jobs, it is important that the hours measures used pertain to one main

job only. All hours variables refer to the full calendar year prior to the

survey. Consequently, if a separation occurred in the calendar year prior to

the survey, the hours measures represent a mixture of hours worked on two

sequential jobs. For the PSID, this problem is compounded by the fact that

the separation variable indicates whether a job change occurred in the year

prior to the survey date (typial1y March) rather than the previous calandar

year.

        As a result of this inconsistency in timing of the hours and separation

variables, to obtain change in hours measures which are unambiguously either

"within job" or "between job", one must use the hours change over a three year
                                                           —             where J is
gap. That is, we base the hour change measures on              HiJt_3,
the job index in t—k. (J=j if the job has not changed and equals j if the job

has changed). We also must exclude observations if the individual indicates a

change of job in survey time periods t, t—1, t—3, t—4.12 We determine whether

Hijt—HjJt_3 is "within't or "between" jobs by examining whether a separation

occurred in time t—2 and set            or        equal to Hijt—HjJt_3


accordingly.

        This method of computing the hours change has two disadvantages. The

first is that many observations are eliminated; the maximum possible number of

observations per individual falls from 13 to 9, since Hjjt—HjJt_3 cannot be

computed if t < 1971. The second and more serious problem is that the sample

becomes biased towards individuals who do not change jobs frequently: if an

 individual changes jobs in year t and again in year t+2, then the values of
                                         — 19 —



              will be set to missing for the time periods t through t+3, because
hjjt—hjjt_3
none of these hours measures are truly "clean". Since there is no clear—cut

answer to this problem we present results from the PSID using both one and

three year changes in hours.

      We also present results when tH.. and H. are based on
                                         ljt

Ht    —HjJt.....5. In this case we set         —
                                                   HjJt_5 to missing if a job change is
reported for times t, t—1, t—5 or t—6. The change in hours is coded as a

"between job" change if a separation occurred in t—2, t—3, and/or t—4. Thus,

multiple separations are possible.

      For unmarried women, the change in hours is also computed over one, three

and five year gaps. Observations were set to missing if the woman was married

in any of the years used to compute the change in hours. The PSID data for

married women contain information on separations from employer only in 1976,

1979, 1980 and 1981. Because of these data limitations, we work with               —

HiJt..1.
     For the QES, Hjjt and Hjjt are based on hours in 1977 minus hours in

1973. Only one hours measure, average hours per week, is available. The

effective QES sample sizes for unmarried and married women are too small to

support an analysis.



3.2 Adjustment of the Hours Change Measures for Job—related Determinants
    of Labor Supply.

     As was mentioned earlier, to the extent that job—related variables which

might be related to labor supply can be controlled for, var(h'1) —

var(h) will provide a better indication of the importance of firm
preferences for hours. The hours adjustment is based upon estimates of the

following equation for the unadjusted change in Hut:
                                             — 20 —

(8) Hjt —    Hjj   =
                       a0 +   a5     {SEPNJ +     aix + a2wt +   a [SEPNI Wjt
                         + a3Ixjt + a4               + a {SEPN] Xjjt

                         +           +
                              Ujjt       IEijt.

SEPN is a separation indicator, and equals 1 if the employer changed between t

and t—k and is 0 otherwise. The variable uj is a composite error component

for omitted variables. The model of hours changes implies that the variance

of ujj. depends upon whether or not a separation has occurred. The error

                   is measurement error in the hours change variable. We assume
 component
                                                                   not a
 ijt has mean 0 and a variance which does not depend on whether or
 separation has occurred. In this case the presence of the measurement error

 ijt adds an extra term to var(LFIit) and var(FIjjt) but does not affect
 the difference between them. To examine the effects of measurement error on

 the unadjusted hours measures we use the covariances of two independent

 measures of the change in annual hours to provide alternative estimates of

                                             estimates should be less affected by
 var(Hijt) and var(M-Ijjt). These
 measurement error. We do in fact find that both variances decline

 substantially and that the difference between them rises relative to


 var(H1t).
      For the PSID, x includes variables for age, race, and years of

 education. These are included because they may affect the average change in

 hours. The variable x includes changes in marital status, number of

 children, a dummy variable indicating the presence of pre—school aged

 children, health status, and non—labor income (which includes a spouseTh labor

 income, if any). The variable xjjt includes changes in union membership and

 changes in 1 digit occupation indicators.             Since we are looking at changes in

                                                                             it is
 hours with and without changes in employer rather than position,

  possible that occupation changes when no separation occurs. The changes in

  the level and in the square of annual hours of unemployment are also included
                                   — 21 —



in
     The equation for the QES contains basically the same variables, with the

following exceptions. First,       is the log of annual earnings. Second,

data on changes in non—labor income were not available. Third, seventeen

additional variables pertaining to changes in the characteristics of jobs were

added. These variables include items such change in commuting time, required

work effort, vacation pay, training possibilities, and job security.'3

     Under the null hypothesis that hours are supply determined, (8) is

similar to the first difference labor supply equations estimated by MaCurdy

(1981), Altonji (1984) and others, although none of the previous intertemporal

labor studies distinguish between changes in hours with and without job

changes. Those familiar with the intertemporal labor supply literature will

note that the coefficients a2, a3, a and a each contain a component which

measures the direct effect of the variable on the change in hours, and a

component which measures the indirect effect through the marginal utility of

income. However, unlike the studies cited above, we do not attempt to

distinguish between the two effects when estimating the change in hours

equations, since only the total effect of      and       is required to

adjust the hours data. If all the personal and job related determinants of

labor supply (including expectational variables) were observed, then aside

from approximation error associated with log linear specification of (8), the

coefficients would not depend on whether or not a separation occurs. We allow

the coefficients to depend on SEPN because the association of the observed job

related variables (eg., the wage change) with unobserved variables (eg., the

change in expectations of future wages) may depend upon whether or not a

separation has occurred.

     We estimate (8) by weighted least squares for the QES, and weighted two
                                          — 22 —



                                                                    for the
stage least squares for the PSID.14 Two stage least squares is used
PSID to minimize estimation bias which arises from the fact that the principal

wage measure in the PSID is annual earnings divided by annual hours worked.

The change in the reported hourly wage, as well as all other variables in

equations (8) are used as instrumental variables for wjti5 It should be

emphasized that noise in wages and the other variables limits our ability to

control even for tobservedIt determinants of labor supply. When estimating (8)

with the QES data, we constrain the coefficients on job—related variables to

be the same for observations with and without job changes.       Given the large

number of job—related variables included in             and the fact that the QES

contains only 67 observations on job changes, this measure is necessary to

conserve degrees of freedom.

     We use the parameter estimates from (11) to compute             and Lht as

follows:
                                      —
(12a)           =
                               a2wt
                           -
(12b) hjt =         H1.t         a}           (4+ a4}
For one set of estimates we also adjust for the change in annual hours of

unemployment. The estimates of a few of the equations used to perform the

adjustments are reported in Tables Al and A2 and discussed in a footnote.16

        The use of two—stage least squares reduces the problem of measurement

error bias in the estimation of a2 and a2. But because the wage measure is

earnings divided by hours, measurement error in hours affects tht and

both directly and through the adjustment for the wage change. Consequently,

it may produce biases in the estimates of var(ht) var(h4t) and the
difference between the two. Measurement error in earnings which is

independent of measurement error in hours may also affect the variances of the

adjusted hours measures. In a footnote we show that measurement error in
                                   — 23 —



hours and in earnings are likely to increase the variance of adjusted hours

both within and across jobs.17 Furthermore, unless a2 is equal to 0, these

additional variance components will not cancel out when computing the

difference between the cross job and within job variances. Depending on the

values of a2 and a2, measurement error could cause the difference between the

cross job and within job variances to be either upward or downward biased.

Given the estimates of a2 and a2 which we obtain, these issues are important

only for married females, and are discussed in footnote 27 below.



                                 4. Results

4.1 Results for Men

     Estimates of the variances of the unadjusted hours changes 11ijt and

      are presented in the left panel of Table 2. The numbers in parentheses

are the standard errors of the variance estimates.'8 The results indicate

that the variance in hours changes when the job has changed are much larger

than when it has not changed, although the specific estimates depend upon the

time gap chosen. For hours/week when the time gap (k) is one year, var(H1)

is .0361 and var(Hjt) —                is .0397     That is, the variance in
    (.002)
                           var(AHt)       (.005)
                                                 .



the change In hours per week associated with different jobs is more than

double the variance within a job. These estimates of the difference are

downward biased due to the fact that the hours/week measure may reflect a

mixture of hours on the new and old jobs. When k=3, observations for which

Hut or Hjjt_3 might reflect a mixture of hours/week on the new and old jobs
have been removed from the sample, and var(Hj), var(MI) and var(Hjt) —

           are .1064, .0360 and .0704 respectively . In this case, hours are
var(Hjt)       (.015) (.002)    (.015)
three times more variable when the job changes than when it does not. The

estimates for k=5 are qualitatively similar to these, while the results for
                                     — 24   —




QES   show that var(Hjt) is 2.2 times as large as var(H1t).

      The findings for weeks per year and hours per year also show that there

are important job specific components to the variance of hours. For weeks per

year, var(LHit) and var(Hjt) are .1916 and .0564 when k=1,
                                       (.010)      (.003)
  .1496 and .0372 when k=3, and .1227 and .0666 when k=5.19 The
  (.026)      (.003)                (.012)       (.004)
figures for annual hours are similar.

      Other studies have found evidence that measurement error in the hours

level is important in PSID. (See Duncan and Hill (1984)). As mentioned

earlier, this is likely to inflate both var(Ht) and var(iHt) but should

not have much effect on the difference between them. If measurement error is

important, the estimates in the table may substantially understate the value

                             relative to var(LH1t). Consequently, our results
of var(Ht) —      var(Hjt)
probably understate the importance of job specific factors in hours changes.

       We have obtained some evidence on the importance of measurement error

using the following procedure. Workers who are paid by the hour are asked to

report their straight time hourly wage. By dividing labor earnings by the

straight time wage, one may obtain an alternative measure of annual hours.

This alternative measure is not based upon the questions about hours per week

and weeks worked which are used to construct the direct measure of annual

hours. Thus, there Is some basis for assuming that the measurement errors in

the two annual hours measures are independent, at least for hourly workers.

In this case, the covariance of the changes in the two hours measures over

intervals with a job change and without a job change will provide estimates of

Var(tH't) and Var(H1t) which are not affected by measurement error.

       The table below reports estimates of Var(Ht) Var(1Ht) and

Var(1Hit) — Var(LH1t) for a sample of workers who were paid by the hour in
both t and t—3. The sample sizes for the variances across and within jobs are
                                       — 25 —



164 and 3878 respectively. The results using the imputed measure of annual

hours and the direct measure are similar and correspond reasonably closely to

the results for the full sample in Table 2. The last column reports estimates

based on the covariances of the two alternative measures of the hours

change. The estimates of Var(IH±t) and Var(tiH) fall to .235 and .037.

Comparison of the middle and last columns suggests that almost half of the

within job variance in the direct measure of hours is measurement error.

These findings indicate that for annual hours Var(1H'1t) is                     6.3

times as large as Var(MI±t). This ratio is considerably larger than the

values of 3.3 and 4.3 based upon columns 1 and 2 respectively. This evidence

suggests that measurement error in hours does in fact lead to an

understatement of the relative importance of job specific factors in hours

changes. The results also provide evidence against the possibility that our

findings could be explained through a mechanism in which the variance in the

measurement error term           is larger when the job has changed than when it

has not.


           Estimates Based on         Estimates based on Estimates Based on the
           Variances of Imputed       Variances of the    Covariances of the imputed
           Measure of Annual flours   Direct Measure of   and Direct Measures of
           (Earnings/Hourly Wage)     Annual Hours        Annual Hours


Var(AHj.t)               .326                .298                      .235
                        (.093)              (.130)                    (.087)

Var(A1ij.t)              .100                .069                      .037
                        (.006)              (.008)                    (.005)

                         .226                .230                        .198
Var(AH1.t)
—                                                                     (.087)
  Var(U3t)              (.093)              (.130)


     In summary, the results for all three hours measures indicate that jobs

play a very important role in hours determination.
                                    — 26 —



Results Using the Adjusted Hours Measures
     The second and third panels of Table 2 report the results for var(hjt)

and var(ihjt) where Ehjt and          are the across job and within job

changes after adjustment for job specific labor supply determinants by the

method described in Section 3.2.

     The middle panel of Table 2 contains the results using hours measures

which have been adjusted for observed job specific determinants of hours, but

have not been adjusted for hours of unemployment. The results for the PSID

data are very similar to those based on the unadjusted hours measures. They

indicate that hours responses to wage changes, changes in union membership,

and shifts in 1—digit occupation do not explain the much larger hours variance
                                                                           —
across jobs than within jobs.2° However, for the QES sample var(EHjt)
                                                                         Taken
var(LHt)     is .0417
                 (.010)
                          whereas var(Lht) —   var(ht)   is .0218
                                                            (.011)
                                                                     .           at


face value, this finding for the QES sample is consistent with the view that

the 17 job characteristics used to adjust hours are important labor supply

determinants and are responsible for the larger difference in variances

obtained for the unadjusted hours measures. In fact, after adjustment for

downward bias in the estimate of var(Lh1t) associated with degrees of

freedom which are lost in hours adjustment process and the small sample size

of the QES, there is little evidence that adjusting hours for the observed job

characteristics in the QES reduces the difference in variances within and

across jobs.21

     The last three columns of Table 2 report results in which the hours

changes incorporate adjustments for hours of unemployment. This adjustment

makes little difference for hours/week. However, for weeks/year var(Hjt) —

             is reduced from .14 to .035 when k=1. The reduction is much
var(tHjjt)
smaller for k=3 and k=5. The larger impact when k=1 reflects the fact that
                                         — 27



occurrence of unemployment is often associated with a job shift, and for this

time interval the separation might have occurred during the year in which

Hjjt_i is measured, whereas for k=3 and k=5, the observations in which

separation occurs are removed from the sample. Thus, unemployment associated

with job separations should not directly influence Ht —
                                                            Hjjt_3     or 11ijt —




Controlling    for Individual Heterogeneity in the Variance of Hours

        In this section we provide estimates of var(hj) —
                                                            var(ht)       which

have been corrected for the likelihood that people who change jobs frequently

have more variable preferences for hours. There are a variety of reasons for

believing that this might be the case. The possibility is particularly

worrisome in light of Abowd and CardTh (1985b) results for both the PSID and

the National Longitudinal Survey indicating that the variance of the change in

the log of annual hours is larger for those who have worked for more than one

employer during the years covered by these surveys than for those who have

worked for only one employer, although Abowd and Card note that much of the

difference appears to be due to excess variance in the years surrounding a job

change (see their footnote 23).

        Let var(hj) and var1(hit) denote the variance for person i of

and          around the population mean for hjjt and         Let y denote the

true difference in var1(ht) and vari(Eht), which (as in the analysis

above) we assume to be the same for all individuals. If                   and

var(h.jt) also depend on an individual specific fixed effect d, then

                                     +
(lOa) vari(h) =           var(tht)
(lOb)     varj(iThjt) =   var(ht)    + y +

        The fixed effect     will arise if (1) the variances and covariances of
                                              — 28 —



the   labor supply determinants have individual specific components, and (2) all

the variances and covariances among the demand components as well as cross

covariances of the labor supply and demand components are the same for all

individuals. We make the assumption that heterogeneity in the variances is

individual specific (as opposed to job specific) because we are most

interested in checking whether consideration of heterogeneity of individual

specific labor supply preferences (eg., heterogeneity in the variance in

individual specific labor characteristics such as sft) can reconcile the large

value of var(ht) —        var(ht) with LS_PC.22
       Let var.(th. ) and        var.(h.
                                   1
                                         ) denote the sample variance of                             1_It
                                                                                                            and
              1    lJt                     lJt
        for person i around the sample means over all persons and time periods

of hjt and               Then,




              ) — var.(h..            = var.(Ah'.             — var.(h..         +   v.        or:
      var.(h.
         1  ijt    1        ijt   )
                                           1       1_It
                                                          )
                                                                 1    1_It
                                                                             )
                                                                                      1
                                                                                           ,




                                          =   y
(13) varj(E.) —          var.(th..)               + v.

where v.
       1                                               vi .
         is a sampling error with mean 0 and variance 62.                                 A consistent


estimate of y can be obtained by taking the mean

                                        over the subsample of individuals for whom
of [varj(Lhj) —
                    varj(h)1
there is at least one observation on                          and at least one on



            =
(14)                var.(h..t) —          var.(h..t),
where I is the number of persons in the subsample.

        The estimates of y, presented in Table 3, are similar to the results for

k=3 which were presented in Table 2. It is also noteworthy that the estimates

of 4-       var.(hj) and 4-           var1(ht)                 are similar to the estimates of

var(h1t) and var(Lh1t) reported in Table 2.                         We conclude that
                                     — 29 —



heterogeneity   bias is not responsible for the earlier finding that the

variance of the hours change is significantly larger when the job changes than

when it does not.



Evaluating the Labor Demand—Perfect Mobility Model: The Distinction Between

Quits and Layoffs

      To provide evidence on the Labor Demand—Perfect Mobility model (LD—PM) of

hours discussed in Section 2, we have computed var(H'1t) separately for job

changes resulting from quits and for job changes resulting from layoffs.

(Layoffs are about 40 % of job changes for our PSID sample of males.) These

results are in Table 4. The values of var(H1) for the two subgroups are

very similar for hours/week and are considerably in excess of the

var(H1t). For weeks/year, var(LH1) is considerably larger for the layoff

sample than for the quit sample, (.275 versus .072 when k=3), and a similar

finding is obtained for annual hours. For these dimensions of hours, the

difference between var(H't) for layoffs and quits is reduced considerably

when hours are adjusted for unemployment, and is reduced even further if one

restricts the sample to individuals who were employed at the survey date prior

to the calendar year in which hours are measured. However, it remains

positive. As was explained in Section 2, the fact that the variance in hours

are if anything larger for job changes arising from layoffs rather than quits

is strong evidence against the view that the large values for

var(tiHt) and var(Vit)—var(h1jt) may be explained with the LD—PM
model. 23

Alternative Measures of the Variability of Hours Within and Across Jobs

     We use the variance as our principal measure of dispersion because

additivity of the variances of the sums of independent random variables
                                     — 30 —



simplifies   the algebra of Section 2 and the Appendix and because the variance

is the most commonly used dispersion measure. However, we also report results

using the mean absolute change in the hours measures as the measure of

dispersion in Appendix Table A424. (Table A4 also presents results for

unmarried and married women.) This measure may be less sensitive to the

presence of a few outliers and perhaps provides a better feeling for the

typical change in hours. The mean absolute change in hours/week, weeks/year,

and annual hours are more than twice as large when the job changes as when it

does not.

       Much work on labor supply has been conducted using actual hours rather

than the log of hours. For this reason, Table A.5 and Table A6 report

estimates of the variances and mean absolute values of the within and across

job changes in actual hours A.jjt and [ijt' where         denotes the actual

value of the various hours measures and is equal to exp(H1t). The changes

are computed over a three year interval. The results are basically consistent

with the results for the log values. The mean absolute value of the time

change in hours/week is about     hours larger when the job changes than when it

does not.25

       As an alternative means of summarizing the data, we have performed an

analysis of the autocorrelations over time of the levels (as opposed to first

differences) of the actual (non log) hours measure         (Results not

reported.) We find that the correlation of jt with its value for person        i


in t—k is much smaller when the job has changed than when it has not. For

example, using hours/week and k=3, the correlation is .23 when the person

has changed jobs between t and t—3 and .57 when the person has kept the same

job.
                                    — 31 —



4.2   Results for Married and Unmarried Women

      Table 5 compares var(Hjt) with var(EHt) and var(hjt) with

var(ht) for a sample of unmarried women. The variance estimates for

unmarried women indicate that hours are heavily influenced by job specific

characteristics. For changes in hours/week when k=3, var(Hjt) is .1780

while var(H) is only .0458. The results for k=3 and k=5 suggest that

changes in all three hours measures are between 4 and 5 times more variable

across jobs than within jobs and this finding holds for actual values of the

hours variables as well as logs. (See Table A5.) Adjustment for observed

characteristics of jobs makes little qualitative difference in the results.

We conclude that the results for unmarried women are qualitatively consistent

with those for men.26

      For married women, data on the occurrence of job changes was collected

only in the 1976, 1979—1981 surveys. Consequently, we report results only for

1 year changes (k=1) for this group, since it is not possible to construct 3

year and 5 year changes using the method discussed in Section 3. The results

in Table 5 show that var(Hjjt) exceeds var(Ht) by a large margin, although

the difference for married women is smaller in percentage terms than it is for

unmarried women or for men. This conclusion holds for the adjusted hours

change measures as well.27 Comparison of columns 1 and 2, rows 1—3 and 13—16

indicates that var(MIj) is similar for married and unmarried women but that

hours on the same job are more variable for married women. This is consistent

with the notion that hours preferences of married women are more variable than

those of unmarried women (and men), and that married women tend to select jobs

which provide more flexible hours. However, the data on hours for 1979—1981

for married women are more likely to be supplied by another household member

than are the data for heads of household. Consequently, measurement error
                                         — 32 —



          be more serious for married women than for the other two groups, and thus
    may

    measurement error might contribute more to the hours variances for married

    women.



                               5. Discussion and   Conclusion

           In this paper we have provided evidence indicating that work hours of

    individuals are heavily influenced by the characteristics of specific jobs.

    The empirical work is based upon the following simple idea. To the extent

    that workers may freely choose hours and hours changes are influenced by
                                                                the variance in the
    shifts over time in individual preferences and resources,

    time change of hours should not depend upon whether or not the particular job

    to which the individual worker supplies labor has changed. The desire to

    reduce or increase hours could be acted upon within the current job.    On the

-

    other    hand, suppose the factors which influence hours worked when a person is

    in a given job are largely specific to that job. In this case, hours changes

    should be larger when persons switch jobs than when they
                                                                do not. We find that

    hours are changes in hours are 2 to 4 times as variable across jobs than

    within jobs. Our analysis of quits and layoffs indicates that this result is

    not consistent with the view that workers are able to easily avoid demand

     constraints by changing jobs whenever they wish to adjust hours, although the

     desire to adjust work hours might be an important factor in job mobility.

     Individuals who change jobs as a result of a layoff experience hours changes

     which are even larger than those who initiate a quit. They do not simply find

     a new job which offers an hours level similar to the level of their previous

     job. We conclude that the characteristics of the specific job held have a

     large influence on the hours worked by individuals at a given point in time.

             We have emphasized that there are at least two structural interpretations
                                     — 33 —



of   these results. One interpretation, which we refer to as LD—IM, is that the

freedom of workers to vary hours per week and weeks per year is sharply

restricted within a given job. Under this interpretation, hours levels are

heavily influenced by firm preferences arising from a variety of factors

mentioned in the introduction to the paper. Upon joining the labor force,

workers seek jobs which match their labor supply preferences. Much of the

variance of hours over time occurs as workers change jobs to seek hours levels

which are more in accord with the amount which they currently wish to work, or

move to jobs which require less desirable hours but offer an overall job

package which is superior to their current one. The second interpretation,

model LS—JC, is that many non—wage labor supply determinants are job specific

and vary greatly across jobs. Given the absence of data on many of the

variables which might influence labor supply to a specific job and errors in

the measures which are available, the fact that our results for the adjusted

and unadjusted hours measures are similar is not very compelling evidence

against a labor supply —3ob cvv'                  2-,Xf1I(o,J
      In any case, the finding that job characteristics are a key influence on

work hours has important implications for research on structural models of

work hours. First, it suggests that research within a labor supply framework

should place much greater emphasis on job—related hours determinants other

than the wage rate.

      Second, the research mentioned in the introduction on aspects of the role

of employer preferences in hours of work should be expanded. With data on a

cross section of jobs and multiple observations on workers in each type of

job, one could attempt to estimate a structural model of hours determination

along the lines of Section 2 (see Appendix 1 for more details) as well as

study the determinants of the relative weights on the preferences of workers
                                    — 34   —




and firms in hours determination.

     Finally, the results suggest that job specific labor supply determinants

and/or hours requirements vary sufficiently across jobs to warrant a key role

in studies of job mobility. Job characteristics which have a large effect on

the number of hours workers wish to work or are required to work at a given

wage also presumably have a large effect on the desirability of various

jobs. Workers whose labor supply preferences change and who wish to reduce or

increase hours as a result may be forced to change jobs.28 The links between

labor supply preferences, hours constraints, and job mobility are an

interesting topic for future research.
                                    — 35



                                   Footnotes

     1 Other recent surveys of the labor supply literature are Heckman and
MaCurdy (1981) and Killingsworth (1983).

     2 See also the recent papers by Filer (1986) and Killingsworth (1984).

       See Lewis (1969), Rosen (1969), Barzel (1973) and Deardorff and
Stafford (1976). Among the early labor demand studies to emphasize employer
preferences between hours per worker and employment are Brechling (1965),
Ehrenberg (1971), Feldstein (1967) and Nadiri and Rosen (1969). There is, of
course, an extensive aggregate time series literature on the demand for
labor. See Hamermesh (1985) and Nickel (1985) for recent surveys.

       Additional references may be found in these papers and in Killingsworth
(1983). Killingsworth (1983, pg. 42) provides references to studies which
have examined the implications of rationing of hours for overtime, shift work,
and multiple job holding. Ham (1979) and Moff it (1981) estimate models in
which workers may be constrained in how little they can work. Moffits
econometric model is very similar to those of Cogan (1981) and Hanoch (1980)
(see also Hausman (1980)) who stress labor supply factors as the source of
the minimum number of hours people choose to work. Blank (1985) discusses
these possibilities in an analysis (like HanochTh) which distinguishes among
hours per week and weeks per year. Dickens and Lundberg (1985) investigate a
labor supply model in which persons must select from a finite number of
employment opportunities. The jobs require different numbers of hours,
although each pays the same hourly wage. In Altonji and Paxson (1985) we
investigate the implications of underemployment and overemployment for the
pattern of wage changes and hours changes which occur when people change jobs.

       See especially Rosens (1985) presentation of this literature. Abowd
and Card (1985) appears to be the first study to use micro data to examine
labor supply within an implicit contracts framework. Bernanke (1985) uses a
joint model of hours and earnings to study labor market behavior during the
Great Depression.

     6 "Firm" and "job" are used synonymously in the paper. In the empirical
work, job changes correspond to employer changes. An analysis of changes in
position within a firm would be an interesting extention of the study.

       In both models complications arise when workers are faced with a
nonlinear schedule relating the wage rate to hours of work rather than with a
parametric wage ———see Rosen (1976), Moffit (1983) and Lundberg (1984).
     8
       Cogan (1981) and Hanoch (1980) discuss preferences for hours per week
and weeks per year.

       This may be relaxed by expressing      as a function of      where the
function may depend upon firm characteristics, and replacing wj in (1) with
the derivative of earnings with respect to H.t. Ht would then be the
implicit solution to the modified equation. imilar modifications may be made
to other equations in the model.

     10 As noted earlier, changes in expectations of future wages are part of
                                   — 36



the vector of labor supply determinants Z11. and feature prominently
conventional lifecycle models of labor supply. One might expect the variance
of changes in these expectations (as well as the current wage) to be greater
when the job changes than when it does not to the extent that wages are job
specific. Controlling for occupation, union status, and the current wage
removes only part of this difference. Consequently, it is at least possible
that the large difference between var(Lht) and var(tht) is due to a
conventional labor supply response to a larger variance across jobs in the
change in expectations about lifetime wages. However, such an explanation is
implausible given the very large difference in variances which we find, the
evidence from a variety of studies that, at least for males, labor supply is
not very responsive to current and future wage changes, and the fact that
current wage changes explain virtually none of the variance of the hours
changes (See Table Al, columns 1, 4, and 7.)

     "The separation indicator from the PSID required extensive recoding for
the years 1968—1973 since quits and promotions are not distinguished in these
years. For details on how the separation indicator was constructed, see
Altonji and Shakotko (1985, Appendix 2).

     12When an individual reports a job change in the previous survey year, it
is difficult to determine whether the job change occurred prior to January, or
between January and the date of the survey. If the job change occurred prior
to January, then the hours measures for the previous calendar year reflect
hours worked on more than one job; if the job change happened after January,
then the hours measures for the current calendar year have this problem.
Since data on tenure with employer are usually not precise enough to determine
exactly when the separation occurred, hours change measures which are based on
the current and the previous calendar year are suspect when a separation is
indicated.

     13 See Table Al and Table A2 for a list.


     14 The observations corresponding to job changes and the observations
corresponding to no job change were weighted (respectively) by estimates of
the inverse of the standard deviation of Ujjt ijt when the job has changed
and when the job has not changed. This corrects for heteroscedasticity
associated with the fact e variance of the error component of (8) depends on
whether or not the job changes. In practice, the weighted estimates of (8)
are very similar to unweighted estimates.

     15 The same problem exists for the QES. Unfortunately, the QES does not
contain an alternative wage measure to use as an instrument. For the
QES, w,    is the change in the log of total annual earnings. See Altonji
(1986) r a detailed discussion of the two PSID wage measures and the
problems which may arise in using them to estimate an intertemporal labor
supply model. For the PSID, the estimate of (8) is based on a subsample of
observations, since the change in the log of the reported hourly wage is
missing for all workers prior to 1970 and for salaried workers prior to
1976. The parameter estimates are used to compute Ah1 and ih1t for each
observation in accordance with equation(9a, 9b) below, regardless of whether
that observation was used to calculate a2, a, a4, and a.
                                        — 37



     16 The R2Th for equations with hours/week as the dependent variable are
very low. The R2 statistic is much higher for the change in weeks/year and
annual work hours, although most of the explanatory power is due to the
inclusion of the change in hours of unemployment. The parameter estimates may
be of some interest to researchers working on intertemporal labor supply
models. The two stage least squares procedure used to estimate columns 1—6 is
very similar to one of the procedures in Altonji (1986), although the PSID
subsample used in the latter study was restricted to workers who were paid by
the hour and who were continuously married to the same wife from 1968 to 1979,
and included only limited data from 1980 and 1981. Also, Altonji (1986) does
not distinguish between hours changes with and without job changes, analyzes
only annual hours/year, does not include interactions among the job change and
wage change, and incudes fewer control variables for annual hours. We find
that the wage response is about evenly divided between hours per week and
weeks per year, although this is less true of the analysis at 3 year
intervals. We also find that the response of annual hours to Wjj is .1271
with a t—value of 2.52 for those who do not change jobs. However, this
response is reduced by —.2023 to —.0752 when a separation occurs. From the
standpoint of the life—cycle labor supply framework, the more negative
coefficient on the wage when a job change occurs is consistent with the view
that wage changes associated with job changes are more permanent and less
easily anticipated than those on a continuing job. However, an alternative
explanation is that there exists a negative association across jobs between
wage rates and the quality of the work environment. It is also worth noting
that the separation dummy has only a small effect on expected value of the
hours change measures. For the QES sample, the coefficient on earnings of
.1699 translates into a wage response of .2047 (.205 = .1699/(1—.1699)). This
estimate is within the range of estimates of the intertemporal labor supply
elasticity for men reported in earlier studies. It is biased downward by
measurement error in earnings and biased upward (toward 1) by the fact that
earnings are endogenous in the hours equation. Overall, the point estimates
are basically consistent with estimates from previous studies summarized in
Ashenfelter (1984), Killingsworth (1983, Ch. 5.4), and Pencavel (1984). Of
course, these results and those of the other other studies do not have a clear
interpretation if employer preferences have strong influence on hours, or if
job mobility is affected by labor supply preferences and hours constraints.

     17The effect of additive measurement errors in the log of hours and the
log of earnings on the variances of the adjusted hours chages within and
across jobs can be determined in the following way. Let H      be the true
va1ueof the log of annual work hours for individual i in jo j at time t, and
let w      be the true value for the log of hourly earnings. Let e1 be an
      ijt
additive  measurement in the log of earnings which is independent of Ejjt. The
fact that the observed value of wj1 is equal to the log of total annual
earnings minus the log of observed annual hours implies that observed hours
and wages will have the following relationship to true hours and wages:

            =
                H:ii   +

            = w        —
                           Eijt + et.
Let h*i.t and h*jt denote true adjusted hours changes within and across
jobs. Tien, the variance of hours changes within and across jobs may be
expressed as:
                                          — 38 —



                    =
     var(hjt)           var(sTh*ijt) + (1+a2)2var(ct) + (a2)2var(et)
     var(h1t) =         var(h*jt)   + (1+a2+a2)2var(LEt) + (a2 + a2)2var(et)
The difference between the variance of hours changes across jobs and the
variance of hours within jobs is:

                                =                —                +
    var(h1t) —      var(ht)         var(h*1jt)       var(h*ijt)
                [(1 + a2 + a2) — (1 + a2)2]var(tt) +

                [(a2 + a2) —        a2lvar(Let)
Note that the effects of the measurement error terms in the above equation are
o   if   a2 is 0.
     18 The reported standard errors are based on the assumptions that the
observations on the change in hours within and across jobs are independent (1)
across individuals and (2) over time for a given person. The correlation of
the change in hours across individuals in the same year is in fact trivial and
may be safely ignored. Correlation over time for a given individual is likely
to bias the standard errors downward by a small amount.

     19 We computed the variance of hours within and across jobs for k=3 and
k=5, but without setting hours to missing in years in which a separation may
have occurred. This resulted in variance estimates closer to those obtained
for k=1. For example, when k=3 and no separation checks are performed,
var(Ht) is .0393, and var(LHj) —                 is .0446. When separation
                                            var(EHijt)
checks are performed var(Hit) is .0360 and var(tH.) — var(Hi.t) is
.0704. Thus when hours measures reflect hours worked in differen jobs,
var(Ht) is understated.
     20 We experimented with the use of 2—digit occupation dummies and
obtained results which are very similar to those reported in the table.

     21 Most of the variability in the 9 one digit occupation measures and the
17 various job characteristics comes from observations across jobs, and there
are only 67 observations on job changers. In this situation the "R2" for
observations in which a separation occurs is likely to be substantial even
under the null hypothesis that none of the job specific variables have any
influence on hour choice. In fact, none of the variables are individually
statistically significant, and the joint hypothesis that the coefficients on
all of them are 0 easily passes an F—test. To obtain a rough idea of bias
from loss of the degrees of freedom in adjusting H1t for changes in job
characteristics, we experimented with using (67 — 17 — 9 —1) rather than (67—
1) as the degrees of freedom of the sum of squared deviations of        from
its mean for job changers. In this case, var(h1.t) —                  var(h1t)
                                                                   is .0561,
which actually exceeds the estimate based upon unadjusted hours. Although
this adjustment is crude the evidence indicates that observed job
characteristics in the QES do not explain the larger variance in hours/week
across jobs than within jobs.

     22 For a number of reasons, var(d) might be associated with the
frequency with which a person changes jobs. For example, layoffs might be
                                     — 39



preceded by an hours reduction. Consequently, a comparison of var(h1.t) and
var(h1t) with individual differences accounted for may provide a beter
indication of var(hjt) —             for a given worker.
                             var(Lh1t)
     23 In Section 2 we did not mention the possibility that large values of
var(H.t) —      var(H1.) and var(ih1t) — var(h1.t) could be reconciled with
LS—PC i for some reaon the variance of individuai specific labor supply
determinants depends upon the factors which cause job changes. For example,
the occurrence of a divorce may be associated with a geographical move and
consequently a job change, as well as large changes in the amount people wish
to work. However, we would expect these considerations to be more of a factor
for quits than for firm—initiated separations, in which case the evidence in
the text suggests that they are not of primary importance. 1e are grateful to
Rebecca Blank for helpful discussions on this issue.
     24 Systematic differences in the hour changes when job changes do and do
not occur are accounted for by subtracting the mean algebraic change in
and H1t from          and Hjjt prior to calculation of the absolute
values. In practice, this adjustment makes little difference in the results.
       25 Although our focus is on hours in the main job, we also examined the
relationship between changes in hours on the main job and changes in hours on
other jobs for our sample of men. We found (1) that the changes in annual
hours on the main job have a negative covariance with changes in hours on
other jobs and (2) the absolute value of this negative covariance rises
proportionately with the higher variance in the hours change on the main job
when the main job has changed. We suspect that these results are consistent
with both LD—IM and LS—JC. If hours changes over time are determined largely
by variation in personal characteristics, we would expect changes in hours on
the main job and on extra jobs to be positively correlated. Use of total work
hours rather than annual hours on the main job does not have much effect on
the results for annual hours in Table 2.
       25 Comparisons of the mean absolute value of                 are
                                                         and
reported in Table A4. Similar comparisons for         and [ijt are presented
in Table A6.

     27 For married women, adjustment of the hours measures sharply increases
the variance in the change in hours when a separation occurs relative to the
variance when the job remains the same. (Compare columns 3, 6, and 9 in rows
13—15.) This is true regardless of whether the hours change measures are
adjusted for unemployment. We investigated the reason for the large affect of
the adjustment and found that it is related to measurement error in the hours
and earnings data in conjunction with the fact that for married women the
point estimates of the response of hours to a change in the wage differ
sharply depending upon whether or not a job change has occurred. As shown in
footnote 17, these two types of measurement error bias the estimates of
yar(h jt) and var(ht) upward, and the size of the bias is increasing in
a2 and a2. To take the most extreme example, the parameter estimates in
Table A3 indicate that the response of hours/week to the wage is —.492 when a
job change does not occur (az) and 2.14 when a job change does occur (a2 +
a2).   The large value of a2 implies a large upward bias in var(hjt) if,
as the evidence in Altonji (1986) and Duncan and Hill (1984) suggess,
measurement error is important. Footnote 17 also shows that var(ht) —
                                   — 40



var(ht) may be biased up or down, depending on the values of a2 and a2 and
the importance of measurement error in hours and measurement error in
earnings. In the case of married women, the sign of the bias is positive. To
get a handle on these issues empirically, we computed alternative measures of
var(h.t) and var(tht) after using the reported hourly wage rather than
average iourly earnings to adjust annual hours for the wage change. In this
case,             var(ht) and var(tht) —       var(Ahjt)   become 0495, 243
and O4252 respectively. As a second alternative, we constrained the parameter
values of the hours adjustment equation to be the same within jobs and across
jobs one obtains estimates, and found that var(ht) —   var(hjt)    is much
closer to the findings for var(H1t) —
table.
                                       var(LHt     which are reported in the


     28 Gustman and SteinmeierTh (1983, 1984) studies of partial retirement by
older workers suggests that this is the case. Kiefer (1984) and Altonji and
Paxson (1985) examine the empirical implications of the possibility that given
imperfect information workers must tradeoff hours adjustments and wage gains
in searching for better jobs. In Altonji and Paxson (1986, in progress) we
are investigating whether changes in labor supply preferences induce quits
from one firm to another and the extent to which changes in labor supply
preferences are reflected in hours changes only if people change employers.
                                           — 41   —




                     Appendix:   A Model of Hours Determination



        In this Appendix we present a prototype model of hours determination

which combines aspects of three models which have been presented in previous

studies: a lifecycle labor supply model, a model of the firn(s preferences for

hours, and an implicit contracts model. The model provides a concrete example

of the framework sketched in Section 2. With more development and a much

richer data set, perhaps it could serve as the basis for a structural analysis

of hours incorporating the preferences of workers and firm. We also derive

complete expressions for the variance in hours changes within jobs and across

jobs in terms of the parameters of the model.



        Al. The Labor Supply Model

        Assume that preferences for consumption and leisure are separable within

periods and over time. (Heckman and MaCurdy (1980), Browning et al (1985),

MaCurdy (1981, 1983) and the surveys by Killingsworth (1983) and Pencavel

(1984) provide detailed discussions of life cycle labor supply models.)

Maximization of utility subject to the usual budget constraint yields:

 (A.l) UH(XiitSijtHiit) =
                                                      exP(wJ)
En (A.l) UH is the marginal utility of hours worked.                          is the

marginal utility of income. x.         =   {x.1,x.
                                                it,x.
                                                   ij,x..
                                                      ljt}
                                                           is   a vector of observed
                                 ijt
variables affecting labor supply; the elements of            are defined in section

2 of the paper. The vector             contains the unobserved counterparts to

and includes expectations of future wages.             is the log of work hours, and

wj is the log of the wage rate.

        For analytic convenience, we assume that in UR has the following linear

form:
                                                         42 —



                      — — X..            —   r S..
                                             —        +   1
(A.2) in U =                                              b lit
             H             b      ijt        b  ijt
Combining (A.1) and (A.2) yields the following equation for the supply of the

log of hours, H.
                      lJt
 (A.3) H. = nX..                 ÷ l's..      + b in X(w. . ,X.  ,S. )
                                                                  .      .   +   b w.
                                                                                     ljt
           lit             lit          lJt               ljt lJt ijt
The utility function used in a number of life cycle studies, such as MaCurdy

(1981) and Altonji (1986) leads to (A.3) with many of the elements

of n and r constrained to 0.

     A2. The Labor Demand Model

     Following the approach taken in the studies cited in fn. 2, assume that

output (Qj) in firm                at time t is a function of the number of workers

employed (N) and the actual (non—log) number of hours per worker (ijt)•

The production function has the Cobb—Douglas form:

                  =
                       P.N! H1                   0 < it)+1, w+1 < 1


The vector             consists of fixed and time—varying factors which affect

productivity. The labor cost function COSTt has the form:

                                                                       0 —
                                                                         < T+1 —
                                                                               < 1
 (A.5) COST
                  it
                       = w. H. N. + C.
                         —jt —it jt              jt it
where        is the real wage and equals exp(wit). The first component of the

cost function, wit                  Njt is the wage bill.              The second component, CJtN'

is costs which are worker specific. We allow for the possibility that worker

specific costs are concave in the number of workers, since costs per worker

for such items as recruiting, training, and health and disability insurance

uiay be smaller for firms with more employees.

        Maximization of profits yields the following equation for the log of

hours demanded of worker i, H.
                            lit
 (A.6) H'. =           B   w.. + D.
            lit             lit         jt
                  •—
where B = [           + WI
          D. = [ 4'    j in C. — [                            in i. ÷ constant
           it   4'+urr      it     4'+wr                          it
                                                         — 43 —



       may be partitioned into those elements which do not vary over time in job
Djt
j
     (di),   and time—varying elements (d).



        A3. The Implicit Contracts Model

        The efficient contract hours level is determined by equating the marginal

product of labor with the marginal utility of leisure. Let Hjt be the log of

the efficient contract hours level, and 9ijt be the log of marginal product of

labor. Since (A.6) relates the marginal product of labor to the wage rate,


                             lit           lit
substitution of H. for H. will imply a value of 0..
                                                                                     ijt   .       Specifically:
    (A.7)    H. =       BO         + D.
              Ljt            ijt      jt
Similarly,         an efficient contract will require that

    in UR                             =    in                           +              .       Thus, one can modify
(A.3) to obtain an expression which relates H'. to 0.
                                                                   ljt.              ljt
    (A.8)    HC. =
              lit
                        riX
                           ijt
                               +     rs..
                                       ljt
                                                + b
                                                            lit lit lJt
                                                      in X(w.. ,X... ,S.         )    + bO..
                                                                                               lit
Solving      for          from (A.7) and (A.8) yields:
                    =
    (A.9)               b — B      D. — b       — B          +
                                                                 rS..    +   b   in

The larger b and the smaller B the less flexible is the firm relative to the

worker with respect to hours preferences, and the larger is the relative

weight of firm preferences In the determination of



       A4. The Combined Model

       How are hours actually determined? A simple rule which nests various

alternatives is that actual hours are a weighted average of the hours level

desired by firms and workers:

(A.1O) H .           =m       H. +        m
                                                          s d ) H'.
                                           d H.ljt÷ (1—rn —in                         0 —
                                                                                        < m ,m ,m +m < 1
              lit         S    lJt                               lJt                           s     d s d—
       Discussions of the feasibility of efficient contracts such as Grossman

(1977), Brown (1982), and Rosen (1985) suggest that the degree to which md and
                                     — 44



     differ from 0 will depend upon the existence of shared rents, and

reputation effects which provide both parties with the incentive to honor the

contract, as well as the degree to which information about the value of

marginal utility of labor and the marginal product of labor is available to

both the firm and the worker. Suppose that contracts are not fully efficient

and both firms and workers use the wage rate as the shadow price of labor in

making their supply and demand offers. Unless the firm is indifferent with

respect to the choice of hours over the range of variation in the workers

prefernces, changes in the preferences of a given worker and variation in
                                         s       d
preferences across workers will cause II•• and H..t to diverge. Presumably,

the relative values of m5 and md reflect the flexibility of worker and firm

preferences over hours, as indexed by the wage parameters b and B of the

supply and demand functions, just as the weights on firm and worker

preferences in the efficient contract level of hours reflect these

parameters. If technology is such that the marginal product of labor is

highly nonlinear with respect to        in the neighborhood of Hjt then

presumably the job is characterized by a value of m5 which is small relative

to mci. Firms and workers may differ in the variability of their hours

preferences as well as in the flexibility of the preferences. The expected

level of compensation across jobs may vary with m5 and mci, the variability in

non—wage determinants of H.t , as well as with the average level

of        (across time periods) give a particular wage. Presumably, workers

sort themselves across firms to some extent so that inflexible (flexible)

workers tend to be matched with flexible (inflexible) employers.

       A5. Derivation of the Change in Hours

       Both the change in hours wihtin jobs and across jobs will contain a term

involving the response of ln        to shifts in observed and unobserved labor
                                                            — 45


supply determinants. We approximate in                                   with the linear form:

 (A.11) in A.. = ll-w..                       +   gX..  + KS..
                        ljt             ljt         ijt    lit
Substituting            (A.11) into (A.1O) and adding a measurement error component
                                                                                                      ijt
yields the hours equation:

 (A.12) H.. =
                  lit
                                m (n +
                                —S        bg)X..  lit + --6
                                                        m (F +      bK)S..
                                                                        ljt
                       +[mb+mbII+mB]w..
                          s  —s   d  ijt
                                         +mD. +C..
                                          —djt   lJt
in    which
                       B
 m =
 —6
          m
            S —b—B               (1—rn —m )
                                        s d
      =                b
          m ÷      b - B (1_mS_md)

Equation (A.12) corresponds to equation (3) in section 2 of the text, where

zj_ =
        Let                denote the change in the log of hours between t and t—k when

the job has changed, and let Hjt denote the change in hours when the job has

not changed. Let th1t and Ahj equal                                      and H1t after adjusting for

the effects of all observable labor supply variables which are job—specific

(i.e.                  x1 and xii). Then,                        and Ahjt can be expressed as:

 (A.13a) hjj =                                ÷ r(4)LslJt] +                  +

 (A.13b)          hjt [V1t +                      r(4)st        +
                                                                    r(3)ts_1 ÷[id_ +              +



where
        =              +                      +
                           b(2)]x                 [r(2)   ÷ bK(2)]Sit
            r              bK
 r(4)=                           (4)
 r(3) =                +
                r(3)       bK(3)
and n =                                                   are the coefficients corresponding to {x1, xj,
                {n(1),     fl(2),      fl(3), n(4)}
                   and F =
x1                                   {F(1)    F(2) r(3) F(4)} are the coefficients corresponding to

                                       The same subscript notation is used for g and K.          The variables

            and c. . -
 ..
  lit                  ii tare           the measurement error components for the change in hours
                                                  — 46         —




within   and across jobs.



     A6. Derivation of the Variance of Hours Changes

     The following assumptions are made about the covariances among the components

of
     ijt             ijt
               and Ah..

          i)        cov(s, dat) =           cov(s_          dt) =        cov(s               dj_t_k) = 0

                                                = 0
         ii)        cov(s ijt—k
                                                                                                         = 0
     iii)           cov(st d) = cov(sijt_k d) = cov(s1tdj_)
         iv)        All variances and covariances are stationary across time, (e.g.,

                                                          and var(st) =                 var(st_k))
                    var(st) =           var(s-t_k)
          v)        The measurement error component cjj is independently

                    distributed over time with the same variance for all i and j

     Equations (A.13a) and (A.13b), together with the assumptions made above, imply

that the population variance of                          and                 are:




(A.14a) var(hit) =                 2.E2var(V)      +   22 r var(sijt)
                              —
                                  2 cov(Vt, Vjt_k) 2 r cov(sjjt
                              +
                                  2    var(d.) —       2E     cov(d., djtk)
                                                         d.              m cov(V.it, d.
                              + m m 2 cov(V. ,
                                —d —s      it             jt ) —     m
                                                                     —d-—s            Jt—k
                                                                                           )


                              —
                                  m     cov(Vjk, d.) + 2r(4) n1 cov(s.., d.c)
                              —                                            —
                                  r(4) rn cov(s.., djtk)                       r(4) m cov(s_k d.c)
                              ÷ 2 var(e..)



                 ) = 2m2 var(V.      2m2 r2 var(s.. ) + 2m2
                                                         —5r2(3) var(s..)
(A.14b) var(Lh.
             ijt      —s      it ) + —s (4)      ijt                  ij
                                                                                                           + 2m2 var(d. )
                          —
                              —S          it it—k )
                              2m2 cov(V. ,V.             — 2m2 r2
                                                              —s (3)         cov(s. ,s. ._)
                                                                                        ij        ij          —d

                          +
                              2   2 var(d.) —
                                                 2 2                                —
                                                                                         2    2
                                                                                                   cov(d.,

                          + 2m    in   cov(V.it ,d.
                                                  j t)   + 2m in
                                                            —d---s
                                                                         cov(V.it j ,d.) — in m
                                                                                                       —d---s        it j
                                                                                                                cov(V. ,d._)
                                                   — 47



                    —   in in cov(V.            ,d.) +    in in cov(V.it ,d...
                                           ic—k j         —d—s             j t—k )
                    —   in in cov(V.                   2m m r
                        —<I—s              it—k,d.
                                                jt ) +   d s (4) cov(s.ljt ,d. )               jt
                    — r(4)                                            —
                                •1fll      cov(siit,d._tk)                r(4) rn cov(s.._tk,d.t)

                    + 2 r          in in
                            (3) —d—-s
                                            cov(s..,
                                                ij          j
                                                          d.) —       r (3)   in   in cov(s.
                                                                              —cl--s        ij  j
                                                                                              .,d._)
                    —
                                                                  2
                        r(3)    indin cov(s1._,d.) +                  var(e..).
The difference between var(h1_) and                      var(h) is:
(A.15) var(thj) —
                         var(h)             =

                  2m2
                        [r3)     var(s1.) +     r(4)cov(s.., sijtk) - r(3) cov(s.., s_)J
              +
                   2     [var(d.) —         cov(d.,d._) — cov(d.t,d._tk) + cov(d.t,d.tk)J
              +
                m         [2 cov(v.,d.) —               cov(V., d_) — cov(Vitk,dj)J
              +
                ds        [cov(vjtdjtk) —    cov(V., dj_tk)J
              ÷ r(4) ••in        [cov(s..,d. k — cov(s..,d._k)]
              ÷ r        in in     [cov(d.        ,s.       ) —   cov(d.
                    (4) —cl--s               jt     ijt—k                  jt
                                                                                ,s.
                                                                                   ij t—k )]
              +          m [2 cov(s1.,, d.) —                                          —
                  r(3)                                          cov(s1d_)                  cov(s1_d)J.

     For the general case in which the preferences of both worker i and firm j are

weighted in hours determination the difference in variances (A.15) involves a large

number of terms. The expression simplifies greatly if hours are determined entirely

by the worker or entirely by the firm. It would be very difficult to identify

richer structural models from the variances and autocovariances of the hours changes

within and across jobs without detailed data on some of the determinants of firm and

worker preferences. A prototype for such an analysis (using earnings and hours) is

Abowd and Card (1985b).
                                   — 48



                                     References

Abowd, John M. and Ashenfelter, Orley, "Anticipated Unemployment Temporary Layoffs,
     and Compensating Wage Differentials" in S. Rosen (ed.) Studies in Labor
     Markets, University of Chicago Press (1981): 141—170.

           and Card, David M., "On the Covariance Structure of Hours and Earnings
     Changes." Unpublished paper, Princeton University, (December 1985a)

           and Card, David M., "Intertemporal Labor Supply and Long Term Employment
     Contracts." Unpublished paper, Princeton University, (December 1985b)

Altonji, Joseph G., "Intertemporal Substitution in Labor Supply: Evidence from
     Micro Data", (forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy June 1986.).

           and Paxson, Christina H., "Hours—Wage Tradeoffs and Job Mobility,"
     Unpublished paper, Columbia University, (November 1985).

           and Paxson, Christina H., "Labor Supply, Hours Constraints, and Job
     Mobility", (in progress, 1986).

_________ and Shakotko, Robert A., "Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority?" NBER
     Working Paper No. 1616, (May 1985).

Ashenfelter, Orley, "Unemployment as Disequilibrium in a Model of Aggregate Labor
     Supply," Econometrica 48, (April 1980): 547—564.

            "Macroeconomic Analyses and Microeconomic Analyses of Labor Supply,"
     Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 16 (1984).

Atrostic, B.K., "The Demand for Leisure and Nonpecuniar Job Characteristics",
     American Economic Review 72: (June 1982): 428—440.

Barzel, Yorum, "The Determination of Daily Hours and Wages," Quarterly Journal of
     Economics Vol. 87 (1973): 220—238.

Bernanke, Ben S., "Employment, Hours, and Earnings in the Depression: An Analysis
     of Eight Manufacturing Industries", NBER Working Paper No. 1642 (June 1985)

Brechling, Frank P. R., "The Relationship Between Output and Employment in British
     Manufacturing Industries," The Review of Economic Studies Vol. 32 (1965): 187—
     216.

Blank, Rebecca, "The Supply of Weeks and Hours of Work Among Female Household
     Heads", Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University (July 1985)

Brown, James N., "How Close to an Auction is the Labor Market?", Research in Labor
     Economics Vol. 5 (1982): 189—235.

Browning, Martin, Deaton, Angus and Irish, Margaret, "A Profitable Approach to Labor
     Supply and Commodity Demands over the Life—Cycle," Econometrica (May 1985).

Cline, Harold, "The Effect of the Job and Job Mobility on the Wage," Discussion
     Paper 79—8, Department of Economics, University of Rochester (December 1979).
                                    — 49   —




 Cogan, John F., "Fixed Costs and Labor Supply", Econometrica 49 No. 4 (July 1981):
      945—964.

Deardorff, A.V., and F.P. Stafford, "Compensation of Cooperating Factors"
     Econometrica 44 (July 1976): 671—684

Dickens, William T. and Lundberg, Shelly, "Hours Restrictions and Labor Supply",
     NBER Working Paper No. 1638 (June 1985).

Duncan, Greg. J. and Hill, Daniel H., "An Investigation of the Extent and
     Consequences of Measurement Error in Labor Economic Survey Data," Institute for
     Social Research, The University of Michigan, (July 1984).

Ehrenberg, Ronald S., "Fringe Benefits and Overtime Behavior", Massachusetts, D.C.
     Health (1971).

           and Schumann, Paul L., "Compensating Wage Differentials for Mandatory
     Overtime," Economic Inquiry 22 No. 4 (October 1984):

Feldstein, M., "Specification of the Labor Input in the Aggregate Production" Review
     of Economic Studies 34 (October 1967): 375—86.

Freeman, Richard E., "Unionism and the Dispersion of Wages", Industrial and Labor
     Relations Review 34 No. 1 (October 1980): 3—23.

Filer, Randall, "The Effects of Nonpecuniary Compensation on Estimates of Labor
     Supply Functions", (forthcoming in The Quarterly Review of Economics and
     Business, 1986).

Grossman, Herschel I, "Risk Shifting, Layoff, and Seniority", Journal of Monetary
     Economics 4 (November): 661—668.

Gustman, Alan L., and Steinmeier, "Minimum Hours Constraints and Retirement
     Behavior", Contemporary Policy Issues, a supplement to Economic Inquiry, No. 3
     (April 1983): 77—91.

__________   "PartialRetirement and the Analysis of Retirement Behavior", Industrial
     and Labor Relations Review Vol. 37, No. 3 (April 1984): 403—415.

Ham, John C., "Rationing and the Supply of Labor: An Econometric Approach",
     Industrial Relations Section Working paper No. 103A, Princeton University (May
     1979)

___________ "Estimation of a Labor Supply Model with Censoring Due to Unemployment
     and Underemployment", The Review of Economic Studies 49 No. 3 (July 1982):
      335—354.

___________ "Testing Whether Unemployment Represents Life—Cycle Labor Supply
     Behavior", (forthcoming in The Review of Economic Studies July 1986.),

Hamermesh, Daniel S. "The Demand for Labor in the Long Run," (forthcoming in 0.
     Ashenfelter and R. Layard eds., Handbook of Labor Economics )
                                — 50



Hanoch, Giora, "Hours and Weeks in the Theory of Labor Supply", in JameSmith
     (ed.), Female Labor Supply: Theory and Estimation. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
     University Press (1980): 119—165.

Hausman, Jerry A., "The Effect of Wages, Taxes and Fixed Costs on WomenTh Labor
     Force Participation," Journal of Public Economics 14 (1980): 161—194.

Heckman, James J. and MaCurdy, Thomas E., "A Life Cycle Model of Female Labor
     Supply", The Review of Economic Studies, 47 (January 1980): 47—74.

                                     "New Methods for Estimating Labor Supply
     Functions: A Survey", Research in Labor Economics, Vol 4 (1981): 65—102.

Kiefer, Nicholas M., "Employment Contracts, Job Search Theory and an Empirical Model
     of Labor Turnover", Department of Economics, Cornell University (August 1984).

Killingsworth, Mark R., Labor Supply. New York: Cambridge University Press (1983).

            "A Simple Structural Model of Heterogenous Preferences and Compensating
     Wage Differentials" Unpublished paper, Rutgers University. (December 1984).

Lewis, H.G., "Employer Interests in Employee Hours of Work," Unpublished English
     version of "Interes del Empleador en las Horas de Tobajo del Empleado,"
     Cuadernos de Economia 18 (1969): 38—54.

Lundberg, Shelly J., "Tied Wage—flours Offers and the Endogeneity of Wages", NBER
     Working Paper No. 1431 (August 1984).

MaCurdy, Thomas, "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life Cycle Setting",
     Journal of Political Economy 89 (December 1981): 1059—1086.

            "A Simple Scheme for Estimating an Intertemporal Model of Labor Supply
     and Consumption in the Presence of Taxes and Uncertainty", International
     Economic Review 24 No. 2 (June 1983): 265—290.

Moff it, Robert, "The Tobit Model Hours of Work and Institutional Constraints",
     Review of Economics and Statistics (1982): 510—515.

__________ "The Estimation of a Joint Wage—Hours Labor Supply Model", Journal of
     Labor Economics 2 No. 4 (October 1984) : 550—566

Nadiri, M. Ishaq and Rosen, Sherwin, "Interrelated Factor Demand Functions",American
     Economic Review 59 (September 1969): 457—471

Nichell, Stephen, "Dynamic Models of Labour Demand", Centre For Labor Economics
     Discussion Paper No. 197, London School of Economics (July 1984) (forthcoming
     in 0. Ashenfelter and R. Layard (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics)

Pencavel, John, "Labor Supply of Men", (1984) (forthcoming in 0. Ashenfelter and R.
     Layard (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics).

Quinn, Robert P., and Staines, Graham., Quality of Employment Survey, 1973—1977:
     Panel, Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan, (1979).
                                   — 51



Rosen, Sherwin, "On the Interindustry Wage and Hours Structure", Journal of
     Political Economy Vol. 77 (1969): 249—273.

___________ "Implicit Contracts Models———A Survey", Journal of Economic Literature
     Vol. 23 No. 3 (September 1985): 1144—1175.

Rosen, Harvey S., "Taxes in a Labor Supply Model with Joint Wage—Hours
     Determination", Econometrica Vol. 64 No. 3 (May 1976): 485—507.

Survey Research Center, A Panel Study of Income Dynamics: Procedures and Tape Codes
     1981 Interviewing Year, Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan,
     Ann Arbor, Michigan. (1982).

Topel, Robert H., "Equilibrium Earnings, Turnover, and Unemployment", Journal of
     Labor Economics 2 No. 4 (October 1984) :500—522.
                                                                                                     TARLE 1
                                                  Definitions,    Means, and Standard      Peviations of Variables. (Standard tdeviatons in narentheses)

                                                          P510 Males       P510    Males     Pomarried     tlnnarried    Married        (dF Males
                                                          1 Year Gap      3 Year Cap         Fems, 1 Year Fet's, 3 "ear Fens, 1 "ear 4 "ear Oap
 Variable           Pefinition                            (k—i)            (k3)              Can (k—i)     Ga (k—3)       Ca (k—I)      (k—4)
 LT-1ours/Week      a) Change in ln(oursfWeek)            .0021           —.0004             .0065         .0076          .00°P         —.0145
                       Within and Across Jobs             (.21)            (.20)             (.26)         (.23)          (.30)         (.213
                    b) Change in ln(Poura/Week)           .0014           —.0025              .0096        .0067          .0128        —.0138
                         Within Jobs (4P1)                (.44)            (.44)             (.24)         (.21)          (.28)         (.19)
                    c)   Change in    ln(Rours/Week)      .0062            .0365             —.0073        .0221         —.0087        —.0169
                         Across Jobs(8}1j)                (.52)            (.57)             (.35)         (.42)         (.36)          (.28)
 lWeeks/Year        a) Change 1 ln(Weeks/Year)            .0050             .0015            .0226         .0069          .0600
                        Within and Across Jobs            (.28)           (.21)              (.42)         (.31)         (.46)
                    b) Change in ln(Weeks/Year)          —.0001           —.0039             .0233         .0059         .0477
                         Within Jobs(tFjj)                (.49)           (.44)              (.38)         (.27)         (.44)
                    c) Change in      ln(Weeks/Year)      .0330           .0408              .0107         .0226         .1341
                      Across Jobs(A0jj)                  (.67)            (.62)              (.56)         (.61)         (.55)

ll4ours/Year       a) Change in ln(l4ours/Year)          .0072            —.0019             .0292         .0146         .0697
                         Within and Across Jobs          (.35)            (.30)              (.53)         (.40)         (.55)
                   h)    Change in ln(Pours/Year)        .0013            —.0064             .0329         .0126         .0605
                         Across Jobs(8Njjt               (.56)            (.53)              (.48)         (.36)         (.53)

                   c)    Change    in ln(T4ours/Year)    .033             .0773              .0124         .0447         .1254
                         Across Jobs(AHjjt)              (.73)            (.75)              (.69)         (.80)         (.66)
E1MICATION         Year of Schooling                     11.94            11.89              11.72         11.66         12.44         12.84
                                                         (3.18)           (3.32)             (2.72)        (2.81)        (2.25)        (2.88)

                   Age of individual                     37.61            41.63              39.82         44.83         36.63          6.04
                                                         (10.8)           (10.01)            (11.60)       (10.05)       (10.6)        (10.7)
MRD                Change in marital status              .011             .0031                                                        .0179
                   MRD1 if married, else 0.              (.23)            (.26)                                                        (.35)
IHEALTR            Change In health. HEALT1—1 if         —.002            .0041              —.0018        .0202                       .0429
                   health limits ability to work         (.26)            (.28)              (.30)         (.33)                       (.33)
8OTINC             Change in (family income minus 227.44                  842.73             7.625        35.74          —81.77
                   individual's labor income)      (4701.1)               (6351.1)           (2321.2)     (3180.6)       (3884.6)
SFPN               SEPN equals 1 if changed              .1554            .0534              .1806         .0620         .1413         .2392
                   employer, else 0.                     (.36)            (.22)              (.38)         (.24)         (.35)         (.43)
AUNI0N             Change in union membershIp.     .0070                  .0067              .0117        .0263                        .0286
                   UNI0N1     if
                              union member,else 0. (.32)                  (.34)              (.27)        (.31)                        (.35)
AITNEM             Change in annual hours of             —1.39           —2.48              —6.37         —3.22         —2.02
                   unemployment                          (254.7)          (156.45)           (345.1)      (195,3)        (311.4)
                   Change in      ln(Average Nourly      .0326            .0817              .0325        .0784          .0189
                   Earnings)                             (.38)            (.37)             (.40)         (.33)         (.40)
Aln(EARNITTGSjjt) Change in ln(Aonual                                                                                                  .1602
                         Earnings).                                                                                                   (.35)
AKIPS              Change in number of children          .0312           —.8525              .0668        —.2903        —.0516
                   Younger    than 18                    (.87)           (1.16)             (.60)         (.92)         (.52)
IKIDS<6            Change in a dutnay which enuals .0056                 —.0273             .0020         .0256         —.0016
                   1 If any kids are      younger than (.33)             (.46)              (.22)         (.28)         (.28)
                   6 year old.
                                                                                                         Table 2
                                                     Within   and Across   .loh   Variances in Changes In the log of Hours/Week, Weeks/Year, and Hours/Year
                                                                                  Males —I'SII) & OES (Standard Errors in Parentheses)

                                 IInacinsted   hours measures                       Adiusted hours meamures.m lint adlusted    Adlusted hours aeasures.a Includes ad—
                                                                                         for hours of unemployment             adjustment for hours of unemployment
                       Vat. Across     'Jar. Within           Difference          Var. Across    'Jar. Within   Difference     Var. Across    Var. Within     Difference
                          Jobs             lobs                                     Jobs             Jobs                         Jobs           Jobs

                       VAR(Al4ljt)     VAR(8jit)              VAR(Hjjt)—          VAR(Ahjjt)    VAR(Ahjjt)     VAR(Mjit)       VAR(4hjjt)     VAR(8hji)       VAR(8h'ji)—
1   Year Cap (k—I)         (1)
                                                              VAR(HIJ)                                         VAR(Ah)                                        VAR(8h1)
                                               (2)                (3)                 (4)           (5)            (6              (7)            (8)            (9)
HOURS/WEEK               .0758            .0361                 .0397              .0710          .0389          .0321           .0711          .0389           .0322
                        (.004)           (.002)                (.005)             (.004)         (.002)         (.004)          (.004)         (.002)         (.004)
WEEKS/YEAR               .1916            .0564                 .l352               .1963         .0587          .1376           .0707          .0361          .0346
                        (.010)           (.003)                (.011)             (.010)         (.003)         (.010)          (.006)         (.002)         (.006)
liohIRs/yRAR             .2765            .0960                 .1805               .2691         .1058          .1633           .1400          .0823           .0577
                        (.012)           (.004)                (.012)             (.012)         (.004)         (.013)          (.007)         (.003)         (.008)
OBSERVATIONS             4428            24071                                     4428           24071                          4428            24071

3 Year Gap (k3)
1iIiRSWWi                .1064           .0360                 .0704                .1277         .0411          .0866           .1215          .0411           .0804
                        (.015)          (.002)                (.015)              (.017)         (.002)         (.017)          (.014)         (.002)         (.014)
WEEKS/YEAR               .1496            .0372                .1124                .1475         .0370          .1105           .0986          .0264          .0722
                        (.026)          (.003)                (.026)              (.024)         (.003)         (.024)          (.019)         (.002)         (.020)
HOURS/YEAR               .3160            .0779                 .2381              .3175          .0827          .2348          .2263           .0705          .1558
                        (.051)          (.004)                (.051)              (.050)         (.004)         (.050)         (.031)          (.004)         (.031)
OBSERVATION               742            l3158                                      724           13158                           742           13158

5 Year Cap      (k5)
HOURS/WEEK               .0947           .0565                  .0382              .0898          .0547          .0351          .0885           .0546          .0339
                        (.007)          (.002)                (.007)              (.007)         (.002)         (.007)         (.007)          (.002)         (.007)
WEEKS/YEAR               .1227           .0666                  .0561              .1224          .0665          .0559          .0755           .0434          .0321
                        (.012)          (.004)                (.013)              (.013)         (.004)         (.014)         (.010)          (.003)         (.010)
HOURS/YEAR               .2524           .1384                 .1140               .2451          .1350          .1101          .1827           .1070          .0757
                        (.023)          (.006)                (.024)              (.023)         (.006)         (.024)         (.016)          (.005)         (.017)
IThSERVATIONS             2272           14143                                      2272          14143                         22721           14143
OES                                                                                         -
}IOITRS/WFEV             .0763           .0346                 .0417               .0539          .0121          .0218
                        (.015)          (.006)                (.016)              (.010)         (.006)         (.011)
OBSERVATIONS              67              213                                        67            213
a
  The procedure used to adjust the hours measures for the effects of job specific variables is discussed in Section 3.2. For the
P510 the job specific characteristics are changes in dummies for I digit occupation and union
                                                                                              Status, and the change in the wage as
well as (for columns 7—9) the change in annual hours of unemployment. For the OES the job
                                                                                           specific characteristics are changes In
dummies for I digit occupation and union membership, the change in the log of annual
                                                                                     earnings, and the changes in 17 varIables
related to job characteristics. The 17 variables include dummies for whether the job is dangerous, whether It
                                                                                                               provides daycare,
whether the work is interesting, whether the physical conditions are good, in the individual learns a lot on the
                                                                                                                 job, whether a
training program Is available, whether the worker Is free to decide how to do tasks, whether promotion chances are good, whether
                                                                                                                                  job
security Is good, whether the work is steady, whether fringe benefits are good, whether the job gives paid vacation
                                                                                                                    days and sick
pay, whether the job requires hard work, and whether travel is convenient; also included are the change in average travel
the change in number of peqple working at the firm. The coefficients used to                                              time, and
                                                                              perform the adjustment are reported In Table A.l
                                                            TABLE 3

                                        Estimates of Variances of the Changes in Hours
                                           Controlling for Individual Heterogeneity
                                PSID Males. 3 Year Gap (k=3) (Standard Errors in Parentheses)*


              Average of Individual         Average of Individual            Difference (y)
               Cross—Job Variances           Within Job Variances       column 1 — column 3



                4         Vari(hj)            4        Var1(h1)     4     Var1(h. - Var1(th1
                _____________                       (2)                              (3)

FOURS/WEEK       .1233                        .0418                            .0815
                 (.017)                       (.004)                           (.017)

WEET<S/YEAR      .1069                        .0403                            .0664
                 (.029)                       (.012)                           (.030)

FOuRS/YEAR       .2433                        .0829                             .1 6O-
                 (.047)                       (.012)                           (.047)
OBSERVATIONS    447                           447                              447
       *
           Var j(hjj) and Varj(hjj) are the sample variances of hjj and
             for person i around tice sample means of h1j and iTh1 computed over
       all time periods and individuals. I is the size of the subsample of
       individuals who had at least one observation on hjjt and at least one
       observation hijt. I equals 447.
                                                          Table

                                   Variance of the Log   of   Hours for Quits and Layoffs

                                              PSID — Males;       3 Year Gaps (k=3)
                                                                              a
                                           (Standard errors in parentheses)



                  .                                      Unadjusted Hours Measures
                  Variance Across Jobs       Variance Within Jobs         (Variance Across Jobs —    Variance Within Jobs)
                        Var(Hjj)                  Var(Hij)                                 Var(Ht)
                      Quits     Layoffs                                            Quits                 Layoffs
                       (1)         (2)               (3)                            (4)                     (5)

  Hours/Week        .1010        .1092              .0360                          .0650                  .0732
                   (.021)       (.021)             (.002)                         (.021)                 (.021)

  Weeks/Year          .0715      .2753               .0372                         .0343                  .2381
                   (.014)       (.065)             (.003)                         (.014)                 (.065)

  Hours/Year          .2049      .4876               .0779                         .1270                   .4097
                   (.054)       (.106)             (.004)                         (.054)                 (.106)
  Observations         449         267              13158

                              Adjusted Hours Measures (including adjustment for hours of unemployment)
                 Variance Across Jobs   Variance Within Jobs     fVariance Across Jobs — Variance Within Jobs)
                        Var(hjj)                  Var(Ah)
                      Quits     Layoffs                                            Quits                 Layoffs

  Hours/Week          .1167      .1214               .0411                         .0756                   .0803
                  (.018)        (.020)             (.002)                         (.018)                 (.020)
  Weeks/Year          .0534      .1596              .0264                          .0270                  .1332
                  (.011)        (.048)             (.002)                         (.011)                 (.048)

  Hours/Year          .1563      .3150              .0705                          .0858             -
                                                                                                          .2445
                  (.028)        (.067)             (.004)                         (.028)                 (.067)
  Observations         449        267               13158


                 Adjusted Hours Measures (including hours of unemployment). np1oyed at             Ume of survey, t—2 b
                 Variance  Across   Jobs     Variance Within Jobs        (Variance Across Jobs —    Variance Within Jobs)
                       Var(hjj)                   Var(hj).
                      Quits     Layoffs                                            Quits                 Layoffs

  Hours/Week          .1142      .1242              .0407                          .0735                  .0835
                  (.019)        (.022)             (.002)                         (.019)                 (.022)

  Weeks/Tear          .0500      .0976              .0249                          .0251                  .0727
                  (.010)        (.028)             (.002)                         (.010)                 (.028)

  Hours/Tear       .1503         .2510              .0686                          .0817                  .1824
                  (.030)      (.053)               (.004)                         (.030)                 (.030)

 Observations         421         203               13124


5The procedure used to adjust hours measures for the effects of job—specific variables and annual hours of
 unemployment is described in  Section 3.2 The job—specific characteristics used for adjustment are changes in
 dtmimies for 1—digit occupation, change in dummy for union membership and change in the log of average hourly
 earnings. The coefficients used to perform the adjustments are reported in Table Al.

bRestricting the sample to individuals employed at the time of the survey at t—2 means that all individuals in
 the 3ample who report a job change in. the previous calendar year have obtained another job by the survey data.
 This ensures that the cross—job variance in weeks/year and hours/year is not due to spells of unemployment.
 spells Out f the labor force, or spells "between jobs."
                                                                                                        Table 5
                                                                                 Within and Across lob Variances in hours
                                                                    P510 — Marriedand Unmarried Females (standard errors in parentheses)

                                   ihnadj%usted hours measures                 Adjusted hours measures.* Not adjusted            Ad3usted hours measures. Includes ad—
                                                                                   fOr hours of unemployment                      liustmnent for hours of unemployment
                      Vat. Across        Var. Within      Difference        Var. Across    Var. Within    Difference             Var. Across      Var. Within     Difference
                      lobs               Jobs                               Jobs           Jobs                                  lobs            lobs

                      VAR(tmHj,11)       VAR(Ai-iiit)     VAR(M14u1t        VA1l(Ahijt)   VAR(Ahijt)
                                                                                                 -                VAR(Ahi,jt)—   VAR(8hi,jt)    VAR(6h1       jr   VAR(Ahji1)_
I!HMARRTEI) FEMAlES   ____________       ___________     vAR(Hi ;)                                                vAR(h1         ____________   ___________        VAR (6h1  )
1   Year Cap (k1)            (1)                (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)                 (6)               (7)             (8)            (9)
}hOI!RS/WF.FK                              .11577           .0658             .1 516         .063g                  .0878          .1519           .0641             .0876
                       (.01(1)            (.005)           (.015)            (.017)         (.005)                 (.018)         (.017)          (.005)            (.018)


WEEKS/YEAR              .1191              .1454            .1737             .3171          .1429                  .1744          .1760           .0949             .0811
                       (.029)             (.011)           (.031)            (.029)         (.011)                 (.031)         (.026)          (.009)            (.027)


1101185/YEAR            .4817               .2304           .2513             .5136          .2344                  .2792          .3551           .1821             .1730
                       (.053)             (.018)           (.056)            (.055)         (.018)                 (.058)         (.045)          (.016)            (.048)
OBSERVATIONS          979               4442                                979           4442                                   979            4442


3 Year Cap (k3)
HOuRS/WEEK              .1780               .0458           .1322             .2779          .0471                  .2308          .2917           .0470             .2447
                       (.043)             (.004)           (.043)            (.052)         (.004)                 (.052)         (.058)          (.004)            (.059)

WEEKS/YEAR              .3691              .0756            .2935             .4307          .0745                  .3562          .2783           .0626             .2157
                       (.098)             (.011)           (.099)            (.114)         (.011)                 (.114)         (.090)          (.008)            (.090)

HOURS/YEAR              .6438                .1276          .5162             .6566          .1244                  .5322          .5035           .1136             .3899
                       (.14Q)             (.016)           (.150)            (.145)         (.015)                 (.146)         (.142)          (.013)            (.143)

OBSERVATIONS          133               2013                                133           2013                                   133            2013

5 Year Cap (k5)
HOURS/WEEK              .2336                .0450          .1886             .2182          .0459                  .1723          .2173           .0457             .1716
                       (.059)             (.055)           (.059)            (.055)         (.005)                 (.058)         (.053)          (.005)            (.053)

WEEKS/YEAR              .3300               .0756           .2544             .3595          .0764                  .2831          .2439           .0540             .1899
                       (.087)              (.018)          (.089)            (.094)         (.018)                 (.096)         (.078)          (.009)            (.078)

1101185/YEAR            .5710               .1281           .4429             .5897          .1327                  .4570           .4819          .1123             .3696
                       (.117)              (.019)          (.119)            (.122)         (.019)                 (.123)         (.114)          (.013)            (.114)

OBSERVATIONS          180                1318                               180           1318                                   180            1318

MARRIED FEMALES
1 Year Cap (k=1)
HOURS/WEEK               .1270               .0840          .0430             .9433          .0905                  .8528           .9576          .0903             .8673
                       (.031)              (.010)          (.032)            (.135)         (.009)                 (.136)         (.142)          (.009)            (.142)

WEEKS/YEAR               .2994               .1925          .1069             .4837          .1841                  .2996           .3744          .1569             .2175
                       (.038)              (.020)          (.043)            (.046)         (.019)                 (.050)          (.037)         (.017)            (.041)


N0IIRS/'3'EAI&           .4341               .2819          .1522            2.2249              .2630             1.9619         2.1909           .2394            1.9515
                       (.064)              (.025)          (.069)            (.265)         (.023)                 (.266)          (.265)         (.021)            (.266)

OBSERVATIONS          359               2181                                359           2181                                    359           2181

*
  The method of adjusting hours measures is discussed in Section 3.2. For unmarried females, ho,,rs were adjusted for
the effects of changes In I digit occupation dummies, change in a dummy for union mesmhershipchange in the log of average
hourly earnings, and (for columns 7—9) change in annual hours of unemployment. For married females, hours were adjusted
for occupation and hourly earnings only, since data on union membership was unavailable. The coefficients used for
                       '-M    n    T)' Al.
                                               Table Al
  Equations for Change in the Log of Hours Used to Construct Adjusted Hours Measures 4hit and Ahljt
                                                               PSIT)   & QS     — Males*
                              Weighted 2—stage least squares** (t—statistics in parentheses)

                       P520 —     1    Year Cap (k—i)                  P510 —    3    Year Can (k—I)          0ES—K4
                     (1)              (2)           (3)           (4)                (5)          (6)         (7)

                     ANOITRS/         1.WEEKS/      1.POU9S/      1.HOURS/           8WEEKS/      4POURS/     8T-TOURS/
                     WYFX             YPAR          VAR           W1'FK              YFAP         VFAP       JFFK
gPUCATION            .0005            .0003         .0007          .0006             .0003        .0009       .0029
                    (.90)         (.51)            (.91)         (.68)           (.453           (.76)       (.62)

ACF                   .0005       —.0005           —.0001        —.0010              .0002       —.0007     —.0170
                    (.1,7)        (.46)            (.07)         (.45)           (.13)           (.25)      (1.69)
ACF2                —. 0000           .0000         .0000          .0000         —.0000           .0000       .0002
                    (.43)         (.46)            (.09)         (.48)           (.245           (.20)      (1.59)
RACF                 .0013        —.0018          —.0005         —.0012           .0032           .0021
                    (.40)         (.55)           (.11)          (.24)           (.71)           (.31)

AMRO                —.0043         .0020          —.0024          .0039           .0169           .0209     —.0039
                    (.60)         (.27)           (.22)          (.42)          (2.00)          (1.60)       (.10)

1.HEALTR             .0025        —.0196          —.0174         —.0158          —.0116          —.0273     —.0273
                    (.41)        (3.16)           (1.88)        (1.93)          (1.57)          (2.240       (.70)
1.OTINC/lOO         —.0001        —.0004           —.0005        —.0002          —.0003          —.0004
                   (1.50)        (5.23)           (4.58)        (2.48)          (4.00)          (4.39)

AOTINC2/l000 .0000                 .0000            .0000         .0000           .0000           .0000
                   (1.07)        (2.56)           (2.51)         (.91)          (2.06)          (2.00)

SEPH                 .0104         .0019            .0121        —.0142           .0069         —.0073      —.0519
                   (1.68)         (.31)           (1.37)         (.60)           (.29)           (.21)      (1.42)

1.UNIOR              .0140         .0089            .0229         .0050           .0010           .0060      —.0840
                   (2.65)        (1.65)           (2.85)         (.72)           (.16)           (.62)      (2.16)

SFPN x             —.0140          .0046          —.0093         —.0134           .0140           .0006
 E.ITNIOF          (1.01)         (.33)           (.47)          (.31)           (.32)           (.01)

AUNI!M/100           .0008       —.0229            —.0221        —.0013          —.0270         —.0283
                    (.1.4)      (12.22)           (2.30)         (.43)          (9.81)          (6.69)

1.UNV4/l000 —.0000                —.0004           —.0004        —.0000         —.0004          —.0004
                   (1.70)       (27.67)          (19.66)         (.39)        (15.92)          (10.57)

SEPH x             —.0011         —.0057          —.0068          .0128           .0002           .0375
 AUNEM             (.32)         (1.59)          (1.33)          (.83)          (1.56)          (1.67)

SEPN x               .0000         .0001           .0001        —.0002           —.0003         —.0005
 AUNEM2             (.16)        (2.33)          (1.73)        (2.13)           (2.34)          (3.12)

                     .0577         .0698            .1271         .0967          —.0258           .0709
                   (1.74)        (2.06)           (2.52)        (2.91)           (.86)          (1.54)

                                                                                                              .1699
1.ln(EARNINCS1jt)
                                                                                                            (3.89)

SEPN x              —.1429        —.0599           —.2023         .0355          —.1065         —.0709
                   (2.72)        (1.13)           (2.64)         (.31)           (.93)           (.44)
 1.Wijt

DFF                 13374         13374            13374          5./.3              5843         581.3      242
R2                   .005             .45           .29           .009               .36          .21        .16
       *
            Also
             included in equations 1—6 were: change In the nuaher of kids,
change itt     a
             dummy variable which equals I if any children are under the age of
6, changes in 1 digit occupation dummies, and nine change In occupation/change
in lob interactions. Also included in equation 7 were: the number of chidren
under the age of 15 in 1977, the number of children under the age of 12 in
1973, the change in the number of children under the age of five, change in 1
digit occupation dummies, and the change in 17 variables relating to joh
characteristics. The 17 variables include dummies for whether the job is
dangerous, whether it provides daycare, whether the work is interesting,
whether the physical conditions are good, whether the individual learns a lot
on the job, whether a training program is availahie, whether the worker is
free to decide how to do tasks, whether promotion chances are good, whether
job security is good, whether the work is steady, whether fringe benefits are
good, whether the job gives paid. vacation days and sick pay, whether the job
requires hard work, and whether travel is convenient; also included are the
change in average travel time, and the change in number of people working at
the firm. The point estimates for these additional variables are reported in
Table 1.2.
       **
              See footnote     for a discussion of the first stage equations for
           and SEPN x Awj.j itt the estimation of columns 1—6. The weight for
obaervations with and without job changes are equal to 1 over the square root
of the estimated residual variances (from the unweighted estimates) of the
hours equation for observations with job changes and for observations without
job changes, respectively. Column 7 was estimated by weighted least squares.
                                                                               Appendix Table A2

                                                                Change in )Jogrs Koustions — PuP 6 OKP — Males
                                                        Variables not reported in rableAl(t_statistics in parentheses')

                             8510 It —   I                                   PSIP It — 3                                            0I!S It — 3
                      (1)          (2)           (1)              (4)              ()             (6)                                                      (7)
                 41)0)185/    8WVFKS/        AR0IJRS/        41)0085/       8WF.PKSI       41)0)185/                                                8140)185/
VARTANTY                      YFAR           YPAR                           YFAR           YFAR           VARTARI!                                  WFVV

INTERCFPT        —.0206       .0019          —.0161           .0014         —.0120         —.0105          INTFRCFPT                                .2532
                 (.90)        (.08)          (.46)           (.03)          (.31)           (.16)                                                   (1.12)

8(1(105)         .0004        —.0021         —.0019          —.0034         .0037           .0002          1(105<15 (1977)                          .0032
                 (.15)        (.86)          (.52)           (1.31)         (1.59)          (.07)                                                   (.25)

8(1(20<6)        .0059        —.0014         .0045           —.0030         .0028          —.0003         KIDS<12 (1973)                            —.0161
                 (1.22)       (.27)          (.61)           (.56)          (.59)           (.03)                                                   (.48)

5(OCCI)          —.0061       —.0381         —.0443          .0133          —.0245         —.0112          8(1(205<5)                               —.0101
                 (.38)        (2.33)         (1.82)          (.61)          (1.23)          (.36)                                                   (.60)

8(OCC1)xSEPN     .0343        .0335          .0678           —.1142         .0503          —.0548          4(PANCEROIIS)                            .0091
                 (.88)        (.85)          (1.21)          (.82)          (.42)           (.27)                                                   (.38)

8(OCC2)          —.0055       —.0354         —.0410          .0134          —.0028          .0106          8(PAYCARK)                               —.1456
                 (.37)        (.78)          (1.81)          (.65)          (.15)           (.37)                                                   (.09)

8(OCC2)xS1(PN    .0692        .0208          .0990           —.0712         —.0160         —.0871          8(FRINCE 8514)                           —.0086
                 (1.83)       (.78)          (1.82)          (.64)          (.14)           (.54)                                                   (.36)

8(0cC3)          —.0243       —.0106         —.0350          .0153          .0174           .0327          8(FXRM S27.F.)                           —.0000
                 (1.50)       (.68)          (1.51)          (.75)          (.94)           (1.15)                                                  (.76)

8(OCC3)xSPPN     .0530        .0252          .0782            .107Q         —.0651         —.1730          8(FRFF TO T1() TASKS)                    .0082
                 (1.40)       (.66)          (1.44)          (.81)          (.48)           (.00)                                                   (.40)

8(0CC4)          —.0054       —.0218         —.0273          .0103          .0013           .0206          4(1108K     lwrgRp,STING)                .0181
                 (.37)        (1.47)         (1.23)          (.98)          (.07)           (.76)                                                   (.74)
A(OCC4)xSSPT'1   .0520        .0242          .0762           —.0917         —.0523         —.1439          8(L1(ARN ON JOR)                         .0354
                 (1.48)       (.68)          (1.51)          (.82)          (.66)           (.80)                                                   (1.52)

8(OCC5)          —.0046       —.0124         —.0171          .0127          .0038           .0166          8(C.Oflfl   PIYYSTCAI.    CO14P(T1OMS)   .0265
                 (.31)        (.83)          (.77)           (.64)          (.21)           (.60)                                                   (1.02)

4(0CC5)xSF.Pr    .0445        .0124          .0569           —.1074         —.0184         —.1257          8(C.001) PROMOTIOW         C}IANCK)      —.0104
                 (1.27)       (.35)          (1.13)          (.90)          (.15)           (.73)                                                   (.38)
8(OCC6)          —.0090       —.0154         —.0245          .0022          .0037           .0059          8(J08 SFCI)RITY)                         —.0086
                 (.60)        (1.00)         (1.07)          (.11)          (.20)           (.21)                                                   (.39)

8(OCC6)xSEPN     .0220        .0038          .0257           —.0942         —.0600         —.1541          8(SICK PAY)                              —.0098
                 (.61)        (.10)          (.50)           (.80)          (.50)           (.90)                                                   (.32)

8(OCC7)          .0074        —.0266         —.0193          .0162          .0118           .0279          8(STF.APY WORK)                          —.0450
                 (.41)        (1.52.)        (.74)           (.68)          (.55)           (.84)                                                   (.73)
A(OC.C7)xSFPN    —.0112       .0208          .0095           —.1215         —.0779         —.2013          8(TRAININC PROCRAM)                      —.0188
                 (.26)        (.49)          (.16)           (.91)          (.57)           (1.03)                                                  (.77)
8(OCCR)          —.1161       .0008          —.1165          —. 1585        .0554          —.1030         8(TRAVFL CPNVFNTF.NT)                     —.0005
                 (2.76)       (.07)          (l.8)           (2.62)         (1.01)         (1.22)                                                   (.47)

8(OCC9)          .0126        .0060          .01R5           .0054          .0052           .0106         A(rRAVFL TIME)                            —.0022
                 (.39)        (.18)          (.38)           (.10)          (.11)          (.14)                                                    (.10)

8(OCC9)xSEPN     .0324       —.0362          —.0039          —.1455         —.0093         —.1548         A(PAID VACATION DAYS)                     —.0073
                 (.46)       (.51)           (.04)           (.59)          (.04)          (.44)                                                    (.20)
                                                                                                          8(WORI( HARD)                             —.0102
                                                                                                                                                    (.40)

                                                                                                          8(0CC2)                                   —.0233
                                                                                                                                                    (.51)

                                                                                                          A(0CC3)                                   —.0110
                                                                                                                                                    (.16)

                                                                                                          8(OCC4)                                   —.0064
                                                                                                                                                    (.09)

                                                                                                          8(OCCS)                                   .0281
                                                                                                                                                    (.40)

                                                                                                          8(00C6)                                   —.0206
                                                                                                                                                    (.34)
                                                                                                          4(000.7)                                  .0480
                                                                                                                                                    (.65)

                                                                                                          8(0C08)                                   —.0364
                                                                                                                                                    (.47)

                                                                                                          8(0CC9)                                   —.0584
                                                                                                                                                    (.28)

                                                                                                          8(OCC1O)                                  .0299.
                                                                                                                                                    (.33)
                                                                                          Table *3
                                                                            Change in Hours Equations        —
                                                                                                           P510
                                                           Married     and Unmarried Females
                                                                                             (t—etatjatica      parentheses)
                                                                                                                 n
                                                                             Weighted 2 Stage Least Squaroe

                                                                          UnmarriedFemales k—3
                           tjninarried Females k—I                                                                             Married Females k—I
                     (1)                                          (4)               (5)            (6)                        (7)              1:8)               (9)
                 ouis/          8WEEKS/          AHOURS/       ARO(JRS/          6WEEXS/       880118Sf               8HOIIRSI
                                                               WEEK                                                                     AWFEKS/           AI4OIJRS/
VARIABLE         WEEK           TEAR             YEAR                            YEAR                YEAR             WEEK
                                                              —                  —               —                                      YEAR              YEAR

INTERCEPT        —.0993         -.0556          —.1560         —.0324            —.0339           —.0666              .0973             .2027             .3004
                                                               (.32)             (.29)            (.43)
                 (1.89)         (.89)           (1.78)                                                                (1.01)            (1.43)            (1.79)
EDUCATION        .0002          .0003            .ooos         —.001              .0001           —.0017              —.0004            —.0057            —.0074
                  (.J)                           (.20)         (.85)             (.04)            (.52)               (.15)
                                (.15)                                                                                                   (1.36)            (1.49)
                                                               .0031             0O20                .0051
ACE              .0057          .0020            .0077                                                                —.0040            —.0028
                                                               (.67)                                                                                      —.0057
                 (1.98)         (.64)                                            (.36)            (.72)               (.84)
                                                 (1.79)                                                                                 (.39)             (.69)
ACE2             —.0001         —.1)                          —.0000             —.0000          —.0006
                                                —.0001                                                                .0001             .0000             .0001
                 (2.07)         (.49)            (1.73)
                                                              (.75)              (.39)            (.80)               (.83)             (.19)             (.49)
RACE             —.0050         .0009                         —.0080            —.0007           —.0092
                                                —.0041                                                                —.0106            —.0337            —.0518
                 (.60)          (.10)                         (.72)              (.05)           (.54)
                                                (.33)                                                                 (.78)             (1.66)            (2.17)
                 .0059          .0017                         —.0137             .0120           —.0017
A(KIDS)                                          .0073                                                               —.0173             .0130             —.0066
                 (.74)          (.19)            (.61)        (2.27)            (1.11)           (.19)                (1.37)            (.71)             (.30)
                                                              .-.0020           —.0022           —.0013
A(KID<6)         —.0108         .0014           —.0089                                                               —.0237             .0010
                                                              (.12)                                                                                      —.0324
                 (.66)          (.08)           (.36)                           (.11)            (.05)               (1.00)             (.03)             (.78)
8OTINC/100       —.0005         —.0020          0.0025        —.0007            —.0007           —.0015               .0018            —.0005             .0015
                 (1.71)         (5.91)          (5.40)        (2.52)            (2.17)           (3.31)              (4.67)            (.77)             (2.19)
8(OTINC2)/1000   .0000          .0000            .0000         .0000              .0000              .oooo           —.0000            —.0000            —.0000
                                (3.47)           (2.93)       (1.00)            (1.53)           (1.82)              (5.07)
                 (.59)                                                                                                                 (.61)             (2.57)
                                                              .0130             .0277            .0408
SRPN             —.0125         —.0106          —.0231                                                               —.1155            .0447             —.0715
                 (.75)          (.65)           (.99)         (.20)             (.47)            (.47)               (.46)             (.51)             (.36)
                 —.0131                                       —.0056            .0240            .0182
AUNION                          .0148            .0017
                 (.80)          (.84)            (.07)        (.31)             (1.15)           (.67)
AUNIONxSEPN      .1331          —.0368           .0963        .0248             .0192            .0441
                 (2.75)         (.79)            (1.43)
                                                              (.14)             (.12)            (.19)
                 —.0004         —.0110          —.0114       —.0055             —.0152           —.0207              .0096
AUNEN/100                                                                                                                              .0031             .0013
                                                              (.77)             (1.82)
                 (.08)          (2.17)          (1.61)                                           (1.90)              (1.45)            (.31)             (1.11)
                                                              .0001             —.0002
AUNEM2/1000      —.0001         —.0005          —.0006                                           —.0002              —.0003            —.0005            —.0005
                 (2.27)         (12.02)                      (.86)              (2.99)           (1.72)              (.54)
                                                (10.08)                                                                                (6.33)            (5.75)
                                                             —.1309             .1717            .0407
SEPN             —.0019         —.0166          —.0185                                                               —.0952            —.0480            —.1433
  AUNEN/100      (.20)          (1.72)                       (1.09)             (1.57)           (.25)               (1.01)
                                                (1.36)                                                                                 (.70)             (.92)
                                                             .0006              —.0001          —.0007
SEPN x           .0001          .0002           —.0003                                                               .0008             .0004             .0012
                                                             (.92)              (2.10)          (.74)
  MJNEN2/1000    (1.38)         (2.46)          (2.70)                                                               (1.00)            (.70)             (.91)
                 .0424
                                                             .0393             —.1220           —.0824
                                —.0515           .0409                                                               —.4919            —.0928            —.5816
                                                             (1.65)            (1.74)           (.90)
                 (1.25)         (.65)            (.37)                                                               (5.02)            (.62)             (3.40)
                                                             .3741             —.2346
       x SEPN    .0T10          .0067            .0838                                          .1406                2.1447            .9630
                                                             54)                                                                                         3.1088
                 (.48)          (.04)            (.38)                         t38)             (.15)                (1.33)            (.83)             (1.16)


                                                                                                                              (continued on    foflowing page)
                                                                 Table A3 (continued)
                                   L'nmarried    Females(k1)                Unmarried Females(k=3)                     Iarri ed Fenales (k=1)
                            (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)          ()           (6)                (7)             (R)               (9)
                         Flours!        Weeks!          Hours!     Hours!       Weeks/        Hours!             Hours!         Weeks!           Hours!
                         Week           Year            Year       Week         Year          Year               Week           Year             Year
LHEALTH                 .0026           .0008          .0224     —.0047         .0218         .0171
                        (1.62)          (.06)          (1.07)    (.29)          (1.18)        (.71)
0CC1                    —.0256          .0245          —.0010    .0275          —.0181        .0091              .0367          .2547            .2 901
                    •   (.54)           (.49)          (.01)     (.44)          (.25)         (.09)              (1.03)         (4.79)           (4.67)

SEPN x t0CCl            .0929           —.0190         .0738     —.5862         .4305        —.1560             —. 1989         —.3085           —.5042
                        (.74)           (.16)          (.42)     (.92)          (.75)        (.18)               (.98)          (1.99)           (1.50)
0CC2                    —.0751          .0078          —.0672    .0014          —.0107       —.0095              .0566           .1968           .2 535
                        (1.61)          (.16)          (.96)     (.02)          (.14)        (.10)               (1.55)         (3.60)           (3.97)
SEPNxAOCC2              —.0957          —.0903         —.1860    —.1321         —.0060       —. 1384             .0648          —.0975           —.0305
                        (.77)           (.75)          (1.07)    (.29)          (.01)        (.23)               (.29)          (.58)            (.08)
0CC3                    —.0068          .0240          .0174     .0302          —.0121        .0179              .0526           .2425           .2 944
                        (.16)           (.54)          (.28)     (.53)          (.18)         (.21)              (1.80)          (5.54)          (5.75)
SEPNxt0CC3              .0960           —.0453         .0507     —.3517         .1139        —.2383             —.0541          —.1233           —.1760
                        (.81)           (.39)          (.31)     (.68)          (.24)        (.34)               (.32)           (.96)           (.63)
A0CC4                   —.0378          .0776          .0397     .0206          .0124         .0328              .0381           .1229           .1613
                        (.74)           (1.41)         (.52)     (.31)          (.16)         (.33)              (.64)           (1.39)          (1.56)
SEPN x t.OCC4           .0014           —.0343         —.0329    —.2287         .3312         .1018              .7354           .3034           1 .045
                        (.01)           (.21)          (.14)     (.32)          (.51)         (.11)              (.78)           (.45)           (.67)
0CC5                    —.0053          .0611          .0558     .0028          —.0342       —.0372              .0600           .0915           .1517
                        (.11)           (1.19)         (.77)     (.05)          (.48)        (.40)               (1.46)          (1.49)          (2.12)
SEPN x tOCC5            .1262           .0003          .1265     —.1079         .0571        —.0513              —.4305         —.2068           —.6374
                        (1.00)          (.00)          (.72)     (.21)          (.12)        (.07)               (1.22)          (.80)           (1 .09)
0CC6                    —.0454          .0941          .0488     —.0278         —.0165       —.0445              —.0842         —.0759           —.1598
                        (.98)           (1.83)         (.68)     (.47)          (.24)        (.50)               (1.48)          (.89)           (1.61)
SEPN    x   t0CC6       .2639           —.0791         .1847     —.1055         —.0245        —.1303             .1164           .0788           .2013
                        (2.04)          (.63)          (1.02)    (.21)          (.05)         (.20)              (.31)           (.28)           (.33)
0CC7                    —.0684          .0462          —.0222    —.0143         —.0510        —.0653             .0733           .2877           .3601
                        (1.46)          (.92)          (.32)     (.24)          (.74)         (.73)              (2.04)          (5.34)          (5.72)

SEPN    x Mcd           .1241           —.0168         .0173     .0466          —.0379        .0086              —.0594         —. 1931          —.2 512
                        (1.00)          (.14)          (.62)     (.09)          (.08)         (.01)              (.28)           (1.23)          (.73)
DFF                     2759            2759           2759                                                      1999            1999            1999
                                                                 1071            1071         1071
R2                      .027            .38            .27                                                       .04             .18
                                                                  .033           .19          .13                                                .15

                                                                                                                                                 PC)r'
*The weights for observations with and without job changes are equal to the inverse of the               of   the estimated residual variances
                                                                                           square root
observations with and without job changes.
                                                             TABLE A4

            Average Absolute Deviations from the Mean of the Change in the Log of Unadjusted Hours Measures *
                                                  Within and Across Jobs
                                    PSID - Males, Married and Unmarried Females
                                           Standard Errors in Parentheses

                                    1   Year Gaps (k1)                                      3 Year Gaps (k=3)
               Average Absol ute   Average Absol ute                    Average Absol ute   Average Absol ute
               Deviations from     Deviations from                      Deviations from     Deviations From
               Mean of Hours       Mean of Hours         Diference      Mean of Hours       Mean of Hours       Difference
               Changes Across      Changes Within        (column 1 -    Changes Across      Changes Within      (column 4 —
               Jobs                Jobs                   column 2 )    Jobs                Jobs                 column 5

                       (1)                 (2)              (3)                (4)                 (5)                 (6)
MALES
Hours/Week        .1629                 .0941            .0688            .1962                 .0992             .0970
                 (.003)                 (.001)           (.003)           (.010)                (.001)           (.010)
Weeks/Year       .2495                  .0888            .1607            .1738                 .0766            .0972
                 (.005)                 (.001)           (.005)           (.013)                (.002)           (.013)
Hours/Year       .3384                  .1558            .1826            .3155                 .1506            .1649
                 (.006)                 (.002)           (.006)           (.017)                (.002)           (.017)
Observations     4428                   24071                            742                15138
UNMARRIED
FEMALES
Hours/Week       .1856                  .1044            .0812           .2598              .1014                .1584
                 (.010)                 (.003)           (.010)          (.030)             (.004)               (.030)
Weeks/Year       .3466                  .1636            .1830           .2979              .1145                .1834
                 (.014)                 (.005)           (.015)          (.050)             (.006)               (.050)
Hours/Year       .4393                  .2303          .2090             .4822              .1831                .2991
                 (.017)                 (.006)         (.018)            (.060)             (.007)               (.060)
Observations     979                    4442                             133                2146
MARRIED
FEMALES
Hours/Week       .1822                  .1309          .0513
                 (.016)                 (.006)         (.017)
Weeks/Year       .3618                  .2004          .1614
                 (.022)                 (.008)         (.023)
Hours/Year       .4369                  .2797            .1572
                 (.026)                 (.010)         (.028)
Ooservations     359                    2181



 Average Absolute Deviations from the Mean of Hours Changes Across Jobs is measured as: Mean H_Mean(AH.t)
 Average Absolute Deviations from the Mean of Hours Changes Within Jobs is measured as:
                                                                                                 Mean LH ut
                                                                                                          —Mean(LH         )
                                                                                                                     ijt
                                                                  Table   A5
                                     Within and   Across Job Variances In Actual Hours (Non-Log)

                                                    Unadjusted Hours Measures

                                           PSID — Males, Married and Unmarried Females

                                   (Standard   Errors    in   parentheses;     —
                                                                                    exP(H1)

                                  1 Year Gaps     (k1)                                         3 Year Gaps   (k3)
                     Variance      Variance                                     Variance       Variance
                    Across Jobs                          Difference                                                 Difference
                                  Within Jobs                                  Across Jobs    Within Jobs
                     Var(&!j)     Var(k!ij)                                    Var(AHjj)       Var(ij)       Var(!jj)—Var(H1j)
                        (1)          (2)                       (3)                   (4)          (5)                   (6)

Ma lea

  Hours/Week          132.79        60.62                     72.17                161.13       65.74                 95.39
                       (4.93)       (1.28)                    (5.09)               (12.71)       (1.88)               (12.84)

  Weeks/Year          152.05        43.91                     108.14               107.76       35.63                  72.13
                       (4.57)       (1.08)                     (4.70)              (10.83)      (1.27)                (10.88)

  Hours/Year          553,267      213,893                339,374                  558,491      224,886               333,605
                      (15,760)      (3,872)               (16,229)                 (38,629)      (5,716)              (39,040)
  Observations        4428          24071                                           742         13158

Unmarried Females

  Hours/Week          110.52        45.92                     64.60                141.34       43.26                 98.08
                      (9.85)        (2.58)                (10.18)                  (23.05)      (3.29)                (23.30)
  Weeks/Year          206.96        88.27                 118.69                   199.14       57.48                 144.66
                      (10.98)       (4.01)                (11.69)                  (38.90)      (4.40)                (39.10)
  Hours/Year          482,092      228,622                253,470                  557,162      168,096              389,066
                      (28,622)      (8,830)               (29,953)                 (76,759)     (9,574)               (71,354)

  Observations          979         4442

Harried Females

  Hours/Week          80.38        45.33                      35.05
                      (10.93)       (3.12)                    (11.36)

  Weeks/year          218.87       106.10                 112.77
                      (19.02)       (6.35)                (20.05)

  Hours/Year         407,167       226,726                180,441
                     (35.907)      (12,098)               (37,890)

  Observations           359        2181
                                                                                                Table A6

                                                                       Average Absolute Deviations from Means of Actual flours   Changes (Non—Log)
                                                                                    Unadjusted Hours Measures
                                                                           PSID —Males, Married and Unmarried Feusales
                                                                       IStandard errors in Parentheses:       —
                                                                                                                 exP(Hij)
                                                   1 Year Caps     (k—i)                               .                                 3 Year Caps     (k—3)
                    Average Absolute Deviations   Average Absolute Deviations                              Average Absolute Deviations Average Absolute DeviatLon8
                       From Means of Crosa—Job     From Means of Within—Job               Difference          From Means of Cross—Job   From Means of Within—Job         Difference
                       Changes In Actual Hours     Changes in Actual Hours                                    Changes In ActualHours     Changes in Actual Hours
                                                                                  (Column 1 — Column 2)                                                                        1    —
                     MeanIMljt                    HeanIAHij .-Mean(A11i31)I                                  MaanlAj1                                                (Column             Column 2)
                                                                                                                        —tnean(Hjjt)I     MeanA!ij
                               (1)                           (2)                              (3)                      (4)                            (5)                          (6)



  Hours/Week                   7.20                          4.21                            2.98                      8.40                           4.56                         3.84
                               (.13)                         (.04)                           (.14)                     (.35)                          (.06)                        (.36)
 Weeks/Year                    8.25                          3.29                            4.96                      5.72                           3.04                         2.68
                               (.14)                         (.04)                           (.15)                     (.32)                          (.04)                        (.32)
  Hours/Year                  542.79                      287.39                           255.40                    529.81                          298.58                231.23
                              (7.64)                       (2.33)                           (7.99)                   (19.33)                         (3.21)                (19.59)
  Observations                 4428                          24071                                                     742                           13158
Unmarried Females

 Hours/Week                    6.Qi                          3.31                            2.71                      8.03                           3.31                         4.72
                               (.28)                         (.09)                           (.29)                     (.76)                          (.13)                        (.77)
 Weeks/Year                   10.34                          5.07                            5.21                      8.49                           4.12                         4.37
                               (.32)                         (.12)                           (.34)                     (.98)                          (.14)                        (.99)
  Hours/Year                 511.15                       277.25                           233.90                    539.70                      258.61                    281.09
                             (15.03)                       (5.50)                          (16.00)                   (44.90)                         (7.09)                (44.50)
 Observations                  979                          4442                                                       133                            2146
Married Females

 Hours/Week                    5.36                         3.57                             1.79
                               (.38)                        (.12)                             .40
 Weeks/Year                   10.90                         5.82                             5.08
                               (.53)                        (.18)                             .56
 Hours/Year                  481.45                       300.74                           180.71
                             (22.10)                       (7.91)                          (23.50)

 Observations                  359                          2181
