NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL OF THE AFRICAN HIV/AIDS EPIDEMIC
Jeremy Greenwood
Philipp Kircher
Cezar Santos
Michèle Tertilt
Working Paper 18953
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18953
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013

We thank Pascaline Dupas and seminar audiences at the 2009 SED Meetings in Istanbul, the 2009
SITE workshop, the 2009 LACEA/LAMES Meetings, the NBER Growth Conference in San Francisco
2010, the University of Wisconsin,World Bank, University of Frankfurt, University of Mannheim,
University of Konstanz,Washington University in St. Louis, University of Texas at Austin, and the
University of Zürich for helpful comments. Financial support from NSF grant SES-0748889, ERC
grant SH1-313719, and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. Last but not least,
Olga Itenberg and Vera Molitor provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Jeremy Greenwood, Philipp Kircher, Cezar Santos, and Michèle Tertilt. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

An Equilibrium Model of the African HIV/AIDS Epidemic
Jeremy Greenwood, Philipp Kircher, Cezar Santos, and Michèle Tertilt
NBER Working Paper No. 18953
April 2013
JEL No. E0,I1,J12,O55
ABSTRACT
Eleven percent of the Malawian population is HIV infected. Eighteen percent of sexual encounters
are casual. A condom is used one quarter of the time. A choice-theoretic general equilibrium search
model is constructed to analyze the Malawian epidemic. In the developed framework, people select
between different sexual practices while knowing the inherent risk. The analysis suggests that the efficacy
of public policy depends upon the induced behavioral changes and general equilibrium effects that
are typically absent in epidemiological studies and small-scale field experiments. For some interventions
(some forms of promoting condoms or marriage), the quantitative exercise suggests that these effects
may increase HIV prevalence, while for others (such as male circumcision or increased incomes) they
strengthen the effectiveness of the intervention. The underlying channels giving rise to these effects
are discussed in detail.
Jeremy Greenwood
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
McNeil Building, Rm 160
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER

Cezar Santos
Department of Economics
University of Mannheim
L7, 3-5
68199 Mannheim
Germany
santos@uni-mannheim.de

Philipp Kircher
Department of Economics
University of Edingburgh
30 Buccleuch Place,
Edinburgh, EH8 9JT, UK
philipp.kircher@gmail.com

Michèle Tertilt
Department of Economics
University of Mannheim
L7, 3-5
68131 Mannheim
Germany
and NBER
tertilt@uni-mannheim.de

1

Introduction

HIV/AIDS is a major cause of death, currently killing about 2 million people
worldwide each year. The number of new infections is even higher than 2 million, suggesting an even more severe problem in the future. The most affected
continent is Africa, which hosts about two thirds of all HIV/AIDS infected people. Within Africa most transmissions occur through heterosexual sex. Furthermore, the majority of the HIV-positive population is female, compared to less
than one third in most developed countries. The current analysis spotlights one
part of Africa: The Republic of Malawi. Malawi has a relatively high HIV/AIDS
rate and the prevalence for women is higher than for men.1 It also has very good
data related to HIV/AIDS and sexual behavior. So, the facts are clear. Traditionally, two approaches have been taken to studying the transmission of HIV/AIDS
in Africa, viz epidemiological studies and field experiments.2 Epidemiological
studies are sophisticated in their treatment of equilibrium but usually lack a feedback loop that captures behavioral responses. Field-experiments are often on a
small scale and do not readily allow for the assessment of general equilibrium
effects.
The current paper advocates the use of choice-theoretic general equilibrium modelling as an additional tool for studying the African HIV/AIDS epidemic. First,
the main benefit that economics can bring to the field of epidemiology is homo economicus. Here the assumption is that humans pick their sexual behavior on the
basis of a rational benefit/cost calculation. This assumption allows one to study
the potential behavioral responses of individuals with respect to particular policies (e.g., adjustments in the number of casual relationships prior to marriage in
response to changes in transmission risk). Second, at the heart of the HIV/AIDS
epidemic is an externality, the transmission of a virus. General equilibrium modelling is well suited for the study of externalities. One can analyze how individual shifts in behavior feed back on each other in equilibrium (e.g., if the rate of
infection for some individuals rise, then the rate of infections for their partners
may increase in turn, etc.). Thus, the great advantage of choice-theoretic equi1
2

Section 2 is devoted to providing background on the Malawian HIV/AIDS epidemic.
A detailed review of the literature is contained in Section 1.1.

1

librium modelling is the joint assessment of both behavioral change and equilibrium adjustment in response to proposed policy interventions. Nothing is for
free, of course. Some abstractions are needed to operationalize choice-theoretic
equilibrium modelling that may render it less rich along some dimensions. As
such, choice-theoretic equilibrium modelling complements the above two existing approaches to the study of disease transmission.
A choice-theoretic general equilibrium search model is built here to study the
Malawian HIV/AIDS epidemic. Despite the fact that computational general
equilibrium models have made great progress in recent decades, there is essentially no application to the field of disease transmission (except for few purely
theoretical studies that form the basis of departure for this analysis but are too
stylized to be directly mapped to data; see the review in the next section). The
first applied general equilibrium framework to be used for this purpose is developed here.
The constructed model has three main ingredients. First, individuals make rational choices about risky sexual behavior. In contrast to most of the literature
(discussed below), the model explicitly models three important margins of risky
behavior. Individuals choose the frequency of sex, whether to get married or
engage in casual sex, and whether to use a condom or not. These margins allow people to choose those types of behavior that are thought to be the most
important factors in disease transmission: having sex often, with many different
people, and not using a condom. Alternatively, people can engage in relatively
safe behavior by being abstinent, getting married, or at least by using a condom.
When making these choices, individuals take the riskiness of each type of activity
into account.
Second, beliefs about the riskiness of various forms of sexual activity are formed
rationally. In the analysis a person’s past sexual history is private information.
Still, the fact that someone desires a casual sexual encounter involving no condom, say, as opposed to seeking a long-term one, may signal something about
his past sexual behavior. In particular, it may indicate a proclivity to engage in
risky behavior. Hence, in the analysis, people form rational forecasts about the
likelihood of a partner having HIV/AIDS based upon the type of relationship
that they are seeking. A person can then forecast the odds of getting HIV/AIDS
2

if s/he engages in a particular type of relationship. An individual’s choice about
what type of sexual activity to engage in may be influenced by his or her belief
about their own health. People assess their odds of having HIV/AIDS rationally
using Bayes’ rule. They understand how various sexual activities affect their future health, which influences their current decisions about which type of sexual
behavior to engage in. People who believe that they have HIV/AIDS may be
more likely to participate in risky behavior than those that do not because they
think that they have little to lose. This channel will worsen the health of participants seeking short-term unprotected sex and amplify the risk of a relationship
with them.
Third, the analysis is general equilibrium in nature. There are “markets” or
“meeting places” for the different types of sexual activities. People have differing tastes over various types of relationships and search accordingly on the various markets to fulfill their desires. They can choose how intensively to search
for a partner on a particular market (or abstain by not searching). They do this
recognizing that some of these meeting places will be riskier than others. For
example, a short-term relationship using a condom is safer than one that does
not. Yet, condoms may fail and hence are not perfectly safe. The model embeds
the well-document fact of monetary transfers within relationships. Each market
is characterized by a transfer that one of the partners makes to the other. These
transfers depend on the number of men relative to the number of women that
seek a particular type of relationship, and equilibrate the two sides of the market. For example, in the absence of transfers there may be more men desiring
casual unprotected sex than women. To attract women towards this risky activity, men may have to make some form of transfer payment. The market structure
eliminates any joint decision problem between partners about whether or not to
use a condom. They have the same desires when choosing the same market.
The constructed model is then tuned to fit aspects of the Malawian data. In particular, it is calibrated to match the HIV/AIDS rates for men and women, the
fraction of sexual relationships that are short term, the fraction of short-term
sexual encounters that use a condom, and the fraction of deaths that arise from
HIV/AIDS. The model’s ability to match some non-targeted lifecycle observations
is then examined. These include the profile by age of a sympton-free person’s be3

lief about being HIV/AIDS infected, the HIV/AIDS infection rate by age, and
the likelihood of a casual sexual encounter by age. The model does very well at
matching the data along these dimensions.
Last, some policy experiments are conducted. To name some, policies are examined such as male circumcision, which some believe reduces the risk of HIV/AIDS
transmission from females to males, the promotion of condom use in casual sex,
and income transfers to females. Earlier purely theoretical work (discussed in
the following literature section) focused on reductions in transmission risk and
emphasized that it can lead to higher overall prevalence because people could
get excessively risky. The quantitative part of this study does not confirm that
behavioral adjustments fully negate the positive effects of reduced transmission
risk. Nevertheless, it is important to account for behavioral adjustments and
equilibrium effects as they do strongly affect the predicted effectiveness. To show
this, we explicitly simulate epidemiological studies (which ignore behavioral adjustments) and small scale field experiments (which ignore equilibrium effects)
within our model. As an example, focus on the treatment of other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) which reduces the transmission risk. The effectiveness of
this policy is over-predicted (by around 30%) by the epidemiological model and
under-predicted (by around 80%) by the field experiment. For other policies the
behavioral responses are larger, and indicate the possibility of negating the positive primary effect. For example, the rate of HIV/AIDS displays a hump-shaped
relationship in the psychic pleasure that people get from sex using condoms.
This study also showcases channels beyond the simple effect that some agents
increase their risky sexual activity. For example, some forms of promoting longterm relationships seem to raise HIV prevalence because some risky people now
join the previously safe haven of marriage. While their move towards marriage
is usually seen as a reduction in their own risky behavior, it increases the infection risk for their marriage partners who previously had a higher chance of
finding a safe match. Such a change in the mixing patterns seriously affects the
effectiveness of the policy. For other interventions such one-sided reduction in
transmission risk (e.g., male circumcision) or increases in income (especially for
women) the behavioral adjustment and equilibrium effects magnify the efficacy
of the policy: Especially women react strongly to higher incomes, which makes
4

them substantially less willing to engage in risky activities. These changes feed
back on the men leading to a virtuous feedback loop.
Overall, this research program aims to develop tools to aid researchers and practitioners in their attempts to think through the various channels that are present
in different interventions, and highlights areas where further and more in-depth
research should be conducted to assess with more confidence the magnitude of
these channels.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The next subsection discusses the relation to the literature on HIV/AIDS. Section 2 provides background
information on sexual behavior and HIV/AIDS in Malawi. Section 3 sets up
the economic environment and defines the equilibrium. Section 4 describes the
benchmark parametrization of the model. Section 5 presents the results of the
policy experiments, as well as additional relevant literature. Section 6 offers some
concluding remarks.

1.1

Relationship to the Literature

This appears to be the first quantitative general equilibrium model of disease
transmission with purposive decision making. Previous papers are either purely
theoretical or do not consider the endogeneity of rational human behavior. In
addition, there are purely empirical studies; in particular, a recent literature uses
field experiments to study HIV/AIDS prevention policies.
The economic literature on disease transmission is small. Philipson and Posner
(1993) provide the first economic analysis of HIV/AIDS. Their book gives a great
overview of the different aspects involved in treating HIV/AIDS – from testing,
to regulatory intervention, to medical research and the political economy of treatment. Most of their analysis is verbal, however.
Few formal models of risky sexual behavior and HIV /AIDS exist.3 For tractabil3

There is of course a large economic literature on mate selection, starting from Becker (1973).
Examples include Burdett and Coles (1997), Shimer and Smith (2000) and Boulier and Rosenzweig (1984). The current paper also connects to the simulation-based analysis of sexual behavior
in Greenwood and Guner (2010). However, none of these papers study disease transmission.

5

ity, most of this work has focussed on only one dimension of risky behavior and
abstracts from intertemporal considerations of an individual over his lifetime.
Most prominently, Kremer (1996) builds a theoretical model where the number of
partners is determined endogenously as a choice by rational agents that depends
on the prevalence of the disease. The paper focuses on the theoretical implications of such endogeneity and shows that a reduction in the transmission probability can increase the overall prevalence rate because individual agents behave
in a more risky fashion. Moreover, it is shown that changes in mixing pattern
might be an important channel affecting the overall prevalence rate. To derive
these predictions theoretically, the paper abstracts from a number of important
issues. People only consider the lifetime probability of contracting HIV/AIDS,
but do not care about the exact timing. In particular, people do not update their
behavior based on past sexual experience. Condom use is not explicitly modeled,
which abstracts from the joint decision problem in using a condom. A distinction
between long-term and short-term partners is not made. Finally, the model is a
one-gender model that makes the analysis of gender asymmetries in the disease
dynamics impossible. The current paper shows how these richer elements can be
modeled, and evaluates quantitatively the impact of these various channels for
disease transmission, but at the cost of additional complexity.
The only other model that explicitly models men and women is Magruder (2011)
who develops a Jovanovic (1979) style matching model of marital search to analyze the HIV/AIDS epidemic in South Africa. The idea is that partners enter trial
marriages and explore whether or not they are good matches. During this period
couples have sex. In his setting, however, there is no decision about whether or
not to use a condom during these trial marriages. Also, the analysis is not general
equilibrium in nature. The decision about whether to accept or reject a partner is
not affected by the prevalence rate of HIV/AIDS in society, or by any beliefs that
the individual may have about whether or not s/he has the virus based upon
her or his past sexual history. These margins may be important because healthy
(young) individuals might self-select into the safety of marriage while those who
believe they are infected have less to gain from safety and might opt for more
risky alternatives.
While the economic literature on disease transmission is small, there is a large
6

literature on disease transmission and specifically HIV/AIDS in epidemiology.
The critical difference to the economic literature is that epidemiological models do not model decision-making.4 In other words, these models do not try to
understand why people engage in risky sexual behavior and how this behavior
changes in response to changes in the environment. Instead, they take sexual
behavior as exogenously given. The assumption that individuals do not change
their behavior in response to their environment–in particular in response to the
overall prevalence of the disease—is problematic for human populations. Survey evidence and several empirical studies suggest that people react to a higher
presence of HIV/AIDS by adjusting the number of partners, the type of sexual
relationships, and the protective measures that they use [Wellings et al. (1994)].
Since economic studies of HIV/AIDS augment epidemiological models with decisionmaking, a brief review of the epidemiological literature is given here. The workhorse epidemiological model of disease transmission is the susceptible-infected
(SI) model with random mixing; see, e.g., Anderson and May (1992). In such
a model people are in either of two states: infected or susceptible. If a person
is infected he transmits the disease to susceptible (non-infected) people until he
leaves the sexually active population. In models of HIV/AIDS there is no stage
of recovery. 5 In these models people encounter other individuals in the population randomly. Most epidemiological models take the number of encounters, i.e.,
the number of sexual partners, as exogenously given.
An interesting contribution is Kremer and Morcom (1998) who introduce selective mixing into an SI model: Individuals have a higher probability of meeting
people like themselves as opposed to others. This idea also features prominently
in this paper, but is applied to the type of sexual behavior that a person seeks. For
example, an individual that seeks a long-term relationship can search in a way
that makes it particularly likely to meet a partner that also seeks a long-term relationship. The special case where people exclusively meet others who are seeking
4
Very recently there have been a few attempts to incorporate decision-making into epidemiological models. However, these are pure theoretical contributions that study a generic infectious
disease, rather than modeling the specific channels through which HIV/AIDS is transmitted.
Examples include Klein et al. (2007), Fenichel et al. (2011), and Toxvaerd (2012).
5
Recovery and either resistance against further infection, or the possibility of reinfection,
are explicitly modeled for other infectious diseases. See Hethcote (2000) for a comprehensive
overview of the mathematical modeling of infectious disease.

7

the same type of relationship allows for selective mixing and avoids modeling
any conflict of interest in relationship formation.
Many papers simulate SI models numerically to forecast the disease incidence
in the future or to study the effectiveness of prevention policies. For example,
Low-Beer and Stoneburner (1997) use such a model to forecast HIV incidence
in East Africa; Johnson (2008) studies the role of other sexually transmitted diseases for the epidemic; Clark and Eaton (2008) simulate the effectiveness of male
circumcision; and Bracher, Santow, and Watkins (2004) study the importance of
condoms. By design, none of these studies takes behavioral changes in response
to the reduced transmission risks into account.
There is also a recent empirical literature that studies HIV/AIDS prevention policies using mostly field experiments, and sometimes natural experiments or crosscountry data. See Behrman and Kohler (2012) for an excellent survey.6 Some of
the field experiments are close to the policy experiments conducted in this paper. For example, several field experiments find that male circumcision lowers
the infection risk for males [see, e.g., Auvert et al. (2005) and Gray et al. (2007)].
Based on cross-country data, Oster (2005) argues that the treatment of other STDs
reduces the infection risk and thereby lowers the incidence of HIV/AIDS. Auld
(2006) analyzes how risky sexual behavior changes with local infection rates using data from San Francisco in the 1980s and finds large elasticities. Again in a
field experiment, Duflo, Dupas, and Kremer (2012) evaluate three school-based
HIV/AIDS interventions in Kenya. They find that subsidizing education reduces
teenage pregnancy but not HIV infections. The interpretation is that the program
reduced the number of pregnancies within marriage, but did not affect casual
sex. This finding underlines the importance of distinguishing committed from
casual relationships, as we do in our model.
Other empirical studies analyze testing, treatment, or information campaigns
which are outside the scope of this paper. Lakdawalla, Sood, and Goldman
(2006) study the effects of anti-retroviral drugs and find that these led to an increase in sexual behavior in the U.S. Thornton (2008) uses evidence from a randomized field experiment in rural Malawi to conclude that testing is not a very
6

See also Padian et al. (2010) for a summary of randomized controlled trials.

8

cost-effective prevention policy. Dupas (2011) shows in a randomized field experiment in Kenya that teenage girls who are given information about the HIV
status of different groups of men respond by shifting sexual behavior to the
lower risk groups. De Walque (2007) finds, based on evidence from Uganda,
that HIV/AIDS information campaigns have a larger impact on more educated
people.7 Ashraf, Bandiera, and Jack (2013) conduct a field experiment that evaluates different incentive schemes for hairdressers to sell condoms as a prevention
policy. While it is found that non-financial incentives are a good motivator to
sell condoms, the impact on HIV/AIDS is not explicitly studied. Recently a few
studies have analyzed the impact of conditional cash transfers on HIV/AIDS
(De Walque et al. 2012). The evidence of the effectiveness of such programs
(where people get paid when they continue to test negative for sexually transmitted diseases) to date is weak at best.
The current paper provides a useful complement to the empirical approach. Theory alone cannot infer the elasticity of sexual behavior in response to policy, for
example. On the other hand, a purely empirical approach has other shortcomings. Typically a randomized field experiment is conducted on a small subgroup
of the population which does not allow for general equilibrium effects due to adjustments in prevalence, prices, and sorting patterns. This might be particularly
important in the context of HIV/AIDS which may affect men and women differently, but often data is collected on one gender only, as in many studies of male
circumcision.
Finally, while the focus here is on the disease itself, several people have analyzed the importance of HIV/AIDS for development or lack thereof (Young 2005;
Santaeulalia-Llopis 2008).

2

Families, Sexual Behavior, and HIV/AIDS in Malawi

The Republic of Malawi serves as a focal country to which the analysis is applied.
Therefore, this section briefly describes some information on the HIV/AIDS epi7

The relationship between education and HIV status is also analyzed in Iorio and SantaeulaliaLlopis (2011).

9

demic in Malawi, together with details about sexual behavior and family life.
This background will be useful in guiding the modeling choices. For example, it
is argued that it is reasonable to ignore in the analysis mother-to-child transmissions and homosexual sex.
The Republic of Malawi is a country in southeast Africa. It has a population
of 14 million people and a land mass of 118,000 square km, making it one of
the most densely populated nations in the world. Malawi suffers greatly from
the HIV/AIDS epidemic.8 Twelve percent of the adult population is currently
infected. This is well above the average within Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), which
has an adult prevalence rate of about 7.2%—see Canning (2006). It is also well
below the HIV rate of the most affected countries, such as Botswana with an adult
prevalence rate of 37%, or South Africa where 22% of all adults are infected. The
Malawian HIV rate has been roughly constant (ranging between 12-14%) since
the mid 1990s, yielding some indication that the disease dynamics have settled
into a steady-state.
The principal mode of HIV transmission in Malawi is through heterosexual sex.
Mother-to-child transmissions are also important, accounting for about 10% of
all new HIV infections. This fact is ignored here. Most people born with HIV
die before they reach sexual maturity (about half of all babies infected during the
perinatal period die before their fifth birthday), and therefore do not add to the
propagation of HIV. Like in the rest of SSA, more than half of the HIV-infected
population in Malawi is female. By contrast two thirds of the infected population is male in the Western world—see World Development Indicators (2009). In
the West, HIV is largely a disease of drug users and homosexuals. In SSA, by
comparison, HIV is a disease that disproportionately affects married (and divorced/widowed) women. The HIV rate among adult women is currently about
13%, compared to 10% among men, suggesting important gender differences.
Women are also affected by HIV much earlier in life. For example, 3.7% of women aged 17-19 are HIV-positive, compared to just 0.4% for men in the same age
category.
A rational model of HIV only makes sense if people understand what HIV is, are
8

Unless noted otherwise, information on HIV prevalence and patterns of sexual behavior are
from the 2004 Demographic and Health Survey’s (DHS) Final Report for Malawi.

10

aware of how it gets transmitted, and know how to avoid it. This seems largely
to be the case in Malawi. Almost 100% of the surveyed Malawians had heard of
HIV or AIDS. About 57% of women and 75% of men correctly identified the use
of condoms as a means to protect against HIV infection. Finally, an overwhelming majority of adults in Malawi—74% for women and 86% for men—know of
a source to get condoms. Finally, Delavande and Kohler (2009) document that
people in Malawi are relatively good in assessing their own probability of being
infected with HIV. Thus, a rational model of risky sexual behavior is a reasonable
approximation for the Malawian epidemic.
Sexual behavior conducive to the spread of the disease is relatively common in
Malawi. Condoms are used by less than half of all respondents in their last sexual
act—30.1% of women reported using a condom during their last sexual activity,
compared to 47.1% of the men. Interestingly, Malawian women have sex at earlier ages than Malawian men. Large age gaps in sexual relationships are quite
common. It is also considered normal for unmarried people to change partners
often. Undie, Crichton, and Zulu (2007) single out the following quote from a female teenager in order to capture the overall attitude that they found towards
varying partners in their interviews: “[Boys say] ’Do you just eat vegetables
daily? Sometimes, you change [your diet]’... Girls say, ’You don’t need to have
one cloth [outfit] only.”’. Furthermore, divorce is relatively common. Reniers
(2003) reports that 45% of marriages end in divorce within 20 years. The quantitative evidence from the DHS suggests that men engage in more risky sexual
behavior than women. This difference might be partially due to a social bias as
to what is acceptable behavior. Miller, Watkins, and Zulu (2001) analyze gender
differences in survey responses in Malawi and find that when husband and wife
answers to a variety of questions contradict each other, the wife is more likely to
have said ’no’ while the husband is more likely to have said ’yes.’ In other words,
gender differences in reported sexual behavior have to be interpreted with caution. Several other forms of risky behavior will be abstracted from in the paper.
For example, the model does not have concurrent relationships, such as extramarital affairs or polygyny, both of which are relatively common in Malawi. In
2004, 8.3% of all married men admitted to having had an affair in the last year.
Women admit to much fewer affairs. Polygyny is also fairly common in Malawi.

11

As recently as 2004, 10% of all men had more than one wife. The model abstracts
from concurrent relationships to keep it tractable. Future work should include
these phenomena.
The high prevalence of risky behavior does not necessarily imply that people are
uninformed or irrational: it is more likely due to the trade-off between increased
safety versus less pleasure. Undie, Crichton, and Zulu (2007) highlight this with
the following quote from an interview with a Malawian female about protected
sex: “You can’t eat [candy] while it’s in the wrapper. It doesn’t taste [good].”
In Malawi, condom use within marriage is essentially non-existent [Chimbiri
(2007)]. One reason is that marital sex is often aimed at reproduction. Furthermore, using a condom in marriage may be interpreted as a signal of infidelity. Bracher, Santow, and Watkins (2004) write that “in essence, using condoms
within marriage is a sign that it is ’not a real marriage’” and quote a Malawian saying “she does not protect herself with her husband, for it is marriage.”
Note also that while using a condom lowers the transmission risk substantially,
it does not decrease the risk to zero. Bracher, Santow, and Watkins (2004) cite a
study that finds that for new condoms, the average breakage rate is 4%; this rate
jumps to 19% for condoms that are 7 years old. The higher breakage rate may,
in fact, be the more relevant figure in the context of Malawi since condom quality degrades faster in a tropical climate where the temperature often exceeds the
recommended storage temperature of 25 degrees Celsius.
Poulin (2007) documents that money and gift transfers in sexual partnerships are
part of the courting practices of young Malawian women and men. In addition to
an expression of love and commitment, she argues that these transfers are a way
of acquiring sex for men and about meeting their financial needs for women. A
gift might be in the form of sugar or soap, but also in cash. Men who give gifts
expect to receive sex, and they expect it sooner rather than later. Transfers are
not made directly before or after sex (as with prostitution), however; rather gift
giving is an integral part of a relationship that may depend on the need (e.g.
for soap) of the recipient as well as the availability of cash for the giver. Similar
evidence is also given in Swidler and Watkins (2007). The model developed here
will allow for such transfers between men and women in sexual relationships.
Finally, note that both testing and treatment (such as anti-retroviral drugs) have
12

been fairly uncommon in Malawi until very recently. Testing was introduced in
2004 within the context of the Malawi Diffusion and Ideational Change Project
(MDICP). This has led to 2,686 women and 2,581 men being tested (as of the
publication of the 2004 DHS Final Report on Malawi), providing the first national
population-based HIV prevalence estimate for Malawi.

3

Economic Environment

Imagine a world populated by males and females. Males and females desire
relationships with the opposite sex. There are two types of relationships, viz
short-term and long-term ones. Within a relationship individuals engage in sex.
Sex is risky because of the presence of the HIV/AIDS virus in society. There are
two types of sex, protected and unprotected. Protected sex offers a better defense
against the transmission of HIV/AIDS across partners. It provides less enjoyment, though. Individuals interested in a short-term relationship must decide
what kind of sex they desire. Put simply, they must weigh the extra momentary
utility associated with unprotected sex against the increased odds of being afflicted with the HIV/AIDS virus in the future. As motivated in Section 2, sex is
always unprotected in long-term relationships. Further, suppose that a person
can only engage in one relationship at a time.
Denote the utility from unprotected sex by u and the utility from protected sex by
p, with u ≥ p > 0. The utility flow in a long-term relationship is u+l, where l may
be negative. A positive l can be interpreted as a taste for long-term attachment,
while a negative l signifies taste for variety in partners. Individuals also realize
utility from the consumption of goods. Let this utility be given by ln(c), where
c is consumption. Each period a person receives income in the amount y. There
is no borrowing or lending in the economy. An individual discounts the future
e Individuals
with a stochastic factor that takes two values, viz e
ι and βe with e
ι ≤ β.
start off life with the low rate e
ι. This low factor reflects the impatience of youth,
which may lead to a predilection to engage in risky behavior. Then, at every
period, a person may switch permanently to the high factor with probability η.
Additionally, there is a probability δ that an individual dies from natural causes

13

in a period. Thus, the effective discount factors are given by ι = e
ι(1 − δ) and
e − δ). The values of l, p, u, y, β, and ι may differ across individuals
β = β(1
of a given gender. The set of fixed characteristics for a person is denoted by
x = (l, p, u, y, β, ι), which will be called a person’s type.
People can search for partners in different markets.9 At the beginning of each
period an unattached individual may search for a long-term partner. The odds of
finding a partner on the long-term market are denoted by πl . The individual can
pick these odds at an increasing cost in terms of lost utility. These search costs
are given by Cl (πl ) = ωl [πl /(1 − πl )]κl +1 , where κl ≥ 0 and ωl > 0. Observe that
C(0) = 0 and C(1) = ∞. A long-term relationship may break up (at the end of)
each period with exit probability ξ. If the person is unsuccessful at finding a longterm mate s/he then enters the short-term market, where s/he can still engage
in sexual behavior for this period. Note that an individual who does not want a
long-term relationship can set πl = 0. If the person wants a short-term one, then
s/he must decide whether to have one involving protected or unprotected sex.
Let πp and πu represent the odds of finding a partner in the protected and unprotected markets for short-term relationships, which will be choice variables. The
cost of searching in each market is given by Cs (πp ) and Cs (πu ), which have the
same functional form as Cl (πl ), but where the parameters κs and ωs are allowed
to differ from the long-term market. The total cost of searching for a short-term
partner will then be Cs (πp ) + Cs (πu ). Assume that an individual will not simultaneously draw a partner on both markets. The odds are therefore constrained by
πp + πu ≤ 1, and an individual will be abstinent with probability πa ≡ 1 − πp − πu .
Also, observe that individuals can choose abstinence by picking πp = πu = 0.
Given the pervasive evidence on gift giving in the context of sexual relationships
(see Section 2), transfers are exchanged for sex. Associated with each market is
a transfer payment, t, that is made between the two partners. For the person
making the transfer, t will be positive, while it will be negative for the individual
receiving it. Think about the people receiving the transfers as supplying relationships on the market, and those paying transfers as demanding them. Interpret
9

The idea that people can rationally target their search behavior to particular markets is
present in many recent theoretical models (e.g. Jacquet and Tan (2007), Eeckhout and Kircher
(2010), Gautier, Svarer, and Teulings (2010)).

14

the transfer as representing the inputs into a relationship: affection, entertainment, gifts, etc. The magnitude of this transfer is determined in equilibrium.10
It will depend upon the demand and supply for a given type of relationship by
each gender. This will hinge on the utility that each gender realizes from a partnership in the various markets and the riskiness of participating in them.
People form beliefs about their own infection status.11 A person enters a period
with a prior belief about the likelihood of not being infected with HIV/AIDS.
Denote this prior belief by φ, which is private information.12 The person then may
have a relationship involving either protected or unprotected casual sex or enter
a long term relationship. The risk of catching HIV/AIDS from an infected person
is different for protected vs. unprotected sex. If the individual has sex with an
HIV/AIDS infected person then the virus will get transmitted with probability
1 − γ, where γ differs across the types of sex and by gender. The transmission
probability is lower for protected sex vis à vis unprotected sex. A person who is
inflicted with HIV/AIDS will typically not show symptoms for a while, in which
case he cannot distinguish his health state from a person who is not infected. If
symptoms occur, they mark the severe part of the illness. The person, and others
in his surroundings, will know that he is ill. Assume that an infected person
will develop symptoms each period with probability α. At the end of a period,
a person updates his prior in Bayesian fashion depending upon: (i) the type of
relationship he was in; (ii) whether or not he observed symptoms in himself, and
(iii) in the case of marriage, whether or not he observed symptoms in his partner.
Let the remaining lifetime utility for a person with the symptoms of HIV/AIDS
be represented by A.13 Assume that a person stricken with HIV/AIDS symptoms
engages in no further relationships. The probability that a person displaying
symptoms dies is δ2 . Since a person with HIV/AIDS symptoms engages in no
further activity, δ2 does not appear in the value functions. However, it is relevant
for computing the average HIV/AIDS rate in society. Note that in the framework
10
Alternatively, market clearing could be achieved through different meeting probabilities.
This should lead to qualitatively similar results.
11
The importance of beliefs are emphasized in Delavande and Kohler (2011).
12
As in Kremer (1996) the current work assumes that characteristics such as age, past sexual
activity and sexual preferences cannot be observed and hence no inference about the infection
status of a partner can be made.
13
Note that A cannot be too large to assure people prefer being healthy over being sick.

15

there is an attrition in the population each period both due to natural death and
to HIV/AIDS. This loss is replenished by an inflow each period of newly born
males and females. Recall that x denotes the set of permanent characteristics for
an individual, namely l, p, u, y, β, and ι. People also differ by gender. Gender
will be suppressed unless it is specifically needed and then it will be represented
by the subscript g (for g = f, m) attached to a function or variable. Assume that
µ type-x individuals are born at the beginning of each period.
Before proceeding on to the formal analysis some notation will be defined. An
individual will be indexed by his prior that he is healthy, φ, his current discount
factor, d, and his exogenous type x. Let Verd (φ, x) denote that lifetime utility for a
person with prior φ, a discount factor d = ι, β, and an exogenous type x who just
found a partner for a relationship of type r = a, l, p, u (abstinent, long-term, shortterm protected and short-term unprotected). Similarly, Vrd (φ, x) will represent
the expected lifetime utility for a person who is currently searching for a partner
in a type-r relationship (for r = l, s where s denotes short term), but has not
found one yet. The timing of events is summarized in Figure 6 in Appendix
A. Attention will now be directed toward the determination of the functions
Verd (φ, x) and Vrd (φ, x). The focus will be on studying a stationary equilibrium for
this setting.

3.1
3.1.1

Short-term Relationships
Abstinence

The case of abstinence is the easiest to analyze. Recall that there are young and
old individuals that differ in their discount factor. Start with a type-x old person
(i.e. with discount factor β), who has failed to match on the short-term sex markets. Thus, he will be abstinent for the current period. Note that the individual’s
discount factor will remain high forever. The value function for this person is
given by
Veaβ (φ, x) = ln(y) + [1 − (1 − φ)α]βVlβ (φ0 , x) + (1 − φ)αβA,

16

(1)

with φ0 = Φa (φ).
The first term on the righthand side of (1) gives the person’s flow utility from
current consumption. Two things can happen next period, as the next two terms
illustrate. Even though the individual does not have sex in the current period,
and is symptom free, he may still develop the symptoms of HIV/AIDS next period because of past relationships. He starts the current period with a prior, φ,
about his probability of being non-infected. Therefore, he will develop symptoms
next period with probability (1−φ)α. In this event the person will realize a utility
level of A, which is discounted at rate β. This reasoning explains the third term
on the righthand side of (1). Likewise, he will remain healthy next period with
odds 1 − (1 − φ)α. In this situation, the person will enter the long-term market
next period and search for a mate. The discounted expected utility from searching on the long-term market next period with prior φ0 is given by Vlβ (φ0 , x). This
logic accounts for the second term in the equation. Also, when the individual
does not suffer the symptoms of HIV/AIDS, he updates his prior in a Bayesian
fashion to φ0 summarized by the function Φa (φ), which will be explained fully in
Section 3.3. Note that if one shows the symptoms of HIV/AIDS in the current
period then it is known with certainty that one has the virus.
Next, consider the case of an abstinent young person (with discount factor ι). The
discount factor may switch next period to the high value, β, with probability η,
or remain at the low one, ι, with probability 1 − η. It is easy to see that the value
function for a type-x person with a low discount factor, ι, and a prior φ, will now
read
Veaι (φ, x) = ln(y) + [1 − (1 − φ)α]ι[ηVlβ (φ0 , x) + (1 − η)Vlι (φ0 , x)]

(2)

+(1 − φ)αιA,
with φ0 = Φa (φ).

3.1.2

Sexual Relationships

Now, suppose that the individual is matched in a short-term relationship. Again,
start with the situation where the person has a high discount factor β. If s = p
17

then the person will use a condom and enjoy utility p from sex. If s = u the individual will enjoy u from unprotected sex. Define the indicator function I(s) to
return a value of 1 when s = p, and a value of 0 otherwise. Thus, the joy from a
short-term sexual relationship can be written as pI(s) + u[1 − I(s)]. The cost of sex
on the two markets differs for two reasons. First, the transmission risk of catching HIV/AIDS from an infected person differs across markets. Specifically, the
transmission risk in the protected market, 1 − γp , is lower than in the unprotected
one, 1 − γu . Second, the average level of healthiness in the pool of participants in
the two markets will in general differ. The fact that a person desires a short-term
sexual relationship that does not use a condom signals something about their
past tendencies to engage in risky behavior. In light of this, φ̄s gives the odds
that a randomly drawn partner on the short-term market s (for s = p, u) does not
have the HIV/AIDS virus.
Given his prior about his own health status, φ, the individual believes that he will
suffer the symptoms of HIV/AIDS next period with probability α[(1 − φ) + φ(1 −
φ̄s )(1 − γs )]. Symptoms can arise from two potential sources. The person could
already have the virus and the symptoms materialize. The odds of this event are
α(1 − φ). Or, the person can catch the virus from his current partner, and then the
symptoms appear, an event that occurs with probability αφ(1 − φ̄s )(1 − γs ). The
odds of not suffering the symptoms of HIV/AIDS next period are then just 1−
α[(1 − φ) + φ(1 − φ̄s )(1 − γs )].
Summarizing, the value function for a type-x individual with prior φ who is currently having a short-term relationship in market s is given by
Vesβ (φ, x) = ln(y − ts ) + pI(s) + u[1 − I(s)]

(3)
β

+{1 − α[(1 − φ) + φ(1 − φ̄s )(1 − γs )]}βVl (φ0 , x)
+α[(1 − φ) + φ(1 − φ̄s )(1 − γs )]βA,
with
φ0 = Φs (φ) , for s = p, u.

(4)

The function Φs (φ) specifies how the individual will update his prior after having short-term sex, contingent upon not observing the symptoms of HIV/AIDS
in the current period. The form of this function is discussed in Section 3.3. Re18

call that the person’s exogenous type, x, determines his tastes for protected sex,
unprotected sex, short-term relationships, and his level of income. The dependence of p, u, y, and β on x in the value functions (1) and (3) is suppressed for
convenience. Similarly, the gender of the individual is also omitted. This will be
indicated later on by a subscript g for g = f, m (male or female) attached, when
relevant, to a variable or function.
Next, consider the case of a young person (with discount factor ι). The discount
factor will switch next period to the high value, β, with probability η, or remain
at the low one, ι, with probability 1 − η. Therefore, the analogue to (3) is
Vesι (φ, x) = ln(y − ts ) + pI(s) + u[1 − I(s)]

(5)

+{1 − α[(1 − φ) + φ(1 − φ̄s )(1 − γs )]}ι[ηVlβ (φ0 , x) + (1 − η)Vlι (φ0 , x)]
+α[(1 − φ) + φ(1 − φ̄s )(1 − γs )]ιA,
again with φ0 = Φs (φ), for s = p, u.
Last, upon entering the market for short-term relationships a person must decide
how much effort to expend searching in each market; that is, he must choose πp
and πu . This is done in accordance with the following problem.
Vsd (φ, x) =

max {πpd Vepd (φ, x) + πud Veud (φ, x) + (1 − πpd − πud )Vead (φ, x)

d ,π d ≤1,
0≤πu
p
d +π d ≤1
πu
p

(6)

−C(πpd ) − C(πud )}, for d = ι, β.
The function Vsd (φ, x) gives the ex-ante value for a type-x individual, with prior
φ, of entering the market for short-term sex. The solution for search effort is
represented by the function πsd = Πds (φ, x), for s = p, u.

3.2

Long-term Relationships

Imagine a person who is currently in a long-term relationship. In a long-term relationship there are no choices to make: there are no affairs, all sex is unprotected,
and the partnership endures until some form of exogenous breakup occurs. Suppose that the person entered this relationship n periods ago with prior φ. At the
19

end of period n this relationship can breakup for three reasons (besides natural
death).14 First, it could transpire that both people are symptom free and that the
relationship terminates due to an exogenous breakup which happens with probability ξ. Second, it could end because the individual’s partner becomes afflicted
with HIV/AIDS symptoms. Third, the person may develop symptoms and the
relationship stops.
The value of entering into a long-term relationship, Veld (φ, x), will now be specified. Start first with an old person (with discount factor β). Note that at the end
of each period the relationship either continues or it may break up for one of the
three reasons mentioned above. From this observation it follows that Velβ (φ, x)
can be written as
Velβ (φ, x) = ln(y − tl ) + u + l
(7)
∞
X
β n (1 − ξ)n Pr[no symptoms in either person, end period n|φ][ln(y − tl ) + u + l]
+
n=1

+

∞
X

β n (1 − ξ)n−1 ξ Pr[no symptoms in either person, end period n|φ]Vlβ (Φhl (φ, n) , x)

n=1

+

∞
X

β n (1 − ξ)n−1 Pr[symptoms just in partner, end period n|φ]Vlβ (ΦA
l (φ, n) , x)

n=1

+

∞
X

β n (1 − ξ)n−1 Pr[symptoms in person, end period n|φ] × A.

n=1

This expression looks more complicated than it really is. It will now be explained.
The term on the right-hand side of the first line gives the current utility from the
match. The next term gives the discounted expected utility accruing when the
match sustains over the next n periods. For a match to sustain until period n + 1
there cannot be an exogenous breakup prior to this date. This occurs with probability (1 − ξ)n . Additionally, neither party can show symptoms before this date.
The formula for the odds that neither partner will show symptoms before period
n is presented in Section C.2 of the Appendix, as are the formulae for the other
probabilities shown. The rest of the expression enumerates the expected utilities
14

For simplicity assume that both partners die together; i.e., with probability δ the pair dies,
and with probability (1 − δ) both survive.

20

associated with breakup events in period n + 1. In particular, the third line reflects separations due to exogenous breakups. An exogenous breakup will occur
at the end of period n with probability (1 − ξ)n−1 ξ. When this happens the individual enters into single life again, where he starts by searching in the long term
market. At that time he updates his prior according to the function Φhl (φ, n). The
individual may also enter into single life because his partner develops HIV/AIDS
symptoms in some period n. This is accounted for by the next term, line 4. In this
situation the individual will update using the function ΦA
l (φ, n). The formulae
for Φhl (φ, n) and ΦA
l (φ, n) are specified in Appendix C.1. Finally, HIV/AIDS may
manifest itself in the individual at the end of some period n. This is captured by
the last line. Also recall that the odds of dying from a natural death are incorporated into β.
The value of a long-term relationship for a person with a low discount factor ι
is determined analogously. One now must take into account that the discount
factor may switch at some future date from ι to β. The expression for Velι (φ, x) is
now slightly more complicated. It is developed in Appendix C.3 – see (21). The
value of searching in the long-term market for a type-(φ, x) person with discount
factor d is given by
h
i
Vld (φ, x) = max πld Veld (φ, x) + (1 − πld )Vsd (φ, x) − C(πl ) , for d = ι, β
πld

(8)

The solution for search effort, πld , is represented by the function πld = Πdl (φ, x).

3.3

Belief Updating

The easiest case for belief updating is a person who was abstinent in a given
period. The function for updating the prior, Φa (φ), is given by Bayes’ rule:
Pr(not being infected this period | φ)
Pr (not observing any symptoms this period | φ)
φ
φ
=
=
.
φ + (1 − φ)(1 − α)
1 − (1 − φ)α

Φa (φ) =

21

(9)

The prior probability of not being infected is φ. The probability of not observing
any symptoms has two components: the odds of not having HIV/AIDS, φ, and
the odds of being infected but not showing symptoms, (1 − φ)(1 − α). As will
be seen, the formula for updating can become complicated when one has sex.
Here, the odds of transmission from the partner must be taken into account. Additionally, in a long-term relationship there is valuable information contained in
a partner’s health status.
After engaging in a short-term relationship, Bayes’ rule says that the prior should
be updated according to the formula
Pr(not being infected this period | φ)
Pr (not observing any symptoms this period | φ)
φφ̄s + φ(1 − φ̄s )γs
=
φφ̄s + (1 − φ)(1 − α) + φ(1 − φ̄s )[(1 − γs )(1 − α) + γs ]

Φs (φ) =

(10)

for s = p, u. There are two reasons why the individual might not have HIV/AIDS.
Perhaps neither him nor his partner had it. The odds of this are φφ̄s . Or, maybe
his partner does have it, but it failed to transmit. This will happen with probability φ(1 − φ̄s )γs . This explains the numerator. Turn now to the denominator. The
individual will show no symptoms in both of these cases. He may also be symptom free even though he actually has the virus. He could initially have the virus
yet no symptoms appear, an event that occurs with probability (1 − φ)(1 − α), or
he could catch it from his current partner but the symptoms fail to materialize,
the odds of which are φ(1 − φ̄s )(1 − γs )(1 − α). Note that this formula presumes
that a short-term relationship ends before an individual can observe whether or
not his partner develops symptoms at the end of the current period.
Finally, updating in long-term relationships is relevant only when the relationship ends. Relationships can end for three reasons: an exogenous breakup, the
person develops symptoms, or the partner develops symptoms. Obviously if a
person develops symptoms, he knows that he is sick and no further updating
is necessary. Denote Bayesian updating for the other two cases by Φhl (φ, n) and
ΦA
l (φ, n) respectively. The exact formulae are given in Appendix C.1.

22

3.4

Stationary Equilibrium

A stationary equilibrium for the developed framework will now be formulated.15
First, the equilibrium type distributions for singles will be specified. Let S d (φ; x)
represent the (non-normalized) stationary distribution of singles at the beginning
of a period. It denotes the measure of singles of type-x that have prior φ and discount factor d. Similarly, let Ld (φ0 ; x) denote the distribution over the prior φ0
for type-x individuals with discount factor d who exit long-term relationships
at the end of a period. Given some distributions S and L of singles and married people, the sexual behavior of individuals according to their decision rule
Π [Πdg,r = Πdg,r (φ, x) for each type] gives rise to a new distribution of singles and
married people, which can be described by a mapping T that is characterized
fully in Section C.4 of the Appendix—see equations (22) to (28). In steady-state
the distributions of singles and married people remain constant, and are determined by a fixed point of this operator:
(S β , Lβ , S ι , Lι ) = T(S β , Lβ ,S ι , Lι ; Π).

(11)

Next, the prevalence rates in each market have to arise from the aggregation of
individual choices. It is now useful to introduce the subscript g (for g = f, m) to a
function or variable to denote the gender of the person in question. The number
of market participants for sexual activity r (= l, p, u), who are of gender g and
type-x with belief φ and discount factor d, is given by
(
Mdg,r (φ, x) ≡

Πdg,r (φ, x)Sgd (φ; x),
[1 − Πdg,l (φ, x)]Πdg,r (φ, x)Sgd (φ; x),

if r = l,
if r = p, u.

(12)

The number of market participants equals the number of singles times their probability of participating in a particular market. For the short-term market this also
entails the probability of not previously finding a long-term partner within the
current period. The odds that a person of gender g within market r is not infected equals the fraction of healthy market participants among the total number
15

The restriction to steady states seems justified since prevalence rates in Malawi have remained roughly constant in recent years.

23

of market participants:
φ̄g,r

P P P
d
d
x
φ φMg,r (φ, x)
P
P
P
, for all g and r.
=
d
d
x
φ Mg,r (φ, x)

(13)

Note that φ̄f,r denotes the non-prevalence among women, which is relevant for
men when determining their odds of getting infected. Similarly, φ̄m,r refers to the
odds among men, but is relevant for the women when making their decisions.
Market clearing means that the number of female participants equals the number
of male participants in any market:
XXX
d

x

φ

Mdf,r (φ, x) =

XXX
x

d

Mdm,r (φ, x), for all r.

(14)

φ

Additionally, a transfer paid by one gender on a market is a transfer earned by
the other so that
tf,r + tm,r = 0, for all r.
(15)
This leads to the following formal definition of equilibrium.
Definition 1 A stationary equilibrium is described by a set of decision rules for search
effort, Πdg,r (φ, x), a set of transfer payments, tg,r , a set of stationary type distributions,
Sgd (φ; x) and Ldg (φ0 , x), and a set of HIV/AIDS (non)prevalence rates for a partner on
each market, φ̄g,r , for all d = {ι, β}, g ∈ {f, m}, r ∈ {l, p, u}, such that:
1. The decision rules for search intensities, Πdg,r (φ, x), satisfy the appropriately gender
subscripted versions of the generic problems (6) and (8), taking as given transfer
payments and HIV/AIDS prevalence rates;
2. The stationary type distributions, Sgd (φ; x) and Ldg (φ, x), solve the appropriately
gender subscripted version of (11) using (12);
3. The prevalence rates for HIV/AIDS on each market, φ̄g,r , are given by (13) using
(12);
4. The transfer payments, tr,g , are such that the markets for all types of relationships
clear according to (14). Additionally, the flow of transfers across the genders must
balance as specified by (15).
24

4

Calibration

To address the HIV/AIDS epidemic in Malawi, the model is analyzed numerically. A benchmark simulation is constructed that displays features that are
broadly consistent with the Malawian case. In particular, the simulated model
has an HIV/AIDS infection rate that corresponds with the Malawian data, a proportion of casual sexual encounters that is approximately the same, and a reasonable fraction of these encounters use a condom.
Interpret a model period as lasting one quarter. Even though the model is set
up to allow for heterogeneity along many dimensions, such as the utility from
sex, income and the discount factor, only two dimensions of heterogeneity are
exploited in the application. First, assume that people differ in their discount
factor. Second, suppose that men and women have different transmission rates,
so that the same level of sexual activity leads to a discrepancy in the HIV rate
across genders. This limited degree of heterogeneity economizes on the number
of parameters to be specified.
The calibration is conduced in three steps. First, to the extent possible, parameters with direct data analogs are taken from the literature. In particular, all parameters relating directly to the biology of the disease are chosen in this way.
Second, the remaining parameters are chosen to match some key observations
related to the HIV/AIDS epidemic in Malawi. The data mostly obtains from
the 2004 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) that was conducted in Malawi.
Using the micro data from this survey, a number of statistics are computed regarding HIV prevalence rates, sexual behavior, marital status, etc. Finally, the
model’s predictions are compared to the data along several non-targeted dimensions. The model performs surprisingly well, which can be interpreted as an
additional validity check.

4.1

Parameters Based on Direct Evidence

The most important parameter values for the simulation are those concerning
HIV/AIDS. Fortunately, for the most part, these can be taken from the medi-

25

cal literature. The transmission risk for one-time male unprotected sex is taken
to be 2.3 per 1,000. This number falls in the range of estimates reported by a
variety of studies.16 Since couples on average have sex 9 times a month, as reported in Gray et al. (2001), this translates into a quarterly non-transmission risk
of γum = 0.94. The transmission risk when condoms are used is obviously lower,
but protection is far from perfect–Bracher, Santow, and Watkins (2004). Select
γpm = 0.98, corresponding to a 67% efficacy rate, which is in line with Weller
(1993) who conducted a meta-analysis of condom efficacy. Further, for physiological and anatomical reasons, and in accord with the medical evidence, females
are assumed to have a higher risk of contracting HIV than males. Nicolosi et al.
(1994) reports a risk that is 2.3 times as high for women. However, the range of
estimates is wide. On the one extreme, Gray et al. (2001) find no statistically significant difference between transmission rates by gender. On the other extreme,
Padian, Shiboski, and Jewell (1991) calculate a factor as high as 20. Erring on
the conservative side, pick γpf = 0.965, which corresponds to women being 75%
more likely to get infected. Using the same gender gap in transmission also for
unprotected sex, set γuf = 0.895.
The average time from infection to the outbreak of symptoms is equal to 10 years
(DHS 2004). Therefore, let α = 0.025; i.e., 40 quarters. The average time from the
outbreak of symptoms to death is 2 years (DHS 2004). Thus, pick δ2 = 0.125; i.e.,
8 quarters.
Some other parameters values can also be pinned down using a priori information. Set the quarterly divorce hazard equal to ξ = 0.03. Bracher, Santow, and
Watkins (2004) report that 26.4% of all marriages in Malawi end in divorce within
the first five years. Assuming a constant annual divorce hazard, this would imply a quarterly risk of 1.56%.17 A rate twice this number is used: First, polygyny
is fairly common in Malawi, from which the analysis abstracts. Second, extramarital affairs are relatively common as well. Therefore, interpret, for example,
16
For example, the annual report of the UNAIDS Joint United Programme on HIV/AIDS (2007)
gives a range of 2 to 6 per 1,000, depending on whether other STDs are present or not. Baeten
et al. (2005) also report a transmission risk of 6 per 1,000. Gray et al. (2001) report a somewhat
lower number of 1.1 per 1,000 for Uganda; however, free condoms were distributed as part of the
study. Wawer et al. (2005) finds transmission rates as high as 82 per 1,000 during the first few
months after infection.
17
A similar number is also reported by Reniers (2003).

26

a 10-year marriage with one affair as two long-term relationships with a third
casual one in between. Section 5.2.3 explores what happens to equilibrium outcomes when the risk of divorce is lower.
The quarterly (non-HIV related) death hazard is taken to be δ = 0.006. A study
conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau (2004) reports a life expectancy without
HIV of 56.3 years for Malawi. Since the model starts at age 15, the quarterly death
hazard is selected to match a life expectancy of 41.3 years. Malawi is a very poor
country. Set y = 320 which corresponds roughly to quarterly GDP per working
age population (note that only about half the population is of working age in
Malawi). Table 1 summarizes the preceding paragraphs by listing all parameters
that are set a priori.
Table 1: PARAMETERS
Parameter
γum
γpm
γuf
γpf
α
δ
δ2
ξ
y

4.2

Value
0.94
0.98
0.895
0.965
0.025
0.006
0.125
0.03
320

CHOSEN OUTSIDE THE MODEL

Interpretation
6% quarterly transmission risk, unprotected sex, men
2% quarterly transmission risk, protected sex, men
10.5% quarterly transmission risk, unprotected sex, women
3.5% quarterly transmission risk, protected sex, women
10 years from infection to symptoms
6% quarterly death risk
2 years from symptoms to death
3% quarterly divorce hazard
quarterly income

Parameters Chosen to Match Data Moments

The remaining parameters have no clear data analogues. For example, utilities
from the different types of sexual relationships are free parameters, constrained
only by p ≤ u; i.e., people enjoy unprotected sex more than protected sex. To ensure interior solutions, the model also specifies that people enjoy variety in their
sexual partners, and so marriage (sex with one partner) decreases overall utility
from unprotected sex (l < 0). These parameters are picked to match several facts

27

related to sex, marriage and HIV/AIDS in Malawi.18
As specified above, the only exogenous heterogeneity (in addition to the gender
difference in transmission risk) is the degree of patience people have. Assume
that the young are more impatient than the old and that there is a small subset
of the population that is extremely impatient.19 Recall that βe and e
ι denote the
discount factors for the young and the old. Subscript these variables by either 1 or
2 to connote regular and impatient agents respectively. Note that these are “pure”
discount factors, i.e., net of mortality risk.20 With these additional assumptions,
there are 14 free parameters: p, u, `, ω u , ω ` , κ, A, µ1 , µ2 , η, βe1 , βe2 , ιe1 and ιe2 . Note
that the population size is a pure scaling parameter and only the relative sizes
of the two types matter: µ2 /µ1 . To render the structure more parsimonious, let
βe2 = ιe1 and ιe2 /βe2 = ιe1 /βe1 . Thus, the discount factor for an old impatient person is
equal to that of a young patient one. Additionally, the relative difference between
the impatient and patient is preserved across age. Thus, there are 11 parameters
to choose, see Table 2 for a summary. To discipline the choice of the parameters,
11 data moments are targeted. Table 3 gives an overview of the data moments
and shows how well the benchmark model matches them.21
The main targets are the overall prevalence rate for HIV/AIDS in society, and the
prevalence rates for each gender. Some additional targets are selected to discipline the exercise, such as the fraction of sex that is casual as opposed to longterm, the fraction of the population that is single, and the pattern of marriage by
age. This ensures that there is not too much reliance on risky short-term interac18

At this stage in the development cycle, the model is too complicated to formally estimate. It
has many parameters. Plus, for a given set of parameter values the model takes some time to
run. The solution process is often a bit temperamental. While, theoretically speaking, models
with externalities can display multiple equilibria, the simulations recover only a single interior
equilibrium; although, some additional boundary equilibria may exist. Clearly, only interior
equilibria have a chance of matching the data. This and some other algorithmic issues require
monitoring when running the computer program and occasionally some intervention is required.
This makes an automated estimation process difficult. Therefore, a more informal approach is
taken to construct the benchmark simulation.
19
The rationale for these choices is as follows. First, a small group of risky people is needed to
generate any HIV in equilibrium. Second, assuming young people to be particularly impatient
leads to more risky behavior among them. The importance of small risky groups (e.g. truck
drivers and prostitutes) and differential risky behavior by age is discussed in the literature (e.g.
Stonebumer et al. (1996), Kremer (1996), Nzyuko et al. (1997) and Oster (2012)).
20
e − δ) and ι = e
That is, β = β(1
ι(1 − δ).
21
All data sources for the tables and figures are discussed in Appendix B.

28

Table 2: C ALIBRATED PARAMETERS
Interpretation
Flow utility unprotected sex
Flow utility protected sex
Flow utility long-term sex
Discount factors
Value of life with Aids
Prob. of switch to high discount factor
relative group size
Search cost parameters

Parameter value
u = 7.5
p = 2.3
l = −5
βe1 = 0.995, e
ι1 = 0.8955
A=5
η = 0.06
µ1 /µ2 = 10
ωs = 0.5, ωl = 30, κ = 0.2

tions. Many people are married, and get married quickly. Moreover, females get
married faster. Additionally, the fraction of condom users in casual encounters
and the number of such encounters are considered. This is important because
the model emphasizes the choice of whether to engage in risky activity. Finally,
the fraction of people that die of natural causes, as opposed to HIV/AIDS, is
included for overall consistency.
The upshot of the analysis is that the benchmark simulation matches these key
features of the Malawian HIV/AIDS epidemic pretty well. To begin with, as can
be seen from Table 3, the HIV/AIDS prevalence rate predicted by the model is
11.8%, matching the data (11.5%) well. Moreover, the experiment captures the
gender difference in HIV/AIDS infection rates, with females experiencing a rate
that is 3 percentage points higher than that for males (13% versus 10%).
In addition to exactly matching moments on HIV/AIDS prevalence, the benchmark model also matches moments of other aspects of sexual activity quite well.
In the model casual or short-term sex is a small fraction of all sexual encounters:
24%, relatively close to the 18% of sex that occurs outside of a union that is reported in the data. For those who engage in casual sex, the model predicts that
33% use a condom. This is less than the 39% seen in the data, but is still close.
In fact, as people have been found to overstate the amount of protected sex they
have [see Allen et al. (2003)], these two numbers may be closer in reality than
first meets the eye. The next row in Table 3 reports the fraction of singles who
had casual sex in the last year. These statistics are different from the fraction of

29

Table 3: TARGETED M OMENTS
Observation
HIV/AIDS rate, %
–Males
–Females
Fraction of all sex that is casual, %
Condom use for casual sex, %
% (of) Singles that had casual sex in past year
% Singles
% Married by age 22
–Males
–Females
% Married by age 50
–Males
–Females
% of deaths related to HIV

Data
11.8
10
13
18
39
37
33

Model
11.5
10
13
24
33
54
38

58
90

60
67

100
100
29

97
96
23

all sexual activity that is casual because (all) married people have sex while some
singles are abstinent. Singles in the model have more casual sex than their reallife counterparts, but again, it is possible that people systematically under-report
their risky sexual behavior. Finally, the fraction of the population that die from
HIV/AIDS is comparable across model and data (23 versus 29%).
What probably is not misreported is people’s marital status. Table 3 lists the fraction of singles in the entire population. The model predicts this fraction to be
38%, close to the 33% observed in the data. Moreover, it captures some of the
gender differences in the timing of marriage. Women marry much earlier than
men–in the data, 90% of women are married by age 22, whereas only 58% of men
are married by this age. The corresponding numbers in the model are 67% and
60%. The model generates the earlier marriage of women (relative to men) via
their higher infection risk. This makes the safety of marriage more attractive for
women vis à vis men. In reality HIV risk is only one reason why women get married earlier than men. Additional considerations such as the risk of pregnancy
make casual encounters more risky for women, which might explain the larger
wedge between the genders in the data compared to the model. As is only reasonable, men eventually “catch up,” and by age 50 almost everyone is married,

30

Figure 1: Fraction ever Married – Model vs. Data
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
15

20

25

30

35

model

40
data

45

50
Age

both in the model and the data. See Figure 1 for a comparison of the fraction of
the population that has ever married in the model vs. the data.

4.3

Non-Targeted Observations

The benchmark model generates some other predictions that are not targeted
when picking values for parameters. Recall that agents in the model have rational beliefs about their HIV/AIDS status. Figure 2 plots the belief distribution
for symptom-free people in the model and compares it to that reported by Delavande and Kohler (2009), who elicited responses on beliefs from rural Malawians.
In both the data and model, there is a steep drop between the number of people
who believe themselves to be almost certainly HIV/AIDS-negative (or healthy)–
say less than a 5% probability of being infected–and the people who are only relatively sure that they are negative–say close to a 15% probability of being infected.
After this drop, beliefs are flat throughout the rest of the distribution–both in the
model and the data. Moreover, in the data the prevalence rates implied by the
reported beliefs roughly match the actual prevalence rates, which is supportive
of the modeling assumption that agents are rational.
Next, several life-cycle implications of the model are compared to the data. The
model tracks these data patterns surprisingly well despite the limited degree of
31

Figure 2: Distribution of Beliefs – Model vs. Data
Beliefs about being infected
0.8

Fraction of Population

0.7

0.6
0.5

0.4
0.3

0.2
0.1

0.0
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4
data

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

model

heterogeneity and despite the limited state variables that describe the agent’s
life-cycle. This finding adds additional confidence for the policy experiments.
Figure 3 plots HIV/AIDS prevalence by age.22 Both the model and data agree
on a hump-shaped infection pattern, despite the fact that agents in the model become sexually active earlier than is observed in the data, which shifts the model’s
life-cycle predictions on HIV/AIDS infections to the left. The hump-shaped pattern is explained by two opposing forces. First, the rise in HIV/AIDS infection is
due to the fact that older people have had more time to be sexually active, and so
a larger percentage of older people is infected with HIV/AIDS. However, people
who are infected early in life will die before they make it to old age. Put differently, people who have made it to old age must be those who have engaged in
less risky sexual behavior and so are less likely to be infected with HIV/AIDS.
This second effect explains the eventual drop in HIV/AIDS prevalence seen at
older ages. Figure 3 also illustrates the differentiated patterns of infection between the sexes. The figure shows that women get infected earlier than men,
both in the model and the data.
22
The data is fitted with a third-order polynomial. See Figures 7 and 8 in Appendix A for a
comparison of the raw data and the fitted line. The somewhat choppy raw data is due to the
small sample sizes.

32

Figure 3: HIV Rate – Men vs. Women, Model vs. Data

0.2

0.1

0
15

20

25

30

35

men (model)
women (model)

40

45

men (data, smoothed)
women (data, smoothed)

50
Age

The model also does a very nice job in matching the decline in risky activity over
the life cycle. Older people are less likely to be single, see Figure 4a. As people
age, they are thus less likely to engage in casual sex; this is reported in Figure 4b.
Note that a related but different statistic is the fraction of singles that have sex in
a given period, since some of them choose to be abstinent. Figure 4c compares
the data to the model counterpart. The data exhibits a declining fraction of singles that engage in sex over the life cycle and the model also generates a similar
pattern. The reason is that people become more patient as they age and, again,
the survivors are more likely to be the individulas who prefer safer lifestyles.
An additional prediction of the model relates to death causes, since agents may
die due to HIV/AIDS or due to other natural causes. Figure 5 compares the
model prediction over the life cycle with its data counterpart. Both the model
and the data exhibit a hump-shaped pattern of HIV/AIDS caused deaths; this is
consistent with the hump-shaped pattern of infection rates.
Finally, protected sex in the benchmark simulation is substantially cheaper than
unprotected sex. The premium for unprotected casual sex is 67%. Note that such
a premium has in fact been documented in the literature. Gertler, Shah, and
Bertozzi (2005) use data from commercial sex workers in Mexico to document a
23% premium for unprotected sex. The premium increases to 46% when the sex
worker is considered to be very attractive.

33

Figure 4: Sexual Behavior by Age – Model vs. Data
(a) Fraction of Singles

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
15

20

25

30

35

model

40

45

data

50
Age

(b) Casual Sex

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
15

20

25

30

35

40

model

45

data

50
Age

(c) Non-abstinent Singles

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
15

20

25
model

30

35

data

34

40

fitted data

45

50
Age

Figure 5: Deaths by HIV/AIDS by Age – Model vs. Data
Fraction of deaths caused by HIV/AIDS 2002
0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80+
Age

data

5

model

Policy Experiments

The model is now ready to explore the effectiveness of various policies intended
to curb the spread of HIV/AIDS. Equate effectiveness with the reduction of the
prevalence rate, as this is the stated goal of many governments and non-profit
organizations. It should be mentioned, however, that a decrease in HIV/AIDS
does not necessarily imply an increase in welfare. On the one hand, if people
have less sex, an activity they enjoy, their welfare might decrease. On the other
hand, the model features an externality as people do not internalize the effect of
their own risky behavior on the health of future partners. Moreover, men and
women might be differentially affected due to a change in prices.
There are two broad classes of policies surrounding HIV: treatment and prevention. Overall, prevention is thought to be more cost-effective than treatment—
see Canning (2006). Thus, the focus of this paper is on prevention. Specifically,
we analyze several medical policies (such as male circumcision and treatment of
other STDs) as wells as policies aimed at behavioral change (e.g. promoting condoms or marriage). Several other prevention policies are beyond the scope of this
paper. In particular, no attempts are made to account for information campaigns

35

and testing. The former requires the introduction of some systematic biases in beliefs, which can then be reduced through the dissemination of information about
HIV/AIDS. The second brings in some deeper issues regarding human nature.23
In addition to studying the effectiveness of the various policies in the full model,
two alternative versions of the model are simulated: (i) small scale field experiments and (ii) epidemiological experiments. To be concrete, the field experiment
assumes that only a small fraction of the population is treated and changes their
behavior, but that this fraction interacts in equilibrium with everyone else at preexisting equilibrium prices and infection rates. The epidemiological experiment
assumes that people make no behavioral adjustments and therefore use the policy functions from the benchmark calibration but the infection probabilities and
assessments of transmission risks are governed by the new transmission probabilities. Comparing the effectiveness of policies across the three versions of the
model demonstrates the importance of both elements—behavioral adjustment
and equilibrium interaction. It also gives insights into the extent to which actual field experiments and epidemiological studies might (or might not) generate
reliable policy advice.
A caveat is in order before proceeding. Research using computational general
equilibrium models to assess the implications that interventions might have on
the spread of HIV/AIDS (or other diseases) is in its infancy. The goal of obtaining hard numbers that can be used for policy analysis is still some way down
the road. However, the model does provide a useful tool for elaborate thought
experiments to discover areas that might need further investigation. The simulations do illustrate potential pitfalls in efforts to limit the disease. Specifically,
as will be illustrated with an example on condom policy, moderate policy interventions have the potential to backfire due to the shifts in sexual behavior that
23
Currently, it is assumed that in casual relationships people care only about their own risk of
becoming infected (and they are committed to faithfulness in marriage). This assumption might
be justifiable when the belief about being infected is moderate and agents can argue to themselves
and others that they did not know they were infected. Under testing, infected people are told with
(near) certainty that they are infected. The consequences for their partners are clearly brought
to their attention. Extrapolating the current behavioral assumption to such an extreme setting
would imply reckless behavior after being tested positive. Concern for others might yield very
different implications. Thus, incorporating testing would bring issues of altruism to the fore. It
is unclear what the best way of dealing with this is.

36

they induce. These shifts in sexual behavior then feed back on the equilibrium
rate of HIV/AIDS. In principle, computational general equilibrium models are
well suited to analyze such effects. In practice, the best structure to be employed
needs to be determined. A prototype structure is offered here.

5.1

Medical Policies

An analysis will now be undertaken of several medical policies that have been
recommended recently.

5.1.1

Policies that Reduce Transmission for Both Sexes

Several policies involve the reduction in transmission risk. For example, results
of a new vaccine trial were made public very recently showing a 30% efficacy.24
Similarly, antiretroviral drugs and certain gels are thought to reduce the transmission risk. Another policy that has recently been advocated is the treatment of
other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). The idea is that the presence of other
STDs makes a person more susceptible to contracting HIV. Thus, reducing other
STDs will decrease the transmission risk, both for men and women. For example,
Grosskurth et al. (1995) finds that improved STD treatment reduced HIV incidence by about 40% in rural Tanzania. Oster (2005) compares data from African
countries and from the US and Western Europe and reaches the conclusion that
treating other STDs would be an effective policy. Using a “diff-in-diff” approach,
she argues that the most likely cause for different HIV rates are STDs—rather
than behavioral differences. This conclusion is somewhat problematic. If current sexual behavior in African countries (where the HIV rate and related risks
are high) is similar to European countries (where the rate and associated risks
are much smaller), then, this may suggest very different attitudes towards risky
behavior in the two continents. If this was the case, then reducing the transmission risk by treating other STDs might lead to behavioral adjustments that crowd
24

Promising results of a new vaccine that would reduce transmission by 30% were recently
reported in the media, e.g. in a Wall Street Journal article on September 25, 2009: “Vaccine Shows
Promise in Preventing HIV Infections.” However, additional data analysis found that the results
are statistically insignificant.

37

Table 4: T REATING O THER STD S

γum
γuf
HIV/AIDS rate, %
–Males
–Females
Fraction of sex that is casual, %
% (of) Casual sex with condom
% Singles who have casual sex
% Men who are single
% Women who are single

Benchmark
0.940
0.895
11.5
10.2
12.8
23.9
33.0
54.0
42.8
38.7

Lower Risk
0.948
0.902
9.9
8.7
11.1
24.2
29.7
57.6
42.1
37.9

Epidem.
0.948
0.902
9.4
8.3
10.6
—
—
—
—
—

Small Field
0.948
0.902
11.1
9.8
12.4
24.3
30.9
56.0
42.6
38.6

out the gains from the reduced risk. Simulating people’s behavior in response
to changed circumstances is one way of taking such behavioral responses into
account and trying to assess the overall impact of such a policy.
Table 4 shows the simulation results for this policy in our quantitative model.
As the transmission risk for both men and women declines by about 13%, the
HIV incidence decreases by 1.5 percentage points from 11.5 to 9.9%. Note that
this decrease in HIV prevalence masks the find that, when faced with better odds
when having sex, agents engage in riskier behavior. The fraction of sex that is
casual increases even though there are less singles around (since unprotected
sex is safer and sex within marriage is unprotected, people have an extra incentive to marry). The reason is that the fraction of non-abstinent singles increases
from 54% to 57.6%. Moreover, out of the singles having sex, condom usage falls
from 33% to 29.7%. The upshot of this experiment is that agents can dramatically
change their behavior in response to the policy and that these behavioral changes
can have non-trivial effects, which can be seen as follows.
Compare the results with the epidemiological version of the experiment. In the
epidemiological experiment, the decline in HIV prevalence is much larger to
9.4%, a 0.5% difference compared to the benchmark. The reason for this difference is exactly the lack of behavioral changes described above.
The field experiment goes in the opposite direction: it predicts a much smaller de-

38

crease in HIV incidence compared to the benchmark (11.1% in the former versus
9.9% in the latter). The reason is that, in the field experiment, the reduced number
of infections does not lead to an overall decrease in the population prevalence
rate. Therefore, it does not feed back into lower infection rates for the treated
population, something that is naturally part of the full model. It is interesting to
note that eight of the nine studies of STD treatment for HIV prevention surveyed
by Padian et al. (2010) delivered flat results. Even though the authors discuss
some potential explanations for these weak results, the simulations presented
here highlight a novel reason, namely the missing general equilibrium effects in
randomized field experiments.
Taking stock, treating other STDs seems to decrease the overall HIV prevalence
rate even though people engage in riskier behavior in response to the lower likelihood of getting infected. This shift in behavior makes the use of a choice-theoretic
model like the one proposed here essential. The differences arising from these
behavioral responses seem to be quantitatively important. Moreover, conducting
randomized field experiments on a small scale might not be enough to assess the
effects of such a policy. General equilibrium effects are present and they might
be powerful.

5.1.2

Male Circumcision

A policy intervention that has received a lot of recent attention is male circumcision. Several studies find a decline in the female-to-male transmission rate for
circumcised males. Based on this evidence, UNAIDS now lists male circumcision
as one recommended strategy for HIV prevention.25 The most widely cited evidence comes probably from Gray et al. (2007) who, based on a randomized field
experiment in Uganda, find that the incidence of HIV/AIDS (over 24 months)
in the treatment group was half the HIV incidence in the control group. Similarly, Auvert et al. (2005) find a 60% reduction in female-to-male transmission for
those who were circumcised in a randomized field experiment in South Africa.
One thing that randomized experiments cannot measure are general equilibrium
25
See http://www.unaids.org/en/PolicyAndPractice/Prevention/MaleCircumcision/
cessed on October 7, 2009.

39

ac-

Table 5: M ALE C IRCUMCISION

γum
HIV/AIDS rate, %
–Males
–Females
Fraction of sex that is casual, %
% (of) Casual sex with condom
% Singles who have casual sex
% Men who are single
% Women who are single
Transfers
–Protected
–Unprotected
–Long term

Benchmark
0.940
11.5
10.2
12.8
23.9
33.0
54.0
42.8
38.7

Lower Risk
0.948
10.0
8.7
11.5
23.4
31.1
55.3
42.2
37.6

Epidem.
0.948
10.7
9.3
12.2
—
—
—
—
—

Small Field
0.948
11.2
9.8
12.8
24.2
31.1
55.8
42.6
38.7

107
189
94

115
237
115

—
—
—

—
—
—

effects. If all men were circumcised, perhaps the entire village would feel safer
and engage in riskier behavior, which would crowd out some of the gains.
Table 5 reports the results in the model when men (and only men) are faced with
lower odds of infection. The first thing to note is that, even though sex is safer
only for men, the prevalence rates for both sexes decrease. The reason for this is
that, with the lower likelihood of getting infected, men are on average healthier
and thus the spread of the disease slows down.
Two other things are worth noting in Table 5. First, both the small field experiment and the epidemiological study suggest that the policy is less effective than
what the full equilibrium says; and that is even more true for women.26 Second,
agents’ behavior regarding single life versus marriage, condom usage, casual sex,
etc. do not seem to change much. Actually, both of these observations can be explained once one looks at the changes in transfers, also reported in the table.
Given that the likelihood of infection does not change for women, they demand
higher transfers from men; that is particular true, of course, where sex is unprotected: short-term unprotected and long-term relationships. Given these higher
26

In the small field experiment, given that there is no change in the odds of infection for women
and the absence of general equilibrium effects by design, the HIV prevalence rate for females will
not change by construction.

40

transfers, men do not change their behavior as much as they would in say, the
small field experiments where general equilibrium effects of this type do not play
any role.

5.2

Policies aimed at Behavioral and Societal Change

Other policies have been aimed directly at social and behavioral change. The
so-called ABC approach stands for abstention, being faithful, and the use of
condoms—Murphy et al. (2006). It is somewhat less clear how such behavioral
changes can be achieved. One avenue that is pursued are large scale media campaigns aimed at disseminating information. More generally, the emphasis is often on information, education, and communication, which is sometimes called
the IEC approach. For example Gallant and Maticka-Tyndale (2004) study the
effectiveness of education campaigns. One problem with such studies is that success is often measured as changes in attitudes and/or reported behaviors, while
it is left open whether actual behaviors changed.27 In the experiments conducted
here the effects of “promoting marriage” are investigated for various interpretations of what this policy might mean. Promoting condoms is modeled as an
increase in the utility from using them.

5.2.1

Condoms

Suppose one could design more pleasurable condoms (or perhaps raise the psychic pleasure of sex with a condom through a publicity campaign). Would this
be desirable? The results are reported in Table 6. It turns out that the HIV rate
displays a hump-shaped pattern when increasing pleasure from condoms, p. The
reason that increasing the utility from protected sex does not always lead to a decrease in the prevalence rate is that single life becomes more attractive. So, even
though condom usage increases, there are more singles in total and they engage
in both protected and unprotected sex. From the table, see that the fraction of
single men and women increases substantially as condoms become more attractive. Moreover, the fraction of singles that engage in short-term sex skyrockets.
27

This point is also made in Dupas (2011).

41

Table 6: B ETTER C ONDOMS
Benchmark
2.3
11.5
23.9
33.0
54.0
42.8
38.7

p
HIV/AIDS rate, %
Fraction of sex that is casual, %
% (of) Casual sex with condom
% Singles who have casual sex
% Men who are single
% Women who are single

Better
3.8
13.3
39.9
66.2
92.2
52.5
48.2

Better Still
4.5
12.7
53.9
73.6
95.6
65.1
61.6

Even though more people use condoms, there is a lot more activity in the casual
sex market. These two forces push the prevalence rate in opposite directions and
this tension can be seen in Table 6. As condoms first get better, the HIV/AIDS
prevalence rate initially goes up. As more and more people start to use condoms,
however, the lower likelihood of getting infected becomes more important and
the prevalence rate starts to go back down. This experiment highlights the potential of some policies to backfire and actually increase the overall prevalence rate.
Note also that these effects can be quantitatively quite important: the prevalence
rate goes up by almost two percentage points before it starts to come down.

5.2.2

Increased Utility from Marriage

Table 7 reports the results of an experiment in which marriage is more attractive. That is, the utility of being married (l + u) increases. The first thing to note
from the table is that, as expected, the fraction of single people plummets. Consequently, the fraction of sex that is casual also exhibits a marked decrease; there
is thus less risky activity taking place in the economy. This adds up to a lower
overall HIV prevalence rate.

5.2.3

Marriage: Entry vs. Exit

Making marriage more attractive might be difficult to implement. A more realistic policy might be to either facilitate entry into marriage (by making search
easier) or impede exit from marriage (by making divorce harder). For example,
42

Table 7: P ROMOTING M ARRIAGE
Benchmark
l+u
2.5
HIV/AIDS rate, %
11.5
Fraction of sex that is casual, % 23.9
% (of) Casual sex with condom 33.0
% Singles who have casual sex 54.0
% Men who are single
42.8
% Women who are single
38.7

Better
3.5
10.0
18.0
33.3
56.3
34.3
27.7

Better Still
4.5
7.8
12.2
33.2
53.1
26.8
20.7

social events organized by community or religious groups may facilitate searching for a spouse. Likewise, the provision of marriage counselling services may
reduce divorce. Similarly, pro-family tax codes could promote marriage and dissuade divorce. The impact effect of both strategies should be an increase in marriage which may have the potential to lower the HIV/AIDS rate. These policies
are operationalized by decreasing the odds of divorce, ξ, and by lowering the
search cost of finding a marriage partner, ωLT . The corresponding experiments
are depicted in Table 8.
As divorce risk decreases, long-term relationships become longer and people become less promiscuous. The fraction of casual sex thus goes down. This happens
of course along with a marked decrease in the number of singles. All this contributes to a lower prevalence rate in equilibrium. However, the decrease of the
prevalence rate is limited because singles have a lot more sex now, which counteracts the benefits from more marriage.
Interestingly, when the search costs in the long-term market are lower (last two
columns), the HIV prevalence rate actually increases. The reason is a worsening
of the pool of people searching in the long-term market. As the search costs in
this market decrease, riskier types find it more profitable to look for a long-term
partner. This worsens the marriage pool and drives the prevalence rate up.

43

Table 8: M ARRIAGE - S EARCH C OSTS

Divorce risk, ξ
Marital search cost, ωLT
HIV/AIDS rate, %
Fraction of sex that is casual, %
% Singles who have casual sex
% Men who are single
% Women who are single
5.2.4

Benchmark
0.03
30
11.5
23.9
54.0
42.8
38.7

AND

D IVORCE R ISK

Divorce risk ↓
0.02
0.015
30
30
10.6
10.0
20.7
19.2
62.4
67.6
34.3
30.3
31.7
28.2

Search cost ↓
0.03
0.03
28
20
11.6
12.0
23.5
22.2
55.2
60.8
41.7
37.2
37.9
34.8

Other Experiments

The framework lends itself to analyzing a host of policies. Space constraints do
not permit a detailed accounting of all the experiments entertained. Therefore, in
this section we briefly summarize a few additional experiments.
Higher Incomes
Developing countries receive substantial financial aid from other countries. Could
such financial aid play any direct role in HIV/AIDS prevention? Increasing income, y, lowers the HIV/AIDS rate substantially in the model. The reason is that
richer people value life more and hence behave in a more risk-averse fashion.
There are fewer singles and in addition singles have less sex. If income is increased for women only, then the effects are even larger. Women now have more
to lose and hence demand a higher price for sex. When male income is held fixed,
men reduce their risky behavior in face of a higher price for sex. This shows up
very clearly in the experiments, where the price of all forms of sex goes up substantially when income for both genders is increased, but only very little when
only women receive the subsidy. Thus, interestingly, the cheaper policy (which
involves payment to half of the population only) is the more effective one.
Discouraging Casual Sex
One might imagine a policy that makes meeting people of the opposite sex more
difficult, for example by taxing popular meeting venues or the inputs they use
such as alcohol. This is operationalized here by increasing ωs . This policy leads
to a decrease in the prevalence rates for both genders. This lower prevalence rate

44

comes from two reasons. First, a lower fraction of singles have casual sex, since
it is more costly to find a mate in these short-term markets. Second there are less
singles in equilibrium. The reason for the second effect is that, since agents know
it is more costly to search in the short-term markets, they search more heavily in
the long-term market.

6

Conclusions

In Malawi about 11 percent of the population has the HIV/AIDS virus. Roughly
18 percent of sex is casual and a condom is used a quarter of the time. An equilibrium search model is constructed to analyze the Malawian HIV/AIDS epidemic.
At the heart of the model is homo economicus. Specifically, it is presumed that
the economic man (or woman) searches for the type of sexual activity that (s)he
desires to engage in, while rationally taking into consideration the risks of this activity. Some people will select stable long-term relationships, others may choose
more fleeting ones. Condoms may or may not be used in these more ephemeral
encounters, depending on the participants’ mutual desires. The number of such
encounters is partially under people’s control. All of these choices crucially affect
the spread of HIV/AIDS in society.
The theoretical model developed is simulated to see whether or not it can capture
some of the salient features of the Malawian HIV/AIDS epidemic. It can. For example, the framework can match the fraction of sex that is casual, the number
of encounters that use a condom, and the HIV/AIDS prevalence rates for men
and women. Furthermore, it can mimic the decline in casual sex by age and the
hump-shaped pattern of HIV/AIDS prevalence over the lifecycle. The benchmark simulation is then used to undertake some policy interventions that are
discussed in the literature. The simulation results suggest that policy analysis
of HIV/AIDS interventions may be very complicated. In particular, some policies (such as promoting condoms) may backfire and actually increase HIV. The
aim of the analysis is to provide a toolbox that allows the study of various interventions, identifies where behavioral change might be important, and thereby
identifies areas where further and deeper exploration might be most warranted.

45

References
Allen, Susan, Jareen Meinzen-Derr, Michele Kautzman, Isaac Zulu, Stanley
Trask, Ulgen Fideli, Rosemary Musonda, Francis Kasolo, Feng Gao, and
Alan Hanworth. 2003. “Sexual Behaviour of HIV Discordant Couples after HIV Counseling and Testing.” AIDS 17 (5):733–740.
Anderson, Roy M., and Robert M. May. 1992. Infectious Diseases of Humans:
Dynamics and Control. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Ashraf, Nava, Oriana Bandiera, and Kelsey Jack. 2013. “No margin, no mission?
A field experiment on incentives for public service delivery.” Unpublished
Manuscript, London School of Economics.
Auld, M. Christopher. 2006. “Estimating Behavioral Response to the AIDS Epidemic.” B.E. Journals in Economic Analysis and Policy: Contributions in Economic Analysis & Policy 5 (1):12.
Auvert, Bertran, Dirk Taljaard, Emmanuel Lagarde, Jolle Sobngwi-Tembekou,
Rmi Sitta, and Adrian Puren. 2005. “Randomized, Controlled Intervention
Trial of Male Circumcision for Reduction of HIV Infection Risk: The ANRS
1265 Trial.” PLoS Med 2 (11):1112–1122.
Baeten, Jared M., Barbra A. Richardson, Ludo Lavreys, Joel P. Rakwar,
Kishorchandra Mandaliya, Job J. Bwayo, and Joan K. Kreiss. 2005. “Femaleto-Male Infectivity of HIV-1 among Circumcised and Uncircumcised Kenyan
Men.” Journal of Infectious Diseases 191 (4):546–553.
Becker, Gary S. 1973. “A Theory of Marriage: Part I.” Journal of Political Economy
81 (4):813–846.
Behrman, Jere R., and Hans-Peter Kohler. 2012. “Sexual Transmission of HIV.”
In Rethink HIV. Smarter Ways to Invest in Ending HIV in Sub-Saharan Africa,
edited by Bjorn Lomborg, 11–48. Cambridge University Press.
Boulier, Bryan L., and Mark R. Rosenzweig. 1984. “Schooling, Search, and
Spouse Selection: Testing Economic Theories of Marriage and Household
Behaviour.” Journal of Political Economy 92 (4):712–732.
Bowie, Cameron. 2006. “The Burden of Disease in Malawi.” In The Epidemiol-

46

ogy of Malawi, edited by Eveline Geubbels and Cameron Bowie. College of
Medicine, University of Malawi.
Bracher, Michael, Gigi Santow, and Susan Cotts Watkins. 2004. “Assessing the
Potential of Condom Use to Prevent the Spread of HIV: A Microsimulation
Study.” Studies in Family Planning 35 (1):48–64.
Burdett, Ken, and Melvyn G. Coles. 1997. “Marriage and Class.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 112 (1):141–168.
Canning, David. 2006. “The Economics of HIV/AIDS in Low-Income Countries:
The Case for Prevention.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20 (3):121–142.
Chimbiri, Agnes M. 2007. “The Condom is an ’Intruder’ in Marriage. Evidence
from Rural Malawi.” Social Science and Medicine 64 (5):1102–1115.
Clark, Samual J., and Jeff Eaton. 2008. “Demographic Consequences of HIV
Epidemics and Effects of Different Male Circumcision Intervention Designs:
Suggestive Findings from Microsimulation.” Working Paper no. 85, Center
for Statistics and the Social Sciences, University of Washington.
Delavande, Adeline, and Hans-Peter Kohler. 2009. “Subjective Expectations in
the Context of HIV/AIDS in Malawi.” Demographic Research 20:817–874.
. 2011. “HIV/AIDS-related Expectations and Risky Behavior in Malawi.”
Population Studies Center, University of Pennsylvania, Working Paper 1104.
De Walque, D., W.H. Dow, R. Nathan, and et al. 2012. “Incentivizing safe sex:
A randomized trial of conditional cash transfers for HIV and sexually transmitted infection prevention in rural Tanzania.” BMJ Open 2, no. e000747.
De Walque, Damien. 2007. “How Does the Impact of an HIV/AIDS Information Campaign Vary with Educational Attainment? Evidence from Rural
Uganda.” Journal of Development Economics 84 (2):686–714.
Duflo, Esther, Pascaline Dupas, and Michael Kremer. 2012. “Education, HIV,
and Early Fertility: Experimental Evidence from Kenya.” Unpublished
Manuscript, MIT.
Dupas, P. 2011. “Do Teenagers Respond to HIV Risk Information? Evidence

47

from a Field Experiment in Kenya.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (1):1–34.
Eeckhout, Jan, and Philipp Kircher. 2010. “Sorting and Decentralized Price
Competition.” Econometrica 78 (2):539–574.
Fenichel, Eli P., Carlos Castillo-Chavez, M. G. Ceddiac, Gerardo Chowell,
Paula A. Gonzalez Parra, Graham J. Hickling, Garth Hollowayc, Richard Horan, Benjamin Morin, Charles Perrings, Michael Springborn, and Ve. 2011.
“Adaptive human behavior in epidemiological models.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science (PNAS) 108 (15):6306–6311.
Gallant, Melanie, and Eleanor Maticka-Tyndale. 2004. “School-based HIV
Prevention Programmes for African Youth.” Social Science and Medicine 58
(7):1337–1351.
Gautier, Pieter, Michael Svarer, and Coen N. Teulings. 2010. “Marriage and the
City: Search Frictions and Sorting of Singles.” Journal of Urban Economics 67
(2):206–218.
Gertler, Paul, Manisha Shah, and Stefano M. Bertozzi. 2005. “Risky Business:
The Market for Unprotected Commercial Sex.” Journal of Political Economy
113 (3):518–550.
Gray, Ronald H., Godfrey Kigozi, David Servadda, Frederick Makumbi,
Stephen Watya, Fred Nalugoda, and Noah Kiwanuka. 2007. “Male Circumcision for HIV Prevention in Men in Rakai, Uganda: A Randomized Trial.”
Lancet 369 (9562):657–666.
Gray, Ronald H., Maria J. Wawer, Ron Brookmeyer, Nelson K. Sewankambo,
David Serwadda, Fred Wabwire-Mangen, Tom Lutalo, Xianbin Li, Thomas
vanCott, Thomas C. Quinn, and the Rakai Project Team. 2001. “Probability
of HIV-1 Transmission per Coital Act in Monogamous Heterosexual, HIV-1Discordant Couples in Rakai, Uganda.” Lancet 357 (9263):1149–1153.
Greenwood, Jeremy, and Nezih Guner. 2010. “Social Change: The Sexual Revolution.” International Economic Review 51 (4):893–923.
Grosskurth, H., F. Mosha, J. Todd, E. Mwijarubi, A. Klokke, K. Senkoro,
P. Mayaud, J. Changalucha, A. Nicoll, J. ka Gina, G.and Newell, K. Mugeye,

48

D. Mabey, and R. Hayes. 1995. “Impact of Improved Treatment of Sexually Transmitted Diseases on HIV Infection in Rural Tanzania: Randomized
Controlled Trial.” Lancet 346 (8974):530–536.
Hethcote, Herbert W. 2000. “The Mathematics of Infectious Diseases.” SIAM
Review 42 (4):599–653.
Iorio, Daniela, and Raul Santaeulalia-Llopis. 2011. “Education, HIV Status,
and Risky Sexual Behavior: How Much Does the Stage of the HIV Epidemic
Matter?” Unpublished Manuscript, Washington University.
Jacquet, Nicolas L., and Serene Tan. 2007. “On the Segmentation of Markets.”
Journal of Political Economy 115 (4):639–664.
Johnson, Leigh Francis. 2008. “The interaction between HIV and other sexually transmitted infections in South Africa: A model-based evaluation.”
Ph.D. diss., Department of Actuarial Science, University of Cape Town.
Jovanovic, Boyan. 1979. “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover.” Journal of
Political Economy 87 (5):972–990.
Klein, Eili, Ramanan Laxminarayan, David L. Smith, and Christopher A. Gilligan. 2007. “Economic incentives and mathematical models of disease.” Environment and Development Economics 12 (5):707–732.
Kremer, Michael. 1996. “Integrating Behavioral Choice into Epidemiological
Models of AIDS.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (2): 549–573 (May).
Kremer, Michael, and Charles Morcom. 1998. “The Effect of Changing Sexual
Activity on HIV Prevalence.” Mathematical Biosciences 151 (1):99–122.
Lakdawalla, Darius, Neeraj Sood, and Dana Goldman. 2006. “HIV Breakthroughs and Risky Sexual Behavior.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121
(3):1063–1102.
Low-Beer, D., and RL Stoneburner. 1997. “An age- and sex-structured HIV
epidemiological model: features and applications.” Bull World Health Organ
75 (3):213–221.
Magruder, J. 2011. “Marital Shopping and Epidemic AIDS.” Demography 48
(4):1401–1428.

49

Miller, Kate, Susan Cotts Watkins, and Eliya M. Zulu. 2001. “Husband-Wife
Survey Responses in Malawi.” Studies in Family Planning 32 (2):161–174.
Murphy, E.M., M.E. Greene, A. Mihailovic, and P. Olupot-Olupot. 2006. “Was
the ABC Approach (Abstinence, Being Faithful, Using Condoms) Responsible for Uganda’s Decline in HIV?” PLoS Med 3 (9):1443–1447.
Nicolosi, Alfredo, Maria Lea Correa Leite, Massimo Musicco, Claudio Arici,
Giovanna Gavazzeni, and Adriano Lazzarin. 1994. “The Efficiency of Maleto-Female and Female-to-Male Sexual Transmission of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus: A Study of 730 Stable Couples.” Epidemiology 5 (6):570–
575.
Nzyuko, S., P. Lurie, W. McFarland, W. Leyden, D. Nyamwaya, and J.S. Mandel. 1997. “Adolescent sexual behavior along the Trans-Africa Highway in
Kenya.” AIDS Suppl 1:S21–26.
Oster, Emily. 2005. “Sexually Transmitted Infections, Sexual Behavior, and the
HIV/AIDS Epidemic.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (2):467–515.
. 2012. “Routes of Infection: Exports and HIV Incidence in Sub-Saharan
Africa.” Journal of the European Economic Association 10 (5): 1025–1058.
Padian, Nancy S., S. I. McCoy, J. E. Balkus, and J. N. Wasserheit. 2010. “Weighing
the Gold in the Gold Standard: Challenges in HIV Prevention Research.”
AIDS 24 (5):621–635.
Padian, Nancy S., Stephen C. Shiboski, and Nicholas P. Jewell. 1991. “Femaleto-Male Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus.” Journal of the
American Medical Association 266 (12):1664–1667.
Philipson, Thomas J., and Richard A. Posner. 1993. Private Choices and Public
Health - The AIDS Epidemic in an Economic Perspective. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Poulin, Michelle. 2007. “Sex, Money, and Premarital Partnerships in Southern
Malawi.” Social Science and Medicine 65 (11):2383–2393.
Reniers, Georges. 2003. “Divorce and Remarriage in Rural Malawi.” Demographic Research 1 (6):175–206.

50

Santaeulalia-Llopis, Raul. 2008. “Aggregate Effects of AIDS on Development.”
Washington University in St. Louis, Unpublished Manuscript.
Shimer, Robert, and Lones Smith. 2000. “Assortative Matching and Search.”
Econometrica 68 (2):343–369.
Stonebumer, Rand L., Daniel Low-Beer, George S. Tembo, Thierry E. Mertens,
and Godwin Asiimwe-Okiror. 1996. “Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection Dynamics in East Africa Deduced from Surveillance Data.” American
Journal of Epidemiology 144 (7): 682–695.
Swidler, Ann, and Susan Cotts Watkins. 2007. “Ties of Dependence: AIDS and
Transactional Sex in Rural Malawi.” Studies in Family Planning 38 (3):147–162.
Thornton, Rebecca. 2008. “The Demand for and Impact of Learning HIV Status.”
American Economic Review 98 (5):1829–1863.
Toxvaerd, Flavio. 2012. “Recurrent Infection and Externalities in Prevention.”
mimeo.
UNAIDS Joint United Programme on HIV/AIDS, ed. 2007. Modelling the Expected Short-Term Distribution of Incidence of HIV Infections by Expose Group Manual.
Undie, Chi-Chi, Joanna Crichton, and Eliya Zulu. 2007. “Metaphors We Love
By: Conceptualizations of Sex among Young People in Malawi.” African
Journal of Reproductive Health 11 (3):221–235.
U.S. Census Bureau, ed. 2004. The AIDS Pandemic in the 21st Century. International Population Reports WP/02-2. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington DC.
Wawer, Maria J., Ronald H. Gray, Nelson K. Sewankambo, David Serwadda,
Xianbin Li, Oliver Laeyendecker, Noah Kiwanuka, Godfrey Kigozi, Mohammed Kiddugavu, Thomas Lutalo, Fred Nalugoda, and Fred a Wabwire Mangen. 2005. “Rates of HIV-1 Transmission per Coital Act, by Stage of
HIV-1 Infection, in Rakai, Uganda.” Journal of Infectious Diseases 191 (9):1403–
1409.
Weller, Susan C. 1993. “A Meta-Analysis of Condom Effectiveness in Reducing
Sexually Transmitted HIV.” Social Science and Medicine 36 (12):1635–1644.
51

Wellings, Kaye, Julia Field, Anne M. Johnson, Jane Wadsworth, and Sally Bredshaw, eds. 1994. Sexual Behavior in Britain. The National Survey of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles. Penguin Books Ltd, London, England.
World Health Organisation, ed. 2008. The Global Burden of Diseases: 2004 update.
WHO Press.
Young, Alwyn. 2005. “The Gift of the Dying: The Tragedy of AIDS and the
Welfare of Future African Generations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120
(2): 423–66 (May).

52

A

Appendix–Additional Figures
Figure 6: Timing of Events

indicates search intensity choice at this node
indicates sexual activity

All singles
enter period
with prior ϕ

match in long
term market

Vl (φ )

no match

€

If no break-up

Exogenous (ε) or endogenous
(= partner symptoms) break-up
match
protected
no match

unprotected
t

match

t+1
Symptoms Exogenous Stochastic update
realized (α), death (δ) Aging (η) prior (ϕ’)
Value: A

B

Appendix—Data

Most of the empirical moments are based on information from the individual
interviews of the Malawi Demographic and Health Survey (MDHS) in 2004, carried out by the Malawi National Statistical Office. In this survey 11,698 women
aged 15 to 49 and 3,261 men aged 15 to 54 were interviewed. Means are calculated using sample weights. For several figures means are calculated by age.
A-1

Since men are underrepresented in the survey, separate means are calculated by
sex, and then averaged. Whenever sources other than the MDHS are used, it will
be indicated. More details on each figure follow. For the interested reader the
details also include the variable names corresponding to each question.
• Figure 1: Fraction ever Married - Model vs. Data
The fraction of ever-married people is derived by dividing the number of
people who are currently married (including cohabitation) or have been
formerly married by all people. The corresponding question is “Have you
ever been married or lived with a man/woman?” (MDHS 2004: v/mv502).
• Figure 2: Distribution of Beliefs - Model vs. Data
Data is based on Delavande and Kohler (2009), Table 3.
• Figure 3: HIV Rate - Men vs. Women, Model vs. Data
In order to calculate the HIV rates by age (MDHS 2004: v012/mv012) and
gender, individual information from the MDHS 2004 is matched with the
HIV test results (MDHS 2004: hiv03) for those people who agreed on doing
the test along with the interview (since not everyone agreed, the sample
size is smaller here: 2404 men and 2864 women). The resulting HIV rates
are smoothed using a third order polynomial. The raw data are shown in
Figures 7 and 8.
• Figure 4a: Singles by Age - Model vs. Data
Those women and men who reported that they have never been married or
are widowed, divorced (living or not living together) are defined as singles
(MDHS 2004: v/mv501).
• Figure 4b: Casual Sex by Age - Model vs. Data
To identify the fraction of sex that occurs in casual relationships, all men
and women are considered who had sex in the last year (MDHS 2004: v/mv529).
Those people are asked with whom they had sex (MDHS 2004: v/mv767a).
They are also asked whether they had sex with a second (MDHS 2004:
v/mv761b, v/mv767b) and third (MDHS 2004: v/mv761c, v/mv767c) partner. If one of the sex partners was not the spouse or cohabiting partner,
then the sex in the last year is categorized as casual sex. Men in addition
A-2

are asked whether they have ever paid for sex (MDHS 2004: mv792). Those
men who have paid for sex in the last year are also defined as being active
in the short-term market.
• Figure 4c: Non-abstinent Singles by Age - Model vs. Data
People were asked when was the last time they had sex. If they did not have
sex in the last quarter they are classified as abstinent (MDHS 2004: v/mv501
and v/mv529). In this figure we only use data from singles (MDHS 2004:
v/mv501).
• Figure 5: Deaths by HIV/AIDS by Age - Model vs. Data
The data on deaths caused by HIV/AIDS are taken from Bowie (2006),
pages 31-42. He reports the fraction of HIV/AIDS related deaths by age
groups, based on the WHO Global Burden of Disease Malawi from 2002.
• Table 1: Parameters Chosen Outside the Model
All sources are described in the text.
• Table 3: Targeted Moments
The data on the prevalence of HIV/AIDS in Malawi derive from the Demographic and Health Surveys’ (MDHS) Final Survey for Malawi in 2004.
See MDHS (2004, Table 12.3). The fraction of sex that is casual is the proportion of people—averaged across men and women—who had sex with
a non-marital, non-cohabiting partner during the last year, conditional on
being sexually active, and is taken from MDHS (2004, Table 11.9). Condom
usage for short term sex also derives from MDHS (2004, Table 11.9)—and is
averaged across men and women. The fraction of singles who have casual
sex is reported in MDHS (2004, Tables 6.71 and 6.72) and corresponds to
the weighted average of never married and divorced/separated/widowed
men and women. The proportion of the population that is single is contained in MDHS (2004, Table 6.1), where single is interpreted as anyone
who is not currently married, averaged across men and women. The fraction of males and females that has ever been married by a certain age is the
same as in Figure 1. The World Health Organisation (2008) reports that 29%
of all deaths in Malawi in 2004 were due to HIV/AIDS.

A-3

Figure 7: Male HIV Rate – Model vs. Data
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
15

20

25

model

30

35

40

45

data (3rd order poly.)

50

55
Age

50

55
Age

data

Figure 8: Female HIV Rate – Model vs. Data
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
15

20
model

25

30

35

40

data (3rd order poly.)

A-4

45
data

C
C.1

Appendix—Theory
Updating in a Long-term Relationship

Whether a breakup occurs for exogenous reasons or because the partner developed symptoms contains information about one’s own HIV status. Below we
develop two separate updating formulae, one for each case. Note that when the
person himself develops symptoms, no updating is necessary since in this case
the person knows he is HIV positive.
First, consider the case where the individual is exiting a long-term relationship
at the end of period n where both partners are symptom free (or appear to be
healthy, h). Here, the individual should update his prior according to the rule
Pr(not being infected and partner showing no symptoms at end of period n|φ)
Pr (no symptoms in either person at end of period n|φ)
φφ̄l + φ(1 − φ̄l )γun (1 − α)n
=
,
(16)
∆h

Φhl (φ, n) =

with
∆h ≡ φφ̄l + (1 − φ)(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)2n
+[φ(1 − φ̄l ) + (1 − φ)φ̄l ](1 − α)n [(1 − γu )

n−1
X

γuj (1 − α)n−j + γun ].

j=0

where φ̄l is the (time-invariant) probability that a randomly drawn partner on the
long-term market does not have the HIV/AIDS virus.
The first term in the numerator is the chance that neither individual in the relationship initially had the HIV/AIDS virus, which occurs with probability φφ̄l .
The second term gives the odds that: (i) the person starts the marriage healthy
but that his partner initially had the HIV/AIDS virus, the odds of which are
φ(1 − φ̄l ); (ii) the virus fails to transmit despite having n periods of unprotected
sex, which has a likelihood of γun ; (iii) the partner never shows symptoms, which
occurs with probability (1 − α)n . The denominator includes these two terms in
addition to the possibility that either person may have caught the HIV/AIDS
A-5

virus, but the symptoms have not appeared yet. There are three possibilities to
consider here. First, perhaps both partners initially had the virus but no symptoms have occurred yet, which is reflected by the term (1 − φ)(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)2n .
Second, there is the situation where the person catches the virus from his partner
in any of the n periods, but the symptoms do not emerge in either individual.
P
j
n−j
This occurs with probability φ(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)n (1 − γu ) n−1
, where
j=0 γu (1 − α)
φ(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)n (1 − γu )γuj (1 − α)n−j is the likelihood that the individual catches
the disease exactly j periods after marriage but neither partner shows any symptoms until this period. Third, there is the possibility that the individual did have
the virus, initially, while his partner didn’t, and no symptoms have occurred. The
P
j
n−j
odds of this happening are (1 − φ)φ̄l (1 − α)n [(1 − γu ) n−1
+ γun ]. No
j=0 γu (1 − α)
symptoms may occur because the virus didn’t transmit (as reflected by the γun in
the brackets) or because it it did transmit at some time but remains dormant [the
P
j
n−j
term].
(1 − γu ) n−1
j=0 γu (1 − α)
The second case where the individual’s partner develops HIV/AIDS symptoms
at the end of period n is similar. Denote this case with superscript A. If a longterm relationship ends because of sickness the individual will obviously observe
this. This information should be used in his updating rule, which now reads
Pr(not being infected and partner showing symptoms at end of period n|φ )
Pr(no symptoms in oneself and symptoms in partner at end of period n|φ)
φ(1 − φ̄l )γun (1 − α)n−1 α
.
(17)
=
∆A

ΦA
l (n, φ) =

with
A

∆

≡ (1 − φ)(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)

2n−1

α + φ(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)

n−1

α[(1 − γu )

n−1
X

γuj (1 − α)n−j + γun ]

j=0
n

+(1 − φ)φ̄l (1 − α) α(1 − γu )

n−1
X

γuj (1 − α)n−1−j .

j=0

Once again focus on the numerator first. The individual can only be healthy,
while his partner shows symptoms, if the former didn’t have HIV/AIDS initially
while the latter did. Furthermore, the virus must have failed to transmit after n
periods of unprotected sex. The odds of this happening are φ(1− φ̄l )γun (1−α)n−1 α.
A-6

The denominator can be explained in similar fashion to the one in equation (16),
with due alternation. The first term, (1 − φ)(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)2n−1 α, gives the odds
that both people initially had the HIV/AIDS virus, but just the partner shows the
symptoms after n periods. It could also happen that the individual doesn’t have
the virus initially, but his partner does. The chance of this happening, together
with just the partner showing symptoms at the end of period n, are given by the
P
j
n−j
second term φ(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)n−1 α[(1 − γu ) n−1
+ γun ]. The probability
j=0 γu (1 − α)
that the partner catches the virus from the individual, and just shows the sympP
n−1−j
j
. Last,
toms at the end of n periods, is (1−φ)φ̄l (1−α)n α(1−γu ) n−1
j=0 γu (1−α)
the third case is trivial. If the individual shows the symptoms of HIV/AIDS, then
he must have the virus.

C.2

Symptom Probabilities

C.2.1 Pr[no symptoms in either person at end of period n|φ]
The odds that neither partner shows the symptoms of HIV/AIDS by the end of
period n can occur for three reasons. First, neither party might have the disease at the time of marriage. The likelihood of this is φφ̄l . Second, both parties could have had been infected with the virus when they were married. The
chances of neither of them showing symptoms after n periods of marriage is

(1 − φ) 1 − φ̄l (1 − α)2n . Last, only one of the parties might have initially been
infected, but neither partner shows symptoms by the end of n. The probability of
P
n−j
j
+γun ].
this compound event is [(1−φ)φ̄l +φ(1− φ̄l )](1−α)n [(1−γu ) n−1
j=0 γu (1−α)
This last event can be decomposed in two cases. The term (1 − φ)φ̄l (1 − α)n (1 −
P
j
n−j
γu ) n−1
gives the odds that the individual in question initially has
j=0 γu (1 − α)
the disease, transmits it to his partner in some period j, and the symptoms fail
to materialize in either person. The expression (1 − φ)φ̄l (1 − α)n γun gives the
likelihood that his partner never catches it. The rest of the formula captures the
symmetric case where it was the partner who initially had the virus. Taking stock

A-7

of all of this gives

Pr[no symptoms in either person at end of period n|φ] = φφ̄l + (1 − φ) 1 − φ̄l (1 − α)2n
n

+[(1 − φ)φ̄l + φ(1 − φ̄l )](1 − α) [(1 − γu )

n−1
X

γuj (1 − α)n−j + γun ].

(18)

j=0

C.2.2

Pr[symptoms just in partner at end of period n|φ]

What are the chances that just the individual’s partner shows the symptoms of
HIV/AIDS by the end of n periods of marriage? Once again there are three cases
to consider. First, perhaps both parties initially had the virus but the symptoms
just appear in the partner at the end of n. This will occur with probability (1 −
φ)(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)2n−1 α. Second, maybe just the partner had the disease initially.
It may have transmitted to the individual in some period j, yet he never shows
P
j
any symptoms. The chances of this are φ(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)n−1 α[(1 − γu ) n−1
j=0 γu (1 −
α)n−j + γun ]. Last, the individual might have been the person who initially had
the sickness and it then spread to his partner in some period j. The odds of this
P
j
n−1−j
. It then transpires
happening are (1 − φ)φ̄l (1 − α)n α(1 − γu ) n−1
j=0 γu (1 − α)
that
Pr[symptoms just in partner at end of period n|φ] = (1 − φ)(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)2n−1 α
n−1

+φ(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)

α[(1 − γu )

n−1
X

γuj (1 − α)n−j + γun ]

j=0
n

+(1 − φ)φ̄l (1 − α) α(1 − γu )

n−1
X

γuj (1 − α)n−1−j .

(19)

j=0

C.2.3

Pr[symptoms in person at end of period n|φ]

The likelihood of the individual exhibiting symptoms in period n is now calculated. His partner does not show any symptoms during the first n − 1 periods,
but might in the nth one. As above there are three cases to consider. First, both
parties might have had HIV/AIDS at the time of marriage, an event which occurs with probability (1 − φ)(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)2n−2 α. Second, maybe only the partner
A-8

initially had the virus and the person catches it in some period j. The odds of
P
j
n−j−1
this are φ(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)n−1 α(1 − γu ) n−1
. Last, the individual may
j=0 γu (1 − α)
have been the one who had it at the beginning of marriage. He may transmit it to
his partner, who in turn shows no symptoms before period n. This occurs with
P
n−1−j
j
+ γun−1 ]. Therefore,
probability (1 − φ)φ̄l α(1 − α)n−1 [(1 − γu ) n−2
j=0 γu (1 − α)
Pr[symptoms in person at end of period n|φ] = (1 − φ)(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)2n−2 α
+φ(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)

n−1

α(1 − γu )

n−1
X

γuj (1 − α)n−j−1

j=0

+(1 − φ)φ̄l α(1 − α)n−1 [(1 − γu )

n−2
X

γuj (1 − α)n−1−j + γun−1 ].

(20)

j=0

C.3

The Value of a Long-term Relationship, d = ι

The value of a long-term relationship for a type-x person who has a prior of φ and
low discount factor, Velι (φ, x), needs to be characterized. Recall that the discount
factor may switch from the low value, ι, to the high one, β, with probability η. If
a switch occurs, the discount factor will remain at the high value thereafter. Now,
think about the discount factor that will be applied to the utility n > 1 periods
ahead. With probability (1−η)n−1 the individual will keep the discount factor ι—
note that he will use the discount factor ι for the next period with certainty. If this
event transpires he will discount utility n periods ahead by ιιn−1 . Alternatively,
he may draw the discount factor β some k < n periods down the road. The new
discount factor will start to apply to period-(k + 1) utility. This event happens
with probability (1 − η)k−1 η. He will then discount period-n utility by ιιk−1 β n−k .
ι
Define the two new discount factors β ι (n) and β (n) by
β ι (n) ≡ (1 − η)n−1 ιιn−1

A-9

(no switch),

and
ι

β (n) ≡

n−1
X

η(1 − η)k−1 ιιk−1 β n−k (switch at some time k)

k=1

= ηιβ n−1

1 − [ι(1 − η)/β]n−1
,
1 − ι(1 − η)/β

with
ι

β (1) = 0.

Given this, the value of a long-term relationship for the low-discount factor case
is given by
Velι (φ, x) = ln(y − tl ) + u + l
(21)
∞
X
ι
[β ι (n) + β (n)](1 − ξ)n Pr[no symptoms in either person at end of period n|φ]
+
n=1

× [ln(y − tl ) + u + l]
∞
X
β ι (n)(1 − ξ)n−1 ξ Pr[no symptoms in either person at end of period n|φ]
+
n=1

× [ηVlβ (φh (n, φ), x) + (1 − η)Vlι (Φh (n, φ), x)]
∞
X
ι
+
β (n)(1 − ξ)n−1 ξ Pr[no symptoms in either person at end of period n|φ]
n=1

× Vlβ (Φh (n, φ), x)x)
∞
X
β ι (n)(1 − ξ)n−1 Pr[symptoms just in partner at end of period n|φ]
+
n=1

× [ηVlβ (ΦA (n, φ), x) + (1 − η)Vlι (Φa (n, φ), x)]
∞
X
ι
+
β (n)(1 − ξ)n−1 Pr[symptoms just in partner at end of period n|φ]
n=1

× Vlβ (ΦA (n, φ), x)
∞
X
ι
+
[β ι (n) + β (n)](1 − ξ)n−1 Pr[HIV/AIDS symptoms in person at end of period n|φ]
n=1

× A.
A-10

Except for the possibility of a switch in the discount factor, the formula resembles
ι
(7). In fact, (21) collapses to (7) when η = 1 implying β(n) = 0—here β (n)
should be set to β n . As before, the first line reports the current utility from the
relationship. Suppose that a match sustains until period n + 1. The second and
third lines give the discounted expected utility accruing over the next n periods.
The next lines handle breakup events for period n + 1. Lines 4 and 5 cover the
situation where the discount factor applying to period n + 1 remains low and an
exogenous breakup occurs. Note that the discount factor may switch upwards
with probability η in period n + 1. Lines 6 and 7 assume an exogenous breakup
occurs and that the discount factor has switched sometime before n + 1. The rest
of the lines should now be self evident.

C.4

Stationary Distributions

Before starting, define the function J by J(z) = 1, if z = 0, and J(z) = 0, if z 6= 0.

C.4.1

Singles distributions, d = ι

Consider the case where singles have the low discount factor, ι. Note that a person can only get into the low discount factor state from the low discount factor
state. The equilibrium distribution for type-x singles, with a low discount factor,
and prior φ is specified by
S ι (φ0 , x) = µ(1 − η)J(φ0 − 1)
X
+(1 − δ)(1 − η)
[1 − Πιl (φ, x)]S ι (φ, x)

(22)

φ

×{{1 − α[(1 − φ) + φ(1 − φ̄p )(1 − γp )]}J(φ0 − Φp (φ))Πιp (φ, x)
+{1 − α[(1 − φ) + φ(1 − φ̄u )(1 − γu )]}J(φ0 − Φu (φ))Πιu (φ, x)
+ [1 − α(1 − φ)]J(φ0 − Φa (φ))Πιa (φ, x)}
+Lι (φ0 , x).
At the beginning of any period the pool of singles comes from five sources. First,
new ones are born. A fraction of these people will draw a low discount factor in
A-11

the first period. These people have not had sex yet, so they know with certainty
they do not have the HIV/AIDS virus. This inflow is given by the first term on
right-hand side. Now, some older singles will fail to find a partner on the market
for long-term relationships. The fraction of populace in this situation is specified
by the second line. Three things can happen to them. Some of these people will
find a mate on the short-term protected sex market. This is the second source
of singles and it is given by the third line. Others will match on the short-term
unprotected sex market. This accounts for the third source of inflow and is shown
by the fourth line. Still others will fail to match, which gives the fourth influx,
as the fifth line indicates. The fifth inflow is from long-term relationships that
have broken up. The last line gives the contribution from this source. This term
is explained next.
Now, suppose that a type-x individual with prior φ and a low discount factor
enters into a long-term relationship. There are two reasons why this person may
exit into single life at a later date: the match dissolves exogenously, or his partner develops HIV/AIDS symptoms. These two events are not mutually exclusive. But, note that if a male enters into single life because his partner develops
HIV/AIDS symptoms, then it doesn’t matter whether or not there was a breakup
as well, because the probability of the latter two events sum to one. Now, if
the match terminates in period n solely due to a breakup then the male will exit
into single life with the prior Φhl (φ, n), while if his partner develops HIV/AIDS
symptoms then he will exit with prior Φal (φ, n). The odds that a type-x person
with a low discount factor will exit into single life at some future date with a
low discount factor, ι, and a prior φ0 , conditional on starting with a prior φ, will
consequently read
ι

0

L (φ , x|φ) =

∞
X

(1 − η)n ξ(1 − ξ)n−1 (1 − δ)n J(φ0 − Φhl (φ, n))

(23)

n=1

× Pr[no symptoms in either person at end of period n|φ]
∞
X
+
(1 − η)n (1 − ξ)n−1 (1 − δ)n J(φ0 − ΦA
l (φ, n))
n=1

× Pr[symptoms just in partner at end of period n|φ],
where the probabilities for symptoms are specified by (18) to (20) above. From
A-12

this it is easy to calculate that the unconditional exit distribution, Lι (φ0 , x), is
given by
X
Lι (φ0 , x) =
Lι (φ0 , x|φ)Πιl (φ, x)S ι (φ, x).
(24)
φ

C.4.2

Singles distributions, d = β

Next, the situation where singles have the high discount factor, β, will be presented. A person can move into the high discount factor state from either the
high or low one. The equilibrium distribution function for type-x singles, with a
high discount factor, and prior φ is given by

S β (φ0 , x) = ηµJ(φ0 − 1)
X
[1 − Πβl (φ, x)]S β (φ, x)
+(1 − δ)

(25)

φ

×{{1 − α[(1 − φ) + φ(1 − φ̄p )(1 − γp )]}J(φ0 − Φp (φ))Πβp (φ, x)
+{1 − α[(1 − φ) + φ(1 − φ̄u )(1 − γu )]}J(φ0 − Φu (φ))Πβu (φ, x)
+[1 − α(1 − φ)]J(φ0 − Φa (φ))Πβa (φ, x)}
+Lβ (φ0 , x)
X
[1 − Πιl (φ, x)]S ι (φ, x)
+(1 − δ)η
φ

×{{1 − α[(1 − φ) + φ(1 − φ̄p )(1 − γp )]}J(φ0 − Φp (φ))Πιp (φ, x)
+{1 − α[(1 − φ) + φ(1 − φ̄u )(1 − γu )]}J(φ0 − Φu (φ))Πιu (φ, x)
+ [1 − α(1 − φ)]J(φ0 − Φa (φ))Πιa (φ, x)} .
The first six lines are the direct analogue to equation (22), only with a high discount factor. The exit distribution from married life, Lβ (φ0 , x), is defined below.
It includes married individuals whose own discount factor moved up from ι to
β at some time during their marriage. The last four lines reflect the inflow of low
discount factor singles who transit to a high discount factor.
To calculate the exit distribution, Lβ (φ0 , x), imagine a type-x person who entered
married life with a high discount factor and a prior of φ. The probability that he
A-13

will exit married life with the prior φ0 is given by
0

β

L (φ , x|φ) =

∞
X

ξ(1 − ξ)n−1 (1 − δ)n J(φ0 − Φhl (n, φ))

(26)

n=1

× Pr[no symptoms in either person at end of period n|φ]
∞
X
+
(1 − ξ)n−1 (1 − δ)n J(φ0 − ΦA
l (n, φ))
n=1

× Pr[symptoms just in partner at end of period n|φ].
Likewise, consider those who start married life with a low discount factor and a
prior of φ but who switch to high discount factor. The odds that they will exit
marriage with the prior φ0 are
ιβ

0

L (φ , x|φ) =

∞
X

[1 − (1 − η)n ] ξ(1 − ξ)n−1 (1 − δ)n J(φ0 − Φhl (n, φ))

n=1

× Pr[no symptoms in either person at end of period n|φ]
∞
X
[1 − (1 − η)n ] (1 − ξ)n−1 (1 − δ)n J(φ0 − ΦA
+
l (n, φ))
n=1

× Pr[symptoms just in partner at end of period n|φ].

(27)

Therefore, the unconditional exit distribution for people entering into single life
from married life with a high discount factor is
Lβ (φ0 , x) =

X

Lβ (φ0 , x|φ)Πβl (φ, x)S β (φ, x) +

X

Lιβ (φ0 , x|φ)Πιl (φ, x)S ι (φ, x). (28)

φ

φ

Last, equations (22) to (28) fully describe the operator T in (11).

D
D.1

Appendix—Algorithm
Computing the Value Functions and Distribution Functions

The algorithm enters each iteration with a guess for the set of values functions,
Ve d and V d , and stationary distributions, Ld and S d , for each type of individual x.
g,r

g,r

g

A-14

g

It is easy to create a guess for the nonprevalence rates, φ̄g,r , from the distribution
functions by using (13) for each market. On each iteration the value functions
are updated using equations (1), (2), (3), (5), (6), (7), (8), and (21). At the same
time the distribution functions are revised on each iteration using (22) to (28). A
grid is constructed for the individual’s prior, φ, over his nonprevalence rate. The
above functions are computed at each grid point. Even though by construction φ
is a grid point there is no guarantee that φ0 will be, given the form of the updating
functions (9), (10), (16) and (17). This is resolved using an interpolation scheme
(MATLAB’s cubic Hermite scheme). For example to compute Veaβ (φ0 , x) on the
righthand side of (1) for an off-the-grid point φ0 a weighted average of Veaβ (φ0i , x)
and Veaβ (φ0i+1 , x) at the two nearest adjacent grid points, φ0i ≤ φ0 ≤ φ0i+1 , is computed.28 A similar issue arises when computing the distribution functions. Take
the density shown in (22), for example. The updating rules (9) and (10) in general
will not map a grid point φ into a φ0 that lies on the grid. Therefore, φ is mapped
onto the two closest adjacent points, φ0i and φ0i+1 , such that φ0i ≤ Φr (φ) ≤ φ0i+1 , for
r = a, u, p, using a linear weighting scheme.

D.2

Pseudo Code for Monte Carlo - partners up to age t

The task is to simulate the average number of partners for n individuals, say
males, over m periods. Create matrices to store the sample paths across individuals for variables such as φ, n, p, a, h, w where n is the number of periods in a
long-term relationship (n = 0 for a single), p is the number of partners to date, a
is a variable indicating whether the person is alive (a = 0 for a dead person and
1 for a living one), h is a variable indicating whether the person is healthy (h = 0
for a person with AIDS symptoms and 1 for a person without symptoms) and w
is the number of marriages ( “weddings”) the person was in to date. For each
individual do the following:
1. At the beginning of life draw two random numbers from a uniform dis28
The Hermit scheme preserves monotonicity of Veaβ in φ, and therefore the extrapolation can
be interpreted as a weighted-average of the nearest grid points. The weights themselves are
computed based on the entire set of grid points, not just based on the nearest ones, to preserve
certain smoothness properties.

A-15

tribution on [0, 1]. If the first is below η, then start the person with high
discount factor and only use decision rules with superscript β throughout
his life. Otherwise, in the first period t = 1 of a person’s life use decision
rules with superscript ι. The probability of switching by the end of period t
is n(t) = [1 − (1 − η)t ]. Consider the realization of the second random variable (call it r) and find the integer t̄ ∈ {1, 2, ...} such that n(t̄ − 1) ≤ r < n(t̄).
For every period t ≤ t̄ of the simulated persons life use policy rules with
the index ι, for every period t > t̄ use policy rule with the index β. (Note
that t̄ might be larger than T , the maximum number of periods we want to
simulate, in which case only subscript y applies).
2. Start off all people as newly born singles with φ = 1, n = 0, p = 0, w = 0,
h = 1, and a = 1. For each person i draw a matrix of m × 3 uniformly
distributed random variables. The seed for the random number generator
should be a function of i.
3. Individual i will enter a given period t with some values for d, φ, n, p, h
and a, denoted by di,t , φi,t , ni,t , pi,t , hi,t , wi,t and ai,t . If ai,t = 0 the individual
is dead and nothing has to be done. Terminate going down the time path
for this individual. Otherwise, if di,t−1 = ι check whether t > t̄. If so, set
di,t = β. Alternatively, when di,t−1 = β then di,t = β. If he is alive ai,t = 1
but sick hi,t = 0, go to step 4. Otherwise, if he is married, ni,t ≥ 1, go to step
5; if he is single, ni,t = 0, go to step 6.
4. If he is alive ai,t = 1 but sick hi,t = 0, draw the first random variable from
column t. If it is below δ2 the person dies, i.e. ai,t+1 = 0. If it is above δ2 then
he lives ai,t+1 = 1 and hi,t+1 = 0. (δ2 is the probability of death for a person
with AIDS symptoms.)
5. Married. If ai,t = hi,t = 1 and ni,t ≥ 1 then the individual is alive and married. Draw the second random variable from the tth row of the matrix of
random variables. Define the probabilities of some of the events discussed
in Section C.2.
N1 ≡ Pr[no symptoms in either person at end of period n|φ],

A-16

E1 ≡ (1 − φ)(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)2n−1 α, cf (19),
E2 ≡ φ(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)

n−1

α[(1 − γu )

n−1
X

γuj (1 − α)n−j + γun ], cf (19),

j=0

n

E3 ≡ (1 − φ)φ̄l (1 − α) α(1 − γu )

n−1
X

γuj (1 − α)n−1−j , cf (19),

j=0

A1 ≡ (1 − φ)(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)2n−2 α, cf (20),
n−1

A2 ≡ φ(1 − φ̄l )(1 − α)

α(1 − γu )

n−1
X

γuj (1 − α)n−j−1 , cf (20),

j=0

n−1

A3 ≡ (1 − φ)φ̄l α(1 − α)

[(1 − γu )

n−2
X

γuj (1 − α)n−1−j + γun−1 ], cf (20).

j=0

(a) Marriage persists. If the random variable is less than (1−ε)(1−δ)N1 (ni,t )/Λ(ni,t ),
where Λ(ni,t ) ≡ [N1 (ni,t ) + E1 (ni,t ) + E2 (ni,t ) + E3 (ni,t ) + A1 (ni,t ) +
A2 (ni,t ) + A3 (ni,t )], then the marriage persists. Here, set φi,t+1 = φi,t ,
ni,t+1 = ni,t + 1, pi,t+1 = pi,t , wi,t+1 = wi,t , ai,t+1 = hi,t+1 = 1.
(b) Exogenous breakup. If the random variable lies between (1 − ε)(1 −
δ)N1 (ni,t )/Λ(ni,t ) and (1 − δ)N1 (ni,t )/Λ(ni,t ) then the marriage breaks
up exogenously and the male enters single life. Here, set φi,t+1 =
Φhl (ni,t , φi,t ), ni,t+1 = 0, pi,t+1 = pi,t , wi,t+1 = wi,t , ai,t+1 = hi,t+1 = 1.
(c) Partner shows symptoms of AIDS/HIV. Alternatively, when the random variable lies between (1 − δ)N1 (ni,t )/Λ(ni,t ) and (1 − δ)[N1 (ni,t ) +
E1 (ni,t )+E2 (ni,t )+E3 (ni,t )]/Λ(ni,t ) then the marriage breaks up because
the male’s partner has the symptoms of AIDS/HIV. Again, the male
enters single life. Here, φi,t+1 = ΦA
l (ni,t , φi,t ), ni,t+1 = 0, pi,t+1 = pi,t ,
wi,t+1 = wi,t , ai,t+1 = hi,t+1 = 1.
(d) AIDS symptoms or death. With probability Q ≡ 1 − (1 − δ)[N1 (ni,t ) +
E1 (ni,t ) + E2 (ni,t ) + E3 (ni,t )]/Λ(ni,t ) the person either gets AIDS symptoms or dies or both. Draw the third random variable in the tth column. If it is below δ/Q the person dies, i.e. ai,t+1 = 0. If it is above the
person survives with AIDS symptoms, i.e. ai,t+1 = 1 and hi,t+1 = 0.
(e) Accounting for newly wedded agents. If ni,t = 1, then set pi,t+1 =
A-17

pi,t + 1, wi,t+1 = wi,t + 1. This step has to be done no matter which event
a to d occurred.
6. Single. If ai,t = hi,t = 1 and ni,t = 0 then the individual is alive and single.
Draw the first random variable from the tth row of the matrix of random
variables. If this random variable lies below πl then the person is newly
wedded and enters period-t married life (set ni,t = 1). Then move to the
marriage state in period t, described in step 5. Otherwise, go through the
three cases outlined below for a single person.
(a) Abstinence is first choice. If πa,t = 1 then the individual chooses abstinence. Draw a random variable from the second column of the matrix. If the number is less than δ the person dies and ai,t+1 = 0. If the
number is between δ and δ + (1 − δ)α(1 − φi,t ) the person gets AIDS
symptoms but continues living so that ai ,t+1 = 1 and hi,t+1 = 0. Otherwise the individual lives on to the next period so that φi,t+1 = Φa (φi,t ),
ni,t+1 = 0, pi,t+1 = pi,t , wi,t+1 = wi,t , ai,t+1 = hi,t+1 = 1.
(b) Abstinence is second choice. If 0 < πa,t , πs,t < 1 then the individual’s
first choice is short-term market s. Abstinence is his second choice.
Draw a random variable from the second column of the matrix. If
the first number is less than πs,t then the person enters the short-term
market. Draw a random variable from the third column of the matrix.
If the number is less than δ the person dies and ai,t+1 = 0. If the number
is between δ and δ+(1−δ)α[(1−φi,t )+φi,t (1−φs )(1−γs )] the person gets
AIDS symptoms but continues living so that ai ,t+1 = 1 and hi,t+1 = 0.
Otherwise the individual lives on to the next period so that φi,t+1 =
Φs (φi,t ), ni,t+1 = 0, pi,t+1 = pi,t + 1, wi,t+1 = wi,t , ai,t+1 = hi,t+1 = 1.
(c) Abstinence is last choice. If 0 < πu,t , πp,t < 1 then the individual’s first
choice and second choices are the short-term markets. Abstinence is
his third choice. Draw a random variable from the second column of
the matrix. If the second number is less than πu,t then the person enters
the unprotected short-term market. Draw a random variable from the
third column of the matrix. If the third number is less δ the person
dies and ai,t+1 = 0. If the number is between δ and δ + (1 − δ)α[(1 −
A-18

φi,t )+φi,t (1−φu )(1−γu )] the person gets AIDS symptoms but continues
living so that ai ,t+1 = 1 and hi,t+1 = 0. Otherwise the individual lives
on to the next period so that φi,t+1 = Φu (φi,t ), ni,t+1 = 0, pi,t+1 = pi,t + 1,
wi,t+1 = wi,t , ai,t+1 = hi,t+1 = 1. If the second number lies in the interval
(πu,t , πp,t +πu,t ) then the person enters the protected short-term market.
Draw a random variable from the third column of the matrix. If the
number is less than δ the person dies and ai,t+1 = 0. If the number is
between δ and δ +(1−δ)α[(1−φi,t )+φi,t (1−φp )(1−γp )] the person gets
AIDS symptoms but continues living so that ai ,t+1 = 1 and hi,t+1 = 0.
Otherwise the individual lives on to the next period so that φi,t+1 =
Φp (φi,t ), ni,t+1 = 0, pi,t+1 = pi,t + 1, wi,t+1 = wi,t , ai,t+1 = hi,t+1 = 1. If the
second number is greater than πu,t + πp,t then the analysis proceeds as
in the abstinence case.
7. The average number of partners during their life for people at age t (counted
at the beginning of the period before having sex), who are still alive, is given
by Σi,t hi,t pi,t /Σi,t hi,t . For the number of agents that are infected, first adjust
the beliefs for those who are married. For any observation (i, t) with ni,t ≥ 2
set φi,t = φ∗ (ni,t − 1, φi,t ). The reason for the adjustment is that n is already
updated in the period where an agent gets newly wed. Then the prevalence in society for those who do not display severe AIDS symptoms yet is
Σi,t hi,t φi,t /Σi,t hi,t .

A-19

