                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     AIR POLLUTION AND PROCYCLICAL MORTALITY

                                            Garth Heutel
                                         Christopher J. Ruhm

                                         Working Paper 18959
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18959


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2013




We thank Matthew Neidell, Nicholas Sanders, and seminar and conference participants at UNCG,
Appalachian State University, NBER, the 2012 AERE Summer Conference, and the 2013 ASSA meetings
for helpful comments, and Will Mautz, Stephanie Norris, and James Small for excellent research assistance.
Ruhm gratefully acknowledges financial support for this research from the University of Virginia Bankard
Fund. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm
NBER Working Paper No. 18959
April 2013
JEL No. E32,I10,Q53

                                              ABSTRACT

Prior research demonstrates that mortality rates increase during economic booms and decrease during
economic busts, but little analysis has been conducted investigating the role of environmental risks
as potential mechanisms for this relationship. We investigate the contribution of air pollution to the
procyclicality of deaths by combining state-level data on overall, cause-specific, and age-specific mortality
rates with state-level measures of ambient concentrations of three types of pollutants and the unemployment
rate. After controlling for demographic variables and state and year fixed-effects, we find a significant
positive correlation between carbon monoxide (CO) concentrations and mortality rates. Controlling
for CO, particulate matter (PM10), and ozone (O3) attenuates the relationship between overall mortality
and the unemployment rate by 30 percent. The attenuation is particularly large, although imprecisely
measured, for fatalities from respiratory diseases and is frequently substantial for age groups unlikely
to be involved in the labor market. Our results are consistent with those of other studies in the economics
and public health literatures measuring the mortality effects of air pollution.


Garth Heutel
Bryan 466, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Greensboro
P. O. Box 26170
Greensboro, NC 27402
and NBER
gaheutel@uncg.edu

Christopher J. Ruhm
Frank Batten School of
Leadership and Public Policy
University of Virginia
235 McCormick Rd.
P.O. Box 400893
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4893
and NBER
ruhm@virginia.edu
                                                                                                  Page 2



       Health is conventionally believed to deteriorate during macroeconomic downturns.

However, a substantial body of research conducted over the last decade instead suggests that

physical health instead improves when the economy temporarily weakens. In particular, there is

strong evidence of a procyclical variation in mortality, but the mechanisms for this relationship

are poorly understood. Early research on this topic emphasized the role of individual behaviors,

which may become healthier during slack economic periods because of increases in available

time and reductions in income; however, recent analyses provide more mixed evidence on

whether this occurs. There is also a strong but limited role for changes in driving behavior and

traffic fatalities, but changes in environmental risk factors have not been studied.

       Air pollution, which increases when the economy strengthens and so may be a source of

procyclical fluctuations in mortality, has not been examined in this context, probably because the

data required to do so are difficult to analyze. This study provides a first step towards filling this

gap by examining the extent to which controlling for pollution attenuates the estimated

coefficient on unemployment rates (the proxy of macroeconomic conditions) in models that are

otherwise similar to those used in previous related analyses. Specifically, using state-level data

for 1982-2009, we incorporate information on ambient concentrations of three air pollutants –

carbon monoxide (CO), particulate matter less than 10 microns in diameter (PM10), and ozone

(O3) – into models that examine total, cause-specific, and age-specific mortality, while also

controlling for state fixed-effects and unemployment rates, general year effects and

supplementary location-specific demographic characteristics.

       We substantiate prior findings that mortality is procyclical over the period studied: a one

percentage point increase in unemployment is associated with a 0.35% decrease in the total

mortality rate. However, after controlling for pollution, the estimated effect declines to 0.24%.
                                                                                                                      Page 3



All three pollutant concentrations exhibit a procyclical variation, but only CO is estimated to

strongly increase mortality, and it is the inclusion of CO that attenuates the estimated

macroeconomic effect. Specifically, a one-standard deviation increase in the CO concentration is

associated with a 2.0% increase in the mortality rate, after controlling for state and year effects,

demographic characteristics and PM10 and O3 levels (but not unemployment rates), and its

inclusion in the full model attenuates the estimated unemployment coefficient by 30%.

         The results for specific causes and ages of death provide suggestive evidence that

environmental risks, like pollution, provide a mechanism for at least some of the procyclical

fluctuation in mortality. In particular, previous research suggests pollution has a significant effect

on deaths from respiratory and cardiovascular disease, and this is what we also find. 1 In our

estimates, a one-standard deviation increase in the CO concentration is associated with a 5.2%

rise in the respiratory mortality rate, and the inclusion of the pollution concentrations in our main

model eliminates the correlation between respiratory fatalities and unemployment rates (although

the estimates are imprecise). Adding controls for air pollution also attenuates (by smaller

amounts) the unemployment rate coefficients for various types of cardiovascular and

cerebrovascular disease, as well as for accidental deaths. Conversely, suicides are countercyclical

and unaffected by pollution. The results for age-specific mortality are also revealing. Consistent

with recent findings by Miller et al. (2009) and Stevens et al. (2011), deaths are estimated to be

procyclical for the young and old, but not for 20-54 year olds, who are of prime working age.

However, CO concentrations are associated with increased mortality for all groups. As a result,

the procyclicality of fatalities is attenuated for youths and seniors – with a particularly strong




1
  For instance, Clancy et. al. (2002) identifies an association between particulate matter concentrations and
respiratory and cardiovascular deaths, and Peters et. al. (2004) links traffic pollution exposure to heart attacks.
                                                                                                          Page 4



reduction for infant deaths – and the countercyclicality of deaths for 20-54 year olds becomes

more pronounced when controlling for pollution levels.



I. Background

        The relationship between macroeconomic conditions and health has been extensively

examined using time series data for single geographic locations. Particularly influential have

been the studies by M. Harvey Brenner and coauthors (e.g. Brenner, 1979) arguing that

recessions increase mortality and health problems. However, many researchers (e.g. Gravelle,

1984) have pointed out serious flaws in Brenner's analysis. Recent time series analyses (e.g.

McAvinchey, 1988; Joyce & Mocan ,1993; Laporte, 2004; Tapia Granados & Ionides, 2008)

correct for some of these issues but, despite these innovations, the results remain ambiguous.

Most time series research suggests that the contemporaneous effect of economic downturns is to

improve health and reduce mortality, but some find countercyclical effects, no impact or

variation across countries or time periods. 2 Such lack of robustness should not be surprising

since any lengthy time series may yield biased estimates due to omitted variables that are

spuriously correlated with economic conditions and affect health. 3

        Following Ruhm (2000), many recent studies address the omitted variables bias issue by

analyzing data for multiple locations and points in time. The key advantage is that panel data

techniques can then be used to control for many potential confounding factors. In particular,

location-specific determinants of health that remain constant over time can be easily accounted

for, as can factors that vary over time in a uniform manner across locations. Death rates, the most


2
 See Ruhm (2012) for a full discussion of these issues and extensive references.
3
 For example, the variation in unemployment during the four decades (beginning in the 1930s) covered by much of
Brenner's research was dominated by dramatic reductions in joblessness following the great depression, where
mortality declined due to improved nutrition and increased availability of antibiotics.
                                                                                                                 Page 5



common dependent variables, are useful to study because mortality represents the most severe

negative health outcome, is objective and well measured, and diagnosis generally does not

depend on access to the medical system (in contrast to many morbidities). However, changes in

non-life-threatening health conditions may not be fully accounted for.

         This research provides strong evidence of a procyclical fluctuation in total mortality and

several specific causes of death, using disparate samples and time periods. A one-percentage

point increase in the unemployment rate (the most common macroeconomic proxy) is typically

associated with a 0.3% to 0.5% reduction in overall mortality, corresponding to an elasticity of –

.02 to –.05, with significantly larger elasticity estimates sometimes obtained. 4

         In explaining why health improves during economic downturns, researchers have

emphasized the role of changes in lifestyles, hypothesizing that increased availability of non-

market “leisure” time makes it less costly for individuals to undertake health-producing activities

such as exercise and cooking meals at home, while lower incomes are associated with reductions

in unhealthy lifestyles like smoking and drinking. The data provide some support for these

mechanisms. There is strong evidence that alcohol sales are procyclical and several studies

(Ruhm, 1995; Freeman, 1999; Cotti & Tefft, 2011) find that alcohol-involved vehicle mortality

declines in such periods. Cardiovascular fatalities, which are strongly influenced by lifestyles,

are also procyclical, with variations of similar or larger magnitude (in percentage terms) than for

total mortality (Ruhm, 2000; Neumayer, 2004; Miller, et al., 2009), and with particularly large




4
  Ruhm (2012) provides a detailed discussion of this evidence. Due to severe data restrictions, few analyses examine
how macroeconomic conditions affect morbidity. Ruhm (2003) finds that increased unemployment reduces the
prevalence of medical conditions (particularly for acute health problems), restricted-activity and bed-days, as well as
ischemic heart disease or intervertebral disk problems. This contrasts with an increase in non-psychotic mental
disorders. Consistent with this last result, Charles and DeCicca (2008) uncover a procyclical variation in mental
health for less-educated and African-American males.
                                                                                                 Page 6



effects for deaths due to coronary heart disease (Ruhm, 2007), that are likely to be responsive to

short-term changes in modifiable health behaviors (but also some environmental risk factors).

       Other behaviors may also become healthier when economic conditions weaken. Ruhm

(2005) finds that severe obesity, smoking and physical inactivity decline, with especially large

reductions in multiple risk factors. Gruber & Frakes (2006) and Xu & Kaestner (2010) provide

further evidence of a procyclical variation in smoking. Ruhm (2000) shows that the

consumption of dietary fat falls while the intake of fruits and vegetables rises. Dehejia & Lleras-

Muney (2004) indicate that pregnant mothers consume less alcohol, with mixed effects for

smoking. Consistent with these patterns, evidence that higher time prices correlate with increased

obesity has been provided for adults and children (e.g. Courtemanche, 2009), individuals spend

more time socializing and caring for relatives when the economy is weak (Edwards, 2008), and

Germans exercise more when wages temporarily decline (Dustmann & Windmeijer, 2004).

       However, changes in health behaviors are probably not the sole, or necessarily the most

important, mechanism for procyclical variations in mortality. In a provocative study, Miller et al.

(2009) find that working age adults are responsible for relatively little of the cyclical variation in

deaths, suggesting that behavioral responses to changes in labor market conditions are unlikely to

be a dominant factor. Some research also raises questions about the strength or direction of the

lifestyle changes. For example, Böckerman et al. (2006) obtain a countercyclical variation in

obesity for Finnish adults in some (but not all) models, as do Charles & DiCicca (2008) for some

U.S. adult males and Arkes (2009) for teenage girls. Johansson, et al. (2006) indicate a

countercyclical pattern of some sources alcohol-related mortality in Finland, Dávlos et al. (2012)

likewise do so for alcohol abuse and dependence among U.S. adults, Arkes (2007) for drug

consumption among teenagers, while Colman & Dave (2011) suggest that increases in leisure-
                                                                                                             Page 7



time exercise during periods of economic weakness are more than offset by reductions in work-

related physical exertion.

        Other risk factors provide potential alternative explanations for why health may improve

during economic downturns. One such risk – traffic fatalities – has been widely studied, with

substantial and robust evidence provided that a one point increase in unemployment reduces such

deaths by 1% to 3% (see Ruhm, 2012, for citations.) This reflects both decreases in driving

during hard economic times and fewer fatalities per mile driven, partly because of less alcohol-

involved driving (Cotti & Tefft, 2011).

        Other joint products of economic activity, air pollution in particular, also present health

risks, especially for infants or senior citizens who do not participate in the labor force (Chay &

Greenstone, 2003; Currie and Neidell, 2005; Currie et. al. 2009). Pollution is an established

contributor to cardiovascular deaths (Peters et al., 2004) but has not yet received attention in

empirical research examining the effects of macroeconomic fluctuations on mortality. This

analysis takes a first step towards rectifying this shortcoming.



II. Research Design

        We analyze the relationship between macroeconomic conditions, air pollution, and

mortality rates, using panel data methods that, following Ruhm (2000), have become standard in

this literature. 5 Studies based on aggregate data usually estimate some variant of:

                                         𝑀𝑗𝑡 = 𝛼𝑗 + 𝑋𝑗𝑡 𝛽 + 𝐸𝑗𝑡 𝛾 + 𝜆𝑡 + 𝜖𝑗𝑡 ,                         (1)

where Mjt is a health outcome (mortality rates here) in location j at time t, E measures

macroeconomic conditions, X is a vector of covariates, α is a location-specific fixed-effect, λ a


5
  Although alternative estimation procedures have some desirable features, we use “standard” models to maximize
the comparability of our results to those obtained in previous research.
                                                                                                            Page 8




general time effect, and ε is the regression error term. Following most previous literature, the

natural log (rather than level) of mortality rates is used, and we report robust standard errors that

are clustered at the state level.

        Unemployment rates are the most common primary proxy for macroeconomic conditions,

and the one focused upon (although we discuss some results using alternative measures). The

supplementary characteristics include controls for the age-structure of the local population, and

the shares in specified education and race/ethnicity subgroups, as well as location-specific

measures of temperature and precipitation. The analysis covers 1982-2009. Detailed emissions

data are unavailable prior to 1982 and location-specific mortality rates after 2009 (at the time of

analysis). States have been the unit of observation is most previous related U.S. research, and are

what we focus upon, although we also briefly summarize the results of a county-level analysis. 6

        The year effects, λt in equation (1), hold constant determinants of death that vary

uniformly across locations over time (e.g. advances in widely used medical technologies or

behavioral norms); the state-fixed-effects, αj, account for differences across locations that are

time-invariant (such as persistent lifestyle disparities between residents of Nevada and Utah).

The impact of the macroeconomy is then identified from within-location variations relative to the

changes in other locations. Equation (1) does not account for unobservable factors that vary over

time within states. 7 Although unemployment rates are the proxy for macroeconomic conditions,

the mortality effects need not be restricted to individuals changing employment status. For

instance, increases in air pollution due to growth in economic output may particularly affect the

health of infants and senior citizens, who are not in the labor force.


6
  Recent related research using county or MSA level data includes Charles & DeCicca (2008) and An & Liu (2012).
7
  The impact of national business cycles, which could differ from more localized fluctuations, is absorbed by the
time effects. Discussions of macroeconomic effects therefore refer to changes within locations rather than at the
national level.
                                                                                                           Page 9



        The primary econometric strategy in the current analysis is to first estimate equation (1),

with 𝛾� providing the overall macroeconomic effect, and then to run the augmented model:

                                  𝑀𝑗𝑡 = 𝛼𝑗′ + 𝑋𝑗𝑡 𝛽 ′ + 𝐸𝑗𝑡 𝛾 ′ + 𝑃𝑗𝑡 𝛿 ′ + 𝜆′𝑡 + 𝜀𝑗𝑡′ ,               (2)

where Pjt is the ambient pollution level at location j and time t. In this specification, 𝛾�′ shows the

partial effect of macroeconomic conditions after controlling for pollution levels, and the degree

of attenuation, relative to 𝛾� from equation (1), shows the extent to which pollution is a mediating

factor in explaining the overall macroeconomic effect. The direct impact of pollution, which is

hypothesized to raise mortality, is estimated as 𝛿̂ ′ in equation (2). This is likely to provide a

lower bound on the true effect to the extent that pollution is only partially controlled for, or

measured with error. For this reason, equation (2) is also estimated with the simultaneous

inclusion of multiple pollution measures, while recognizing that multicollinearity may limit our

ability to interpret the coefficients obtained for the individual emissions variables. 8 We also

estimate first-stage models where pollution levels are the dependent variables and unemployment

rates the key regressors, to confirm our hypothesis of a positive relationship between economic

activity and emissions levels.



III. Data

        Three primary data sources are used for this investigation: pollution levels from the

Environmental Protection Agency’s Air Quality System (AQS) database, unemployment rates

from U.S. Department of Labor’s Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) Database, and

mortality rates from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's Compressed Mortality




8
 The correlation coefficient between our state-level measures of CO and PM10 is 0.582; between O3 and PM10 it is
0.293; and between CO and O3 it is 0.084.
                                                                                                           Page 10



Files (CMF). We also used additional sources, described below, to obtain data on state

demographic and weather characteristics.

        The AQS database (http://www.epa.gov/air/data/) contains air pollution concentration

data from monitors in the 50 United States and the District of Columbia. Measures are available

for a large number of pollutants, but the three that we focus on are carbon monoxide (CO),

particulate matter less than 10 microns in diameter (PM10), and ozone (O3). Each are among the

six "criteria pollutants" designated by the Clean Air Act and are thus widely accepted as having

negative health effects. CO, PM10, and O3 were chosen among the criteria pollutants because of

the large number of monitors measuring them in the AQS and because these pollutants have been

linked with health problems and mortality in previous research. 9 For instance, Currie and Neidell

(2005) and Currie et. al. (2009) find infant mortality is positively and significantly related to CO

exposure, while Chay and Greenstone (2003) find a correspondingly significant effect for

particulate matter. 10

        Data on CO concentrations were available from a total of 1,470 monitors over the 1980 to

2010 timespan; there were 4,144 monitors for PM10 between 1982 and 2010, and 2,799 O3

monitors from 1980 to 2010. For each monitor-year, the AQS provides summaries of air

pollution measurements, including arithmetic and geometric means, percentiles and days above

specified limit values. 11 A challenge of using the AQS is that it provides an unbalanced panel,

since pollution monitors change over time. For instance, the median CO monitor was only in the

data for seven years, and just 65 CO monitors (4.4%) were available all 31 years. Similarly, the



9
  We also attempted to examine PM2.5 (particles smaller than 2.5 microns in diameter) but were unable to do so
because of the small amount of monitoring (no more than 40 monitors annually) prior to 1999.
10
   Chay and Greenstone examine total suspended particulates (TSPs), an older EPA designation that has been
replaced by PM10 and PM2.5.
11
   We use only monitors reporting CO or O3 concentrations at an hourly duration, and PM10 concentrations for a 24-
hour duration. These are the most commonly used durations for the respective pollutants.
                                                                                                              Page 11



median PM10 monitor was in the data for six years, and fewer than 1.2% were available in all 29

years. We account for monitors that enter or exit within a year in a manner described below.

         Because each state's monitors are changing over time, considerable effort and

experimentation were required to come up with meaningful location-specific pollution

measures. 12 For states with only one monitor, we used the annual arithmetic mean of that

monitor’s pollution concentration readings as the state-level measure. For states with multiple

monitors, we used a weighted average of each monitor’s annual arithmetic mean, weighted by

the population of the county in which it is located times the percent of total potential

observations from the monitor that were actually observed. For instance, a monitor that only

reported daily observations for one half of the year was discounted by 50%. We dropped

observations from 2010 and before 1982, since we lack mortality data for those years. After

doing so, we are left with a dataset spanning 1982-2009 and containing 1,333 state-year level

observations of CO concentrations (not every state is represented in all years), 1,270

observations of PM10 concentrations, and 1,378 observations of O3 concentrations. 13 Our

pollution concentration measures certainly contain errors because we are attempting to identify

average levels for the entire state using monitors for a limited set of locations. We discuss

alternative measures below, when describing our county-level analysis.

         The LAUS data (http://www.bls.gov/lau/lauov.htm) came from a Federal-State

cooperative effort in which monthly estimates of total employment and unemployment are

12
   Currie and Neidell (2005) use data just from California monitors, and their results are unaffected by whether or
not they use the subsample of monitors that are in the panel for the entire period or whether they use the entire
unbalanced panel (see their footnote 7).
13
   PM10 monitoring is quite limited in the early years, with between 2 and 15 states having monitors prior to 1985,
but with the majority of states doing so in subsequent years. Chay and Greenstone (2003, p.419-420) address the
issue of whether the monitors may be strategically placed by authorities to mislead about true environmental
conditions. They note that the Code of Federal Regulations, which describes criteria that determine the siting of
monitors, specifically forbids this type of strategic siting and that the EPA can enforce this by overseeing and
authorizing localities’ monitor siting plans. However, given the frequency of entrance and exit of monitors in our
panel, it remains possible that these regulations are not fully enforced.
                                                                                                  Page 12



prepared for approximately 7,300 areas including: census regions and divisions, states,

metropolitan statistical areas, counties, and some cities. Concepts and definitions underlying the

LAUS data come from the Current Population Survey (CPS), the household survey that is the

official measure of the labor force for the nation. This analysis uses annual average state

unemployment rates as the key proxy for macroeconomic conditions. State unemployment rates

are available throughout the entire analysis period. County level unemployment rates are

comparable over time starting in 1990.

       The CMF (http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data_access/cmf.htm) include county- and state-

level mortality and population counts. Data prior to 1988 are publically available while those

from 1989 to 2009 were obtained through a special agreement with the CDC. The CMF include a

record for every death of a U.S. resident, with source data condensed by retaining information on

the state and county of residence, year (rather than exact date) of death, race and sex, Hispanic

origin (after 1998), age group (16 categories), underlying cause of death (ICD codes and CDC

recodes). The number of records is reduced in the CMF by aggregating those with identical

values for all variables and adding a count variable indicating the number of such records. The

file also contains population estimates, based on Census data, for US, State, and county resident

populations, as well as for subsamples stratified by race, sex, Hispanic origin, and 13 age groups.

The number of live-births is also included to permit the calculation of infant mortality rates.

       Using the CMF mortality and population data, we constructed dependent variables:

annual total mortality rates; annual mortality rates from eleven specific causes – respiratory,

cardiovascular, acute myocardial infarction (heart attack), ischemic heart disease,

cerebrovascular disease (stroke), cancer, accidents (total, vehicular, and non-vehicle), suicide,

and homicide; and mortality rates for seven age groups – infants, 1-19, 20-54, 55-64, 65-74, 75-
                                                                                                              Page 13



84, and ≥85 year olds. These outcomes were chosen for consistency with the previous literature,

to test rigorously for differences across age-categories (since pollution affects groups with low or

no participation in the labor force) and to distinguish between sources of death expected to be

strongly influenced by pollution levels (e.g. respiratory diseases) versus those anticipated to be

unrelated to them (e.g. suicides).

         State-year level demographic controls were obtained from a variety of sources. Multiple

years of the Current Population Survey (CPS) March Annual Demographic Survey were used to

provide state-level information on gender, race, and education population shares. Specifically,

our regression models control for the share of the state population who were: female, black, other

nonwhite, Hispanic and aged <1, 1-19, 55-64, 65-74, 75-84 and ≥85 years old. In addition, the

estimates held constant the share of persons aged 25 and over in the state who were high school

graduates (without college), had attended college, and who were college graduates. A state-year

level measure of total highway miles driven per capita was generated with data obtained from the

U.S. Department of Transportation Highway Statistics Series

(http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/policyinformation/statistics.cfm). Using weather data from the

National Climatic Data Center at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

(http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/temp-and-precip/time-series/), we constructed measures of average

temperature and precipitation. 14

         We restrict our analysis to the 1,147 state-year observations from 1982-2009 containing

information on all three pollutants. The number of states represented from 1985 through 2009

varied from 40 to 47, but before 1985 there were never more than 13 states represented. 15


14
   These data are not available for Hawaii and so we omit it from our analysis. We also estimated and obtained
robust results for models that also controlled for heating and cooling degree days and the Palmer drought severity
index, for which data were available in all locations except Hawaii, Alaska and Washington DC.
15
   All of the regression results presented below are robust to dropping observations from before 1985.
                                                                                                            Page 14



Summary statistics are presented in Table 1. PM10 concentrations are measured in micrograms

per cubic meter (𝜇g/m3), and CO and O3 concentrations in parts per million (ppm).



IV. Results

a. Macroeconomic Conditions and Pollution

        We begin the econometric analysis by testing whether ambient pollution rises during

economic booms and falls during downturns, a necessary first-stage for this to provide a

mechanism for the procyclical fluctuation in death rates. Table 2 presents regression results

where the dependent variables are standardized pollution measures (with mean zero and standard

deviation one) for PM10 (columns 1 and 2), CO (columns 3 and 4), and O3 (columns 5 and 6).

All regressions are weighted by the state's population and include state-fixed effects and year-

fixed effects (not reported). Columns 2, 4, and 6 also control for state population shares in

specified age, gender, race/ethnicity and education groups. The coefficients on these variables

are shown in Appendix Table A.1.

        As hypothesized, there is a significant negative relationship between the unemployment

rate and all three pollution measures. A one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate

is associated with about a one-tenth of a standard deviation decrease in the ambient PM10

concentration and about a one-fifteenth of a standard deviation reduction in ambient CO and O3

concentrations. Controlling for demographic measures modestly attenuates these correlations for

PM10 and CO, while the coefficient magnitude for ozone falls by half. Nevertheless, all of the

parameter estimates differ significantly from zero, and the results verify our expectation that

emissions are procyclical. 16 Most coefficients on the demographic variables are statistically


16
  Surprisingly, we found few other papers directly investigating this issue. Heutel (2012) documents the
procyclicality of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions at the quarterly level. Using ARIMA regressions, he estimates the
                                                                                                                Page 15



insignificant. Precipitation is correlated with significantly lower pollution, and temperature is

with significantly higher pollution.

b. Total Mortality

         We next turn to the main question of whether pollution provides a possible mechanism

for the procyclical variation in mortality. Table 3 summarizes the results of models where the

dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the overall mortality rate. All specifications

include controls for demographic variables and state- and year-fixed effects (reported in

Appendix Table A.2), as well as the state unemployment rate – our proxy for macroeconomic

conditions. The basic model, in column 1, verifies earlier findings by Ruhm (2000) and others

showing that unemployment rates are negatively correlated with mortality. Specifically, a one

percentage point increase in the unemployment rate is associated with a 0.35% decrease in the

total mortality rate. This is smaller than the 0.5% predicted reduction obtained by Ruhm (2000),

but consistent with evidence by Stevens et. al. (2011) that the estimated procyclicality of

mortality is somewhat attenuated when adding post-1991 observations to the model. 17 Among

the demographic coefficients, age has the expected effect on mortality, with higher shares of both

infants and senior citizens being correlated with higher mortality rates. Race, gender, and

education do not exhibit clear patterns, possibly because of they are highly correlated with the

dominant age effects.

         The reminder of Table 3 adds controls for pollution to the basic model. Standardized

PM10 concentrations are incorporated in column 2, CO concentrations in column 3, O3

concentrations in column 4, and all three pollution measures simultaneously in column 5. Neither


elasticity between U.S. GDP and CO2 emissions levels to be between 0.5 and 0.9. Smith and Wolloh (2012) find
that aggregate water quality in the U.S. is positively correlated with the national unemployment rate.
17
   Using data from 1978-2006 and a specification similar to that in column 1, they obtain an unemployment
coefficient of -.0019. See Ruhm (2013) for a detail analysis confirming that the procyclical variation in mortality has
weakened or disappeared in recent years.
                                                                                                               Page 16



PM10 or O3 levels are highly predictive of mortality, nor do they substantially attenuate the

predicted macroeconomic effect. The coefficients on them, in columns 2 and 4, suggest that one

standard deviation increases are associated with statistically insignificant 0.2% and 0.4%

increases in mortality, which is just a fraction of the 1.9% mortality reduction predicted by a one

standard deviation increase in CO levels (in column 3). When controlling for all three pollutants

together (column 5), the CO coefficient is the only significant one, with a one standard deviation

increase again predicting a 1.9% drop in mortality. Given this pattern, we primarily focus on the

results for CO below, although controlling for all three types of emissions in our models. 18

         Adding CO emissions to the model cuts the unemployment rate coefficient by about 30%,

whether or not the other two pollutants are included in the regression. In the basic specification

(column 1), a one percentage point increase in unemployment reduces predicted mortality by

0.35%; this falls to 0.24% when all three pollution concentrations are controlled for (column

5). 19

c. Cause-specific mortality

         The evidence that changes in air pollution provide a mechanism for the procyclical

fluctuation in mortality will be strengthened if the unemployment coefficients are more sharply

attenuated after controlling for pollution for sources of fatalities that we expect to be strongly

related to emissions levels (such as those from respiratory diseases) than for those where the

relationship is anticipated to be weaker (like cancer deaths) or nonexistent (like homicides). We


18
   Stronger results for CO than other pollutants are consistent with the findings of other researchers. Currie and
Neidell’s (2005) examination of infant mortality also uncovers significant effects of CO, but not PM10 or O3,
concentrations. Beatty and Shimshack (2012) examine all three pollutants' effects on childhood morbidity and find
effects from CO but not PM10. Arceo et. al (2013) examines infant mortality in Mexico and finds significant effects
from both PM10 and CO, but their estimated magnitudes of CO coefficients are larger than those found in the US.
19
   Appendix Table A.2 also presents results for a model that controls for the pollution measures but not the
unemployment rate. When doing so, CO continues to be positively correlated with total mortality at the 5% level,
while PM10 and O3 are insignificantly related to it (see column 6 of Table A.2). Coefficients for the remaining right-
hand-side variables are also quite similar to those in our main specifications.
                                                                                                Page 17



examine this by considering deaths from respiratory, cardiovascular, and cerebrovascular

diseases, from cancer, and from two subcategories of cardiovascular disease – ischemic heart

disease and acute myocardial infarction (heart attacks). For each cause of death, Table 4 presents

the results of two specifications. The first (column a) is the basic model that controls for state

unemployment rates, state and year effects, and demographic variables, but not air pollution. The

second (column b) adds controls for the standardized emissions levels.

       Mortality rates are negatively correlated with unemployment rates for all six causes of

death when not controlling for pollution (column a), although the association is not significant

for respiratory or cancer mortality (but is of substantial magnitude for the former). Heart attacks

are the most procyclical – a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate is predicted

to decrease deaths from this source by two percent. The same rise in unemployment is estimated

to reduce mortality from cardiovascular disease and stroke by about one percent, and ischemic

heart disease by 1.2%. Cancer fatalities are unrelated to macroeconomic conditions, as has been

found previously (Ruhm, 2000).

       The pollution measures are added as controls in specification b. We hypothesized that

pollution will increase respiratory deaths and probably also some cardiovascular fatalities.

PM10 and O3 do not have a significant effect in any of these cases, consistent with the results for

total mortality above. (The only exception is the barely significant negative coefficient on PM10

for cardiovascular deaths.) Conversely, ambient CO levels are significantly and positively

associated with deaths from respiratory causes, cardiovascular disease, ischemic heart disease,

and stroke: a one-standard-deviation increase in CO concentrations is associated with 5.7%,

1.4% and 5.9% increases in deaths from respiratory, cardiovascular, and ischemic heart diseases.
                                                                                                                 Page 18



This is consistent with earlier findings of a positive effect of pollution for these causes of

death. 20

         Controlling for pollution switches the sign of the unemployment coefficient for

respiratory deaths from negative to positive, although the original effect was of small magnitude

and imprecisely estimated. It does not attenuate the predicted effect on cardiovascular fatalities,

but when focusing on ischemic heart disease, which is likely to be more responsive to short-term

triggers and changes in risk factors, the magnitude of the coefficient falls by 10%. The estimated

unemployment effect declines by around 15% for stroke deaths but does not change for heart

attack fatalities. This last result is surprising, since heart attacks account for over half of deaths

due to ischemic heart disease.

         Table 5 presents information on deaths from external causes including motor vehicle and

other accidents (separately), suicides, and homicides. Mortality rates from motor vehicle

accidents are procyclical, suicides are countercyclical, while homicides and other accidents are

not significantly related to macroeconomic conditions. 21 We do not expect fatalities from these

causes to be strongly related to pollution levels, and they are not for suicides, homicides or motor

vehicle deaths. The last finding is especially comforting given the potential for variation in

driving behavior to be a confounding omitted variable. 22 Surprisingly, pollution is positively

correlated with the non-vehicle accident death rate, and controlling for it increases the magnitude

and significance of the (positive) unemployment coefficient. A potential explanation is that jobs

20
   Similarly, Peters et. al. (2004) uncover a positive correlation between exposure to pollutants caused by traffic and
heart attack. Mustafic et. al.’s (2012) meta-analysis indicates that short term exposure to several pollutants,
including PM10 and CO, is significantly associated with heart attack risk. Clancy et. al. (2002) demonstrate a
correlation between particulate matter concentrations and respiratory and cardiovascular deaths. Wellenius et. al.
(2012) link daily levels of PM2.5 to strokes.
21
   These results are consistent with prior research findings (e.g. Ruhm, 2000), except that a procyclical variation in
non-vehicle accidents and homicides has sometimes previously been found. Ruhm (2013) provides evidence that
non-vehicle accidents have shifted from being procyclical to countercyclical over time.
22
   Controlling for per-capita miles driven, which are significantly correlated with the vehicle fatality rate, does not
substantially alter these results.
                                                                                                               Page 19



in “polluting” industries are less safe, so that when production rises, both emissions and non-

vehicle accidents increase. Although we cannot directly test this possibility, since the data do not

distinguish whether deaths occurred on the job, evidence from the Bureau of Labor Statistics

Injuries, Illness, and Fatalities, Census of Occupational Injuries Database confirms the high

rates of fatal injuries in the cyclically sensitive manufacturing and construction industries. 23

d. Age-Specific Mortality

         Miller et al. (2009) provide evidence that procyclical variations in mortality are

particularly pronounced among the young and old – who are unlikely to be directly involved in

the labor market. Changes in pollution levels could explain some of these patterns, since the

health of these groups might be particularly vulnerable to environmental risks, and negative

shocks might be relatively likely to result in death. 24 We address this possibility in Table 6,

which summarizes estimation results for the mortality rates of six age groups: <1, 1-19, 20-54,

55-64, 65-74, and 75-84 year olds. As before, the models control for unemployment rates,

demographic characteristics (other than age), and state and year effects, both with and without

the pollution measures. 25

         In the basic model (column a), unemployment is negatively correlated with the mortality

rates of all age groups except 20-54 year olds, with particularly strong procyclicality observed

for infants and youths (under 20). A one point increase in the unemployment rate is predicted to

reduce the mortality of these two groups by 0.9% and 1.4%, which compares to decreases of



23
   For instance, using data for 2009 from http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshwc/cfoi/cftb0241.pdf (accessed March 15, 2013),
we calculate that construction industries had a non-vehicle fatal accident rate that was over four times as large as
that for all industries (6.9 vs. 1.5 per 100,000 workers) and that this industry accounted for over 30 percent of such
occupational mortality in that year.
24
   Much of the prior literature on the health effects of pollution focuses on infant mortality (Chay and Greenstone
2003, Currie and Neidell 2005, Currie et. al. 2009, Greenstone and Hanna 2011, Knittel et. al. 2011).
25
   Observations are weighted by state population in the specified age category. We also examined the mortality of
persons ≥85 but obtained insignificant results for this age group and so omit these finding from Table 6.
                                                                                                           Page 20



0.5%, 0.7% and 0.3% for 55-64, 65-74 and 75-84 year olds, and a statistically insignificant 0.1%

increase in the death rate of prime-working-age (20-54 year old) individuals.

        When adding controls for pollution concentrations (specification b), we see the

hypothesized attenuation of the macroeconomic coefficients for the most vulnerable groups –

infants and older individuals. Specifically, the unemployment coefficient declines, in absolute

value, by 31%, 19%, and 32% for <1, 55-64 and 75-84 year olds, and becomes statistically

insignificant in the last case. It is noteworthy that the large macroeconomic fluctuations in deaths

of 1-19 year olds are not substantially affected by the inclusion of the emissions variables, which

makes sense if these deaths occur for reasons that are largely unrelated to environmental risks. 26

As above, neither PM10 nor O3 is significantly related to the mortality rates of any of the groups,

whereas CO concentrations are predicted to increase death rates for all six age categories.

e. County-Level Results

        In Table 7, we replicate earlier regression results using the county, rather than the state,

as the unit of observation. There are both advantages and disadvantages to using county-level

data. The main advantage is that average state levels of pollution and unemployment may

conceal significant within-state disparities that are lessened by using county data. The major

disadvantage is that there may be more error in the measurement of both mortality and

unemployment rates at smaller units of geographic aggregation. 27 There are also issues of data

comparability across time, since a consistent county unemployment rate series is only available

beginning in 1990. Limiting the analysis to this period would obviously reduce sample sizes and



26
   Consistent with this, accidents were the leading cause of death in 2010 for 1-4, 5-14, and 15-24 year olds –
accounting for 32%, 31% and 41% of mortality for these groups – but were much less important for infants or senior
citizens, where they were responsible for 5% and 2% of fatalities (Murphy, et al., 2012).
27
   The greater measurement error in county than state unemployment rates is well known. Errors in classifying the
county of residence at death have been less studied but Pierce and Denison (2006) provide evidence of substantial
misrecording of counties using mortality data from Texas.
                                                                                                            Page 21



the timespan of analysis. As an alternative, we purchased county-level unemployment data for

earlier years from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) and combined it with the post-1989

information on county unemployment rates. However, the BLS warns that these data are not fully

comparable to those for later years and cautions against their use in this way. There are also no

deaths for some causes or age groups in smaller counties in some years; we replace these zero

values with one so that we can take the natural log. 28 Finally, as detailed next, the sample of

counties is limited to those with pollution monitors located within them or nearby, possibly

reducing the generalizability of the results. For all of these reasons, we treat our county-level

analysis as a robustness check but not necessarily preferable to the main state-level investigation.

        We calculate county pollution levels in two ways. The first, analogous to what we did at

the state level, averages monitor readings in the county, weighted by the percentage of potential

observations from the monitor that are actually observed. 29 PM10, CO and O3 pollution monitors

are available for 923, 394 and 957 counties respectively. We restrict the analysis to 4,148

county-year observations (from 279 counties) where we have measurements for all three

pollutants. The median number of years that counties appear in the sample is 15 (out of 28 total).

        The second method of measuring pollution concentrations takes advantage of the known

location of each monitor (latitude and longitude) and uses all monitors close to a county, (not just

those inside it). Specifically, we follow Currie and Neidell (2005) by calculating a weighted

average of pollution readings from all monitors within 20 miles of the county's population

centroid, weighting by the inverse of the monitor’s distance from the centroid. 30 This




28
   An alternative would be to estimate negative binomial regression models, which can deal with zero death counts
(Miller, et al., 2009), or to drop these observations.
29
   If the county contains only one monitor, pollution readings are obtained directly from it.
30
   County population centroids are calculated by the U.S. Census Bureau, based on the 2000 Census.
                                                                                                                Page 22



substantially increases the number of counties and observations in sample, to 8,944 observations

for 542 counties, since many counties without a pollution monitor do have one nearby. 31

         The mortality measures and age shares are all available at the county level for all years

from the CMF files; however, the demographic and weather variables, which were obtained from

other sources, are available only at the state-year level and so are included in this way in the

regressions. The models also control for county-fixed effects and state-by-year-fixed effects.

         The top half of Table 7 replicates results from Tables 3 and 4, but at the county level. 32

In the first two columns, the negative correlation between total mortality and unemployment

rates is about twice as high as it was at the state level – a one point increase in the county

unemployment rate is predicted to reduce total mortality by around 0.8%. Controlling for the

three pollution measures attenuates the unemployment rate coefficient by around 10%, (versus

more than 30% in the state analysis). The correlation between CO and mortality is 28% higher

than at the state level but we again see no significant predicted effect of the other two pollutants.

         The third through sixth columns present results for deaths from respiratory and ischemic

heart disease, the two causes for which pollution had the largest effect in the state level

regressions (see Table 4). In that analysis, a one point rise in unemployment predicted a

statistically insignificant 0.3% reduction in respiratory deaths. Here, the estimated decrease is a

much larger (and statistically significant) 1.3% decrease. CO is again the only significant

pollutant but its coefficient is smaller than at the state level. Conversely, ischemic heart disease

deaths are estimated to be less procyclical at the county than state level (the unemployment


31
   By contrast, adopting this method at the state level substantially reduces the number of observations, since many
monitored states do not have a monitor within 20 miles of the state population centroid.
32
   Replicating Table 2 at the county level yields results that are somewhat weaker than those at the state level.
Specifically, when using average monitor readings in the county, the air pollution coefficients are about one-half to
one-fifth as large as they were with state-level data. Somewhat stronger and more significant associations are
obtained when using the alternative distance-based measure. Weaker results at the county than state level are
consistent with the previously mentioned hypothesis that county-level data are more error-prone than state data.
                                                                                                               Page 23



coefficient is 0.007, rather than 0.014, and not significant), and the coefficient on CO is only

0.0132 (compared to 0.0587 at the state level) and not significant. Controlling for pollution

attenuates the unemployment rate coefficient by 8% for respiratory deaths and 10% for ischemic

heart disease, again suggesting that the overall macroeconomic effects could partially result from

changes in emissions. 33

         The bottom panel of Table 7 presents county level results using the distance-based

measure of pollution exposure. In these regressions, the evidence of the procyclicality of

mortality is somewhat weaker than in the top panel, while the effects of pollution on mortality

remain strong and largely consistent with prior results (with PM10 also here being positively

associated with total and respiratory mortality). 34 In these models, the unemployment

coefficients are attenuated by 29% for total mortality and 40% to 50% for deaths from

respiratory causes and ischemic heart disease, again consistent with pollution providing a

mechanism for the macroeconomic effects.

f. Comparison to Other Estimates

         The preceding analysis demonstrates that air pollution provides a plausible mechanism

for some of the procyclicality of mortality. Causality is difficult to prove because of the potential

for uncontrolled confounding factors. What we can do, however, is examine whether our

predicted pollution effects are plausible when compared to results from previous research

providing micro-level estimates of the relationship between ambient concentrations and



33
   Mixed results were obtained for other types of mortality (not reported in the table). The county level estimates
indicated procyclicality of deaths from cardiovascular disease, heart attacks, and stroke, but not those from external
causes. CO was only significantly correlated with cardiovascular deaths, and the unexpected positive correlation
between pollution and non-vehicle accident fatalities remained.
34
   Following Chay and Greenstone (2005), we also estimated models using the county's attainment status, defined by
the Clean Air Act's National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQSs), as an instrumental variable for pollution.
Unfortunately, attainment status turned out to be a weak instrument, and so the second-stage coefficients (for
mortality) were insignificant.
                                                                                                Page 24



mortality. This comparison is summarized in Table 8. A detailed description of the methods and

calculations is provided in Appendix B.

       Although the basic procedure is straightforward, there are several issues need to be

addressed. First, our estimates above examined the percent change in mortality predicted by a

one standard deviation change in the specified pollution level. By contrast, earlier research

reports effects of standard units of pollution (e.g. parts per million or 𝜇g/m3), as well as

alternative outcome measures (e.g. deaths per 100,000 or relative risk ratios). Therefore, our first

task was to use conversion factors to make our estimates as comparable as possible to those of

earlier investigations. Second, some previous studies focused on incidence (e.g. of strokes or

heart attacks) rather than mortality rates. In these cases, we make the strong assumption that the

incidence and mortality effects are comparable. Third, the prior research analyzes a limited set of

mortality outcomes, using regression specifications that may be quite different than ours.

       Given these issues, we present point estimates only (no confidence intervals or standard

errors) to highlight that our “back-of-the-envelope” calculations are not meant to provide precise

estimates, but instead a qualitative assessment of how our results compare to those obtained

previously. We should also emphasize that the prior estimates are often imprecise, and that

deviations between our results and those of earlier work do not necessarily indicate biases or

errors in our predictions.

       Table 8 provides consistent, although certainly not definitive, evidence corroborating our

hypothesis that pollution may explain a substantial portion of the procyclicality of mortality.

Based on prior estimates of the effects of pollution on mortality, combined with our results

showing how emissions vary with macroeconomic conditions, pollution is estimated to account

for between 7% to 30% of the procyclicality of mortality in most models, although with smaller
                                                                                                               Page 25



or larger estimates in three cases (columns 4, 6 and 7). Conversely, estimates based fully on our

analysis (including those for the predicted mortality effects of pollution) suggest that air

pollution accounts for 9% to 15% of the cyclical fluctuations, in those cases where we estimate

that it has any effect. 35 The estimates using the two methods are sufficiently similar to suggest

that our anlaysis provides plausible estimates of the role of pollution in accounting for

procyclical variations in mortality.



V. Discussion

         Recent research indicates that mortality increases during times of economic strength and

declines when the economy weakens. This relationship is strongest for the young and old, rather

persons of prime-working age, suggesting that the direct effects of changes in labor market

conditions are unlikely to fully explain these patterns. 36 A plausible alternative is that variations

in other risks explain some of the macroeconomic fluctuation in deaths. One such risk, traffic

fatalities, has been widely studied and universally found to increase when the economy

strengthens. However, a different potential health risk – air pollution – is also likely to depend on

the state of the economy but has not been previously studied. We begin to remedy this

shortcoming by providing an initial investigation of how three types of emissions, carbon

monoxide (CO), particulate matter (PM10), and ozone (O3), fluctuate with macroeconomic

conditions, and whether these variations help to explain observed fluctuations in mortality rates.

         Specifically, we used panel data for 1982-2009 to identify the effect of the

macroeconomy on mortality rates, with and without controls for ambient pollution


35
   We did not find a significantly positive effect of PM10 on deaths from strokes, respiratory or cardiovascular
diseases, so Table 8 reports a zero effect in these cases.
36
   However, there could be indirect effects. For example, working age individuals may have more time during
economic downturns to care for young children or aged parents, resulting in health benefits for these groups.
                                                                                                             Page 26



concentrations. Consistent with previous research, we uncovered a significant negative

correlation between state unemployment and mortality rates, after controlling for state

demographic characteristics and fixed-effects, as well as general year effects. Adding the three

air pollutants to the model attenuated the predicted unemployment rate effect by 30%, consistent

with a substantial role for air pollution. CO concentrations were estimated to be more important

than PM10 or O3 concentrations, but we do not know whether this represents differences in true

health effects, the accuracy of emissions measurement, or correlations with other types of

pollution or uncontrolled confounding factors. 37

        The results for specific causes of death were also largely (but not entirely) consistent with

an important role for air pollution as a mechanism explaining procyclical changes in mortality. In

particular, CO levels had large positive direct estimated effects on fatalities from respiratory

causes, ischemic heart disease and stroke, and their inclusion substantially attenuated the

unemployment rate coefficients in these models. However, the macroeconomic estimates were

imprecise for several causes of death, and the attenuation resulting from including the pollution

controls was modest for some types of cardiovascular mortality. Pollution levels were also

positively associated with non-vehicle accidental deaths for reasons that are not well understood

but could be related to the growth, during economic rebounds, of risky cyclically-sensitive jobs

such as those in construction industries. As a check on the plausibility of our results, we

combined our estimates of the responsiveness of pollution to macroeconomic conditions with the

findings of detailed previous investigations of how pollution affects mortality. The results of this


37
  The toxicity of exposure to high CO levels has long been understood, and recent epidemiological studies also
suggest the dangers of exposure at lower levels, for even relatively brief periods of time (USEPA 2010). Consistent
with this, some recent research (Arceo et. al. 2013, Beatty and Shimshack 2012, Currie and Neidell, 2005) finds a
key role for CO. However, other investigations obtain negative health effects of total suspended particulates (Chay
and Greenstone, 2003) or, in some specifications, PM10 (Knittel et al., 2011). We also link PM10 to mortality in our
estimates using county level data and a distance-based pollution measure (see Table 7). Thus, disentangling between
CO and PM10 mortality effects remains an area with unanswered questions.
                                                                                                              Page 27



analysis further suggest that changes in pollution levels may explain a portion of the observed

procyclical variation in mortality.

          This research should be considered preliminary, rather than definitive, because of some

unexplained results and since many extensions would be desirable. At the most basic level, we

cannot be sure that we are not underestimating or overestimating the true effects of pollution. On

the one hand, our emissions measures are crude, being limited to just three of many types of

pollutants, and may be measured with error, leading to an understatement of the true effects. In

future work it would be useful to control for additional pollutants and to go beyond average

ambient concentrations (e.g. by examining peak levels and fluctuations around the mean). The

use of state level data is also potentially problematic since pollution monitoring is provided for

only a limited set of locations. We partially addressed this by conducting a county-level

investigation, which provided results that were largely but not entirely consistent with findings at

the state-level.

         Furthermore, other robustness checks of our main results met with mixed success. For

instance, in regressions replicating Table 3, but using gross state product (GSP) or average state

personal income as the macroeconomic measure, rather than unemployment rates, the

coefficients on these proxies were positive but not quite significant (the p-values were 0.24 and

0.19), weakly suggesting the procyclicality of mortality. 38 However, controlling for pollution did

not attenuate the estimated macroeconomic effects in these models, suggesting the need for

further research using alternate measures of the business cycle. 39



38
   Data were from the Bureau of Economic Analysis: http://www.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?ReqID=70&step=1.
Both GSP and personal income exhibit a trend, we detrended each state's annual real GSP and personal income
series (in logs) using the Hodrick-Prescott filter (Hodrick and Prescott 1997), with a smoothing parameter of 6.25
for annual data (Ravn and Uhlig 2002).
39
   CO was again the only pollutant that was significantly correlated with mortality.
                                                                                                              Page 28



         We also ran regressions separately for the 1982-1994 and 1995-2009 periods. 40 Recent

studies (Stevens et al., 2011; Ruhm, 2013) indicate that the procyclicality of mortality has

become less pronounced in recent years. Consistent with this, we find that mortality is highly

procyclical from 1982-1994 but not at all, or even slightly countercyclical, from 1995 on. On the

other hand, the positive correlation between CO emissions and mortality is only found after

1995. This suggests that the cyclical behavior of both pollution and emissions has changed over

time, and that additional study is needed to understand these changes.

         Finally, we cannot be sure that an attenuation of the estimated macroeconomic effects

occurring when pollution controls are added to the model reflects a causal relationship rather

than a spurious correlation between emissions and unobserved factors. This may lead to an

overstatement of the true effect of pollution and suggests that alternative strategies, such as

instrumental variables techniques, might be useful.

         Notwithstanding these caveats, our results suggest potential implications for policy. The

findings should certainly not be taken to imply that recessions are beneficial (although they may

slightly less costly than is commonly understood), or used to argue for (or against)

macroeconomic stabilization policies. Indeed, the procyclicality of pollution-induced mortality

could be irrelevant to optimal emissions policy, if the marginal external damages (to which the

marginal price of pollution should be equalized) do not vary over the business cycle. Conversely,

it may be useful to moderate the cyclical fluctuations in pollution if the damages are nonlinear,

or if the elimination or moderation of mortality spikes during expansions is a public policy goal

in its own right. A tradable emissions permits scheme might assist in accomplishing this goal




40
  We break the sample in this way because 1995, which is roughly the midpoint of the full sample period, is the first
year for which PM10 data become available in the majority of states.
                                                                                           Page 29



since the costs of polluting would rise in periods of economic strength, when the demand for

permits is high.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality              Page 30



Bibliography

An R, Liu J (2012) Local Labor Market Fluctuations and Physical Activity Among Adults in the

      United States, 1990-2009. ISRN Public Health, Article 318610, 1-7.

Arceo E, Hanna R, Oliva P (2013) Does the Effect of Pollution on Infant Mortality Differ

      Between Developing and Developed Countries? Evidence from Mexico City. Working

      Paper.

Arkes J (2007) Does the Economy Affect Teenage Substance Use? Health Econ 16, 19-36.

Arkes J (2009) How the Economy Affects Teenage Weight. Soc Sci Med 68, 1943-1947.

Beatty T, Shimshack J (2012) Air Pollution and Children's Respiratory Health: A Cohort

      Analysis. Working Paper.

Böckerman P, et al. (2006) Does a Slump Really Make You Thinner? Finnish Micro-Level

      Evidence 1978-2002. Health Econ 10(5), 9-13.

Brenner MH (1979) Mortality and the National Economy. Lancet 314 (8142), 568-73.

Charles KK, DeCicca P (2008) Local Labor Market Fluctuations and Health: Is there a

      Connection and For Whom? J Health Econ 27, 1532-1550.

Chay K, Greenstone M (2003) The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality: Evidence from

      Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by A Recession. Q J Econ 118, 1121-67.

Chay K, Greenstone M (2005) Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the Housing Market.

      Journal of Political Economy 113, 376-424.

Clancy, L, P Goodman, H Sinclair, D Dockery (2002) Effect of Air Pollution Control on Death

      Rates in Dublin, Ireland: an Intervention Study. Lancet 360, 1210-1214.

Colman GJ, and Dave DM (2011) Exercise, Physical Activity, and Exertion Over the Business

      Cycle. NBER Work Pap 17406.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality               Page 31



Cotti C, Tefft N (2011) Decomposing the Relationship Between Macroeconomic Conditions and

      Fatal Car Crashes During the Great Recession: Alcohol- and Non-Alcohol-Related

      Accidents. B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 11(1 – Topics), Article 48.

Courtemanche C (2009) Longer Hours and Larger Waistlines? The Relationship Between Work

      Hours and Obesity, Forum for Health Economics and Policy 12 (2 – Obesity), Article 2.

Currie J, Neidell M (2005) Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn from

      California’s Recent Experience?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 1003-1030.

Currie J, Neidell M, Schmieder J (2009) Air Pollution and Infant Health: Lessons from New

      Jersey, Journal of Health Economics 28, 688-703.

Dávlos M, et al. (2012) Easing the Pain of an Economic Downturn: Macroeconomic Conditions

      and Excessive Alcohol Consumption. Health Economics 21, 1318-1335.

Dehejia R, Lleras-Muney A (2004) Booms, Busts, & Babies’ Health. Q J Econ 119, 1091-1130.

Dockery DW, Pope CA (1994) Acute Respiratory Effects of Particulate Air Pollution. Annual

      Review of Public Health 15, 107-132.

Dustmann C, Windeijer F (2004) Wages and the Demand for Health – A Lifecycle Analysis.

      Mimeo, University College London, May.

Edwards R (2008) American Time Use Over the Business Cycle. Mimeo, CUNY.

Freeman DG (1999) A Note on ‘Economic Conditions and Alcohol Problems. J Health Econ 18,

      661-70.

Gravelle HSE (1984) Time Series Analysis of Mortality and Unemployment. J Health Econ 3,

      297-305.

Greenstone, M, R Hanna (2011) Environmental Regulations, Air and Water Pollution, and Infant

      Mortality in India. NBER Working Paper #17210.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality              Page 32



Gruber J, Frakes M (2006) Does Falling Smoking Lead to Rising Obesity? J Health Econ 25,

      183-197.

Heutel, G. (2012) How Should Environmental Policy Respond to Business Cycles? Optimal

      Policy under Persistent Productivity Shocks. Review of Economic Dynamics. 15, 244-264.

Hodrick, R, E Prescott (1997) Postwar US Business Cycles: An Empirical Investigation. Journal

      of Money, Credit, and Banking 29, 1-16.

Johansson E, et al. (2006) Alcohol-Related Mortality, Drinking Behavior and Business Cycles’

      Eur J Health Econ 7, 215-220.

Joyce TH, Mocan HN (1993) Unemployment and Infant Health: Time-Series Evidence from the

      State of Tennessee. J Hum Res 28, 185-203.

Knittel C, D Miller, N Sanders (2011) Caution, Drivers! Children Present: Traffic, Pollution, and

      Infant Health. NBER Work Pap 17222.

Laporte A (2004) Do Economic Cycles Have a Permanent Effect on Population Health?

      Revisiting the Brenner Hypothesis. Health Econ 13, 767-79.

McAvinchey ID (1988) A Comparison of Unemployment, Income and Mortality Interaction for

      five European Countries. Appl Econ, 20 (4), 453-71.

Miller DL, et al. (2009) Why Are Recessions Good for Health. Am Econ Rev 99, 122-127.

Murphy, SL, J Xu, and KD Kochanek (2012) Deaths: Preliminary Data for 2010. National Vital

      Statistics Reports 60(4), January 11.

Mustafic H, et al. (2012) Main Air Pollutants and Myocaridal Infarction: A Systematic Review

      and Meta-Analysis. Journal of the American Medical Association 307(7), 713-721.

Neumayer E (2004) Recessions Lower (Some) Mortality Rates. Soc Sci Med 58, 1037-47.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality              Page 33



Peters A, et al. (2004) Exposure to Traffic and the Onset of Acute Myocardial Infarction. New

      Engl J Med 351(17), 1721-30.

Pierce JR, Denison AV (2006) Place-of-residence Errors on Death Certificates for Two

      Contiguous U.S. Counties. Population Health Metrics 4(1), 6.

Ravn M, and H Uhlig (2002) On Adjusting the Hodrick-Prescott Filter for the Frequency of

      Observations. Review of Economics and Statistics 84, 371-376.

Ruhm CJ (1995) Economic Conditions and Alcohol Problems. J Health Econ 14, 583-603.

Ruhm CJ (2000) Are Recessions Good For Your Health? Q J Econ 115, 617-50.

Ruhm CJ. (2003), ‘Good Times Make You Sick’, Journal of Health Economics, 22 (4), 637-658.

Ruhm CJ (2005) Healthy Living in Hard Times. J Health Econ 24, 341-63.

Ruhm CJ (2007) A Healthy Economy Can Break Your Heart’, Demography 44, 829-848.

Ruhm CJ (2012) Understanding the Relationship Between Macroeconomic Conditions and

      Health. In AM Jones (ed.) Elgar Companion to Health Economics, 2nd Edition. Cheltenham,

      UK: Edward Elgar. 5-14.

Ruhm CJ (2013) Recessions, Healthy No More? Mimeo, University of Virginia.

Smith V, Wolloh C. (2012). Has surface water quality improved since the Clean Water Act?

      NBER Work Pap 18192.

Stevens, AH, DL Miller, M Page and M Filipski (2011) The Best of Times, the Worst of Times:

      Understanding Pro-cyclical Mortality, NBER Work Pap 17657.

Tapia Granados JA, Ionides EL (2008) Reversal of the Relationship Between Economic Growth

      and Health Progress: Sweden in the 19th and 20th Centuries. J Health Econ 27, 544-563.

US EPA (2010) Integrated Science Assessment for Carbon Monoxide (Final report).

      EPA/600/R09/019F.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality            Page 34



Wellenius, G, M Burger, B Coull, J Schwartz, H Suh, P Koutrakis, G Schlaug, D Gold, M

      Mittleman (2012) Ambient Air Pollution and the Risk of Acute Ischemic Stroke. Archives

      of Internal Medicine 172, 229-234.

Xu X, Kaestner R (2010) The Business Cycle and Health Behaviors. NBER Work Pap 15737.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                         Page 35



Table 1: Sample Means for Selected Variables
                                                                                 Mean     Standard Error
Emissions
 PM10 concentration (𝜇g/m3)                                                     27.394        0.224
 CO concentration (ppm)                                                          0.885        0.013
 O3 concentration (ppm)                                                          0.052        0.000
State unemployment rate (%)                                                      5.588        0.051
Mortality Rates (per 1000)
 Total                                                                           8.670        0.036
 Respiratory {466-496}, [J20-J47, U04]                                           0.590        0.005
 Cardiovascular {390-448}, [I00-I78]                                             3.403        0.022
 Acute Myocardial Infarction {410}, [I21-I22]                                    0.763        0.009
 Ischemic Heart Disease {410-414}, [I20-I25]                                     1.298        0.022
 Cerebrovascular Disease {430-438}, [I60-I69]                                    0.572        0.004
 Cancer (140-208}, [C00-C97]                                                     1.991        0.009
 Accident {E800-E869, E880-E929}, [V01-X59, Y85-Y86]                             0.399        0.003
 Vehicle Accident {E810-E825}, [V02-V89]                                         0.178        0.002
 Non-vehicle Accident {E800-E807, E826-E949}, [V90-                              0.221        0.002
                        X59, Y85-Y86]
 Suicide {E950-E959}, [X60-X84, Y87.0]                                            0.126       0.001
 Homicide {E960-E978}, [X85-Y09, Y87.1, Y35, Y89.0]                               0.073       0.002
 < 1 year old                                                                     8.275       0.075
 1-19 years old                                                                   0.402       0.003
 20-54 years old                                                                  2.260       0.016
 55-64 years old                                                                 10.680       0.063
  65-74 years old                                                                24.753       0.111
  75-84 years old                                                                57.510       0.172
  ≥ 85 years old                                                                151.246       0.274
State Population Shares
  < 1 year old                                                                   0.014        0.000
  1-19 years old                                                                 0.271        0.001
  20-54 years old                                                                0.497        0.001
  55-64 years old                                                                0.092        0.000
  65-74 years old                                                                0.069        0.000
  75-84 years old                                                                0.042        0.000
  ≥ 85 years old                                                                 0.015        0.000
  Female                                                                         0.514        0.000
  Black (non-Hispanic)                                                           0.120        0.004
  Other nonwhite (non-Hispanic)                                                  0.040        0.001
  Hispanic                                                                       0.070        0.003
  High school incomplete                                                         0.176        0.002
  High school graduate/12th grade completed                                      0.353        0.002
  Some college/<4 years completed                                                0.231        0.002
  College graduate/4+ years completed                                            0.240        0.002
Weather
  Annual precipitation (mm, 00s)                                                37.772        0.440
  Temperature (°F)                                                              52.894        0.224
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                           Page 36



Note: Summary statistics are over the state-year observations, from 1982-2009, including only those 1147
observations for which we have PM10, CO, and O3 concentrations. ICD-9 codes for specific causes of death
categories applying from 1982-1998 are shown in curly brackets; corresponding ICD-10 codes, used from 1999 on
are displayed in square brackets.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                                                                Page 37



Table 2: Relationship between Pollution and Unemployment Rates
                                                                                                  State Emissions Level

      Regressor                                                            PM 10       PM 10        CO              CO               O3              O3
                                                                            (1)         (2)         (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)

      State unemployment rate (%)                                         -0.100**   -0.0930***   -0.0611**     -0.0529*        -0.0704**         -0.0372*
                                                                          (0.0382)    (0.0276)    (0.0274)      (0.0264)         (0.0325)         (0.0219)
      Demographic controls                                                      No      Yes          No            Yes              No               Yes
      Observations                                                          1,147      1,147        1,147         1,147            1,147            1,147
      R-squared                                                             0.816      0.836        0.862         0.887            0.699            0.808
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Standard errors clustered at the state are in parentheses. Dependent variable is the ambient pollution measure (PM10 or
CO), standardized (mean zero, standard deviation one). State- and year-fixed effects are included but not reported. Even-numbered columns also include
controls for the share of state residents who are female, black, other nonwhite, in one of six age groups (<1, 1-19, 55-64, 65-75, 75-84 and ≥85 years old), as well
as the share of ≥25 year olds who are in three education categories (high school graduate without college, some college, college graduate). Regressions are
weighted by the state population. Robust standard errors, clustered at the state level, are reported in parentheses.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                                                                 Page 38



Table 3: Econometric Estimates of the Determinants of Total Mortality
       Regressor
                                                                     (1)           (2)                (3)                   (4)                   (5)

       State unemployment rate (%)                            -0.00354**        -0.00334**       -0.00253**            -0.00338**            -0.00243**
                                                                (0.00142)       (0.00134)         (0.00120)             (0.00142)             (0.00118)
       PM10                                                                      0.00211                                                      -0.000733
                                                                                (0.00277)                                                     (0.00244)
       CO                                                                                         0.0191**                                    0.0192**
                                                                                                  (0.00879)                                   (0.00870)
       O3                                                                                                                0.00420               0.00433
                                                                                                                        (0.00254)             (0.00272)
       R-squared                                                   0.984          0.984              0.985                 0.984                 0.985
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variable is the natural log of the total mortality rate (n=1,147). State- and year-fixed effects are included
but not reported. All models also include controls for the share of state residents who are female, black, other nonwhite, in one of six age groups (<1, 1-19, 55-64,
65-75, 75-84 and ≥85 years old), as well as the share of ≥25 year olds who are in three education categories (high school graduate without college, some college,
college graduate). Regressions are weighted by the state population. Standard errors, clustered at the state level, are reported in parentheses.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                                                                 Page 39




Table 4: Econometric Estimates of the Determinants of Mortality from Specific Diseases
                                             Respiratory              Cardiovascular                                                 Heart Attack
    Regressor
                                          (a)           (b)          (a)            (b)                                            (a)               (b)

      State unemployment rate (%)                             -0.00328          0.000284    -0.00695*** -0.00687***          -0.0198***         -0.0198***
                                                             (0.00458)          (0.00395)    (0.00223)      (0.00231)         (0.00412)          (0.00346)
      PM10                                                                       0.00510                   -0.00770*                              -0.0124
                                                                                (0.00698)                   (0.00400)                             (0.0108)
      CO                                                                        0.0568***                    0.0142*                               0.0289
                                                                                (0.0191)                    (0.00757)                             (0.0238)
      O3                                                                         0.00223                     0.00150                              -0.0117
                                                                                (0.00705)                   (0.00312)                            (0.00858)

                                                             Ischemic Heart Disease                   Stroke                             Cancer
                                                                  (a)              (b)          (a)             (b)                (a)               (b)

      State unemployment rate (%)                            -0.0142**          -0.0129**   -0.0107***    -0.00915***         -0.000492          0.000204
                                                             (0.00533)          (0.00606)    (0.00352)      (0.00297)         (0.00115)         (0.000898)
      PM10                                                                       -0.0166                    -0.00755                             -0.000833
                                                                                (0.0143)                    (0.00547)                            (0.00239)
      CO                                                                         0.0587*                    0.0377**                              0.0129*
                                                                                (0.0312)                     (0.0174)                            (0.00687)
      O3                                                                        -0.00820                     0.00716                              0.00249
                                                                                (0.0127)                    (0.00462)                            (0.00221)
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variables are natural logs of the specified cause-specific mortality rate (n=1,147). All models control for
state- and year-fixed effects and demographic characteristics. Observations are weighted by the state population. Standard errors, clustered at the state level, are
reported in parentheses.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                                                                  Page 40



Table 5: Econometric Estimates of the Determinants of External Causes of Death
                                                          Vehicle Accident                                                    Non-Vehicle Accident
Regressor
                                                      (a)                  (b)                                               (a)                       (b)

State unemployment rate (%)                                                     -0.0306***             -0.0288***         0.00309                  0.00871*
                                                                                (0.00372)              (0.00394)         (0.00521)                 (0.00488)
PM10                                                                                                    0.0111                                     0.0299***
                                                                                                       (0.00942)                                   (0.00993)
CO                                                                                                      0.0137                                     0.0371**
                                                                                                        (0.0127)                                    (0.0163)
O3                                                                                                      0.00191                                     0.0236*
                                                                                                        (0.0116)                                    (0.0131)
                                                                                             Suicide                                  Homicide
                                                                                   (a)                    (b)                (a)                       (b)
State unemployment rate (%)                                                     0.0153***              0.0159***          0.00345                   0.00403
                                                                                (0.00507)              (0.00481)         (0.00977)                 (0.00864)
PM10                                                                                                    0.00442                                     -0.0107
                                                                                                       (0.00728)                                    (0.0214)
CO                                                                                                      -0.00551                                     0.0271
                                                                                                        (0.0108)                                    (0.0427)
O3                                                                                                      0.0116                                      0.00366
                                                                                                       (0.00780)                                    (0.0180)
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variables are the natural logs of the specified cause-specific mortality rate (n=1,147). All models control
for state- and year-fixed effects and demographic characteristics. Observations are weighted by state population. Standard errors, clustered at the state level, are
reported in parentheses.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                                                  Page 41




         Table 6: Econometric Estimates of Determinants of Age-Specific Mortality
                                             < 1 Year Olds             1-19 Year Olds                                     20-54 Year Olds
         Regressor
                                           (a)           (b)          (a)          (b)                                    (a)         (b)

         State unemployment rate (%)                      -0.00876***           -0.00608**   -0.0138***   -0.0131***   0.00128      0.00414
                                                            (0.00266)           (0.00236)     (0.00428)   (0.00393)    (0.00346)   (0.00290)
         PM10                                                                    0.00608                   -0.00452                 0.00151
                                                                                (0.00625)                 (0.00803)                (0.00702)
         CO                                                                     0.0389***                  0.0238*                  0.0480*
                                                                                 (0.0132)                  (0.0124)                 (0.0241)
         O3                                                                      -0.00299                  -0.00466                 0.00453
                                                                                (0.00879)                 (0.00821)                (0.00706)
                                                                 55-64 Year Olds                 65-74 Year Olds          75-84 Year Olds
         VARIABLES
                                                                 (a)               (b)           (a)         (b)          (a)         (b)


         State unemployment rate (%)                       -0.00463**           -0.00373**   -0.00678*** -0.00579***   -0.00284*    -0.00194
                                                            (0.00211)           (0.00178)     (0.00139)   (0.00128)    (0.00159)   (0.00142)
         PM10                                                                    -0.00290                  -0.00227                 -0.00195
                                                                                (0.00415)                 (0.00357)                (0.00218)
         CO                                                                     0.0232**                  0.0216**                 0.0185**
                                                                                (0.00925)                 (0.00824)                (0.00734)
         O3                                                                     -0.000736                 0.000713                  0.00404
                                                                                (0.00448)                 (0.00379)                (0.00245)
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                                                              Page 42




Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variables are natural logs of the specified age-specific mortality rate. All models control for state- and
year-fixed effects and demographic characteristics. Observations are weighted by the state population within each age group. Standard errors, clustered at the
state level, are reported in parentheses
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                                                                 Page 43



Table 7: County-Level Analysis
                                                                  Total Mortality                      Respiratory               Ischemic Heart Disease
Regressor
                                                                (a)                 (b)          (a)                 (b)            (a)                 (b)

                                                                 Counties with Pollution Monitors (n=4,148)
County unemployment rate (%)                             -0.00759***            -0.00685***   -0.0131*         -0.0120*          -0.00719           -0.00644
                                                           (0.00260)             (0.00241)    (0.00713)        (0.00693)        (0.00876)           (0.00863)
PM10                                                                             0.00165                       -0.00194                               0.0104
                                                                                 (0.00366)                     (0.00702)                            (0.00884)
CO                                                                              0.0246***                      0.0390**                               0.0132
                                                                                 (0.00728)                     (0.0165)                              (0.0143)
O3                                                                               0.00176                       -0.000519                             -0.0101
                                                                                 (0.00648)                     (0.00938)                             (0.0111)
                                    Counties with Pollution Monitors within 20 Miles of Population Centroid (n=8,944)
County unemployment rate (%)                               -0.00380*             -0.00270     -0.00602         -0.00346          -0.00166           -0.000854
                                                           (0.00220)             (0.00212)    (0.00557)        (0.00528)        (0.00706)           (0.00680)
PM10                                                                             0.00481*                      0.0139**                             -0.000410
                                                                                 (0.00262)                     (0.00582)                            (0.00792)
CO                                                                              0.0233***                     0.0480***                             0.0277**
                                                                                 (0.00484)                     (0.0129)                              (0.0129)
O3                                                                               -0.00570                      -0.00757                             -0.0190**
                                                                                 (0.00422)                     (0.00990)                            (0.00905)
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. The dependent variables natural logs of the total or cause-specific mortality rate. All models control for county- and state-
by-year fixed effects and demographic characteristics. Regressions are weighted by the county population. In the top panel, analysis is restricted to counties
monitoring all three pollutants. In the bottom panel, analysis includes counties with monitors within 20-miles of the population centroid, with distance-weighted
pollution measures calculated, using procedures detailed in the text. Standard errors, clustered at the county level, are reported in parentheses.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                                                                  Page 44



Table 8: Comparison of Estimated Pollution Effects Based on Previous Research and Current Analysis
                                   (1)               (2)                (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)              (9)
Paper                            Currie           Chay and          Knittel et.   Knittel et.   Mustafic    Mustafic    Clancy et.   Clancy et. al.   Wellenius et.
                                   and           Greenstone         al. (2011)    al. (2011)      et. al.     et. al.   al. (2002)      (2002)         al. (2012)
                                 Neidell           (2003)                                        (2012)      (2012)
                                 (2005)
Pollutant                          CO            TSP/PM10               CO          PM10          CO         PM10         PM10          PM10          PM2.5/PM10
Outcome                          Infant            Infant             Infant       Infant        Heart       Heart      Respiratory Cardiovascular       Stroke
                                mortality         mortality          mortality    mortality     Attacks     Attacks       Deaths       Deaths


                                               Estimated Effect of a One Unit Pollution Increase on Mortality1 Based On:
Previous Research                  18.1            1.00          17.1         18.0       0.0550    0.000600      0.00443               0.00294          0.00103
Current Research                   34.7              1.41               34.7         1.41        0.0715        0         0.000653          0               0
                                                        Change in Cyclical Deaths Explained By Pollution Based On:
Previous Research                 7.2%              11.0%         6.8%       197.24%       7.1%        2.0%        96.6%                30.2%             6.9%
Current Research                  13.7%             15.4%              13.7%        15.4%        9.30%        0%          14.2%           0%              0%
1
 Units are deaths per 100,000 live births (change in death rate), in response to a one-unit change in pollution, in columns 1 through 4 (5 through 9). CO units are
parts per million (ppm); PM10 units are 𝜇g/m3.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                      Page 45



Appendix A: Supplementary Tables
Appendix Table A.1: Relationship between Pollution and Unemployment Rates

                                                                            State Emissions Level

                                                                                          CO
Regressor                                   PM 10            PM 10              CO                     O3         O3
                                                                                          (4)
                                               (1)              (2)             (3)                    (5)        (6)

state unemployment rate (%)                               -0.0930***
                                           -0.100**                        -0.0611**   -0.0529*     -0.0704**   -0.0372*

                                           (0.0382)         (0.0276)        (0.0274)    (0.0264)    (0.0325)    (0.0219)

<1 year old                                                 109.7**                      39.52                  161.8*
                                                            (49.83)
                                                                                        (47.00)                 (84.84)

1-19 years old                                               -11.00                      0.844                  -22.60**

                                                             (7.531)                    (5.701)                 (10.17)

55-64 years old                                             -27.67**                     1.574                   10.83

                                                             (12.54)                    (16.13)                 (10.72)

65-74 years old                                               22.58                     -14.70                   -18.74

                                                             (20.85)                    (15.50)                 (11.30)

75-84 years old                                              -13.11                      15.43                   -33.87

                                                             (25.76)                    (29.41)                 (21.99)

≥85 years old                                                98.54*                     -19.31                  93.21*

                                                             (54.31)                    (51.08)                 (53.28)

female                                                       -0.620                      0.924                   -1.325

                                                             (2.277)                    (2.129)                 (2.566)

black                                                        0.0164                     -2.981                   0.454

                                                             (1.663)                    (1.836)                 (1.836)

other nonwhite                                               -3.024                    -7.334***                -5.121*

                                                             (2.755)                    (2.133)                 (2.827)

Hispanic                                                      1.530                      1.226                   -1.974

                                                             (2.275)                    (1.749)                 (1.434)

high school graduate/12th                                    -1.242                     3.641*                   -1.246
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                        Page 46



 grade completed (age 25+)
                                                             (1.655)                       (1.906)                (1.385)

some college/<4 years                                         0.532                       6.111***                 0.809
 completed (age 25+)
                                                             (1.996)                       (2.022)                (1.840)

college graduate/4+ years                                     1.928                         2.174                  1.281
  completed (age 25+)
                                                             (1.832)                        (1.983)               (2.098)
average annual precipitation                                                              -0.00248**
                                                          -0.0114***                                             -0.0234***

                                                           (0.00255)                      (0.00100)              (0.00244)
average temperature                                                                                              0.122***
                                                           0.0302**                        0.00933

                                                            (0.0135)                       (0.0118)               (0.0212)
constant
                                           1.966***           4.878         1.536***        -1.311     0.304       6.646*

                                            (0.595)          (3.256)            (0.357)    (4.040)     (0.378)    (3.482)

Observations                                 1,147            1,147             1,147       1,147      1,147       1,147

R-squared                          0.816        0.836         0.862         0.887        0.699     0.808
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variable is the ambient pollution measure, standardized
(mean zero, standard deviation one). State- and year-fixed effects are included but not reported. All
regressors other than the unemployment rate refer to state population shares. Regressions are weighted by
state population. Robust standard errors clustered at the state level are in parentheses.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                                                   Page 47




Appendix Table A.2: Econometric Estimates of the Determinants of Total Mortality
       Regressor
                                                                  (1)              (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)

       state unemployment rate (%)                          -0.00354**          -0.00334**   -0.00253**   -0.00338**   -0.00243**
                                                             (0.00142)           (0.00134)    (0.00120)    (0.00142)    (0.00118)
       PM10                                                                       0.00211                               -0.000733   -4.69e-05
                                                                                 (0.00277)                              (0.00244)   (0.00247)
       CO                                                                                    0.0191**                   0.0192**    0.0200**
                                                                                             (0.00879)                  (0.00870)   (0.00881)
       O3                                                                                                  0.00420       0.00433     0.00460
                                                                                                          (0.00254)     (0.00272)   (0.00281)
       <1 year old                                           13.14***           12.91***     12.39***     12.46***      11.76***    10.79***
                                                               (3.581)            (3.357)      (3.205)      (3.739)       (3.258)     (3.383)
       1-19 years old                                        -1.495***          -1.472***    -1.511***    -1.400***     -1.421***   -1.577***
                                                               (0.355)            (0.347)      (0.376)      (0.391)       (0.403)     (0.389)
       55-64 years old                                        2.785**            2.843**     2.755***      2.739**      2.687***    2.648***
                                                               (1.053)            (1.082)      (0.927)      (1.072)       (0.964)     (0.980)
       65-74 years old                                         2.419*             2.371*      2.699**       2.498*       2.799**     2.661**
                                                               (1.288)            (1.295)      (1.089)      (1.312)       (1.107)     (1.072)
       75-84 years old                                       7.165***           7.193***     6.870***     7.307***      7.005***    7.043***
                                                               (2.070)            (2.069)      (1.748)      (2.023)       (1.716)     (1.730)
       ≥85 years old                                         8.275***           8.067***     8.643***     7.884***      8.315***    7.874***
                                                               (2.802)            (2.753)      (2.662)      (2.743)       (2.569)     (2.598)
       female                                                   0.126              0.128        0.109        0.132         0.114       0.139
                                                               (0.153)            (0.154)      (0.136)      (0.153)       (0.135)     (0.135)
       black                                                    -0.109             -0.109     -0.0520        -0.111      -0.0535     -0.0559
                                                               (0.158)            (0.157)      (0.113)      (0.159)       (0.114)     (0.114)
       other nonwhite                                           -0.220             -0.213     -0.0799        -0.198      -0.0588     -0.0532
                                                               (0.199)            (0.200)      (0.194)      (0.198)       (0.192)     (0.198)
       Hispanic                                               -0.0169            -0.0201      -0.0403      -0.00863      -0.0308     -0.0221
                                                               (0.156)            (0.152)      (0.123)      (0.152)       (0.120)     (0.122)
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                                                                 Page 48



       high school graduate/12th                                0.0777             0.0803      0.00824       0.0830            0.0122            0.0209
        grade completed (age 25+)                              (0.0868)           (0.0873)     (0.0904)     (0.0833)          (0.0870)          (0.0891)
       some college/<4 years                                   0.318**            0.317**       0.202*      0.315**            0.198*            0.193*
        completed (age 25+)                                     (0.138)            (0.136)      (0.103)      (0.138)           (0.103)           (0.104)
       college graduate/4+ years                                -0.0651            -0.0691       -0.107      -0.0705            -0.111            -0.109
         completed (age 25+)                                    (0.132)            (0.130)      (0.116)      (0.132)           (0.116)           (0.117)
       average annual precipitation                            5.81e-05           8.21e-05    0.000106     0.000156          0.000199*         0.000210*
                                                             (0.000112)         (0.000100)   (0.000105)   (0.000138)         (0.000117)        (0.000116)
       average temperature                                    -0.000397          -0.000461    -0.000575    -0.000908          -0.00108          -0.00132
                                                             (0.000761)         (0.000796)   (0.000797)   (0.000728)         (0.000798)        (0.000809)
       Observations                                              1,147              1,147        1,147        1,147             1,147             1,147
       R-squared                                                 0.984              0.984        0.985        0.984             0.985             0.985
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Dependent variable is the natural log of the total mortality rate. State- and year-fixed effects are included but not reported.
All regressors other than the unemployment rate refer to state population shares. Regressions are weighted by state population. Robust standard errors clustered
at the state level are in parentheses.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                    Page 49



Appendix B: Estimated Pollution Effects from Our Analysis and Previous Research

          In Table 8, we combined micro-level estimates of the effects of pollution on mortality

rates, obtained from other studies, with our estimates of the relationship between pollution and

the business cycle to predict how a one-percentage-point increase in unemployment would affect

the mortality rate. We then compared these results to those obtained entirely based on estimates

using our analysis sample and procedures. The methods for doing so are described more fully in

this appendix.

          We draw on six previous studies. Currie and Neidell (2005) examine the effect of PM10,

CO, and O3 on infant mortality rates in California. In their preferred specification, a one part per

million (ppm) reduction in CO concentration is correlated with an 18.125 decrease infant deaths

per 100,000 live births. 41 Chay and Greenstone (2003) estimate that a 1 unit (𝜇g/m3) reduction of

total suspended particulates (TSPs) is asscociated with 4-7 fewer infant deaths per 100,000 live

births. 42 In OLS regressions, Knittel et. al. (2011) find significant negative effects of CO

concentrations on infant mortality, but after instrumenting for pollution using traffic and weather

data, they instead obtain significant effects for PM10 concentrations, where a one unit (𝜇g/m3)

reduction is associated with 18 fewer deaths per 100,000 live births. Mustafic et. al.’s (2012)

meta-analysis indicates that a 1 mg/m3 increase in CO concentration increases the relative risk of

heart attacks to 1.048 (a 4.8% increase), and a 10 𝜇g/m3 increase in PM10 concentration

increases the relative risk to 1.006. Clancy et. al. (2002) find that a 35.6 𝜇g/m3 increase in PM10




41
   Like us, they find that only CO is significantly correlated with mortality. In a closely related study of New Jersey,
Currie et al. (2009) estimate that the same CO reduction would eliminate 17.6 infant deaths per 100,000 live births.
42
   To compare our results for PM10 to the results for TSP (an older designation of particulates that includes more
pollutants), we use rule-of-thumb EPA guidelines for comparing different types of particulates, cited in Dockery and
Pope (1994), suggesting that one unit of TSP is equivalent to 0.55 units of PM10.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                  Page 50



concentration decreases respiratory deaths by 15.5% and cardiovascular deaths by 10.3%. 43

Wellenius et. al. (2012) estimate that the odds ratio of stroke onset is 1.11 per 6.4 𝜇g/m3 increase

in PM2.5 concentration. 44

          Table B.1 provides details on the calculations summarized in Table 8. For greater clarity,

we carefully describe the methods and findings in column 1 of that table, which uses results from

Currie and Neidell’s (2005) analysis of the effects of CO exposure on infant mortality in

California. The first row of the table presents our estimate of the cyclicality of pollution, where a

one-percentage-point increase in unemployment predicts a 0.0258 ppm reduction in CO. This

unemployment rate coefficient differs from that shown in Table 2 because the units of CO are

ppm, so as to be comparable with Currie and Neidell (2005). The second row provides our

estimate of the cyclicality of mortality – the unemployment coefficient from a model where

infant mortality is the outcome. We estimate that a one percentage point increase in

unemployment is correlated with 6.53 fewer infant deaths per 100,000 live births. This result

differs from the corresponding estimate in Table 6 because the log (rather than level) of mortality

rates was used there.

          The third row displays Currie and Neidell’s (2005) previously described estimate that a

one ppm increase in CO causes 18.125 additional deaths per 100,000 live births. The fourth row,

“Δ in Cyclical Deaths Explained” is the product of the first and third rows (-0.0258 × 18.125),

and indicates how the pollution reduction induced by a one percentage point increase in the

unemployment rate is expected to decrease infant mortality, based on Currie and Neidell's (2005)


43
   Clancy et. al. (2002) actually study a pollutant called "black smoke," or "British smoke." The EPA finds that black
smoke is equivalent to PM10 (Dockery and Pope 1994).
44
   The EPA's guidelines for comparing PM2.5 to PM10 suggest that one unit of PM2.5 is equivalent to 1.67 units of
PM10 (Dockery and Pope 1994). Wellenius et. al. (2012) reports the effect of a 6.4 𝜇g/m3 change in PM2.5 because
that is the interquartile range of pollution exposure in their study. We convert this to an impact of a 1 𝜇g/m3 change
by simply dividing the effect by 6.4.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                 Page 51



estimate of how CO is related to the infant death rate. The resulting expected reduction of 0.468

deaths per 100,000 live births is then divided by the estimated total reduction of 6.53 deaths per

100,000 live births from a one point increase in unemployment (shown in row 2), to imply that

the share of the procyclicality of infant deaths due to the cyclicality of pollution is 7.2% (-

0.468/6.53). This is shown in the fifth row and labeled “Pollution Share of Cyclical Deaths”.

          The sixth through eighth rows of Table B.1 present corresponding results based purely on

the estimates developed in this analysis. Row 6 shows our prediction that a one unit increase in

pollution (in the same units as the comparison paper) will increase infant mortality by almost

twice as much as was found by Currie and Neidell (34.7 vs. 18.1 deaths per thousand live

births). 45 The seventh and eighth rows repeat the calculations in rows (4) and (5), except using

our result for how pollution affects mortality. Thus, the “Δ in Cyclical Deaths Explained” is -

0.8953 (-0.0258 × 34.70) and the “Pollution Share of Cyclical Deaths” is 13.7% (-0.8953/6.53).

          The remaining columns of Table 8 show results using other research on the link between

pollution and health. Using Chay and Greenstone's (2003) results, PM10 pollution accounted for

11.0% of the procyclicality of infant mortality. The point estimate based on our analysis is about

40% larger, although not statistically significant. Knittel et. al.’s (2011) OLS regressions find CO

effects comparable to those in Currie and Neidell (2005). However, their IV regressions instead

show a PM10 effect, and one that is an order of magnitude greater than our estimates or those of

Chay and Greenstone (2003). Using this result, the predicted contribution of pollution-induced

mortality cyclicality is twice as big as the total change in deaths (see column 4). If correct, this

finding implies that other cyclical changes, besides that of PM10, would make the infant

mortality rate countercyclical.


45
  Currie and Neidell (2005), and the papers in columns 2 through 4, consider death rates per 100,000 live births; we
evaluate death rates per 100,000 <1 year olds. Here we assume that these death rates are equivalent.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                    Page 52



          Columns 5 through 9 compare our results with those from medical studies, where

mortality effects are reported in terms of relative risk or odds ratio, which we describe as

percentage changes (i.e. a relative risk of 1.05 equals a 5% increase). In column 5, Mustafic et.

al. (2012) report that a one-unit increase in CO raises heart attack incidence by 5.5%. 46 Our

estimate (for heart attack deaths) is 7.2%, or about one-and-a-half times as large. When

combining our estimate of the procyclicality of CO with Mustafic et. al.’s (2012) estimate of

heart attack incidence, pollution accounts for 7.1% of the overall procyclicality of heart attack

mortality. Using just our estimates, 9.3% of the procyclicality is accounted for. Mustafic et. al.

(2012) also report results for PM10 on heart attacks (column 6) which, combined with our

estimates of the effects of the economic conditions on PM10 levels, indicates that the cyclicality

of PM10 accounts for 2.0% of the change in deaths from heart attacks. Clancy et. al. (2002) find

significantly positive effects of PM10 on both respiratory and cardiovascular deaths. According

to our calculations, these account for 97% and 30% of the procyclical variations in mortality

from these causes. Conversely, our analysis fails to uncover a significantly positive effect of

PM10 on deaths from either cause (unemployment coefficient is negative for the latter), so we

report zero effects. We do estimate that changes in PM10 are responsible for around 14% of the

procyclical variation in cardiovascular mortality, one-sixth as large as that predicted using

Clancy et al.’s 2002 estimates. Finally, Wellenius et. al. (2012) find a significant effect of PM2.5

on stroke incidence, which appears to explain around 7% of the procyclicality of stroke

mortality. 47 Once again, we do not find any relationship between PM10 (our closest equivalent

to PM2.5) and deaths from strokes, so that none of the macroeconomic variation in stroke

mortality is explained.

46
   Mustafic et. al. (2012) reports relative risk on heart attack incidence (not mortality) for a 1 mg/m3 increase in CO
concentrations; we adjust to the standard units of CO with the conversion factor 1 mg/m3 = 0.873 ppm.
47
   Wellenius et. al. (2012) also report odds ratios for stroke incidence rather than mortality.
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                                                                  Page 53



Table B.1: Estimated Pollution Effects Using Results from Previous Research
                                   (1)               (2)                (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)           (8)              (9)
Paper                            Currie           Chay and          Knittel et.   Knittel et.   Mustafic    Mustafic    Clancy et.   Clancy et. al.   Wellenius et.
                                   and           Greenstone         al. (2011)    al. (2011)      et. al.     et. al.   al. (2002)      (2002)         al. (2012)
                                 Neidell           (2003)                                        (2012)      (2012)
                                 (2005)
Pollutant                          CO           TSP/PM106               CO          PM10          CO         PM10         PM10          PM10          PM2.5/PM107
Outcome                         Infant             Infant             Infant       Infant        Heart       Heart      Respiratory Cardiovascular       Stroke
                               mortality          mortality          mortality    mortality     Attacks     Attacks       Deaths       Deaths

                      Estimate of Cyclicality of Pollution and Mortality, Based on Current Analysis

Cyclicality of                  –0.0258             –0.716           –0.0258       –0.716       –0.0258      –0.716       –0.716        –0.716           –0.716
Pollution1
Cyclicality of                    –6.53             –6.53              –6.53        –6.53       –0.0199     –0.0199      –0.00328      –0.00695         –0.0107
Mortality2
        Estimate of Pollution as Mechanism for Cyclical Variation in Mortality, Based on Previous Research
Pollution on                       18.1              1.00               17.1         18.0        0.0550     0.000600     0.00443       0.00294          0.00103
Mortality3
∆ in Cyclical                    –0.468             –0.716            –0.441        –12.9       –0.00142    –.000400     –0.00317      –0.00210        –0.000737
Deaths Explained4
Pollution Share of               7.17%              11.0%             6.75%         197%         7.14%       2.01%        96.6%         30.2%            6.89%
Cyclical deaths5
        Estimate of Pollution as Mechanism for Cyclical Variation in Mortality, Based on Current Analysis
Pollution on                       34.7              1.41               34.7         1.41        0.0715        0         0.000653          0               0
Mortality1
∆ in Cyclical                    –0.896             –1.01             –0.896        –1.01       –0.00185       0        –0.000467          0               0
Deaths Explained4
Pollution Share of               13.7%              15.4%             13.7%        15.4%         9.30%        0%          14.2%           0%              0%
Cyclical deaths 5
Garth Heutel and Christopher J. Ruhm: Air Pollution and Procyclical Mortality                                                                                Page 54



1
  Unemployment rate coefficient from regression where dependent variable is pollution concentration (not normalized).
2
  Unemployment rate coefficient from regression where dependent variable is mortality rate (in deaths per 100,000) in columns 1 through 4 and log mortality rate
in columns 5 through 9).
3
  Units are deaths per 100,000 live births (change in death rate), in response to a one-unit change in pollution, in columns 1 through 4 (5 through 9). CO units are
parts per million (ppm); PM10 units are 𝜇g/m3.
4
  Calculated as the product of “Cyclicality of Pollution” and “Pollution on Mortality”.
5
  Calculated as “∆ in Cyclical Deaths Explained” divided by “Cyclicality of Mortality”.
6
  Chay and Greenstone study TSP. We compare to our results from PM10, using the EPA guidelines for comparing the two pollutants (Dockery and Pope 1994).
7
  Wellenius et. al. study PM2.5. We compare to our results from PM10, using the EPA guidelines for comparing the two pollutants (Dockery and Pope 1994).
