                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       TESTING MACROPRUDENTIAL STRESS TESTS:
                        THE RISK OF REGULATORY RISK WEIGHTS

                                           Viral V. Acharya
                                            Robert Engle
                                            Diane Pierret

                                        Working Paper 18968
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18968


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2013




The authors thank supporters of the Volatility Institute of the Stern School at NYU for financial support
that made this research possible. Thanks go to the Sloan Foundation, the Banque de France, the University
of New South Wales, the Universite de Lausanne, Deutsche Bank, Blackrock and the Michael Armellino
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Viral V. Acharya, Robert Engle, and Diane Pierret. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Testing Macroprudential Stress Tests: The Risk of Regulatory Risk Weights
Viral V. Acharya, Robert Engle, and Diane Pierret
NBER Working Paper No. 18968
April 2013
JEL No. G01,G11,G21,G28

                                                 ABSTRACT

Macroprudential stress tests have been employed by regulators in the United States and Europe to
assess and address the solvency condition of financial firms in adverse macroeconomic scenarios.
We provide a test of these stress tests by comparing their risk assessments and outcomes to those from
a simple methodology that relies on publicly available market data and forecasts the capital shortfall
of financial firms in severe market-wide downturns. We find that: (i) The losses projected on financial
firm balance-sheets compare well between actual stress tests and the market-data based assessments,
and both relate well to actual realized losses in case of future stress to the economy; (ii) In striking
contrast, the required capitalization of financial firms in stress tests is found to be rather low, and inadequate
ex post, compared to that implied by market data; (iii) This discrepancy arises due to the reliance on
regulatory risk weights in determining required levels of capital once stress-test losses are taken into
account. In particular, the continued reliance on regulatory risk weights in stress tests appears to have
left financial sectors under-capitalized, especially during the European sovereign debt crisis, and likely
also provided perverse incentives to build up exposures to low risk-weight assets.


Viral V. Acharya                                        Diane Pierret
Stern School of Business                                Volatility Institute, Stern School of Business
New York University                                     New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84                          44 West 4th Street, KMC 9-66
New York, NY 10012                                      New York, NY 10012
and CEPR                                                dpierret@stern.nyu.edu
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu

Robert Engle
Department of Finance, Stern School of Business
New York University, Salomon Center
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-160
New York, NY 10012-1126
and NBER
rengle@stern.nyu.edu
1. Introduction

    Since the financial crisis of 2008, macroprudential stress tests have become a standard
tool used by regulators to assess the resilience of financial systems. Macro stress tests have
been designed to help macroprudential regulation, which essentially aims at preventing the
costs of financial distress to spread to the real economy (Acharya et al. (2009, 2010a,b,
2012); Borio and Drehmann (2009); Hanson et al. (2011); Hirtle et al. (2009)). Therefore,
macro stress tests focus on a group of financial institutions that, taken together, can have
an impact on the economy (Borio et al. (2012)) and create systemic risk. Macroprudential
regulation of these institutions reduces the probability and the cost of a financial crisis by
forcing institutions to internalize their contribution to systemic risk.
    However, concerns have been raised that macro stress tests do not serve the goal of
macroprudential regulation as they should. Greenlaw et al. (2012) argue that macro stress
tests are still microprudential in nature since they focus on the solvency of individual institu-
tions. They also remain microprudential as they fail to characterize the ’endogenous’ nature
of systemic risk (Borio and Drehmann (2009); Galati and Moessner (2011)). According to
Borio and Drehmann (2009), macro stress tests “risk lulling policymakers in a false sense of
security” as they fail to provide real-time ex ante measurement of systemic risk.
    Macro stress tests are also strongly dependent on Basel regulation defining measures
(the capital ratios) of the financial performance of banks. Hanson et al. (2011) show that
the capital ratios give incentives to banks to shrink their assets, which in turn leads to the
amplification of financial distress. More recent concerns focus on the denominator of capital
ratios (the risk-weighted assets) where the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2013)
recognizes in a recent survey the inconsistency of risk weights measurement across banks.
Haldane (2011, 2012) also raises fears over the complexity and the robustness of risk weights
and calls for simpler market-based metrics.
    In this paper, we test macroprudential stress tests (including the most recent ones) by
comparing their outcomes to those from a simple methodology that relies on publicly avail-
able market data (see Acharya et al. (2010a,b, 2012); Brownlees and Engle (2011)).1 The
proposed measure (SRISK) represents the capital shortfall a financial institution would need
to raise during a crisis, and is available on the NYU Volatility Laboratory website (Vlab).2
Vlab methodology is viewed in this paper as a benchmark to macro stress tests that addresses

   1
    Other surveys on macroprudential stress tests include Alfaro and Drehmann (2009); Borio et al. (2012);
Greenlaw et al. (2012); Hirtle et al. (2009); Schuermann (2012).
  2
    http://Vlab.stern.nyu.edu/


                                                    2
many of the above concerns.
    The test of macroprudential stress tests comprises three steps, namely: (i) We compare
projected losses from stress tests to market-implied losses and actual realized losses; (ii)
We compare required capital shortfalls of stress tests to the market-implied capital shortfall
SRISK; and (iii) we consider the efficacy of regulatory risk weights and outline incentives
created by the reliance on risk weights in asset portfolio decisions of banks.
    Our assessment of regulatory stress tests reveals that the projected losses of stress tests
and Vlab correlate well and both predict well the actual realized losses of banks under severe
economic conditions. In striking contrast, the required capitalization of financial firms in
stress tests is found to be rather low, and inadequate ex post, compared to SRISK. We
document that this discrepancy arises due to the reliance on regulatory risk weights in
determining required levels of capital once stress-test losses are taken into account.
    The deviation with Vlab is even greater when the impact of the stress scenario is trans-
lated into higher risk weights (as in European stress tests) since the stressed risk weights are
uncorrelated to the actual risk of banks during a crisis. Furthermore, Basel risk standards
are proven to provide no incentives for banks to diversify as risk weights ignore the subad-
ditivity feature of portfolio risk. Therefore, firms tend to concentrate their entire portfolio
on one asset category or exposure according to a false risk weight, and the underestimation
of risk weights (as banks use their own models in Basel II) automatically leads to excess
leverage.
    This reliance on regulatory risk weights appears to have not only left financial sectors
under-capitalized (especially during the European sovereign debt crisis), but likely also pro-
vided perverse incentives to build up exposures to low risk-weight assets. Overall, we argue
that stress tests relying on Basel risk regulation are not sufficient because (a) the increase
of risk over time cannot be captured ex ante without market-based measures, and (b) risk
weights are flawed cross-sectionally as banks can game their risk-weighted assets, i.e. take
advantage of (a) to reduce their regulatory capital requirements. Without using market
measures of risk, a capital requirement based on the size and leverage of banks delivers more
consistent results than the risk-based capital shortfall of stress tests.
    The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 introduces macroprudential stress
tests and Vlab. We test the stressed losses of stress tests in Section 3 and the stressed capital
ratios and shortfalls in Section 4. The efficacy of regulatory risk weights is tested in Section
5.




                                               3
2. Stress tests and Vlab
2.1. Macroprudential stress tests sample
    We consider stress tests conducted on a US and EU-wide level. These stress tests can be
qualified as macroprudential stress tests as opposed to microprudential stress tests conducted
on a bank-level as a requirement under the Pillar II of Basel II (Internal Capital Adequacy
Assessment Process (ICAAP)). Other macroprudential stress tests, not discussed here, were
undertaken by national authorities (e.g. Ireland, UK, Spain) and by the International Mon-
etary Fund.
    The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve has been responsible for conducting
macroprudential stress tests in the US. A first stress test exercise called the Supervisory
Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) was launched in 2009 as a response to the 2008 financial
crisis. With the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010, an annual supervisory stress test of the US financial
system became a requirement, and the Fed’s capital plans rule of 2011 required all US bank
holding companies with consolidated assets of $50 billion or more to develop and submit
capital plans to the Federal Reserve on an annual basis. As a result, the Federal Reserve
conducted stress tests as part of the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR)
in 2011, 2012 and 2013.
    EU-wide stress tests were initiated by the Committee of European Banking Supervisors
(CEBS) in 2009 and 2010. The CEBS became the European Banking Authority (EBA) on
January 1, 2011, which coordinated a new stress test the same year. As opposed to US stress
tests by the Federal Reserve, European stress tests are conducted in a bottom-up fashion:
banks submit their stress test results to national supervisory authorities (NSAs) for review
before NSAs submit to the EBA. For this reason, the EBA qualifies the EU-wide stress test
exercise as a microprudential stress test. These stress tests are however the outcome of a
global macroeconomic scenario defined by the European Central Bank (ECB) and share the
objective of an overall assessment of systemic risk in the EU financial system.
    Stress tests can have different goals depending on their context: the SCAP 2009 is a good
example of a crisis management tool as opposed to pre-emptive, forward-looking stress tests
that followed. The EBA 2011 disclosed in July 2011 also served as a confidence-building tool
during the European sovereign debt crisis. The EBA Capital Exercise released in December
2011 is not a stress test but has been an additional tool to restore market confidence with
the recommendation and the creation of an exceptional and temporary capital buffer.
    The disclosure level of a stress test outcome is a very strategic decision of the regulator
that is well discussed in Goldstein and Sapra (2012), Petrella and Resti (2013) and Schuer-


                                              4
mann (2012). Some stress tests only disclose the stress scenario; other stress tests disclose an
aggregate outcome of the stress scenario. On the opposite, the EBA 2011 stress test has an
unprecedented level of transparency for the EU banking system. The amount of information
at the bank level is very high and downloadable in an excel file from the EBA website.3 To
our knowledge, only three US and two EU-wide macroprudential stress tests publicly dis-
closed a bank-level outcome of the stress test exercise; the SCAP 2009, the CCAR 2012 and
the CCAR 2013 in the US; the CEBS 2010 and the EBA 2011 in the European Union. These
five macroprudential stress tests with bank level disclosure are the sample of stress tests of
this paper. Their outcomes and the outcome of the EBA Capital Exercise are summarized
in Tables 1 (US) and 2 (EU).

2.2. An alternative to stress tests: Vlab
    Next to stress tests conducted by US and European regulators, a team of researchers
at NYU Stern School of Business developed an alternative methodology to measure the
systemic risk of financial institutions purely based on publicly available information (see
Acharya et al. (2010a, 2012); Brownlees and Engle (2011)). The results of this methodology
are available on the Volatility Laboratory website (Vlab), where systemic risk rankings are
updated weekly both globally and in the United States (see http://Vlab.stern.nyu.edu/).
The systemic risk measure (SRISK) of Vlab represents the capital an institution would need
to raise in the event of a crisis. SRISK of a financial institution depends on its size, its
leverage and its stock return during a crisis (Long-Run Marginal Expected Shortfall), where
the crisis is defined by a 40% fall in aggregate market equity over a six-month time window.
    The Long-Run Marginal Expected Shortfall (LRMES) captures the co-movement of a
firm with the market index; LRMES is the average of a firm’s returns across the simulation
paths where the market return falls by 40% over six months (see Brownlees and Engle
(2011)).4 Defining M V as today’s market capitalization of a firm, LRM ES ∗ M V is the
expected market cap loss that equity holders would face during the 6-month crisis scenario.
The capital shortfall of a firm (SRISK) is then derived assuming the book value of its debt
(D) stays unchanged over the six-month scenario while its market cap falls by LRM ES ∗M V

        SRISK = E [k(D + M V ) − M V |crisis] = kD–(1 − k)(1 − LRM ES) ∗ M V,                    (1)

  3
    http://www.eba.europa.eu/EU-wide-stress-testing/2011/2011-EU-wide-stress-test-results.aspx
  4
    The equity market return is the S&P500 for US banks, the MSCI ACWI World ETF index for European
banks. Note that for European banks, the long run simulation is not yet implemented and LRMES is
approximated by 1-exp(-18*MES) where MES is the expected daily return of the bank if the daily market
return is less than -2%.

                                                 5
where k is the prudential capital ratio.
    Vlab uses a prudential capital ratio k of 8% for US banks and a milder k of 5.5% for
European banks to account for the difference in leverage due to different accounting standards
in the two regions: EU banks report under IFRS whereas US banks report under US GAAPs.
Under US GAAPs, banks are allowed to report their derivatives on a net basis. The netting
of derivatives is most of the time not allowed under IFRS norms leading to a substantial
increase of the size of the balance sheet. Engle et al. (2012) indicate that the total assets of
large US banks would be between 40% and 60% larger under IFRS than under US GAAPs.
    As the stress is on the market value of equity, Vlab methodology can be viewed as a mark-
to-market stress test. Vlab does not have the information granularity of the supervisory
data of regulatory stress tests but the use of publicly available market data allows for real-
time forward looking measures. Moreover, the simplicity of the Vlab scenario compared to
the complex multi-factor scenarios of stress tests makes Vlab outcomes robust to various
economic environments. Vlab is therefore used as a macroprudential benchmark in the
assessment of regulatory stress tests outcomes. Differences in scenarios and data of Vlab
and regulatory stress tests are further discussed in Appendix A.
    We show the aggregate output of common banks between stress tests and Vlab in Table
3. All the banks in US and EU stress tests are not available in Vlab mainly because some
banks in the stress tests samples are not publicly traded. Vlab reports the results of 18 of
the 19 US BHCs (all except Ally Financial Inc.) and close to 60% of the banks in European
stress tests.
    In the next sections, we test the outcome of stress tests against this market-implied
benchmark and banks’ real outcomes during the European sovereign debt crisis. We first
test the projected losses of stress tests against the market capitalization loss of Vlab and
actual realized losses in Section 3. Second, we test the capital requirements implied by
stress tests against SRISK in Section 4. This two-step test allows disentangling the effect of
different stress scenarios that directly impact projected losses, from the impact of different
risk measures. Then, a third test compares the regulatory risk weights of stress tests and
the market risk weight of Vlab with realized measures of risk in Section 5.

3. Testing stressed losses

   Stress test models translate the stress scenario into a bank outcome. The most direct
impact of the stress scenario should be visible on banks’ projected losses. We show that,
despite different scenarios, data and models, stress tests losses and Vlab losses correlate well,


                                               6
and both predict well the ranking of banks realized losses under severe economic conditions.

3.1. Stress tests vs. Vlab losses
    We compare the projected losses of stress tests with Vlab market cap loss (M V ∗LRM ES)
in Table 3. From this table, we notice the important gap between the “Loss” and the “Net
Loss” of stress tests (especially in Europe) due to the effect of projected revenues under the
stress scenario. The net loss is the main driver of capital diminution under stress and is
the accounting equivalent of the Vlab loss. However, the order of amplitude of Vlab losses
is similar to the amplitude of ’pure’ losses of stress tests that do not include the stressed
revenues. Moreover, Vlab loss is a six-month loss whereas stress tests losses are projected
over two years. Vlab market cap loss therefore appears more severe than the stress tests
capital losses.
    The rank correlations of Vlab loss with the total losses of stress tests are very high and
significant in all stress tests (see Table 4, panel A). Huang et al. (2012) do the same test
for the SCAP and find that the stress test losses are well correlated to several market-based
measures of systemic risk;5 our rank correlation estimate of 0.68 is close to their estimate of
0.67 for the Marginal Expected Shortfall (MES) of Acharya et al. (2010b).6 We also report
the correlations of Vlab loss with the stress tests loan losses and trading losses since they are
the most important sources of losses (85%) according to the CCAR 2012. The correlations
of Vlab loss with the loan and trading losses are also very high and significant, making Vlab
ranking and the ranking of losses under supervisory stress scenarios very consistent.
    The correlations of Vlab loss with the total net loss (including stressed revenues) are
smaller for all stress tests and negative in Europe; banks with higher profits under the EBA
and CEBS stress scenarios are predicted to have higher losses in Vlab. Some banks are
actually reporting positive profits under the stress scenario of stress tests where modeling
assumptions on revenues cover the stressed losses.7 The profits are then reported in the

   5
     The Marginal Expected Shortfall (MES) of Acharya et al. (2010b), the CoVaR of Adrian and Brun-
nermeier (2010), and the marginal contribution to the Distress Insurance Premium (DIP) of Huang et al.
(2009).
   6
     With the difference that Huang et al. (2012) use the marginal expected shortfall (MES) instead of the
long-run counterpart LRMES, and the MES is multiplied by the Tier 1 capital instead of the market cap.
   7
     First, the stress scenario is not an absolute scenario as in Vlab but is defined as a deviation from a
baseline scenario. If some banks are projected to make large profits in the baseline scenario, they will make
lower but still positive profits under the adverse scenario. Second, the EBA explains that the stress scenario
may lead to a higher net interest income where some banks assume that the impact of higher interest rates
will be passed onto customers without a corresponding increase in the cost of funding for the bank. Then,
the EBA considers a directional market risk stress test; depending on the direction of their exposures banks
can realize trading gains on certain portfolios.

                                                      7
balance sheet so that the divergence with Vlab is also visible in capital changes. We show in
Figure 1 that the projected profits under the EBA stress scenario lead to increasing capital
levels for many banks with the largest Vlab losses.

3.2. Predicting banks’ real losses during the European sovereign debt crisis
    It is important to note that stress tests outcomes are not a usual forecast; it is a forecast
conditional on a specific adverse macro-economic scenario. Ideally, we would compare stress
tests outcomes to the real outcomes of banks during a period where the state of the world
is exactly the same as described in the stress scenario. The exact stress scenario does not
occur in reality so we select stress tests followed by a period where the economic conditions
sufficiently deteriorate to pretend it is a realization of the stress scenario.
    Figure 2 illustrates the disclosure dates of the different stress tests (vertical bars) to-
gether with the six-month forward return of three indices: a US (S&P500), a European
(Eurostoxx50) and a global index (MSCI ACWI World). The figure shows that only two
stress tests are followed by a global economic downturn: the CCAR 2011 in the US and the
EBA 2011 in the EU. The CCAR 2011 was disclosed on March 18, 2011 and the EBA 2011
on July 15, 2011. However, only the EBA 2011 discloses a bank-level output of the stress
test exercise. Five months later, the disclosure of the EBA Capital Exercise on December
8, 2011 is followed by a more mixed performance of the economy: the European and world
index returns are still slightly negative, but the S&P500 is positive again.
    We focus on the EBA 2011 stress test to assess the forecasting performance of Vlab
and stress tests, as it is the only stress test with bank-level disclosure followed by a global
economic downturn. The realized returns from 06/30/2011 to 12/31/2011 of the S&P500,
the Eurostoxx50 and the ACWI World index are respectively -4.89%, -20.67%, and -13.47%.
This outcome is less severe than the Vlab scenario (40% decline in the World equity index)
and is closer to the ECB scenario (15% decline in stock prices in the Euro area).
    Table 5 shows the similar performance of Vlab and the EBA in forecasting the actual
ranking of banks realized outcomes during the European sovereign debt crisis. We consider as
realized outcomes the realized loss (panel A) and the realized return (panel B). The realized
return of bank i at time t is − t+1+W
                                 P
                                    t+1    ln(pit /pit−1 ), where pit is the stock price of the bank
and its realized loss is defined by
                                                        t+1+W
                                                         X
                        Realized lossi,t,W = −M Vit ∗           ln(pit /pit−1 )                 (2)
                                                         t+1


where M Vit is the market-value of equity (all converted in Euros), t = 06/30/2011 and

                                                 8
W = 130 (six months).8
    For predicting realized losses (panel A), Vlab market cap loss has the highest rank corre-
lation (0.832) with the six-month realized loss. However, size only (measured by the market
cap) appears to be one of the most important factors predicting the realized ranking with a
correlation of 0.812. The size indeed explains most variations among banks stress test results
(more than 50% as shown by a principal component analysis on the EBA 2011 output). In
order to make other systemic risk factors apparent, the subsamples of (very) large banks
(with Core Tier 1 capital over 19 $ bn) and small banks are treated separately.9 The 15
large banks include HSBC, Barclays, BNP Paribas, Deutsche Bank, etc. and are comparable
to the 19 US BHCs.
    When we look at correlations in the small and large subsamples, the EBA projected total
losses are a better predictor of the ranking of realized losses of large banks than Vlab. The
correlation of the realized loss with the EBA projected total net loss is negative (except
for large banks) since many banks with positive projected profits in the stress test actually
endured the highest losses during the sovereign debt crisis.
    For predicting realized returns (panel B), the estimated core Tier 1 capital return over
the EBA stress scenario is a better predictor of the ranking of realized six-month returns,
but Vlab long-run marginal expected shortfall (LRMES) predicts better the amplitude of
realized returns according to the root mean square error (RMSE).

4. Testing stressed capital ratios and shortfalls

    Capital ratios are the most important output of stress tests. They determine which
bank failed the test under the stress scenario and the following supervisory measures or
recapitalization plans. In US Dodd-Frank-Act stress tests, banks have to pass regulatory
thresholds on four ratios each quarter of the stress scenario: the Tier 1 Common Capital
Ratio (T1CR), the Tier 1 Capital Ratio (T1R), the Total Risk-Based Capital Ratio (Total
CR) and the Tier 1 Leverage Ratio (T1 LVGR).10 The only ratio to be passed in the EBA
stress test is the Core Tier 1 Capital Ratio, which is considered equivalent to the US definition

   8
     Data source for stock prices and exchange rates: Datastream. Data source for market caps: Vlab. To
compare Vlab and EBA forecasting performance, Vlab results are downloaded on the closest date (June 30,
2011) prior the disclosure of the EBA results in July 2011.
   9
     The groups of small and large banks were defined according to a hierarchical clustering analysis on the
output of the EBA 2011 stress test.
  10
     The disclosed ratios are actual ratios before the stress scenario (actual), stressed ratios at the end of the
stress scenario (projected) assuming all capital actions, and minimum ratios over the 9 quarters of the stress
scenario (min) assuming all capital actions or assuming no capital actions.

                                                        9
of the T1CR. The ratios of four stress tests are reported in Tables 1 (CCAR 2012 and 2013)
and 2 (CEBS 2010 and EBA 2011), before and after the application of the stress scenario.
    The numerators of ratios are different qualities of capital based on Basel requirements:
the Tier 1 common or core capital, the Tier 1 capital, and the Total Risk-Based Capital. Tier
1 common capital (US) and Core Tier 1 capital (EU) are the closest to common shareholders
equity. The Total Risk-Based Capital is the addition of Tier 1, Tier 2, and possibly additional
Tier 3 capital to cover market risk activities. As for the denominator, the T1 LVGR is the
only ratio defined in terms of total assets (average of total assets over the last quarters), the
denominators of all other ratios are the risk-weighted assets (RWA).
    In order to comply with the regulatory ratio thresholds, banks can either increase their
numerator (raise capital) or decrease their denominator (sell assets). As the regulator do
not care how banks increase their ratios, banks meeting difficulties to raise fresh capital in
bad times are incited to shrink their asset base instead. Multiple firms shrinking their assets
then have the potential to create a credit crunch and fires sales, leading to the worsening
of the credit crisis (Hanson et al. (2011)). Instead of relying on ratios, the SCAP 2009
lead to a substantial recapitalization of the US financial system by forcing 10 bank holding
companies to raise a 75 $ bn capital buffer. After the failure of the EBA 2011 stress test to
recapitalize the EU financial system, the EBA released in early December 2011 the results
of a recapitalization plan of the European financial sector called the “Capital Exercise”. The
EBA Capital Exercise is not a stress test (no stress scenario) but recommended the creation
of a 115 EUR bn capital buffer (including 30 EUR bn for Greek banks)11 to restore market
confidence during the European sovereign debt crisis. The capital buffer estimates of stress
tests are also shown in Tables 1 and 2.

4.1. Stress tests vs. Vlab ratio
    Vlab equivalent to the estimated capital shortfalls of stress tests is the market-based
estimate SRISK (eq. (1)). To facilitate the comparison with stress tests ratios, we define
the Vlab market leverage ratio under stress (M-LVGRs ) as the ratio of market cap to quasi-
market assets under Vlab stress scenario

                                                 M V (1 − LRM ES)
                           Vlab M-LVGRs =                           .                               (3)
                                               M V (1 − LRM ES) + D

  11
    Greek banks are treated separately in the EBA capital exercise where their capital buffer is defined
in order not to conflict with pre-agreed arrangements under the EU/IMF program (European Banking
Authority (2011c)).


                                                  10
The total estimated capital shortfalls and the cross-sectional average of ratios of Vlab and
stress tests are reported in Table 3. The severity of Vlab SRISK and M-LVGRs is in striking
contrast with stress tests estimates for all stress tests. This is consistent with the finding of
Hanson et al. (2011) that regulatory ratios are not a binding constraint for banks whereas
the market is. The difference is even more obvious in Europe where the capital shortfall
estimates of the last two stress tests (resp. 0.2 EUR bn in the CEBS 2010 and 1.2 EUR bn
in the EBA 2011) appear extremely low compared to the corresponding SRISK (resp. 796
EUR bn and 886 EUR bn).
    The stressed individual ratios of US BHCs and large European banks tell us the same
story. They are illustrated with their Vlab ratios in Appendix B for the last European stress
test (EBA 2011) and the two last US stress tests (CCAR 2012 and 2013). Vlab ratio is
almost always more severe than the stressed regulatory ratios, especially in Europe, where
all the large banks pass the stress test but none of them passes Vlab test (see Figure B.2a
in the Appendix).12
    Table 4 (panel B) shows the rank correlations between SRISK and the estimated capital
shortfalls of stress tests. In the European stress tests, most banks have a zero capital shortfall
as the disclosed shortfall is

                Disclosed Capital Shortfall = max(0, [k 0 ∗ RW AS − CapitalS ]),                     (4)

where k 0 is the prudential capital ratio threshold used in the stress test (5% in the EBA
2011), RW AS and CapitalS are respectively the risk-weighted assets and the capital level of
a bank at the end of the stress scenario. We actually observe that most European banks end
up with a capital excess at the end of the stress scenario (see Figure 5a) when we remove
the zero bound and derive the ’absolute’ capital shortfall

                       Capital Shortfall (RWA) = k 0 ∗ RW AS − CapitalS .                            (5)

The rank correlation of SRISK with (5) is highly negative, significant and almost the same
in the last two European stress tests (-0.791 (CEBS 2010) and -0.790 (EBA 2011), see Table
4). Therefore, banks with the highest estimated capital shortfall in Vlab are considered to
be the safest and the most well capitalized banks in European stress tests. The size however
also plays a role in this result as the correlation with SRISK decreases for small banks (-0.53,

  12
    The threshold for both American and European regulatory ratios (in blue) is 5%. Vlab uses a threshold
k of 8% in the US case and 5.5% in the EU due to the divergences in accounting standards.


                                                   11
in the EBA 2011 stress test) and is not significant in the group of large banks.
    All the most systemically important institutions according to SRISK end up with large
capital excess at the end of the stress scenario of European stress tests. We show this result
in Figure 5a for the 2011 EBA stress test and obtain a similar pattern for the stress test of
2010. Changes in the capital shortfall/excess estimates from 2010 to 2011 are also not always
consistent between Vlab and stress tests. The biggest changes in stress tests estimates are
observed for Barclays and the Royal Bank of Scotland, that appear to have reduced capital
excess in 2011, but the Royal Bank of Scotland sees its SRISK declining too as the bank was
less leveraged in 2011. Banco Santander and Intesa Sanpaolo experienced the largest SRISK
increases between 2010 and 2011 as both banks grew in size (larger market cap), in risk
(larger LRMES) and in leverage for Banco Santander. Contrastingly, the capital excess of
Banco Santander remains the same in the 2011 stress test and increases for Intesa Sanpaolo.
    It is hard to believe that the European financial sector was so well capitalized when the
EBA stress test was disclosed in July 2011. The estimated SRISK of Dexia of 26 EUR bn
at the end of June 2011 appears more credible than the EBA capital excess of 7.9 EUR
bn, knowing that Dexia was the first bank to be bailed out in the context of the European
sovereign crisis in October 2011. The resolution plan of Dexia included the sale of its
Belgian banking subsidiary for 4 EUR bn to the Belgian government, the sale of some of its
assets and businesses, and guarantees of up to 90 EUR bn provided by Belgium, France and
Luxembourg.13 The resolution plan lead to a net loss of 11.6 EUR bn for 2011 due to the
discounted sales of assets.
    Another piece of evidence of the failure of the 2011 stress test comes from the EBA own
estimates, five months later, of an “exceptional and temporary capital buffer to address cur-
rent market concerns over sovereign risk and other residual credit risk related to the current
difficult market environment”. The recommended capital buffer (the “Overall Shortfall”) of
115 EUR bn, well above the 2.5 EUR bn of the EBA stress test, is defined by

               EBA Overall Shortfall = max(0, [0.09 ∗ RW A − T 1C]) + Buf f SOV,           (6)

where Buf f SOV ≥ 0 is an additional capital buffer for sovereign debt exposures in the
European Economic Area (EEA). The overall shortfall is not the outcome of a stress test
but is the result of three main drivers: the target 9% T1 core capital ratio (instead of 5%),
the application of Basel 2.5 to derive risk-weighted assets (increasing the capital requirement

 13
      Dexia agrees to Belgian bail-out, Financial Times, October 10, 2011.


                                                      12
for market risk), and the sovereign buffer on EEA sovereign debt exposures (one third of the
buffer).14 The rank correlation of SRISK with the EBA overall shortfall is positive (0.163)
but not significant at 5%. The exercise corrected for the underestimated sovereign risk
weights with the additional sovereign capital buffer but many SRISK-top banks like Crédit
Agricole still had zero capital shortfall in the EBA Capital Exercise (see Figure 4b). We may
argue that the estimates of the exercise were still too low compared to SRISK (see Table 3)
and arrived too late in December 2011 as many banks were already in deep financial trouble.
Dexia, with 6.3 EUR bn shortfall in the exercise and 21.7 EUR bn SRISK, was bailed out
a second time for 5.5 EUR bn by French and Belgian governments in November 2012 and
reported a net loss of 2.9 EUR bn for 2012.15 Crédit Agricole, with no capital shortfall in
the exercise but a 88 EUR bn SRISK, announced a net loss of 6.5 EUR bn for 2012.16
    The rank correlations in the last part of Table 4 (panel C) reveal two important compo-
nents driving stress tests and Vlab rankings apart: the capital actions and the risk-weighted
assets. The aggregate outcome of stress tests with and without the effect of capital actions
is presented in Tables 1 (US) and 2 (EU). The impact of capital actions on ratios is negative
in the CCAR since capital actions are capital distribution plans (submitted as part of the
CCAR). Conversely, capital actions are capital raising plans in the SCAP and the EBA
and have a positive impact on stress tests outcomes.17 For all stress tests, rank correlations
with Vlab measures increase when capital actions are ignored. We show in the next section,
that rank correlations also increase substantially when risk-weighted assets in stress tests
measures are replaced by total assets.

4.2. Risk-based capital vs. leverage
    The assessment of banks leverage using a Tier 1 leverage ratio (T1 LVGR) defined as the
ratio of Tier 1 capital to total assets is a recommendation of Basel III to supplement the
risk-based regime (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2011)). Haldane (2012) shows

  14
      European Banking Authority (2011c)
  15
      Fresh Franco-Belgian bailout for Dexia, Financial Times, November 8, 2012. Dexia at ‘turning point’
amid more losses, Financial Times, February 21, 2013.
   16
      Second year in red for Crédit Agricole, Financial Times, February 20, 2013.
   17
      Capital actions in the CCAR 2012 include all proposed future capital distribution plans (issuance of
capital instruments, dividends payments and share repurchases) throughout the stress scenario. In the EBA
2011, capital actions include issuance of common equity, government injections of capital and conversion
of lower-quality capital instrument into Core Tier 1 capital. The EBA additionally considers the effect of
mandatory restructuring plans and the final outcomes only consider mandatory measures announced before
disclosure. In the SCAP, the capital actions include the proposed capital actions and the effects of the results
of the first quarter of 2009. The correlation between SRISK and the SCAP capital buffer also increases from
0.507 to 0.562 when capital actions are not included.

                                                      13
that this ratio significantly predicts the failure of financial firms whereas the risk-based core
Tier 1 capital ratio (T1CR) does not.
    In the CCAR 2012, two banks (Citigroup and MetLife) failed the T1 LVGR under the
stress scenario. In the CCAR 2013, Goldman Sachs has the lowest stressed leverage ratio
followed by Morgan Stanley and JP Morgan, and two firms (Ally Financial and American
Express) fail the T1 LVGR under stress when considering the effect of their original submis-
sions of planned capital actions. We build a Tier 1 leverage ratio for the European banks of
the EBA stress test and find that Deutsche Bank would have failed the stress test if the Basel
III 3% T1 LVGR backstop existed. In Figure 3, the visual correlation between the market
leverage ratio under Vlab stress (M-LVGRs ) and the stressed Tier 1 leverage ratios appears
to be strong in the last US and European stress tests (CCAR 2013 and EBA 2011). This
result is confirmed in Table 4 (panel C); the rank correlation with Vlab M-LVGRs increases
from 0.581 to 0.877 when the RWA, the denominator of capital ratios, are replaced by total
assets in the CCAR 2013. We obtain similar results one year earlier with the CCAR 2012,
and in Europe with the 2011 EBA stress test.
    The contrast between risk-based and leverage-based stress tests outcomes is even more
obvious when the stress test capital shortfall is written as a function of total assets. We
show in Table 4 (panel B) and Figure 5b that the correlation between SRISK and the capital
shortfall of the EBA stress test becomes highly positive (0.679) and significant when the
EBA shortfall is written as a function of total assets instead of risk-weighted assets. The
leverage-based capital shortfall is given by

                        Capital Shortfall (TA) = k ∗ T AS − CapitalS ,                       (7)

where k is the same prudential ratio used in Vlab (5.5% for European banks), and T AS
are the total assets of the bank at the end of the stress scenario. The result holds when we
control for the size; the rank correlation between (7) and SRISK remains high and significant
at 1% in the groups of small (0.634) and large banks (0.743). With this definition, the EBA
shortfall would have increased from 1.2 EUR bn to 372 EUR bn, which is still less severe
than SRISK (886 EUR bn) for a sample of 53 EU banks. Dexia would have been forced to
raise 9.5 EUR bn in July 2011, and Crédit Agricole 35.8 EUR bn, with the leverage-based
shortfall of eq. (7).

4.3. EU-US differences
   The ultimate impact of the stress scenario is a decline in capital ratios under both US
and EU stress tests. However, this result comes from a diminution of capital (numerator)

                                               14
in the US whereas increasing RWA (denominator) is the main driver of lower capital ratios
in Europe (see Tables 1 and 2). We will see in the next section that RWA definitions are
however not the same; RWA are derived under Basel I in the US (before 2013), under Basel
II in the EU.
    Stress tests of the Federal Reserve focus on the 19 largest US BHCs whereas European
stress tests concern 90 banks representing 65% of the assets in the EU banking sector. We
can expect more heterogeneity in the 90 banks of 21 EU countries due to their different size
and business models.
    Other differences come from different stress scenario trajectories and assumptions on the
balance sheet growth. The SCAP 2009, the CEBS 2010 and the EBA 2011 have a static
balance sheet evolution assumption whereas the CCAR assumes that the size of the balance
sheet can change according to economic conditions. US stress scenario tend to revert to
a ’normal state’ of the world at the end of the scenario, unlike the EBA which assumes
further deterioration of the economic situation the second year of the stress scenario. This
is the reason why the Federal Reserve considers minimum ratios over the scenario horizon to
determine who failed the stress test, while European stress tests consider ratios at the end
of the stress scenario.
    Overall, different definitions, samples, assumptions and scenarios lead to a RWA fall of
6.1% at the end of the supervisory stress scenario of the CCAR 2012 and a RWA increase of
14% under the EBA 2011 adverse scenario. Moreover, the leverage ratio cannot reflect the
European stress scenario as the stress appears in risk weights and total assets are assumed
constant over the scenario. The stressed leverage ratios also decline less in the US than the
stressed risk-based ratios. The impact of the projected total assets and RWA changes on US
ratios is however not straightforward according to the Federal Reserve.

5. Testing the efficacy of regulatory risk weights

    A major difference between Vlab and stress tests measures comes from the denominator
of regulatory ratios. Regulatory ratios and shortfalls are expressed as a function of risk-
weighted assets whereas Vlab uses quasi-market assets. We have shown in Section 4.2 that
the European financial sector would have ended up better capitalized if stress tests had
relied on a simple leverage ratio instead of the complex regulatory capital ratios standardized
by risk-weighted assets. We therefore argue that the forbearance of stress tests outcomes
(especially in Europe) comes rather from the regulatory risk weights, than from the stress
tests methodologies.


                                              15
5.1. Basel I and Basel II
    Risk-weighted assets (RWA) definitions are not the same in US and European stress tests;
RWA are derived under Basel I in the US (before 2013), under Basel II in the EU. This leads
to important differences in risk measures and stress tests models. Risk weights are fixed for
different asset categories under Basel I whereas banks can use their own models to derive
RWA under Basel II.
    Under Basel I, RWA are defined such that assets are assigned to four different asset
categories with different risk weights (0%, 20%, 50%, 100%). These four categories could
be roughly described as exposures to sovereigns (0%), banks (20%), mortgages (50%), and
corporates (100%). In the SCAP, the rank correlation of SRISK was indeed the highest with
the most risky asset category. But Basel I risk weights cannot reflect the risk evolution of
the different asset categories; in 2011, SRISK becomes more correlated with the zero-weight
risk category (including sovereign debt exposures) than with the most risky 100%-weight
category.
    The definition of risk-weighted assets under Basel II incorporates credit risk, operational
risk and market risk components. The capital requirement for credit risk remains the most
important component (around 80% of RWA) and is defined in terms of exposures at default
(EAD) and risk parameters. Risk parameters (probability of default and loss given default)
are used to assign weights to each exposure. In the EBA 2011 stress test, the increase
of RWA under the stress scenario comes from the credit risk component; the changes are
located in risk-weights (stressed LGDs and PDs) since EADs are considered invariant under
the static balance sheet assumption. This is a major difference with the US methodology
that considers fixed risk weights, even if credit rating migrations are allowed. The RWA
methodology is however updated in the CCAR 2013 where the stressed RWA also include
BHCs’ projections of a market risk component defined under the stricter Basel 2.5 market
risk rule.
    Concerns on the robustness of Basel II risk weights have been raised in Haldane (2012),
given the degree of over-parametrization of RWA and the risk parameter estimates purely
based on in-sample statistical fit over short historical samples. The use of banks internal
models to derive their risk parameters under the Internal-Rating-Based (IRB) approach of
Basel II has also been criticized. First, Basel II was designed such that the use of banks
internal models would allow them to derive lower RWA in order to incite banks to update
their risk management practices. Le Lesle and Avramova (2012) indicate that this resulted
in lower RWA under Basel II, and therefore lower capital charges than under Basel I whereas


                                              16
the internal models did not necessarily conduct to lower risks. Second, concerns about the
consistency of risk weights across firms have been raised in Haldane (2011, 2012); Le Lesle
and Avramova (2012). The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2013) confirmed
these concerns showing in their “Regulatory Consistency Assessment Programme” (RCAP)
that differences in risk weights (in the trading book) across firms reflect modeling choices
and supervisory decisions rather than actual risk taking. Third, the internal models used
to derive risk weights are completely opaque. Haldane (2012) indicates that risk weights
are black boxes that investors do not understand or trust. These concerns have important
implications for the European stress tests outcomes knowing that 59 of the 90 participating
banks in the EBA 2011 stress test are IRB banks, i.e. use their own models to derive risk
weights under the stress scenario.

5.2. Stress tests vs. Vlab risk weight
   Acharya et al. (2012) establish a connection between Vlab estimates and regulatory risk-
weighted assets by defining the effective aggregate market risk weight to total assets corre-
sponding to a SRISK of zero. Vlab aggregate risk weight is

                       Vlab risk weight = (1 − (1 − k) ∗ LRM ES)−1                          (8)

and is comparable to the aggregate regulatory risk weight defined by the ratio of RWA to
total assets (also called RWA density in Le Lesle and Avramova (2012)). The risk weight
could be interpreted as an aggregate measure of risk per unit of asset; the smaller the risk
weight, the less risky the asset holdings of a bank.
    As Vlab risk weight is conditional on a crisis, we compare it to the stressed aggregate risk
weights of stress tests. Figure 6a compares the projected risk weight at the end of the EBA
stress scenario with the Vlab risk weight. These measures of risk have nothing in common;
the rank correlation is negative (-0.238) and not significant at 5%. Dexia and Crédit Agricole
are among the riskiest banks according to the Vlab measure and among the safest with the
stress test risk weight: both banks have values above the 75% quantile of the Vlab risk
weight distribution while they both appear below the 25% quantile of the EBA risk weight
distribution.

5.3. Forecasting risk during the European sovereign debt crisis
  This section empirically validates the risk measures of stress tests and Vlab as aggregate
measures of bank risk during a crisis. To that end, we compare the performance of these
measures to predict a realized measure of risk; the six-month realized volatility defined by

                                              17
                                          v
                                          u t+1+W
                                          u1 X
                               RVi,t,W   =t       (rit − r̄it,W )2                             (9)
                                            W t+1

where W = 130 days (six months), r̄it,W is the six-month forward average return of bank
i at date t (the disclosure date of the EBA stress test). A striking result appears in Table
5 (panel C) where only Vlab risk weight predicts the ranking of banks realized risk. The
rank correlation between the realized volatility and the stress test risk weight is negative and
not significant. This result is consistent with the results of Haldane (2012); Le Lesle and
Avramova (2012) and the RCAP of the Basel Committee showing that risk weights are not
consistently derived across firms. Instead, banks game the RWA by reallocating their assets
according to risk weights but this strategy does not necessarily lead to lower risks. Das and
Sy (2012) also studied the predictive power of risk-weighted assets and find that RWA do
not, in general, predict market measures of risk.
    The absence of correlation between the stressed risk weights and the realized risk of
banks during a crisis shows furthermore that Basel risk weights are also used for regulatory
arbitrage in a macro stress test. Risk weights have no predictive power as they are derived
from accounting data and therefore, can only be updated ex-post. The absence of predictive
power of stressed risk weights during the European sovereign debt crisis also supports the
argument of Haldane (2012) that risk-weighting is suboptimal in an uncertain environment.
    We reproduce the results of Das and Sy (2012) for the banks in the EBA stress test
with the difference that we use stressed risk weights instead of the actual ones. Different risk
factors are regressed on the realized volatility measure in (9) and the estimated coefficients are
presented in Table 6. Each column is a different regression with a different set of independent
variables. To show the individual effect of each independent variable, the first five columns
report the coefficients of univariate regressions. According to the goodness-of-fit measures
of the univariate regressions, the book-to-market ratio is the most important factor followed
by Vlab risk weight, and the stressed Tier 1 leverage ratio. The table also shows that the
parameter of the EBA stressed risk weight (column 5) is not significant to predict realized
volatility.
    The EBA stressed risk weight parameter becomes however positive and significant when
we control for other risk factors. In column 7, a multivariate regression includes all risk factors
and the parameters are all significant at the 1% level (except the constant). Moreover, the
adjusted R2 increases from 53.18% to 61.29% (from columns 6 to 7) when the EBA stressed
risk weight is added to the regression. These results suggest that regulatory risk weights can


                                                18
bring additional information on risk once we account for other more important risk factors
like the book-to-market ratio, Vlab risk weight and the leverage ratio.
    A final validation test looks at the change in risk from the disclosure of the EBA 2011 to
six months after disclosure. Specifically, we assess how the change in EBA risk weights over
the stress scenario predict the realized change in risk defined by RVi,t,W − RVi,t−W,W . We
show in Table 5 (panel D) that the change in Basel II risk weights, i.e. the stress on PDs and
LGDs, is well correlated to the realized risk change of small banks. We conclude that even
if the EBA stressed risk weight is individually a wrong measure of the aggregate bank risk,
the stress model applied on risk weights is right. Projected changes in risk weights indeed
predict the ranking of banks’ risk increases during the European sovereign debt crisis.
    Vlab risk weight also predicts well the change in risk suggesting that the risk measure does
not only predict a risk level but also reflects investors expectations on banks’ risk evolution.

5.4. Portfolio choice under regulatory risk weights
    We demonstrate in this section the weakness of Basel regulatory risk weights as an aggre-
gate measure of bank risk where the bank is seen as a portfolio of assets. The bank chooses
its allocation of resources to maximize its return subject to a tolerable level of risk. Regu-
lators implement several standards of prudent risk but these may sometimes be misguided.
Here we consider the allocation of a fixed investment budget to asset categories subject to
the regulatory requirement implemented in a stylized version of Basel standards.
    Let T A be the total assets to be allocated between cash, C (equivalent to the capital
requirement for credit risk in Basel II), and other risky assets. Let there be N risky assets
with conditional expected returns given by the (N × 1) vector m, and conditional covariance
matrix given by the (N × N ) matrix H. According to Basel rules, each of these assets has a
risk weight wj between zero and one which we assemble in a (N × 1) vector w. The solution
is a (N × 1) vector of dollars to be invested in each asset, q. The vector q will also determine
the optimal exposures at default under Basel II and the optimal RWA, w0 q. The risk budget
requires that C ≥ kw0 q, where k is the prudential capital ratio and C = T A − ι0 q, where ι
is a (N × 1) vector of ones.
    To maximize asset returns subject to these constraints the firm must solve

                                           max q 0 m
                                             q                                             (10)
                                 s.t. T A − ι0 q ≥ kw0 q, q ≥ 0




                                                 19
The Lagrangian of this maximization problem is

                         L(q, λ, µ) = m0 q − λ (T A − ι0 q − kw0 q) − µ0 q                   (11)

where the scalar λ and the (N × 1) vector µ are Lagrange multipliers. The first order
condition of equation (11) with respect to q is given by

                                      m0 + λ (ι0 + kw0 ) − µ0 = 0                            (12)

Multiplying equation (12) by q and recognizing that either q or µ will be zero for each asset
(from the first order condition of (11) w.r.t. to µ), then

                               m0 q + λ (ι0 q + kw0 q) = 0                                   (13)
                                                         m0 q = −λT A
                                                                −m0 q
                                                           λ =
                                                                 TA
Replacing λ in (12), we obtain

                                            m0 q
                                                  
                                  0
                               m −                     (ι0 + kw0 ) − µ0 = 0                  (14)
                                            TA

Hence all non-zero allocations qj , must satisfy
                                      0 
                                      mq
                             mj −            (1 + kwj ) = 0                                  (15)
                                      TA
                                                 mj       m0 q
                                                        =
                                               1 + kwj    TA

    Supposing that each asset has a different value of mj (1 + kwj )−1 , then the maximum will
occur if the entire portfolio of the bank ι0 q is invested in the asset with the greatest value of
this ratio. The amount invested in this asset will be
                                                          TA
                                              qj =                                           (16)
                                                        1 + kwj

If there are multiple assets with the same value of this ratio, the performance will be the
same for any feasible allocation to these assets.
    The main observation is that the risk of a portfolio is always less than or equal to the sum
of the risks of its components. The use of risk-weighted assets ignores this portfolio feature
of risk and consequently there is no incentive from the regulatory perspective to diversify.


                                                        20
The only case where this measure is appropriate is when all assets are perfectly correlated.
    Then, if the risk weights are underestimated (as banks use their own risk models under
Basel II) or are not adjusted to reflect increased risk during a crisis (as observed with Basel
I risk weights in the CCAR 2012, and in Das and Sy (2012)), a bank will choose its optimal
asset with the most underestimated risk weight and this will automatically lead to excessive
leverage. If wj is the risk weight of the optimal asset and since qj = ι0 q = T A − C, the
leverage ratio C/T A from (16) is 1 − (1 + kwj )−1 . Consequently, banks will take excessive
leverage if their risk weights are not adequately adjusted to more severe economic conditions.
    We show that the mechanical relationship between risk weights and leverage also holds
empirically after the application of the stress scenario in the European stress test of 2011
(Figure 6b). The rank correlation between stressed risk weights and stressed Tier 1 leverage
is 0.62 for 53 European banks and increases to 0.89 for the 15 largest banks.
    The theoretical result of (16) also explains the portfolio decisions of many Eurozone
banks during the European sovereign debt crisis. Acharya and Steffen (2012) document that
the increase of exposures to risky sovereign debt is partly explained by regulatory arbitrage;
banks with higher risk weights increased their exposures to risky sovereign debt to reduce
the cost of raising fresh capital, as these exposures have a zero capital requirement (zero-risk
weight). To a large extent, it also explains the misguidance of stress tests about European
banks risks. For example, Dexia was holding a portfolio of risky sovereign bonds of almost
a third of its balance sheet largely financed with short-term debt. Acharya and Steffen
(2012) further show that this type of behaviour was largly pervasive among Eurozone banks.
Therefore, the reliance on Basel risk weights appears not only to have left financial sectors
undercapitalized but also incentivized the build up of risky sovereign debt exposures.

6. Concluding remarks

    This paper provides an assessment of the outcomes of macroprudential stress tests con-
ducted by US and European regulators. Concerns have been raised on the lack of robustness,
severity and transparency of stress tests measures. In this paper, we test the risk assessments
and outcomes of stress tests against a market-based macroprudential benchmark (Vlab) that
addresses many of those concerns.
    We find that the projected losses of stress tests and Vlab correlate well and both predict
well the actual realized performance of banks under severe economic conditions. Contrast-
ingly, the required capitalization of financial firms in stress tests is found to be rather low
and inadequate ex post, compared to Vlab capital shortfall estimate SRISK. We document


                                              21
that this discrepancy arises due to the reliance of stress tests outcomes on regulatory risk
weights, and especially in European stress tests running under Basel II where the impact of
the stress scenario is translated into higher risk weights. For example, Dexia appeared as
one of the safest bank in the latest European stress test disclosed in July 2011, but ranked
among the riskiest banks in Vlab. Three months later, Dexia was the first bank to be bailed
out in the context of the European sovereign debt crisis.
    We show that regulatory risk weights of stress tests have no link with the realized risk of
banks during a crisis. Risk weights are only informative when we control for other risk factors
like a market measure of risk, the leverage ratio and the book-to-market ratio. Furthermore,
Basel risk standards based on risk-weighted assets are demonstrated to provide no diversifi-
cation incentives as they ignore the subadditivity feature of portfolio risk. Therefore, banks
are encouraged to invest their entire portfolio on one asset category or exposure according to
a false risk measure, and the underestimation of risk weights (as banks use their own models
in Basel II) automatically leads to excess leverage. This misguidance on the asset risk-return
allocation is likely to hold in future stress tests, despite the new Basel III Tier 1 Leverage
ratio, as the reliance on static regulatory risk weights remains under Basel III.

———————
References

Acharya, V., Brownlees, C., Engle, R., Farazmand, F., Richardson, M., 2010a. Measuring
  systemic risk. In: Acharya, V., Cooley, T., Richardson, M., Walter, I. (Eds.), Regulating
  Wall Street: The Dodd-Frank Act and the New Architecture of Global Finance. John
  Wiley and Sons, Ch. 4.

Acharya, V., Engle, R., Richardson, M., 2012. Capital shortfall: a new approach to rankings
  and regulating systemic risks. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 102:3,
  59–64.

Acharya, V., Pedersen, L., Philippon, T., Richardson, M., 2009. Regulating systemic risk.
  In: Acharya, V., Richardson, M. (Eds.), Restoring Financial Stability: How to Repair a
  Failed System. John Wiley & Sons, Ch. 13.

Acharya, V., Pedersen, L., Philippon, T., Richardson, M., 2010b. Measuring systemic risk,
  Working Paper Stern School of Business.



                                              22
Acharya, V., Steffen, S., 2012. The "greatest" carry trade ever?: Understanding eurozone
  bank risks, preprint.

Adrian, T., Brunnermeier, M., 2010. CoVaR, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Re-
  ports No. 348.

Alfaro, R. A., Drehmann, M., 2009. Macro stress tests and crises: What can we learn. BIS
  Quarterly Review December, 29–41.

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, June 2011. Basel III: A global regulatory frame-
  work for more resilient banks and banking systems, Bank for International Settlements.

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2013. Regulatory Consistency Assessment pro-
  gramme (RCAP) - Analysis of risk-weighted assets for market risk, Bank for International
  Settlements.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, 2009a. The Supervisory Capital Assessment
  Program: Design and Implementation, April 24, 2009.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, 2009b. The Supervisory Capital Assessment
  Program: Overview of Results, May 7, 2009.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, 2011. Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Re-
  view: Objectives and Overview, March 18, 2011.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, 2012. Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Re-
  view 2012: Methodology and Results for Stress Scenario Projections, March 13, 2012.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, 2013a. Comprehensive Capital Analysis and
  Review 2013: Assessment Framework and Results, March 14, 2013.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, 2013b. Dodd-Franck Act Stress Test 2013: Su-
  pervisory Stress Test Methodology and Results, March 7, 2013.

Borio, C., Drehmann, M., 2009. Towards an operational framework for financial stability:
  "fuzzy" measurement and its consequences, Central Bank of Chile Working Paper No.
  544.

Borio, C., Drehmann, M., Tsatsaronis, K., 2012. Stress-testing macro stress testing: does it
  live up to expectations?, BIS Working Paper No 369.

                                            23
Breuer, T., Jandačka, M., Rheinberger, K., Summer, M., 2009. How to find plausible, severe,
  and useful stress scenarios. International Journal of Central Banking 5, 205–224.

Brownlees, C., Engle, R., 2011. Volatility, correlation and tails for systemic risk measurement,
  NYU Working Paper.

Das, S., Sy, A., 2012. How risky are banks’ risk-weighted assets? Evidence from the financial
 crisis, IMF Working Paper WP/12/36.

Engle, R., Jondeau, E., Rockinger, M., 2012. Dynamic conditional beta and systemic risk in
  Europe, preprint.

European Banking Authority, 2010. Aggregate outcome of the 2010 EU wide stress test
  exercise coordinated by CEBS in cooperation with the ECB, July 23, 2010.

European Banking Authority, 2011a. 2011 EU-wide stress test: Aggregate report, July 15,
  2011.

European Banking Authority, 2011b. 2011 EU-wide stress test: Methodological note, March
  18, 2011.

European Banking Authority, 2011c. EBA recommendation on the creation and supervisory
  oversight of temporary capital buffers to restore market confidence, December 8, 2011.

Flood, M., Korenko, G., 2013. Systematic scenario selection, Office of Financial Research
  Working Paper 0005.

Galati, G., Moessner, R., 2011. Macroprudential policy - a literature review, BIS Working
 Papers No 337.

Glasserman, P., Kang, C., Kang, W., 2012. Stress scenario selection by empirical likelihood,
  preprint. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2101465.

Goldstein, I., Sapra, H., 2012. Should banks’ stress test results be disclosed? an analysis of
 the costs and benefits, working Paper, Booth School of Business, University of Chicago.

Greenlaw, D., Kashyap, A., Schoenholtz, K., Shin, H., 2012. Stressed out: Macroprudential
  principles for stress testing, Chicago Booth School of Business Working Paper No. 71.

Haldane, A., 2011. Capital discipline, Bank of England speech, January 9, 2011.
  URL http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/documents/speeches/2011/speech484.pdf

                                              24
Haldane, A., 2012. The dog and the frisbee, Bank of England speech, August 31, 2012.
  URL http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/documents/speeches/2012/speech596.pdf

Hanson, S., Kashyap, A., Stein, J., 2011. A macroprudential approach to financial regulation.
  Journal of Economic Perspectives 25:1, 3–28.

Harris, T., Herz, R., Doron, N., 2012. Accounting’s role in the reporting, creation, and
  avoidance of systemic risk in financial institutions. In: Fouque, J.-P., Langsam, J.
  (Eds.), The handbook of systemic risk. Cambridge University Press, available at SSRN:
  http://ssrn.com/abstract=1987749.

Hirtle, B., Schuermann, T., Stiroh, K., 2009. Macroprudential supervision of financial in-
  stitutions: Lessons from the SCAP, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No.
  409.

Huang, X., Zhou, H., Haibin, Z., 2012. Systemic risk contributions. Journal of Financial
 Services Research 42, 55–83.

Huang, X., Zhou, H., Zhu, H., 2009. A framework for assessing the systemic risk of major
 financial institutions. Journal of Banking & Finance 33:11, 2036–2049.

Le Lesle, V., Avramova, S., 2012. Revisiting risk-weighted assets: Why do RWAs differ across
  countries and what can be done about it?, IMF Working Paper WP/12/90.

Petrella, G., Resti, A., 2013. Supervisors as information producers: Do stress tests reduce
  bank opaqueness? Journal of Banking & Finance.

Schuermann, T., 2012. Stress testing banks, Wharton Financial Institutions Center Working
  Paper No. 12-08.




                                             25
     Table 1: US stress tests results. This table presents the aggregate outcome of US stress tests for which a bank-level outcome is
     publicly available. “T1” is the Tier 1 capital, “T1C” is the Tier 1 Common capital, and “RWA” are the risk-weighted assets. “T1CR” is the
     Tier Common Capital Ratio (T1CR = T1C/RWA); “T1R” is the Tier 1 Capital Ratio (T1R = T1/RWA); “Total CR” is the Total Risk-based
     Capital Ratio (Total CR = Total Capital/RWA); “T1 LVGR” is the Tier 1 Leverage Ratio (T1 LVGR = T1/Total Assets). In parentheses:
     number of banks failing the regulatory criterion. “min” stands for the cross-sectional average (unweighted) of banks minimum ratios over the
     9 quarters of the CCAR scenario. The different minimum ratios may not happen on the same quarter. The column “After scenario? ” presents
     the aggregate results of stress tests without the effect of BHCs planned capital actions (results disclosed in the Dodd-Frank Act stress test 2013
     for the CCAR 2013).


                      Disclosure      Sample           Scenario horizon     Measure and threshold        Before scenario    After scenario     After scenario?
      SCAP 2009       05/07/2009      19 US banks      2009 - 2010          T1                           837 $ bn
                                      (19 BHCs)        (2 years)            T1C                          413 $ bn
                                                                            RWA                          7815 $ bn
                                                                            T1CR ≥ 4%                    6.7% (2)




26
                                                                            T1R ≥ 6%                     11.5%
                                                                            T1C shortfall ≤ 0                               74.6 $ bn (10)     185 $ bn (10)
      CCAR 2012       03/13/2012      19 US banks      Q4 2011 -            T1                           907 $ bn           540 $ bn
                                      (19 BHCs)        Q4 2013              T1C                          741 $ bn           438 $ bn
                                                       (9 quarters)         RWA                          7356 $ bn          6904 $ bn
                                                                            T1CR ≥ 5%                    10.1%              6.6% min (3)       7.3% min (1)
                                                                            T1R ≥ 4%                     12.3%              8.0% min (0)       8.7% min (0)
                                                                            Total CR ≥ 8%                15.5%              10.8% min (2)      11.5% min (2)
                                                                            T1 LVGR ≥ 3-4%               7.4%               5.2% min (2)       5.7% min (1)
      CCAR 2013       03/14/2013      18 US banks      Q4 2012 -            T1C                          792 $ bn
                                      (18 BHCs)        Q4 2014              T1CR ≥ 5%                    11.3%              6.9% min (1)       8.0% min (1)
                                                       (9 quarters)         T1R ≥ 4%                     13.1%              8.3% min (0)       9.8% min (0)
                                                                            Total CR ≥ 8%                15.6%              10.7% min (0)      12.1% min (0)
                                                                            T1 LVGR ≥ 3-4%               8.8%               5.7% min (2)       6.8% min (0)
     Table 2: EU stress tests results. This table presents the aggregate outcome of EU-wide stress tests for which a bank-level outcome
     is publicly available. “T1” is the Tier 1 capital, “T1C” is the Tier 1 Core capital, and “RWA” are the risk-weighted assets. “T1CR” is the Core
     Tier 1 Capital Ratio (T1CR = T1C/RWA); “T1R” is the Tier 1 Capital Ratio (T1R = T1/RWA). In parentheses: number of banks failing the
     regulatory criterion. Ratios are cross-sectional average ratios at a specific date (scenario start or scenario end). The column “After scenario? ”
     presents the aggregate results of stress tests without the effect of capital actions and restructuring plans.


                       Disclosure      Sample            Scenario horizon     Measure and threshold       Before scenario      After scenario     After scenario?
      CEBS 2010        07/23/2010      91 banks,         2010 - 2011          T1                          1162 EUR bn          1118 EUR bn
                                       65% of            (2 years)            RWA                         1.12 EUR tn          1.22 EUR tn
                                       EU-27 assets                           T1R ≥ 6%                    10.3%                9.2% (7)
                                                                              T1 shortfall ≤ 0                                 3.5 EUR bn




27
      EBA 2011         07/15/2011      90 banks,         2011 - 2012          T1                          1218 EUR bn          1199 EUR bn
                                       65% of            (2 years)            T1C                         1006 EUR bn          1001 EUR bn        954 EUR bn
                                       EU-27 assets                           RWA                         11.37 EUR tn         13 EUR tn          13.12 EUR tn
                                                                              T1CR ≥ 5%                   8.9% (3)             7.7% (8)           7% (20)
                                                                              T1C shortfall ≤ 0                                2.5 EUR bn         25 EUR bn
      EBA Capital      12/08/2011      65 banks                               T1                          1190 EUR bn
      Exercise                         (excluding                             T1C                         987 EUR bn
                                       Greek banks)                           RWA                         10.55 EUR tn
                                                                              T1CR ≥ 9%                   10.2% (27)
                                                                              Sovereign buffer            39 EUR bn
                                                                              Overall shortfall ≤ 0       85 EUR bn (31)
     Table 3: Vlab vs. stress tests: aggregate results. This table presents the aggregate outcome of the samples of common
     banks between Vlab and regulatory stress tests. Vlab output is available on the website Vlab.stern.nyu.edu, under “NYU Stern Systemic
     Risk Rankings of U.S. Financials with Simulation” for US banks (where k = 0.08 in eq. (1)), and “NYU Stern Systemic Risk Rankings of
     World Financials without Simulation” for European banks (where k = 0.055 in eq. (1)). Vlab output is downloaded on the last date before the
     scenario start date of each stress test exercise. Vlab download date: 12/31/2008 (SCAP), 09/30/2011 (CCAR 2012), 09/28/2012 (CCAR 2013),
     12/31/2009 (CEBS), 12/31/2010 (EBA), 09/30/2011 (EBA Capital Exercise). Vlab MV loss = M V ∗ LRM ES, SRISK is the market-based
     capital shortfall defined in eq. (1), Vlab M-LVGRs is the ratio of market cap to quasi-market assets under Vlab stress scenario (eq. (3)). Stress
     tests ratios (T1CR for EBA and CCAR, T1R for CEBS) are cross-sectional averages at the end of the stress scenario in EU stress tests, and
     cross-sectional averages of min ratios over the stress scenario in US stress tests (without the effect of BHCs planned capital actions). Stress
     tests losses are the sum of projected losses over the stress scenario and across banks. “Loss” (SCAP) = Total Loss estimates , “Loss” (CCAR)
     = Loan Losses + Trading and Counterparty Losses + Realized Losses on Securities + Other Losses, “Loss” (CEBS & EBA) = Impairment
     losses + Trading losses. “Net Loss” (SCAP) = max(0, Total Loss estimates - Resources Other Than Capital to Absorb Losses in the More
     Adverse Scenario), “Net Loss” (CCAR) = max(0, - Projected Net Income before Taxes), “Net Loss” (CEBS) = max(0, Loss - pre-impairment
     income after the adverse scenario), “Net Loss” (EBA) = max(0, - Net profit after tax ). In parentheses: number of banks failing the systemic
     risk criterion.




28
      US                                                     Stress tests estimates                                      Vlab estimates
                       Sample            Shortfall            Ratio        Loss             Net loss       SRISK              M-LVGRs            MV loss
      SCAP 2009        18 US BHCs        63.1 $ bn (9)                     590 $ bn         229 $ bn       674 $ bn (18)      2.39%              438 $ bn

      CCAR 2012        18 US BHCs                             7.55% (0)    529 $ bn         226 $ bn       669 $ bn (17)           3.54%         447 $ bn

      CCAR 2013        17 US BHCs                             8.37% (0)    457 $ bn         197 $ bn       494 $ bn (14)           5.48%         525 $ bn

      EU
                       Sample            Shortfall            Ratio        Loss             Net loss       SRISK                   M-LVGRs       MV loss
      CEBS 2010        50 EU banks       0.2 EUR bn           8.98% (1)    425 EUR bn       39 EUR bn      796 EUR bn (48)         2.6%          399 EUR bn

      EBA 2011         53 EU banks       1.2 EUR bn           7.98% (4)    381 EUR bn       70 EUR bn      886 EUR bn (51)         2.26%         402 EUR bn

      EBA Capital      44 EU banks       72 EUR bn (22)                                                    1059 EUR bn (42)        1.56%         336 EUR bn
      Exercise         (excluding
                       Greek banks)
     Table 4: Vlab vs. stress tests: rank correlations. This table presents the rank correlations of stress tests and Vlab results.
     Panel A: rank correlations with Vlab MV loss (LRM ES ∗ M V ). Panel B: rank correlations with Vlab capital shortfall SRISK (eq. (1)).
     Panel C: rank correlations to Vlab M-LVGRs , i.e. the ratio of market cap to quasi-market assets under Vlab stress scenario (eq. (3)). Stress
     tests “Total Net Loss” (i.e. net of revenues) and “Total Loss” are defined in Table 3, without the zero bound on net losses. Stress tests ratios
     are defined in Table 2. “min” stands for the minimum ratio over the 9 quarters of the CCAR scenario, other ratios are ratios at the end of
     the stress scenario. The symbol ? indicates ratios based on stress tests results without the effect of capital actions and restructuring plans.
     Vlab download date: 12/31/2008 (SCAP), 09/30/2011 (CCAR 2012), 09/28/2012 (CCAR 2013), 12/31/2009 (CEBS), 12/31/2010 (EBA),
     09/30/2011 (EBA Capital Exercise). The symbol * indicates statistical significance at the 5% level; ** at 1%. Sample size: 18 (SCAP and
     CCAR 2012), 17 (CCAR 2013), 50 (CEBS), 53 (EBA), 44 (EBA Cap. Ex.).


                                               Panel A: Rank correlations with Vlab MV loss
             Stress tests projected losses     SCAP 2009      CCAR 2012        CCAR 2013       CEBS 2010      EBA 2011
             Total Net Loss                    0.280          0.604**          0.507*          -0.296*        -0.476**
             Total Loss                        0.682**        0.851**          0.842**         0.830**        0.760**
             Loan losses                       0.580*         0.555*           0.662**         0.837**        0.751**
             Trading losses                    0.477*         0.660**          0.589*          0.731**        0.694**




29
                                                Panel B: Rank correlations with Vlab SRISK
             Stress tests capital shortfalls   SCAP 2009      CCAR 2012        CCAR 2013       CEBS 2010      EBA 2011      EBA Cap. Ex.
             max(0, Shortfall (RWA))           0.507*                                          -0.153         -0.273*       0.163
             Shortfall (RWA)                                                                   -0.791**       -0.790**
             Shortfall (TA)                                                                                   0.679**

                                               Panel C: Rank correlations with Vlab M-LVGRs
             Stress tests projected ratios     SCAP 2009      CCAR 2012        CCAR 2013       CEBS 2010      EBA 2011
             T1R, scenario end                                0.204                            0.043          0.280*
             T1CR, scenario end                               0.242                                           0.282*
             T1CR? , scenario end                                              0.453                          0.546**
             T1 LVGR, scenario end                            0.576*                                          0.570**
             min T1CR                                         0.463            0.078
             min T1CR?                                        0.797**          0.581*
             min T1 LVGR                                      0.684**          0.561*
             min T1 LVGR?                                     0.846**          0.877**
Table 5: Forecasting during the European sovereign debt crisis. This table presents the
rank correlations of the EBA and Vlab outcomes with the realized outcomes of banks after disclosure of the
EBA stress test in July 2011 (p-values in parentheses). Panel A: rank correlations with the 6-month realized
                                                                                   Pt+131
loss (eq. (2)). Panel B: rank correlations with the 6-month realized return (− t+1 ln(pit /pit−1 )). Panel
C: rank correlations with the six-month realized volatility RVi,t,130 (eq. (9)). Panel D: rank correlations with
the change in realized volatility RVi,t,130 −RVi,t−130,130 . EBA T1C return = (T1C0 −T1CS )/T1C0 ; EBA risk
weight (scenario end) = RWAS /TAS ; EBA risk weight change = RWAS /TAS - RWA0 /TA0 , where subscript
S (resp. 0) denotes quantities after (resp. before) the EBA stress scenario. Vlab output is downloaded
before the disclosure date of the EBA stress test: 06/30/2011. Sample size: 15 (large), 38 (small), 53 (all).
RMSE: root mean square error on the whole sample.


              Panel A: Rank correlations with the 6-month realized EUR loss
                  Estimated losses              Large      Small      All        RMSE
         Vlab     MV loss                       0.293      0.610      0.832      5086
                                                (0.289)    (0.000)    (0.000)
         EBA      Total Net Loss                0.329      -0.100     -0.272     11202
                                                (0.232)    (0.549)    (0.048)
         EBA      Total Loss                    0.557      0.527      0.803      4945
                                                (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)

                Panel B: Rank correlations with the 6-month realized return
                  Estimated returns             Large      Small      All        RMSE
         Vlab     LRMES                         0.350      0.314      0.299      0.553
                                                (0.201)    (0.055)    (0.029)
         EBA      T1C return                    0.546      0.339      0.354      0.767
                                                (0.035)    (0.038)    (0.009)

              Panel C: Rank correlations with the 6-month realized volatility
                  Estimated risk                Large      Small      All        RMSE
         Vlab     risk weight (eq. (8))         0.554      0.561      0.535      3.395
                                                (0.032)    (0.000)    (0.000)
         EBA      risk weight, scenario end     -0.111     -0.055     -0.140     4.539
                                                (0.694)    (0.742)    (0.318)

         Panel D: Rank correlations with the 6-month realized volatility change
                  Estimated risk changes        Large      Small      All        RMSE
         Vlab     risk weight (eq. (8))         0.521      0.395      0.434      1.305
                                                (0.046)    (0.014)    (0.001)
         EBA      risk weight change            0.061      0.397      0.341      2.400
                                                (0.830)    (0.014)    (0.012)



                                                      30
Table 6: Realized volatility regressions. Parameter estimates of cross-sectional regressions.
Dependent variable: six-month realized volatility (eq. (9)), after disclosure of the EBA stress test in July
2011. EBA T1 LVGR (scenario end) = T1S /TAS ; EBA risk weight (scenario end) = RWAS /TAS , where
subscript S denotes quantities at the end of the EBA stress scenario. Vlab download date: 06/30/2011.
White’s heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors in parentheses. The symbol * indicates statistical
significance at the 5% level; ** at 1%. Sample size: 53.


         Regression #                  1          2        3          4           5        6            7
         Constant                      4.39**     -0.44    6.25**     5.02**      5.95**   3.35**       1.46
                                       (0.27)     (1.84)   (0.83)     (0.47)      (0.94)   (1.41)       (1.52)

         Book-to-market                0.03**                                              0.031**      0.04**
                                       (0.001)                                             (0.001)      (0.002)

 Vlab    risk weight (eq. (8))                    2.76**                                   2.901**      3.45**
                                                  (0.99)                                   (0.68)       (0.71)

 EBA     T1 LVGR, scenario end                             -34.47*                         -134.98**    -177.7**
                                                           (16.26)                         (24.24)      (16.38)

 EBA     T1 LVGR2 , scenario end                                      -167.78              867.27**     997.99**
                                                                      (126.03)             (172.2)      (108.3)

 EBA     risk weight, scenario end                                                -2.58                 4.84**
                                                                                  (1.59)                (1.37)

         F-test                        11.48**    7.63**   5.92*      1.76        2.5      15.77**      17.47**

         Adj. R2 (%)                   16.78      11.31    8.65       1.45        2.8      53.18        61.29




                                                    31
Figure 1: Stress test change in capital vs. Vlab market cap loss (EUR millions).
Change in Core Tier 1 Capital (Delta T1C) under the EBA 2011 stress scenario (blue) against Vlab market
capitalization loss (Delta MV) (red). Negative changes represent a capital increase. Banks are ranked accord-
ing to their changes in Core T1 Capital under the EBA stress scenario. Vlab download date: 12/31/2010.



                                                                                                                                           -­‐15000	                                       -­‐5000	                       5000	     15000	          25000	     35000	     45000	     55000	  
            Royal	  Bank	  of	  Scotland	  Group	  PLC	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                            Lloyds	  Banking	  Group	  PLC	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                         Commerzbank	  AG	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                Bank	  of	  Ireland	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                             NaGonal	  Bank	  Of	  Greece	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                            EFG	  Eurobank	  Ergasias	  SA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                         Dexia	  SA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                 Banco	  Popular	  Espanol	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                Alpha	  Bank	  AE	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                           Piraeus	  Bank	  SA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                          Agricultural	  Bank	  of	  Greece	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                TT	  Hellenic	  Postbank	  SA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                           Banco	  Pastor	  SA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                 Espirito	  Santo	  Financial	  Group	  SA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                        Bank	  of	  Cyprus	  Plc	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                 Marﬁn	  Popular	  Bank	  PCL	  (Cyprus)	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                UniCredit	  SpA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                SNS	  REAAL	  NV	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                  Banco	  BPI	  SA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                   Banco	  de	  Sabadell	  SA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                 Oesterreichische	  Volksbanken	  AG	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                  Bankinter	  SA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                       Landesbank	  Berlin	  Holding	  AG	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                       Bank	  of	  ValleVa	  PLC	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                        Banco	  Popolare	  SC	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                          Pohjola	  Bank	  PLC	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                  Raiﬀeisen	  Bank	  InternaGonal	  AG	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                  Sydbank	  A/S	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                               Jyske	  Bank	  A/S	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                       Banco	  Comercial	  Portugues	  SA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                      Erste	  Group	  Bank	  AG	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
              Skandinaviska	  Enskilda	  Banken	  AB	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                 OTP	  Bank	  PLC	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                 Swedbank	  AB	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                         Credit	  Agricole	  SA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                      Unione	  di	  Banche	  Italiane	  SCPA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                DNB	  NOR	  ASA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
          Banca	  Monte	  dei	  Paschi	  di	  Siena	  SpA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                          Svenska	  Handelsbanken-­‐AB	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                           Nordea	  Bank	  AB	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                KBC	  Groep	  NV	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Irish	  Life	  &	  Permanent	  Group	  Holdings	  PLC	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                          Societe	  Generale	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                   BNP	  Paribas	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                   Barclays	  PLC	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                        Deutsche	  Bank	  AG	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                        HSBC	  Holdings	  PLC	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                ING	  Groep	  NV	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                          Danske	  Bank	  A/S	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                     Allied	  Irish	  Banks	  PLC	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                       Banco	  Bilbao	  Vizcaya	  Argentari	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                      Intesa	  Sanpaolo	  SpA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                       Banco	  Santander	  SA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
                                                                                                                         Delta	  T1C	  under	  EBA	  stress	  scenario	                                                               Delta	  MV	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           32
Figure 2: Stress tests context. The lines represent the 6-month forward realized returns of the
S&P500 (red), the Eurostoxx50 (blue) and the MSCI ACWI World ETF index (black). The 6-month
forward realized return is derived from daily stock prices pt of the market index: 6-month forward realized
         Pt+131
return = t=t+1 ln(pt /pt−1 ) ∗ 100. Vertical bars represent the disclosure date of each stress test (in red for
US stress tests, blue for European stress tests).


              S&P500 6M-FORWARD RETURN                     EUROSTOXX50 6M-FORWARD RETURN
              ACWI World 6M-FORWARD RETURN
                                                                   CEBS 2010          EBA 2011     CCAR 2012
                                            SCAP 2009
                                                                                            EBA
                                                  CEBS 2009                    CCAR 2011
   40                                                                                       Capital
                                                                                            Exercise



   20




    0




  -20




  -40




  -60


   2007               2008              2009                2010               2011              2012




                                                      33
Figure 3: Stress tests Tier 1 leverage ratios vs. Vlab market leverage ratio. The
Tier 1 Leverage ratio (T1 LVGR) is the ratio of Tier 1 Capital to total assets. Vlab market leverage ratio
(M-LVGRs ) is the ratio of market cap to quasi-market assets under Vlab stress scenario (eq. (3)). “Min”
stands for the minimum ratio across the 9 quarters of the CCAR 2013 scenario. CCAR 2013 ratios do not
consider the effect of planned capital actions and are disclosed in the Dodd-Frank Act stress test (DFAST
2013). EBA 2011 ratios are the projected ratios at the end of the stress scenario.

                       (a) CCAR 2013 min T1 Leverage ratio (wihout the effect of
                       capital actions) vs. Vlab market leverage ratio. Vlab down-
                       load date: 09/28/2012.




                       (b) EBA 2011 stressed T1 Leverage ratio vs. Vlab market
                       leverage ratio. Vlab download date: 12/31/2010.




                                                   34
     Figure 4: EBA capital shortfalls vs. SRISK
(a) Disclosed capital shortfall in the EBA 2011 stress test (eq. (4))
vs. SRISK (EUR millions). Vlab download date: 12/31/2010.




 (b) EBA Capital Exercise “Overall Shortfall” (eq. (6)) vs. SRISK
 (EUR millions). Vlab download date: 09/30/2011.




                                 35
Figure 5: EBA risk-based and leverage-based capital shortfalls vs. SRISK
          (a) EBA 2011 stress test ’absolute’ risk-based capital shortfall/excess
          (eq. (5)) vs. SRISK (EUR millions). Vlab download date:
          12/31/2010.




            (b) EBA 2011 stress test leverage-based shortfall (eq. (7)) vs.
            SRISK (EUR millions). Vlab download date: 12/31/2010.




                                            36
Figure 6: Stress test risk weight vs. Vlab risk weight and T1 leverage ratio.
Projected regulatory risk weight at the end of the EBA 2011 stress scenario (RWAS /TAS , horizontal axis)
against Vlab risk weight (a), and the projected Tier 1 Leverage ratio at the end of the EBA 2011 stress
scenario (b). Vlab download date: 12/31/2010.

                        (a) Projected regulatory risk weight vs. Vlab risk weight




                     (b) Projected regulatory risk weight vs. projected Tier 1 Lever-
                     age ratio at the end of the EBA 2011 stress scenario (T1S /TAS )




                                                   37
Appendix
A. Vlab vs. regulatory stress tests design
A.1. Scenarios
    The design of robust and coherent scenarios has been an important topic of the stress
testing literature (Breuer et al. (2009); Flood and Korenko (2013); Glasserman et al. (2012)
and others). Stress test results are indeed all conditional on the scenario definition. The
scenarios of the Federal Reserve, the EBA and Vlab are different on several dimensions:
they consider different variables, horizons, stress levels and trajectories. Vlab scenario is
the simplest one; it is a one-factor scenario featuring a 40% drop in equity prices over six
months. Other variables are considered endogenous to the market factor.
    The stress scenario of stress tests usually focuses on an adverse macro-economic scenario
defined as a deviation from a baseline scenario. The EBA stress scenario developed by the
European Central Bank features a macro-economic stress scenario defined as a deviation of
the European Commission forecasts. On the opposite, Vlab is an absolute market stress
scenario and prevents the procyclical effects of deviation-based scenarios where stress sce-
narios, and consequent stress tests outcomes, are more severe during bad times. Also, the
Vlab scenario horizon of six months is shorter than stress tests scenarios that typically last
two years and justifies better the assumption of most stress tests that banks do not react to
the stress scenario.
    Unlike Vlab, stress tests scenarios are multi-factor scenarios and the principal challenge
of the scenario design is coherence. Stresses have to be consistent across the multiple vari-
ables such that the joint outcome of the scenario is economically realistic. The challenge of
coherence also grows as the number of variables increases. The SCAP 2009 considered only
three factors: the real GDP growth, the unemployment rate and house prices. The CCAR
2012 stress scenario defines trajectories for 25 macro-economic and financial variables, and
additionally accounts for a global market shock on the six BHCs with large trading activities.
The number of factors in the ECB scenario exceeds 70 variables and the ECB also considers
a market stress scenario conditional on the macro-economic scenario.
    The question of causality of macro-economic variables on financial variables is raised
in Alfaro and Drehmann (2009) where severe macro-economic conditions are shown to be
subsequent to the beginning of financial crises. This argument questions the whole relevance
of macro-economic scenarios and the models used to map macro scenarios on the financial
performance of banks. Macro-economic scenarios defined by exogenous shocks on macro-
economic variables are rooted in the microprudential perspective as it ignores the endogenous

                                             38
nature of systemic risk where feedback effects from the financial sector amplify the macro-
economic crisis.
    The robustness of stress tests scenarios is also questioned. Borio et al. (2012) indicate
that the selection of a stress scenario is easier when the stress tests are crisis management
tools as they are designed when the key risks are apparent. Indeed, in the SCAP 2009, a
decline of local house prices is a significant factor explaining larger loan loss rates. In the
EBA 2011, country-specific shocks to sovereign credit spreads are translated into valuation
haircuts of banks sovereign exposures.
    Other concerns on stress tests come from the focus on the coherence and plausibility
of stress scenarios, which could dilute their severity. Comparing to the 40% equity market
index decline over six months of Vlab; the EBA stress scenario considers a fall of between
10% up to 20% in equity prices over two years. The CCAR 2012 assumes a 50% drop in the
Dow Jones total stock market index at the middle of the scenario (late 2012) but then reverts
at the end of the scenario to a higher level than pre-scenario prices. We argue that this focus
on plausibility, while can facilitate the buy-in of all stakeholders involved in a macro stress
test (Borio et al. (2012)), severely undermines the reliability of stress tests results.

A.2. Data
A.2.1. Public vs. supervisory
    US and EU-wide stress tests are implemented using extended bank supervisory data. US
BHCs submit their data confidentially to the Federal Reserve using standardized FR Y-14A
forms. These forms contain detailed information on capital composition, loans and securities
portfolios, trading and counterparty exposures, and historical P&L. The reports additionally
collect BHCs’ own projections of loss and revenues and their estimates of exposures sensi-
tivities to a set of risk factors specified by the Federal Reserve. In Europe, banks implement
stress tests themselves and use their own data. Banks are encouraged by the EBA to use
all the time series available on credit risk parameters and P&L figures for the application of
the macro scenario.
    Next to EU and US extensive-data based stress tests, Vlab could be qualified as a non-
invasive stress test. Vlab results are obtained from a reduced dataset of publicly available
data including historical market prices, market cap and leverage.

A.2.2. Market vs. accounting
   The stress scenario is mostly applied to accounting data in the supervisory stress tests
whereas Vlab stresses the market value of equity. In that respect, Vlab can be viewed as a
mark-to-market stress test. Market prices are believed to reflect expectations of all market

                                              39
participants on banks performance and are available in real time. Harris et al. (2012) further
argue that balance sheet data, being single point estimates at a specific reporting date, cannot
reflect the dynamic risks embedded in assets and liabilities. For these reasons, market data
are considered to be more informative than accounting numbers.
    Another problem concerning accounting data comes from their lack of uniformity. Ac-
counting standards are different; US banks report under US GAAPs and European banks
under IFRS. This leads to large differences in the leverage ratios as mentioned earlier. But
even using the same standards they are still some large cross-border differences as pointed
out by the EBA. Moreover, accounting rules are subject to different interpretations at the
bank level.
    Then, along with its informative content, we can also question the reliability of accounting
data during a crisis. We have shown in Section 5.3 that banks with a high book-to-market
ratio experienced higher realized volatility during the European sovereign debt crisis. The
positive and significant correlation between the book-to-market ratio and risk indicates that
investors do not trust banks estimates of their capital levels during a crisis. In the US too,
the book-to-market ratio increased after the financial crisis; market capitalizations were far
above regulatory capital levels in 2008 but the regulatory capital becomes larger than the
market cap for many banks in 2011.

A.3. Vlab as a macroprudential benchmark
    According to Borio et al. (2012), any stress test has four elements: the scenario, the
risk exposures (or the bank data), the model and the outcome. The scenario specifies the
shocks to be applied to bank data using a specific model, and the resulting measures are the
final outcome of the stress test. The simplicity of Vlab on the scenario and data dimensions
could represent its main weakness. It does not have the information granularity at the
asset category or exposure level that stress tests have. Vlab does not however do worse
than stress tests when it comes to forecasting real bank outcomes during a crisis as shown
in Section 3.2. Instead, the use of publicly available market data makes Vlab estimates
richer and more transparent; it provides real-time forward looking measures of risk and
the use of market data also addresses the concerns on the reliability and consistency of
accountingbased measurement across firms. The simplicity of the Vlab scenario makes its
outcomes robust to various economic environments and supports the argument in Haldane
(2011, 2012) that complex uncertain environments call for simpler rules. Vlab severity makes
SRISK the binding constraint for banks where stress tests estimates are not (Hanson et al.
(2011)), and requiring banks to raise SRISK is likely to bring the benefits of greater stability

                                              40
to the financial system. Vlab SRISK is therefore viewed as a macroprudential benchmark
addressing the concerns on the lack of robustness, severity and transparency of stress tests
measures, that regulators may be interested to use in the assessment of their own stress tests
outcomes.




                                             41
B. Supplementary figures

Figure B.1: EBA 2011 capital ratios vs. Vlab market leverage ratio. The Core Tier
1 capital ratio is the ratio of Core Tier 1 Capital to risk-weighted assets at the end of the stress scenario
(December 2012). Banks pass the stress test if their stressed T1CR is larger than 5%. The Tier 1 Leverage
capital ratio is the ratio of Tier 1 Capital to total assets at the end of the stress scenario. Vlab M-LVGRs
is the ratio of market cap to quasi-market assets under Vlab stress scenario (eq. (3)). Vlab download date:
12/31/2010. Banks are ranked according to their stress test capital ratios.


            (a) Core Tier 1 capital ratio of large banks at the end of the EBA 2011 stress scenario
            (blue, threshold 5%) vs. Vlab market leverage ratio (M-LVGR under stress) (red).

                                                                    0%	     1%	     2%	     3%	     4%	     5%	      6%	      7%	      8%	      9%	     10%	  

              Royal	  Bank	  of	  Scotland	  Group	  PLC	  
                                     Commerzbank	  AG	  
                                    Deutsche	  Bank	  AG	  
                                      Societe	  Generale	  
                                           UniCredit	  SpA	  
                                             Barclays	  PLC	  
                         Lloyds	  Banking	  Group	  PLC	  
                                              BNP	  Paribas	  
                                  Banco	  Santander	  SA	  
                                    HSBC	  Holdings	  PLC	  
                                     Credit	  Agricole	  SA	  
                                           ING	  Groep	  NV	  
                                 Intesa	  Sanpaolo	  SpA	  
                  Banco	  Bilbao	  Vizcaya	  Argentari	  
                                       Nordea	  Bank	  AB	  

                                     T1CR	  under	  the	  EBA	  2011	  stress	  scenario	                  Vlab	  M-­‐LVGR	  under	  stress	  


            (b) Tier 1 Leverage ratio (T1 LVGR) at the end of the EBA 2011 stress scenario
            (blue) vs. Vlab market leverage ratio (M-LVGR under stress) (red).

                                                                    0%	     1%	     2%	     3%	     4%	     5%	      6%	      7%	      8%	      9%	     10%	  

                                    Deutsche	  Bank	  AG	  
                                             Barclays	  PLC	  
                                     Commerzbank	  AG	  
                                              BNP	  Paribas	  
                                      Societe	  Generale	  
                                     Credit	  Agricole	  SA	  
                                       Nordea	  Bank	  AB	  
                                           ING	  Groep	  NV	  
                                           UniCredit	  SpA	  
                                  Banco	  Santander	  SA	  
                         Lloyds	  Banking	  Group	  PLC	  
                                    HSBC	  Holdings	  PLC	  
                                 Intesa	  Sanpaolo	  SpA	  
                  Banco	  Bilbao	  Vizcaya	  Argentari	  
              Royal	  Bank	  of	  Scotland	  Group	  PLC	  

                                   T1	  LVGR	  under	  the	  EBA	  2011	  stress	  scenario	                 Vlab	  M-­‐LVGR	  under	  stress	  

                                                                                               42
Figure B.2: CCAR 2012 capital ratios vs. Vlab market leverage ratio. The Tier 1
Common capital ratio (T1CR) is the ratio of Tier 1 Common Capital to risk-weighted assets. The Tier 1
Leverage ratio (T1 LVGR) is the ratio of Tier 1 Capital to total assets. “Min” stands for the minimum ratio
across the 9 quarters of the CCAR 2012 scenario (Q4 2011 to Q4 2013). Note that the different minimum
ratios of banks may not happen during the same quarter. CCAR 2012 ratios do not consider the effect of
planned capital actions. Thresholds to pass the stress test (min ratios have to be larger than): 5% (Min
T1CR), 3-4% (Min T1 LVGR). Banks with a 4% T1 LVGR threshold: Ally, American Express, Capital One
and MetLife. Vlab M-LVGRs is the ratio of market cap to quasi-market assets under Vlab stress scenario
(eq. (3)). Vlab download date: 09/30/2011. Banks are ranked according to their stress test capital ratios.

              (a) Min Tier 1 Common capital ratio (Min T1CR) under the CCAR 2012 stress
              scenario (blue, threshold 5%) vs. Vlab market leverage ratio (M-LVGR under
              stress) (red).
                                                                     0%	     2%	     4%	      6%	       8%	          10%	        12%	        14%	       16%	  

                                     Ally	  Financial	  Inc.	  
                                                    MetLife	  
                                       Morgan	  Stanley	  
                                        Suntrust	  Banks	  
                                      Bank	  Of	  America	  
                                     Regions	  Financial	  
                                       Goldman	  Sachs	  
                                            CiGgroup	  Inc.	  
                                     JP	  Morgan	  Chase	  
                                                    Keycorp	  
                                               Wells	  Fargo	  
                              PNC	  Financial	  Services	  
                               Capital	  One	  Financial	  
                                 BB&T	  CorporaGon	  
                                              US	  Bancorp	  
                                FiRh	  Third	  Bancorp	  
                                    American	  Express	  
                Bank	  Of	  New	  York	  Mellon	  Corp	  
                                              State	  Street	  

                                    Min	  T1CR	  under	  the	  CCAR	  2012	  stress	  scenario	              Vlab	  M-­‐LVGR	  under	  stress	  



              (b) Min Tier 1 Leverage ratio (Min T1 LVGR) under the CCAR 2012 stress
              scenario (blue, threshold 3-4%) vs. Vlab market leverage ratio (M-LVGR under
              stress) (red).
                                                                     0%	     2%	     4%	      6%	       8%	          10%	        12%	        14%	       16%	  

                                            Ci+group	  Inc.	  
                                       Morgan	  Stanley	  
                                                    MetLife	  
                                       Goldman	  Sachs	  
                                     JP	  Morgan	  Chase	  
                                     Regions	  Financial	  
                                        Suntrust	  Banks	  
                                      Bank	  Of	  America	  
                                     Ally	  Financial	  Inc.	  
                Bank	  Of	  New	  York	  Mellon	  Corp	  
                                 BB&T	  Corpora+on	  
                               Capital	  One	  Financial	  
                                               Wells	  Fargo	  
                              PNC	  Financial	  Services	  
                                                    Keycorp	  
                                              State	  Street	  
                                              US	  Bancorp	  
                                FiTh	  Third	  Bancorp	  
                                    American	  Express	  

                                  Min	  T1	  LVGR	  under	  the	  CCAR	  2012	  stress	  scenario	           Vlab	  M-­‐LVGR	  under	  stress	  
                                                                                                43
Figure B.3: CCAR 2013 capital ratios vs. Vlab market leverage ratio. The Tier 1
Common capital ratio (T1CR) is the ratio of Tier 1 Common Capital to risk-weighted assets. The Tier 1
Leverage ratio (T1 LVGR) is the ratio of Tier 1 Capital to total assets. “Min” stands for the minimum ratio
across the 9 quarters of the CCAR 2013 scenario (Q4 2012 to Q4 2014). Note that the different minimum
ratios of banks may not happen during the same quarter. CCAR 2013 ratios do not consider the effect of
planned capital actions and are disclosed in the Dodd-Frank Act stress test (DFAST 2013). Thresholds to
pass the stress test (min ratios have to be larger than): 5% (Min T1CR), 3-4% (Min T1 LVGR). Banks with
a 4% T1 LVGR threshold: Ally, American Express and Capital One. Vlab M-LVGRs is the ratio of market
cap to quasi-market assets under Vlab stress scenario (eq. (3)). Vlab download date: 09/28/2012. Banks
are ranked according to their stress test capital ratios.

               (a) Min Tier 1 Common capital ratio (Min T1CR) under the CCAR 2013
               stress scenario (blue, threshold 5%) vs. Vlab market leverage ratio (M-LVGR
               under stress) (red).
                                                                             0%	   1%	   2%	   3%	   4%	   5%	   6%	   7%	   8%	   9%	   10%	   11%	   12%	   13%	   14%	   15%	   16%	   17%	   18%	   19%	   20%	  

                                             Ally	  Financial	  Inc.	  
                                               Morgan	  Stanley	  
                                                Goldman	  Sachs	  
                                              JP	  Morgan	  Chase	  
                                              Bank	  Of	  America	  
                                                       Wells	  Fargo	  
                                                Suntrust	  Banks	  
                                       Capital	  One	  Financial	  
                                             Regions	  Financial	  
                                                            Keycorp	  
                                                         CiOgroup	  
                                                      US	  Bancorp	  
                                         FiQh	  Third	  Bancorp	  
                                    PNC	  Financial	  Services	  
                                          BB&T	  CorporaOon	  
                                           American	  Express	  
                                                      State	  Street	  
                 Bank	  Of	  New	  York	  Mellon	  Corp/The	  

                                       Min	  T1CR	  under	  DFAST	  2013	  stress	  scenario	                                                      Vlab	  M-­‐LVGR	  under	  stress	  



               (b) Min Tier 1 Leverage ratio (Min T1 LVGR) under the CCAR 2013 stress
               scenario (blue, threshold 3-4%) vs. Vlab market leverage ratio (M-LVGR
               under stress) (red).
                                                                             0%	   1%	   2%	   3%	   4%	   5%	   6%	   7%	   8%	   9%	   10%	   11%	   12%	   13%	   14%	   15%	   16%	   17%	   18%	   19%	   20%	  

                                                Goldman	  Sachs	  
                                               Morgan	  Stanley	  
                                              JP	  Morgan	  Chase	  
                 Bank	  Of	  New	  York	  Mellon	  Corp/The	  
                                                         CiLgroup	  
                                              Bank	  Of	  America	  
                                       Capital	  One	  Financial	  
                                                Suntrust	  Banks	  
                                                      State	  Street	  
                                             Regions	  Financial	  
                                                       Wells	  Fargo	  
                                          BB&T	  CorporaLon	  
                                                            Keycorp	  
                                                      US	  Bancorp	  
                                    PNC	  Financial	  Services	  
                                         FiVh	  Third	  Bancorp	  
                                           American	  Express	  
                                             Ally	  Financial	  Inc.	  

                                     Min	  T1	  LVGR	  under	  DFAST	  2013	  stress	  scenario	                                                     Vlab	  M-­‐LVGR	  under	  stress	  
                                                                                                                       44
