                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         NOTES ON THE TAX
                      TREATMENT OF STRUCTURES




                         Roger H. Gordon

                        James R. Hines Jr.

                       Lawrence H. Summers




                      Working Paper No. 1896




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, MA 02138
                             April 1986




This paper was prepared for the NBER Conference on The Effects of
Taxation on Capital Formation, February 13-16, 1986. We are
indebted to the Harvard-MIT Joint Center for Housing Studies for
partial support of this research. We thank Patric Hendershott,
Jack Mintz, Anthony Pellechio, James Poterba, and Emil Sunley far
helpful comments on an earlier draft. Mary Joyce and John Musgrave
of the Bureau of Economic Analysis and Karen Cys, Thomas Petska, and
Alan Zemple of the Internal Revenue Service kindly provided us with
unpublished data. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Taxation and projects in Government Budgets and
Taxation and Capital Formation. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #1896
                                                 April 1986




                  Notes on the Tax Treatment of Structures




                                 ABSTRACT




     More than three quarters of the United States tangible capital stock repre-
sents structures. Tax policies potentially have a major impact on both the
level and composition of investment in structures and equipment. This point is
explicitly recognized in most discussions of the effects of capital income
taxation. Two aspects of the taxation of structures -- the relative burden
placed on structures as opposed to equipment investment and the non-taxation of
owner occupied housing under the income tax -- have attracted substantial atten-
tion in recent years. This paper explores these two aspects of the taxation of
structures investments.

     While the tax system may well have a potent impact on the level and com-
position of structures investment, this paper argues that conventional analyses
of these effects are very misleading. We reach two main conclusions. First,
under current tax law, certain types of structures investment are very highly
tax favored. Structures can be transferred and therefore depreciated more than
once, and structures may be readily financed with tax-favored debt. Overall, it
is unlikely that a significant bias towards equipment and against structures
exists under current law. Second, the conventional view that the tax system is
biased in favor of homeownership is wrong. Because of the possibility of "tax
arbitrage" between high bracket landlords and low bracket tenants, the tax
system has long favored rental over ownership for most households. The 1981
reforms by reducing the top marginal tax rate reduced this bias somewhat.




Roger H. Gordon            James R. Hines Jr.            Lawrence H. Summers
Department of Economics    Department of Economics       Department of Econoniics
University of Michigan     Harvard Un-iversity           Harvard University
Ann Arbor, MI 48109        Cambridge, MA 02138           Cambridge, MA 02138

(313) 764—6769             (617) 495—2144                (617) 495-2447
     More than three quarters of the United States tangible capital stock

represents structures. Despite their relatively low rates of depreciation,

structures account for more than half of all gross fixed investment in most

years. Tax policies potentially have a major impact on both the level and

composition of investment in structures. This point is explicitly recognized

in most discussions of the effects of capital income taxation. Two aspects of

the taxation of structures --   the   relative burden placed on structures as

opposed to equipment investment and the non-taxation of owner occupied housing

under the income tax -- have attracted substantial attention in recent years.

This paper explores these two aspects of the taxation of structures invest—

ments.

     The Treasury1984) in its recent tax reform proposal, pointed to the

extra tax burdens placed on structures relative to equipment as a major defect

of the current ACRS system.     The 1985 Economic Report of the President echoes

this sentiment, concludthg that, The effective tax rate.    .   .is   lower for equip-

ment than for structures. Because different industries utilize different

mixes of capital goods, differential taxation of assets results in differen-

tial taxation of capital income by industry. The average effective Federal

corporate tax rate on fixed investment varies widely by industry." The deci-

sions of the Congress in 1984 and 1985 to scale back the depreciation benefits

to structures but not to equipment is perhaps surprising in light of these

conclusions.

    The allegedly favorable treatment of owner occupied housing has long been
                                       —2-


 a target of academic critics of the tax system although suggestions for reform

 have generated little if any political support. The failure to include

 imputed rent is often treated as a tax subsidy. A large literature summarized

 in Rosen (1985) has estimated the welfare loss thought to come from tax

 induced changes in tenure choice. And the corporate income tax is often

opposed on the ground that it exacerbates the distortions caused by the non-

taxation of owner occupied housing.

     While the tax system may well have a potent impact on the level and

composition of the structures investment, this paper argues that conventional

analyses of these effects are very misleading. We reach two main conclusions.

First, under current tax law, certain types of structures investment are very

highly tax favored. Overall, it is unlikely that a significant bias towards

equipment and against structures exists under current law. Second, the

conventional view that the tax system is biased in favor of homeownership is

wrong. Because of the possibility of "tax arbitrage" between high bracket

landlords and low bracket tenants, the tax system has long favored rental over

ownership for most households. The 1981 reforms by reducing the top marginal

tax rate reduced this bias somewhat.

     Many earlier analyses have reached different conclusions because of their

failure to take account of several aspects of the behavior of real world

investors which serve to reduce the effective tax burden on structures

investment. First, structures may be depreciated more than once ("churned")

for tax purposes. Particularly where devices can be found to reduce the

effective rate of capital gains tax below the statutory rate, the effective

purchase price of a structure may he reduced substantially by the knowledge
                                       —3—


 that it can be depreciated several times. Second, some types of structures,

 particularly commercial buildings, are very easy to borrow against because

 they are quite liquid assets. To the extent that the tax system favors the

 use of debt finance they too will be favored. Third, certain types of invest-

ments, especially residential rental capital, facilitate tax arbitrage.

     The paper is organized as follows. Section I reviews trends in

structures investment over the past few years and highlights the dramatic

increase in the rate of investment in commercial buildings that has occurred

in recent years. Some information on the ownership of different types of

structures investments is also presented. Section II describes the tax rules

governing the churning of capital assets and considers under what

circumstances the churning of assets will be tax advantaged. Section III con-

siders the role of leverage and raises the possibility that structures invest-

ments are favored under current tax law because of their ability to carry

debt. Section IV examines the tax advantages to homeownership and shows that

the tax law actually provides incentives for most households to rent their

homes. Section V concludes the paper by discussing the implications of our

results for tax reform and future research.
                                      —4-.




I.   PATTERNS OF STRUCTURES OWNERSHIP AND INVESTMENT


     A number of studies, notably Auerbach (1983) and Fullerton and Henderson

(1984), have made rather elaborate calculations of the deadweight losses

arising from the failure of the tax system to impose equal burdens on

different types of corporate investment. In large part it is the assumed

differential taxation of equipment and structures that drive the results of

these studies. This differential taxation creates production inefficiencies

within industries, and also favors some industries at the expense of others.

Despite the results of many academic experts and the results of staff analyses

suggesting that the then current law was heavily biased in favor of equipment,

the Congress in 1984 chose to scale back the depreciation benefits associated

with structures investments while not altering the tax treatment of equipment

investments. Tax legislation in 1982 had reduced somewhat the value of depre-

ciation allowances for equipment, but standard calculations still showed

equipment to be strongly tax favored over structures. The 1984 action was

taken at least in part because of a widespread perception that the 1981 acce-

leration of depreciation allowances had led to the rapid growth of tax

shelters based on investments -in structures. Additional tax law changes in

1984 and 1985 further reduced the value of depreciation allowances for struc-

tures while leaving equipment allowances intact.

     How can one square the perception that structures are a common tax

shelter vehicle with calculations suggesting that they are among the most

heavily taxed assets? Part of the answer may be found in Table 1 which

examines the composition of the stock of structures in 1983 the most recent
                                          -5—


year for which data are available. The first row of the table shows that

corporate structures represented less than a quarter of all structures in 1983

and that they accounted for less than half of all depreciable structures.

     While detailed data are not available on the ownership of different types

of structures, it -is clear from the data in the table that the vast majority

of residential capital represents owner occupied housing with the bulk of the

remaining residential capital representing partnerships and proprietorships.

Only a negligible fraction of residential capital is held in corporate form.

The ownership of non-residential structures is more complex. It appears

likely to us that most of the non-corporate structures are commercial

buildings owned by partnerships or proprietors. The other main categories of

nonresidential structures --     industrial   buildings, mines and public utility
structures --   are   probably largely owned by corporations.


     Patterns of Structures Investment

     Table 2 presents some information on the composition of structures

investment in 1980 before the introduction of ACRS and in 1985. The

Table highlights a number of aspects of structures investment that seem

critical in assessing neutrality arguments suggesting a tax bias against

structures investment. First, a substantial share of structures investment

takes place in forms where the effects of taxes cannot sensibly be analyzed in

isolation. In 1985, for example public utilities accounted for about

20 percent of all investment in structures. The profit rate of most public

utilities is regulated and in many cases the benefits associated with tax

incentives, especially the investment tax credit, are passed on to consumers.
                                       -6—


Public utility firms may have objectives more complicated than simple

unconstrained profit maximization. About 40 percent of structures investment

takes place in forms where other public microeconom-ic policies are intimately

involved in guiding the allocation of resources     educational and hospital

buildings, mining and petroleum, and farming. As with public utilities

examining the effects of tax benefits in isolation is likely to be very

misleading. The remaining 40 percent of structures investment takes place in

industrial and commercial buildings where tax considerations are presumably of

primary importance. What is perhaps surprising is that industrial buildings

(plants) represent only about 10 percent of all non-residential structures

investment. Commercial buildings account for the remaining 30 percent of non-

residential structures investment.

     Second, the information in the table indicates that there has been a

fairly dramatic shift in non—residential structures investment towards

commercial buildings and in particular office buildings over the last five

years. The dollar volume of investment in commercial buildings more than

doubled between 1980 and 1985 compared to an increase of less than 50 percent

in overall structures investment.    The industrial buildings category has been

particularly weak over the same period, so commercial building investment is

now four times as great as industrial buildings investment compared with a

ratio of two to one in 1980. It is perhaps ironic that the 1981 tax cut which

had as a major objective spurring corporate investment has been followed by a

dramatic spurt in commercial buildings investment --- a large part of which

occurs outside the corporate sector. Between 1980 and 1985, real investment

in commercial structures increased by 56 percent, of which office building
                                       —7-.




 investment rose 85, compared to a 22 percent increase in overall nonresiden-

 tial construction and a 26 percent increase in equipment investment.    As we
 discuss in detail below the dramatic divergence between patterns of investment

 in commercial buildings and other structures raises the suspicion that despite

 their identical depreciation schedules the tax system affects them very dif-

 ferently.

      We resist the temptation to analyze closely the evolution of investment

 in different types of assets over the last few years because of the problem

stressed by Auerbach and Hines (1986) among others of gauging the effects of

anticipated changes in tax policy. In 1984 and 1985 the depreciation

incentives for investment -in structures were reduced. In addition, rules

limiting investors' ability to utilize structures investments as tax shelters

were introduced. More changes in the same direction are currently under

discussion. It is a least conceivable that some of the strength in commercial

buildings investment, and perhaps other types of investment as well, comes from

a desire to accelerate investments so that they will receive favorable tax

treatment. Given the common political view that real estate investments are a

major tax shelter vehicle, it is possible that these effects are most

important in the case of commercial buildings.

     Table 2 also indicates that residential investment has been
                                                                   surprisingly
strong over the last five years. The dollar volume of residential investment

has increased by more than 50 percent over the past 5 years, and real invest-

ment in residential structures has increased by 26 percent, the same rate of

growth exhibited by equipment investment. Virtually all of the real growth in

residential investment is attributable to owner-occupied housing, which has
                                      -8-


 risen 57% despite the fact that alone among structures it received no new tax

 incentives in 1981. Hendershott (1986) provides some evidence suggesting that

at the same time that residential investment has been strong the homeownership

rate has increased substantially.

     The patterns of structures investment documented in this section suggest

that conventional analyses of the effects of taxation may be seriously

misleading. Such analyses do not distinguish between tax effects on different

types of nonresidential structures and so cannot account for the great

strength of commercial buildings investment relative to other types of struc-

tures investment. Many conventional analyses emphasize an alleged tax bias

towards owner occupied housing. These analyses cannot account for the obser-

vation that owner occupied housing investment rose more rapidly than that of

any other category following the 1981 tax change which conferred substantial

depreciation benefits on rental housing. These apparent anomalies may just

reflect non-tax factors which exert a substantial influence on investment.

Alternatively, it is possible that important aspects of the effects of the tax

system on structures have been neglected. We consider the latter possibility

below.
 II. TAX CHURNING OF NONRESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY


      As -is now well understood, the present value of the depreciation

 allowances permitted on a capital asset has an important impact on the

 incentive to invest in it.   Indeed, differences in the treatment of

depreciation between assets is often regarded as a major source of

non-neutrality in the tax system. Unfortunately, calculation of the present

value of the depreciation allowances on a given capital asset is not

straightforward because of the possibility of the assets being transferred and

depreciated more than once for tax purposes. Particularly in an inflationary

environment, there may be large advantages to turning assets over so their

depreciable basis will be increased. Even with no inflation, asset sales

raise the value of prospective depreciation allowances as long as depreciation

allowances are more accelerated than economic depreciation. However, the

incentive to churn assets is mitigated by the capital gains taxes and

"recapture" taxes which must be paid when depreciable assets are sold.

     This section examines the effects on investment incentives of the

possibility that assets can be depreciated more than once,1 After a review of

the legal treatment of depreciation allowances and recapture, we analyze the

desirability of churning different classes of assets. We find that the

incentive to churn and the related incentive to invest is rather sensitive to

both tax rates and assumed discount rates.


     Depreciation and Recapture Rules

     The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 established shorter and faster

write-offs of capital costs for new investment 'in equipment and structures.
                                      -10-


The Accelerated Cost Recovery System (ACRS) included a provision for

depreciation of most classes of structures by a 175 declining balance method

over 15 years. ACRS replaced the Asset Depreciation Range (ADR) system, which

was by comparison far less generous in its treatment of capital depreciation

allowances.

     The ACRS significantly reduced corporations' costs of investing in

structures and equipment. Other than the named goal of Economic Recovery, one

of the purposes of the law was to rectify the effect of then—rising inflation

on incentives to invest. Since the favorable depreciation provisions were

designed to undo by themselves the effects of inflation, the law contained

features which made it more costly than before to sell assets in order to per—

mit the purchaser to get depreciation allowances on the higher, inflated

basis.

     The 1981 tax law permits investors to choose from a variety of options

for depreciating most classes of real property. Besides using 1759 declining

balance with switch-over to straight—line over an asset life of 15 years,

investors could select a straight-line depreciation method for an asset life

o-f 15, 35, or 45 years as they chose. Under normal business circumstances,

of course, an investor who planned never to sell his assets would always

choose the shortest and most accelerated depreciation method.2 However, the

recapture provisions of the law depend on the chosen method of asset

depreciation.

     For investors who choose straight—line depreciation and who sell their

assets, the difference between the sales price and the tax basis is treated as

a capital gain and is taxed at the capital gain rate. However, for investors
                                         —11—


in nonresidential structures who choose the 175?6 declining balance depre-

ciation scheme and who sell their assets at a gain, the value of all depre-

ciation allowances taken to date are recaptured as ordinary income (rather

than as capital gains). This recapture of all past depreciation deductions is

normally sufficiently costly that an investor would be better off using

straight—line depreciation if he intended to sell the asset at any point.

     Congress has modified the tax treatment of structures since passage of

the 1981 act, although not substantially. The 1984 Deficit Reduction Act

(DEFRA) lengthened the tax lives of most structures to 18 years and changed

slightly the tax treatment of installment sales. Structures tax lives were

further extended to 19 years in 1985. Depreciation and recapture provisions

were otherwise unaffected by these laws.3



     Evaluating the Incentive to Churn


     The feasibility of churning an asset depends on its characteristics. A

specialized industrial structure is likely to be difficult to sell because its

functional specificity limits the range of potential buyers. And it may be

difficult to sell and lease back because of the moral hazard and other

problems associated with rental contracts. Most commercial real estate, on the

other hand, is not highly specialized and is therefore easily leased. Indeed

Pan Am rents space in the Pan Am building and Exxon rents its space in

Rockefeller Center. A natural conjecture then is that if the tax benefits to

churning are substantial, a significant tax distortion may be created in favor

of liquid assets. We explore this possibility by considering the magnitude of
                                             —12--



 the tax incentive for the churning of commercial buildings.

        Consider an investor, corporate or noncorporate, which invests in a com-

 mercial building in 1985, expecting the tax law, inflation, and the interest

 rate not to change in the future. There are three possible depreciation stra-

 tegies that must be considered. First, the investor can use accelerated

depreciation (with straight—line switch-over) and never churn the asset.

Second, the investor can use accelerated depreciation and churn at the optimal

point. Third, the firm can use straight—line depreciation and churn at the

optimal point. We consider the attractiveness of each of these alternatives

in turn.

        Depreciation allowances can be easily calculated for scenarios in which

firms do not churn their assets. For the current 19-year tax lifetime, it is

optimal for firms to use 175% declining balance for the first 10 years of asset

lives, switching to straight-line depreciation thereafter. The value to the

firm of these allowances iS:

                        19
(2.1)        PV   =T         Da(j)   [1+i(1—T)]3
                       j=1

where D9(j) is the depreciation allowance inthe jth year using ACRS accelera-

tion and I is the required nominal before-tax rate of return.4 Here T -is the

investor's ordinary tax rate, so equals 46% for a corporation and can be as

high as 50% for an individual.

        If instead the firm chooses the second option of depreciating its struc-

ture using the straight-line method and selling the asset after k years, then

the present value of the firm's depreciation allowances minus capital gains

liability is:
                                                           —13—


                                    k
                                                                                       k
  (2.2)         NET(k) =       T         D(j)[l+i(1-T)J3          -
                                                                      CG{Q(k)   [i-         D(j)J}[1+i(lT)}k
                                   j=1
                                                                                      j=1
 where D5(j) is the straight-line
                                                      depreciation allowance in the jth year and
 Q(k) is the market value of the asset after
                                                                  k years. In this case,
          =   1/19 for all j. CC in (2.2) is the
                                                 capital gains rate, which normally
 equals 28% for a corporation, and is at most 20% for an individual. With the

 further assumption that structures
                                                       depreciate exponentially at an annual rate
 5, Q(k) simplifies to:


 (2.3)         Q(k) =       [(l_o)(l+lr)Jk

where ir is the inflation rate. To calculate the tax benefits from
                                                                                                churning,
assume that k represents the optimal choice of waiting time between asset

purchase and sale. Then the second—round
                                                              optimal tax treatment of the used
asset will also include churning after k
                                                             more years. Assume for simplicity
that the firm sells the asset to itself
                                                            at a market price, incurring a tran—
saction cost in the process. Then the present value of all net depreciation

benefits minus costs iS:


              PV =                           IC
(2.4)
                     j =0
                            {NET (k) -            •
                                                      Q(k)[1+i(l-T)J


where IC is the fraction of sales price the firm pays as a transaction cost.

This expression simplifies to:

              PV = {NET (k) -           IC
(2.5)                                        •
                                                 Q(k)[1+i(1-T))l/{i        -


        The third option the firm faces is somewhat
                                                    more complicated. Assuming
that the rate of inflation exceeds the
                                                          asset's exponential depreciation rate,
                                                   —14-


so that the seller realizes a capital gain over purchase price, net

depreciation benefits after churning in the kth year are:

                            k
                       T         D (j)[1+i(1—T))
                                                   ' — {C0{Q(k)—1]
(2.6)         NETa =
                           j=1
                            k                        k
                   + T            D(j)[1+i(1-Tfl
                           j=1


        The potential tax benefits of churning are sensitive to the choice of

capital gains tax rate. Previous calculations of the tax effects of asset

sales have assumed that capital gains are all taxed upon realization at the

statutory rate. Particularly for individuals but to some extent for

corporations as well there are devices available which permit capital gains

taxes to be avoided or deferred. This makes the churning of assets much more

attractive. The features of the tax system that permit capital gains taxes to

be avoided or reduced in present value include installment sales, variations

in marginal tax rates, artificially generated losses, steps up in basis, and

outright cheating.

        The main device that both corporations and individuals can both use to

defer capital gains taxes is the installment sale. Rules governing

installment sales were actually liberalized in 1980 but have been tightened

more recently.5 In an installment sale the seller accepts a sequence of

installment payments for his property. The buyer is permitted to use the

present value of these payments, the sale price, as his depreciation basis.

However the seller must pay capital gains tax on the principal component of

installment payments only as they are received. The net effect is to defer

the seller's capital gains tax liability. The advantage can be quite substan-
                                       —15—


 tial since at current interest rates deferral for seven years halves a tax

 liability. The advantage is magnified if for some reason the seller's tax

 rate is expected to decline. While the installment sale is a commonly

 discussed tax avoidance device, we are not aware of quantitative information

on the frequency of its use.

      For individuals with temporarily low income or corporations with negative

or very small taxable profits, progressivity of the tax code makes the effec-

tive marginal capital gains tax rate lower than its normal (statutory) value.

Since taxpayers have some freedom to realize capital gains during advantageous

(low tax rate) years, there is an option value attached to an anticipated

future capital gains liability that reduces the effective rate. The results

of Auerbach and Poterba (1986) suggest that this may be more important for

individuals than corporations.

     The possibilities for avoiding capital gains taxes are broadened

considerably when the possibility of generating artificial losses is

recognized. Stiglitz (1983) among others has discussed a variety of "tax

timing" strategies through which taxpayers can generate capital losses without

taking on substantial risks.6 The law limits the abilities of individuals and

corporations to deduct capital losses against ordinary income. To the extent

that these limits bind, the marginal tax rate on additional capital gains

income is zero. Poterba (1985) presents evidence suggesting that about 20

percent of household dividends were received by tax payers for whom marginal

capital gains were untaxed because they were in this situation. It seems

plausible that the fraction is higher for the sophisticated investors who hold

commercial real estate.
                                      —16—


     The tax code provides for a tax free step up in the basis on an asset if

the taxpayers dies and bequeaths the asset or if the asset is given to

charity. To the extent that taxpayers anticipate that they may die over the

period -in which they plan to hold an asset the expected tax rate is reduced.

The step up of basis on some kinds of charitable gifts means that individuals

who plan to donate to charity an amount greater than their capital gains

income can avoid capital gains taxes entirely. These two provisions mean that

even naive and honest taxpayers can avoid capital gains tax burdens.

      Finally there is the possibility of failing to report capital gains.

Overall, Poterba estimates that about 40 percent of capital gains are not

reported. This figure refers to capital gains on all types of assets.

Unfortunately, separate figures are not available for real estate.7

     The combination of these factors suggests that capital gains arising when

structures investments are churned are effectively taxed at much less than the

statutory rate. We therefore consider also the incentives for churning that

arise when individuals' capital gains are completely untaxed and when they are

taxed at half the statutory rate, as well as corporations' incentives when

their capital gains are taxed at half and three-quarters the statutory rate.


     Results

     Table 3 reports values of net before-tax corporate depreciation

allowances and effective tax rates for representative parameter values. These

calculations employ the 2.479 annual exponential depreciation rate Hulten and

Wykoff (1981) report for commercial structures, and assume that transactions

cost when assets are sold equal 5? of the sales price. The table presents
                                          —17—


 results with required rates of return of 296 and 496. As Summers (1986)

 argues, these rates are if anything higher than those
                                                          suggested by theory but
 are rather lower than those actually used
                                              by corporations. The 4% figure is
 standard in the effective tax rate literature.

      For the churning scenarios it is assumed that the firm chooses the

 depreciation method and interval between asset sales so as to maximize

 profits. As this table makes clear, under current law corporations will

 seldom want to churn structures for tax reasons. This is hardly
                                                                 surprising,
 since the recapture provisions of the tax law were designed to prevent such

 transactions. If the marginal corporate investor faces less than the

statutory capital gains rate, then it may become slightly preferrable to churn

 its structures.

     Table 4 presents similar calculations for
                                                  top-bracket individuals who
invest in structures through such devices as partnerships or proprietorships.

As the table suggests, individuals have
                                           much stronger incentives to churn
structures than do corporations. The
                                         top individual tax rate for ordinary
income is 50%, and the top capital gains rate is 20%. Even ignoring the

likely ability of individuals to avoid more of their
                                                       capital gains liability
than corporations can theirs, the 30% spread between the ordinary income and

statutory capital gains rate is a much stronger churning incentive than the

1896 spread faced by corporations.

     At a 3% rate of inflation and 2% required rate of return individuals

always choose to churn their assets, and -if they can avoid capital

gains taxes, may face negative effective tax rates. Even at higher inflation

rates churning is a tax—preferred
                                     activity for individuals. Whether at a
                                       —18

particular inflation rate corporations or individuals face higher effective

tax rates may depend on their marginal capital gains rates. The source of

funds matters as well, since the double taxation of corporate earnings may

make the required corporate rate of return for new savings capital

substantially higher than the rate for, say, partnership investors. Section

III treats this issue in more depth, but it is sufficient at this point to note

that individuals may face strong incentives to invest in structures and sell

them later.8 In particular, these results suggest that the tax code favors

individual rather than corporate ownership of structures.

     The preceding analysis is subject to two qualifications. Our calcula-

tions understate the potential importance of the resale of assets because they

ignore the option value associated with uncertainty in asset values. If an

asset appreciates rapidly, there will be tax advantages to turning it over.

For a careful treatment of tax churning -in a model where depreciation -is

stochastic, see Williams (1981). He finds that introducing uncertainty signi-

ficantly increases the effect of the churning on the effective purchase price

of new capital goods. For example, parameter values which most closely

approximate the current tax treatment of structures produce the result that

doubling the variance of future asset prices raises the expected present value

of depreciation allowances by about 15. Uncertainty in the tax law and the

possibility of favorable future tax law changes may contribute to this effect.

The second qualification is that our results may overstate the gains from

churning by ignoring the capital gains taxes which often must be paid on land

sales that accompany the transfer of structures. It is not clear to what

degree these two qualifications are offsetting.
                                       —19—


      The Extent of Churning

     The limited available empirical evidence suggests that churning is an

 important part of the depreciation strategy for investors in structures.

Table 5 presents data on the depreciation methods chosen by corporations and

partnerships for their structures investments in 1981 and 1982. Corporations

used straight-line depreciation for 38 of the value of their structures

investments in 1981 and for 33% in 1982. Except in very unusual circumstan-

ces, use of straight-line depreciation makes sense only when firms plan to

sell their assets at some date. In addition, under the generous pre-1984

recapture rules for installment sales, some firms may have used accelerated

depreciation even if they wanted to churn their assets later. By such exten-

sive use of straight-line depreciation, the corporate sector gives up the

substantial tax benefits of acceleration in order, presumably, to avoid costly

recapture when the structures are sold later.9

     The bottom panel of Table 5 presents far more striking information on

partnerships. Fully 60% of the value of strucures put in place by part-

nerships since the introduction of ACRS was depreciated straight-line. This

is, of course, quite consistent with our findings that churning can be very

attractive for individual investors and that individuals are more likely than

corporations to take advantage of churning possibilities. The 60% figure in

Table 5 is likely to understate the extent of straight—line use for nonresi-

dential investment, since the entry includes residential investment other than

low—income housing. The absence of a special recapture penalty makes it very

likely that partnerships use accelerated depreciation for their residential

investments, so the fraction of nonresidential structures depreciated
                                      -20-


straight-line is probably above 6O. While the data on partnership and cor-

porate depreciation methods are preliminary and subject to reporting error, it

seems clear that they support the hypothesis that investors often plan to sell

their assets. At the very least, this information casts doubt on the relevance

of standard effective tax rate calculations that assume all investors to use

accelerated depreciation methods.

     The results in this section suggest that taking account of the

possibility of tax churning may help to explain the recent boom in commercial

building. If individuals use low discount rates and can avoid capital gains

taxes, the tax burden on commercial structures may now be small or even

negative. This reflects both the 1981 tax reforms and the reduction in

inflation since 1980. It probably represents a substantial reduction in the

tax burden from the situation that prevailed prior to 1981.



III. CORPORATE FINANCIAL POLICY AND THE EFFECTIVE
      TAX RATES ON STRUCTURES INVESTMENT


     Our analysis so far has concerned features of the tax treatment of

investments in structures which are common to individual investors, part-

nerships, and corporations. The current conventional wisdom that current tax

law favors equipment over structures is derived from studies which have

focused on corporate investment rather than overall investment.10 The calcula-

tions underlying these claims are almost always based on a variant of the for-

mula for the user cost of capital derived by Hall and Jorgenson (1967). This

formula, however, ignores a variety of factors, among them personal taxes and

corporate financial policy. In this section, we argue that when the effects
                                       —21—


 of personal taxes and corporate financial policy are taken into account, there

 is a much smaller difference between the calculated effective tax rates on

 structures and equipment, and perhaps even a tax advantage to investments in

 structures.

      The intuitive point is very simple. The tax law seems to treat

 debt-financed investments more favorably. Therefore, to the degree that a

 project can be financed with debt it becomes more attractive. Investments in

 structures should be much more easily financed with debt than investments in

equipment. Structures are easily used as collateral for a loan, there is a

dense secondary market for most types of buildings where a creditor can go if

the collateral must be liquidated, and the market value of a building used as

collateral is normally much more predictable than the values of many other

assets. A firm should therefore be able to obtain a much larger loan on a

building than on many other assets without imposing any effective default risk

on the lender.11

      The difficulty with examining the implications of the tax incentive to

use debt is that there is no consensus in the literature concerning the

determinants of corporate debt-equity ratios. Most of this section will focus

on what we will call the traditional model of debt-equity decisions, though we

will explore at the end the implications of some alternative models.

      In this traditional model, corporations have at the margin a tax

incentive to favor debt finance. Income accruing within a corporation is

taxed at a higher rate than income accruing directly to shareholders.

Corporate income is taxable both under the corporate tax and again, either as

dividends or as capital gains, under the shareholders' personal income tax,
                                      —22—


while income accruing directly to shareholders is taxable only under the

personal tax. This difference in tax rates creates an opportunity for tax

arbitrage. A firm and its shareholders can shift taxable income from the

firm to the shareholders simply by having the firm borrow from the

shareholders, using the proceeds to repurchase equity from the shareholders.

The direct effect of this transaction is to lower the taxable income of the

corporation by the amount of the interest payments made on the debt, and

increase the individuals' taxable income by this amount less the change in

income from equity.

      In spite of this tax incentive to use debt finance, firms do not use

debt exclusively because the possibility of bankruptcy leads to conflicts of

interest between debt and equity holders, with associated real costs.12 These

real costs could take the form of direct legal and administrative costs in

bankruptcy, monitoring costs of lenders as they try to protect themselves, and

agency costs created by the incentive on the firm to change its behavior to

aid equity holders at the expense of bond holders.13

      In deriving an explicit expression for the size of the tax incentive to

use debt, it is important to take account of the degree to which the income

which shareholders receive from equity takes the form of dividends rather than

capital gains. While there is no convincing explanation for why firms pay

dividends, we presume that shareholders prefer to have at least some of the

return from equity take the form of dividends, perhaps for liquidity reasons

or perhaps because of the signal conveyed about the solvency of the firm. Our

approach to dividends is very similar to that of Poterba and Summers (1985).

      Except for the changes described above, we continue to follow the
                                                —23—


 approach developed by Hall and Jorgenson (1967). When will an investment just

break even? Assume that the value of the marginal product of the investment

equals p and that the asset depreciates exponentially at a rate ô. The

construction cost of the project is q. However, the out-of-pocket cost of the

project to the firm is only q(1-k-uz), where k is the investment tax credit

rate, u is the corporate tax rate, and z represents the present value of the

depreciation deductions allowed under the tax law. We assume that the firm

finances this amount by borrowing bq(1—k—uz), raising the rest of the funds

from equity holders. Let i represent the nominal coupon rate on this debt,

and let ir represent the inflation rate. By using debt, the firm incurs some

real costs due to the possibility of bankruptcy. Denote these real costs by

C(b). We assume that C(O) = 0, that C' > 0,               and that these costs are

deductible from taxable corporate income. Then the after-corporate-tax real

return, R, to equity holders from this project, net of depreciation, will
                 —
equal R =   [p       C(b))(1—u)   —
                                      (1—k—uz){ô +   b[i(1-u)   -
                                                                    irj}.
      This real return is taxable under the personal income tax as either

dividends or capital gains. Assume that a fraction p of this return is paid

out as dividends, and that the personal tax rate on dividends is m, while

that on accruing capital gains is c. The effective tax rate, e, on the real

return therefore equals e = pm +          (1-p)c.14    Not only is the real return

taxable, however, but the inflationary increase in nominal value is also

taxable. We assume that this inflationary capital gain is taxable only at the

capital gains tax rate. Shareholders therefore receive a net of personal tax

return from this investment equal to R(1-e) -            cir(1—b)(1-k-uz). They receive
this return on an initial investment of (1-b)(1-k-uz). Had they invested
                                               -24-


these funds in bonds instead, they could have received a net of tax return per

dollar invested of i(1-m) -       it.   However, due to the illiqu-idity of income

received as capital gains rather than as coupon payments or dividends, they

would require that their return on an investment in equity be higher by an

amount 0(p), where we assume that 0(1) = 0 and 0' < 0.

         Given these assumptions, shareholders are just indifferent between

investing in bonds or investing in this corporate project if


(3.1)           R(1—e) — cir(1—b)(1—k—uz) = (1—b)(1—k—uz)[i(1—rn) —         it + 0]

This equation implicitly determines not only the required rate of return,

p, on an investment project, but also the firm's optimal dividend payout rate,

    and optimal debt-value ratio, b*. The firm would set b and p so as to

minimize the required          that it must earn on capital. Simple algebra shows

that the first-order conditions for the optimal b* and p* imply


(3.2)       C'(b*) =    (1—k-uz)/(].—u)(1-e){i[u      + e(1-u) — m]   -
                                                                          p(m—c)ir + D}



(3.3)       -D'(p*) = (rn-c) [1(1-rn) —   ir(1-c) +    D]/(1-e)


Equation (3.2) shows that the debt-equity ratio would be increased until the

rise in bankruptcy costs from extra debt just equals the extra tax savings

from further use of debt plus the gain from the greater liquidity of income

from debt. Similarly, equation (3.3) shows that the dividend payout rate

would be increased to the point where the tax loss from paying more dividends

just equals the gain to the individual from the extra liquidity.

        Given   these values for b* and p*, equation (3.1) then implies that
                                        —25—


(3.4)       p = C +   q(1-k-uz)

                                                                      —
                {(1_b*){i(1_m) — ir(1—c) + D] +   (1_e)(o÷b*li(1_u)       ir]}/[(1—u)(1—e)J

This equation corresponds to the expression for the user cost of capital in

Hall and Jorgenson (1967), corrected for the effects of corporate financial

decisions and personal taxes.

        As long as the expression in braces -in equation (3.4) is the same for

all projects, conditional on the value of 5,      these extra complications make
little difference. The numerical value of this expression -is difficult to

estimate, even without the complications added here, so that past authors have

chosen some arbitrary value for the expression as a whole rather than make an

attempt to estimate each parameter.15 However, to the extent that the optimal

values of b* or p* differ by project, these differences ought to be taken -into

account when comparing the effects of the corporate tax on different types of

investments.

        There is every reason to expect the optimal value of b* to vary by type

of capital, for the reasons described above. It should also vary by industry,

if only because the variability of the profits of a firm vary systematically

by industry. Certainly the observed debt—value ratios differ substantially

by industry. According to the figures reported in Fullerton and Gordon (1983)

for the debt-value ratio in a select group of industries in 1973, the observed

ratios ranged from 0.08 -in construction to 0.787 -in real estate. The

average in the economy was 0.399.16

        Unfortunately, there are no good data on the differing degrees to which

debt -is used to finance different types of capital within an industry.
                                                 —26—


 Auerbach (1985) attempted to explain differences in the debt-value ratios of

 different firms in part by differences in their use of structures vs.

 equipment and found no sytemat-ic relation --          coefficient      estimates differed

wildly across specifications. However, the use of structures vs. equipment

by industry can easily be correlated with other omitted factors which differ

by industry and affect desired debt—value ratios, Given the lack of any good

evidence on differences in the use of debt to finance different types of

capital, the modest objective of this section is to demonstrate the importance

of plausible differences in debt-value ratios for different projects to

calculated effective tax rates for these different projects.


        Effective Tax Rates

        The effective tax rate, T, on a project, as Auerbach (1983) defines it,

would satisfy the equation


            c      - C -
(3.5)                      (1-b)D(1--k-uz)   =    q[(i(1-m)   -
                                                                  ir)/(1--r)   + 5]


where q respresents the value in equilibrium of a unit of corporate capital.

In our context c is the value of the marginal product, since a new investment

generates incentive and agency costs due to the tax-induced incentive to favor

debt and avoid dividends. Here -r = 0 only if the value of the marginal return

to new capital, net of depreciation, equals the individual's marginal time

preference rate.

        To indicate the potential importance of differences in debt-value ratios

between assets, assume that we have calculated various effective tax rates

assuming no differences -in the use of debt finance. If, for example, the
                                                    —27—


value of b for structures in fact exceeds that for equipment by 0.4, what

effect does this have on the estimated tax rate? If
                                                                         T0   is   the previously

estimated effective tax rate on structures and                      -is the revised estimate,
                                                               T1
then it follows easily from equations (3.4) and (3.5) that


(3.6)          [1(1—rn) —                     —
                            1r][(1/(l—-r0))       1/(1—T1)]

        =   0.4(1-.k—uz){i(u(1—e)    —                  -
                                         (1—p)(m—cfl        pm(rn—c) +   D[u+e(1—u)fl/[1—u)(1—e)J


        In evaluating this expression, we attempt to follow the parameter

assumptions made in Auerbach (1983) wherever possible. In particular, we

assume that the initial estimate of the effective tax rate on structures is

0.421, as Auerbach calculated for 1982, that u = .46 and k = 0 by

statute,17 that 1(1-rn) =        it + 0.04,   again as in Auerbach,18 that p =                  0.4, and
that i equals the AAA corporate bond yield in 1982 of 0.138. We approximated

z by 0.5.19 For the personal tax rates m and c, we initially set m =                             0.35 and
c =   0.05.
        Choosing a value for 0 is more arbitrary. However, equation (3.3)

gives an equilibrium condition for 0', so if we assume a functional form for

D we can calculate its value. We therefore assumed that 0(p) =                          a(1-p),    for

some value a, implying that 0(p) =            -(1-p)D',     with D' given by equation

(4.3). This specification implies that in equilibrium the optimal dividend

payout rate for any given firm is indeterminate, though the average payout

rate for all firms together may be explicitly determ-ined. We note below how

our estimates change if we instead assume that 0(p) =                    a(1-p)2,     which leads to

a unique optimal payout rate for each firm.
                                           '-28-



         Given these parameter values, the new estimate of the effective tax rate

on structures drops dramatically from 0.421 to 0.193. In contrast, the

estimated effective tax rate on equipment reported by Auerbach for 1982 was

0.084. At least with these parameter values, the difference becomes minor.

Given these parameter values, the calculated value of 0 equalled 0.0118,

 implying that a rather modest value of liquidity -is sufficient to offset the

tax disadvantage to dividends.

        The key parameters in this calculation are the estimate of the difference

 in the value of b between equipment and structures, the estimates of m

and c, and the value of the real after—tax interest rate. If, for example,

the debt-value ratio for structures exceeds the value for equipment by only

0.3, then the effective tax rate on structures drops to only 0.265.

         Similarly, let us maintain our previous assumption about the difference

-in the debt-value ratios, but now consider two alternative assumptions about

the values of in and c. First, assume that in      = 0.46   and c =   0.20 With these
values, the tax advantage to using debt is much reduced, since capital gains

from equity are untaxed while interest income -is taxed more heavily under the

personal tax. Under these assumptions, the effective tax rate on structures

drops to only 0.285. However, -if we make the alternative assumption that

in   = .225,   following the results in Gordon and Malkiel (1981), and set c =     .05,
then the effective tax rate on structures drops to 0.076.

         Let us now return to our initial assumptions that the difference in the

debt-value ratio used in funding structures and equipment is 0.4, and

continue to assume that m = 0.35 and that c =      0.05,    but assume that the real

after—tax interest rate is only 0.03, changing the estimate of the inflation
                                         -29--



rate accordingly. With these assumptions, the effective tax rate on

structures drops to 0.071.

         Finally, if we again maintain our initial assumptions, but assume that

the functional form for 0 is 0(p) = a(1—p)2, implying a smaller value for

0 in equilibrium, then the effective tax rate on structures drops to only

0.232.

           Therefore, at least using the traditional model of corporate financial

decisions, differences in the optimal debt-value ratio for different types of

capital can make a substantial difference when calculating effective tax

rates. For most of the cases explored, the remaining difference in the

effective tax rates on equipment and structures is minor, and can be of either

sign.

         This traditional model of corporate financial decisions is far from the

only one discussed seriously in the finance literature. For example, the

papers by Miller (1977) and by DeAngelo and Masulis (1980) each argue, on

different grounds, that firms may have increased their use of debt until the

point where the tax advantage of using debt is eliminated. Miller considers

the effect of the increased personal interest income on the marginal personal

tax rate, while DeAngelo and Masulis consider the drop in corporate taxable

income due to interest deductions on the marginal corporate tax rate. Under

either model, differences in debt-value ratios by project have no impact on

the effective tax rates on different projects. Each of these arguments

depends critically on the marginal corporate or personal tax rate evolving

enough before the debt-value ratio becomes so high as to lead to non-negligible

agency or bankruptcy costs.
                                        -30--



      A quite different model of corporate financial policy was developed

recently in Myers and Majluf (forthcoming). They argue that when market

 investors see a firm issue new equity or new risky bonds, they will infer from

this that the firm's managers likely view the current prices of equity or

bonds as too high and are trying to take advantage of it. As a result, market

prices fall when new securities are issued, and managers must take this into

account when considering going to the market for new funds. They argue, as a

result, that the firm will prefer to use internal sources of funds, and will

require a higher rate of return on a new project if it must raise the funds by

issuing risky securities to outside investors.

      Their argument does not consider the implications of the tax incentive

to use debt finance. As long as bonds issued by the corporation remain

riskiess, then this favorable tax treatment would make debt finance cheaper

than internal finance. If new debt issues are risky, then there -is a tradeoff

between the tax advantage of new debt issues and the disadvantage of outside

finance on which their model focuses. But the ability to finance a project

with riskless bonds will vary by project, since projects differ in their

suitability as collateral for a loan.   If, as we argued above, structures make

good collateral and can be financed heavily with debt before that debt becomes

risky, then the required rate of return for structures should normally be

lower than that for other projects, even ignoring tax effects, and would be

lowered further by the tax advantage to debt finance. In this context,

however, a simple comparison of effective tax rates is no longer sufficient to

judge the effect of the tax law on the efficiency of the composition of the

capital stock, since capital may be allocated inefficiently even without tax
                                       -31—


 distortions.

      The analysis in this section suggests that effective tax rate calcula-

 tions are extremely sensitive to assumptions about marginal debt-equity

 ratios. To the extent that different types of capital assets have different

 abilities to carry debt, this means that standard calculations which assume

 constant (often zero) marginal debt-equity ratios are likely to be misleading.

The vast disparities in debt-equity ratios across industries suggest that the

error introduced by ignoring variations in the leveragability of assets is

probably large. These results also help to resolve the empirical puzzle

raised at the beginning of the paper. Commercial buildings, especially office

buildings, can probably carry much more debt than other more specialized

structures. They may therefore be burdened much less by taxes than conven-

tional analyses suggest.



IV. TAXATION AND TENURE CHOICE


     It is widely believed that the tax system favors owner occupied housing.

This conclusion is repeated in many textbooks and forms the basis for a

significant amount of research on the effects of taxation on tenure choice.

The standard argument is straightforward. The services of owner occupied

housing are untaxed while rental payments are treated as taxable income.

While landlords are permitted tax deductions which are not permitted to

homeowners, as long as there is some positive effective tax rate on rental

income, home ownership is nonetheless thought to be tax favored. As a number

of authors including Litzenberger and Sosin (1977), Titman (1982), and
                                              —32—


Hendershott (1986) have recognized there is an important defect in this argu-

ment. It ignores the possibility of tax arbitrage between high bracket

 landlords and low bracket tenants. High bracket tax payers have a comparative

advantage over low bracket taxpayers in making use of interest deductions

which they can exploit by borrowing in order to buy real estate which they

then rent to low bracket tax payers.

        When this effect is recognized, it turns out that homeownership is tax

favored for only a very small number of taxpayers. In this section we

demonstrate this conclusion by considering the effects of homeownership in a

setting where people would be indifferent between owning and renting their

homes but for tax incentives. In reality of course, other considerations such

as transaction costs, desire to own one's own place of residence, and the

differing incentive effects of rental and ownership contracts influence tenure

choice. But in order to study the incentives provided by the tax system, we

abstract from these effects.

        Before turning to a calculation of the tax incentive for different

households to own their own home, it is useful to begin by illustrating the

potential tax advantage of tenancy. The user cost of owner occupied housing

for a taxpayer in the t percent tax bracket is:


(4.1)       c0 =                 -   71 + m + 5
                   (1—t)(i+pt)

where c0 represents the user cost, i is the nominal interest rate, Pt is the

property tax rate, it is the inflation rate, m represents maintenance costs

expressed as a fraction of house value, and 5 is the sum of the depreciation

rate and risk premium.
                                                  —33—


        Calculation of the cost of rental housing is more complex. We assume

that competition forces rents down to the point where landlords earn the same

risk adjusted return on rental property as they could on bonds. This

assumption is warranted as long as landlords can at the margin borrow or lend.

It will become apparent that top bracket landlords will be able to charge the

lowest rents and so represent the marginal supplier of rental housing. The

breakeven condition for top bracket landlords requires that:


             R           [(1_t*)i_1T+5j(1_t*z) + Pt + m
(4.2)


where t is the top bracket tax rate, and z represents the present value of

depreciation allowances permitted for tax purposes.21 It follows that

taxpayers will prefer to rent rather than own their homes as long as c0 > R,

which occurs as long as the following condition is satisfied:


                           t*Zi + [(1r--ö)t*(1_z)/(1_t*)]
(4 3)        t       <
                 p
                                       (i+pt)

        Inspecting (4.3), it is clear that, assuming real after—tax interest

rates to be positive, the breakeven tax rate at which investors are just

indifferent to owning their homes is an increasing function of z and of the

top tax rate t*.            It is also an increasing function of the rate of inflation

assuming that the real interest rate remains constant. This is because

increases in nominal interest raise the advantage to structuring transactions

so as to allocate interest deductions to high bracket taxpayers. These con-

siderations suggest the effects of the 1981 Tax Reform on tenure choice cannot

be evaluated on an a priori basis. On the one hand, the introduction of ACRS

tends to promote rental housing, while the reduction in the top tax rate from
                                      --34-



70 to 50 percent tends to reduce the incentives for rental housing. We there-

fore turn to a quantitative calculation of the breakeven tax rate under alter-

native tax regimes.

     Under ACRS, residential property was permitted 1759 declining balance

depreciation over a useful life of 15 years (now 19 years). In addition,

residential property has the desirable feature that upon sale accelerated

depreciation is recaptured at ordinary income rates only to the extent that it

has exceeded straight-line depreciation. The 1981 Act also permits purchasers

of used assets to use the 1759 declining balance depreciation method. Prior

to 1981, asset lives were substantially longer but investors in new residen-

tial structures were allowed 2OO? declining balance (or sum-of-the-years-

digits) depreciation. Purchasers of used assets were required to use 125

declining balance depreciation, thereby lowering the prices of used structures

relative to new structures, and reducing the value of tax churning. High

individual marginal tax rates provided ample incentive for investment in ren-

tal housing, however. The Appendix describes the method used to determine the

value of depreciation allowances with churning under pre-ACRS tax rules.

     Table 6 presents values of marginal tax rates for individuals who were

indifferent between homeownership and renting for the years 1965-1985. To

solve equation 4.3, we follow DeLeeuw and Ozanne (1979) in assuming that

6=0.014 and P=O.O2. In performing the user cost calculations (3.1), we add a

0.04 premium to 6 in order to adjust the cost of asset depreciation for risk.

Individuals' expectations of future inflation are represented by a distributed

lag on past inflation, and the before-tax interest rate is the historical Baa

corporate bond rate. In each year owners of residential rental property are
                                       —35—


assumed to optimize over the choice of depreciation method and potential

churning period.22

     The results in Table 6 describe four scenarios. We examine cases in

which individuals who own rental housing avoid half their capital gains

liability at the margin and also cases in which they pay the full statutory

rate on capital gains. In addition, we report separately specifications in

which investors treat depreciation allowances as risky (and so add 0.04 to the

annual discount rate in calculating their present value) and in which they are

viewed as riskiess.

     The striking implication of the findings reported in Table 6 is that home

ownership has not until recently been favored by the tax code.23 High

individual tax rates before 1982 encouraged most taxpayers to rent their

dwellings from top—rate individuals. While the results in Table 6 reflect

changing inflation and interest rates as well as statutory tax changes, it is

hard to escape from the conclusion that falling personal taxes have undone

changes in the depreciation provisions to make home ownership much more

attractive in recent years. From this perspective, -it is perhaps not

surprising that home ownership and residential investment have been strong in

recent years.



V.   CONCLUSIONS


     The analysis 'in this paper highlights the difficulty of predicting the

effects of tax rules on the level and composition of investment. The

incentives for investment provided by the tax law turn out to depend on a
                                          -36--



 number of quite specific features of the law, rather than just on tax rates

 and depreciation schedules. They also depend on how the tax law interacts

 with the liquidity characteristics of different types of assets. Analyses

 which omit these factors are likely to have little predictive power for the

 effects of tax changes on the composition of investment. And normative

 conclusions based on models which omit them are likely to be very misleading.

     Our   findings   imply that there are at most minimal allocative losses

 resulting from the differential treatment of equipment and structures under

current depreciation schedules. There are substantial reasons to believe that

residential and non—residential real estate investments made by partnerships

are substantially favored under current law, because of the tax advantages

associated with churning assets, arbitrage between taxpayers in different

brackets, and leverage. Movements to equalize effective tax rates on

structures and equipment investments as these rates are normally measured

would be likely to exacerbate these distortions. Changes in the tax rules

governing recapture, limited partnerships and the use of non—recourse debt have

the potential to reduce the tax benefits accruing to investments in rental

properties and commercial buildings. Alternatively the possible tax bias in

favor of these assets could be mitigated by providing them with depreciation

schedules different than those afforded other structures investments.

     The conclusion that the tax system discriminates strongly in favor of

rental housing and against owner occupied housing raises important issues for

subsequent research. Given tax incentives, some other explanation must be

given for the predominance of home ownership. A natural candidate is the

moral hzard problem associated with rental contracts. Tenants have little
                                      -37-


incentive to care for properties which they do not own. Landlords have strong

incentives to deny tenants the right to alter properties in ways that tenants

may prefer but which may ultimate reduce market value. These problems are

solved when people rent from themselves as with owner occupied housing. In

the presence of moral hazard problems, the market is unlikely to attain an

optimal solution even in the absence of taxes. The imposition of taxes which

discourage home ownership may result in very substantial deadweight losses

given the presence of pre—exist-ing distortions.

      A similar point applies to the question of debt financed investments in

structures. To the extent that there are important information problems

bearing on types of capital which are not liquid, too little investment in

these types of capital is likely to take place even in the absence of taxes.

These biases may be exacerbated by tax rules which favor liquid investments.

If so, the social costs of non-neutral taxation may be much greater than the

loses associated with distortionary taxation in environments without

pre—existing distortions. Consideration of structures investments highlights

the need for the development of models considering the effects of taxes in

markets already distorted by information problems. It seems likely that the

welfare consequences of the interaction of tax rules and information problems

are likely to be far greater than those found in typical neutrality

calculations. We plan to pursue these issues in future research.
                                       -38--



                                    APPENDIX:

             Calculation of Depreciation Allowances With Churning


     This appendix describes the solution method used to evaluate the present

value of depreciation allowances when firms or individuals churn 'their assets.

The procedure is slightly more complicated than standard present-value calcula-

tions because the value of future tax benefits is a function of the prices of

used assets, which are functions of those tax benefits, and so on. Consistency

requires that anticipated prices of used assets take churning possibilities into

account.

     These calculations assume that investors expect inflation rates, interest

rates, and the tax law not to change in the future. In addition, our results

employ the assumption that assets depreciate at constant exponential rates.

These assumptions are standard in the effective tax rate literature when com-

puting the value of depreciation allowances. Hendershott and Ling (1984)

assume a different, reverse—sum--of--the-years depreciation schedule, which per—

mits a direct numerical evaluation of churning benefits. Assets which depre—

ciate exponentially have no terminal dates, thus making -it impossible to use

the solution technique Hendershott and Ling describe to evaluate churning of

these assets. Pellechio (1985) employs a solution method which can accomodate

exponential depreciation but is different from the one used here.

     Equations 2.2 -   2.6 in the text describe the value of depreciation allowan-
ces when firms churn their assets after k years. These equations include terms

for Q(k), the market price of a used asset k years after its initial purchase

(the price of new capital in the first year -is normalized to one). Under the
                                                -39—


assumption that the tax treatment of old assets is the same as that accorded new

assets, Q(k) is as given in 23:


(A.1)       Q(k) =


        Unfortunately,    this assumption of symmetric treatment of old and new assets

is valid only under ACRS. Before the introduction of ACRS, used nonresidential

structures had to be depreciated straight-line. Pre—ACRS residential structures

were depreciated at declining balance rates of 2OO when new and 125 when used.

These features make old assets less valuable than (A.1) indicates. Of course,

these rules do not change the relative prices of used assets of different ages,

since their tax treatment if sold is identical; -it will, for example, always be

the case that


(A.2)       Q(k+ri) =   [(1_6)(171)]fl   Q(k)


        In calculating the present value of depreciation allowances, we used (A.2)

and prevailing depreciation rules to solve numerically for the optimal treatment

of used assets. Denote by Zju the present value of depreciation allowances for

an investor in asset I when it -is used.               If   represents the present value of

depreciation allowances for a new asset, then it will be the case that:


(A.3)      Q(k) =    [(16)(1)]k          (l-TZ.)/(1-Tz.)


        Given the depreciation and recapture rules of equations 2.2 -        2.6,   the

maximized present value of depreciation benefits for a new asset which the

investor plans to sell in year k will be:
                                      -40--



(A.4)    Zth =   ak   +


where aik and ik depend on tax rules, inflation, depreciation rates, and

other parameters. Substituting (A.3) into (A.4) produces


         z. =
(A.5)            {a.k + ik 1-oj)(1+ir)]J / {i + kThill - TZ.}

The optimal churning program maximizes the value of     in (A.5), and we use

that value of zth for the calculations in the tables.
                                      -41-


                                   Footnotes



1.   Hendershott and Ling (1984) and Pellechio (1985) have examined the

incentives for churning assets. Our treatment generalizes their work by

allowing for the important possibility that effective capital gains rates are

below statutory rates. This accounts for our more positive view of churning

as a device for reducing tax liabilities.

2.   Limitations on loss carry-forewards may induce some small number of firms

in special circumstances to choose the longer depreciation lives and the

associated straight-line method. See Auerbach and Poterba (1986).

3.   We do not consider the churning of equipment; however, in general it is

never desirable to churn equipment for tax reasons alone. The investment tax

credit (ITC) consitutes a substantial part of cost recovery for equipment

investment, and the tax law includes harsh recapture provisions for the ITC

upon early sale of equipment. Since used equipment is ineligible for the ITC,

the combined effect is to make asset sales unattractive from a tax standpoint.

Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1983) find that not even equipment put into place

before the introduction of ACRS could be profitably churned after 1981.

4.   The formula actually requires a minor correction for discounting of

depreciation allowances within each year and the mid-month convention; the

calculations in the tables embody these subtleties.

5.   Tax changes in 1984 required that investors pay recapture taxes imme-

diately upon sale of an asset, even if the buyer pays in installments. As

Gilson, Scholes, and Wolfson (1986) illustrate, however, an installment sale

can still significantly reduce the seller's effective capital gains tax rate.
                                     —42—


6.   Recent law changes have limited but by no means eliminated investors

abilities to use these strategies.

7.   We are agnostic on the question of whether sophisticated real estate

investors are more likely than other investors to underreport their gains. it

may be particularly difficult to avoid declaring capital gains on an asset for

which a taxpayer has received depreciation allowances for years.

8.   Note that the incentive to chrun is strongest at low inflation rates.

Under current recapture rules, churning serves less to undo the effects of

inflation than it does to exploit the difference between economic depreciation

and tax depreciation.

9.   These fractions of depreciation taken using accleration are substantially

lower than fractions Wales (1966) reports for most industries in 1960.

Running his learning functions foreward to 1982 predicts rates of use of acce-

lerated depreciation even more at variance with firms' practices, despite

changes which have made accelerated depreciation more generous than before.

10. For a recent example, see Auerbach (1983).

11. Buildings are not unique in this regard. Our argument applies as well

to any asset where there is a good secondary market and a relatively stable

price. Other examples might include motor vehicles, airplanes, or main-frame

computers. Most types of equipment, however, tend to be specialized to the

activities of a particular firm, so have little value to a creditor if they

are seized in lieu of repayment of the debt. Conversely, not all types of

buildings are equally liquid or have an equally stable value. Office

buildings, for example, are probably far more liquid than factory buildings.

12. For a recent exposition of this view, see Modigliani (1982) or Gordon
                                         —43—


 (1982).

 13. For an exposition on these points, see Gordon and Malkiel (1981), Myers

 (1977), Jensen and Meckling (1976), or White (1983).

 14. In this section c refers to the effective capital gains tax rate on

 accruinQ gains rather than on realized gains as in the last section.

 15. Hall and Jorgenson (1967) set this expression equal to S +    0.1.   Auerbach

 (1983), while also deriving a related formula involving the effects of debt

 finance, set the resulting espress-lon equal to 5   + 0.4.
 16. These figures represent the average use of debt for all the capital in

the     firm, and not necessarily the marginal debt-value ratio. However, there

 is no systematic reason in the above model why the desired value of b* ought

to change as a firm expands.

17. We ignore here the possibility that the firm may have taxable losses that

cannot be carried back to previous tax years or at least carried forward and

used up quickly. For further discussion, see Auerbach (1983) and Auerbach and

Poterba (1986).

18. Bradford and Fullerton (1981) demonstrated the sensitivity of estimated

tax rates to this estimate of the individual's opportunity cost of funds.
                                                                              By

following Auerbach (1983) in assuming such a high after-tax real interest

rate, we reduce the effects of debt finance on the estimated effective tax

rate.

19. See Summers (1986) for a discussion of the discounting of depreciation

allowances.

20. In order to keep the real after-tax interest rate at 0.04, we adjust the

estimate for the inflation rate as needed.
                                       —44-


21.   In deriving (4.2), we follow Bulow and Summers (1984) in assuming that

the tax system does not share -in the risks associated with owning structures.

22. Calculations for the pre—ACRS period ignore potential complications

involving interactions of depreciation allowances and the maximum tax on

earned income, as described by Hite and Sanders (1981). For our purposes it

is enough to assume that for marginal investors the bulk of their income is

unearned. In addition, these calculations ignore the cost of land and the

capital gains tax liability that may be generated when a residence is churned

and land is sold. We assume implicitly that owner-occupiers and renters rent

the land for their residences at equal rates.

23. These results differ substantially from more standard calculations of

authors such as Diamond (1980) and Hendershott and Shilling (1982) that find

homeownership to have become progressively more attractive over the 1970s.

Our model incorporates tax arbitrage, and also differs from theirs -in assuming

that investors expect house prices to be in equilibrium, and therefore rising

at the general rate of inflation.
                                      —45-


                                  References


Auerbach, Alan J. 1985. "Real Determinants of Corporate Leverage," in
     Corporate Capital Structures in the United States, edited by Benjamin M.
     Friedman. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

__________   1983. "Corporate Taxation in the United States," Brookings Papers
     on Economic Activity 2:451-506.

Auerbach, Alan J. and James R. I-tines Jr. 1986. "Tax Reform, Investment, and
     the Value of the Firm", NBER Working Paper No. 1803, January.

Auerbach, Alan and Laurence Kotlikoff. 1983. "Investment Versus Savings
     Incentives: The Size of the 'Bang for the Buck' and the Potential for
     Self-Financing Business Tax Cuts", in L. Meyer, ed., The Economic
     Consequences of Government Deficits. Boston: Kluwer-Nijhoff.

Auerbach, Alan and James Poterba. 1986. "Tax Loss Carryforwards and
     Corporate Tax Incentives.." Mimeo. February.

Bradford, David F. and Don Fullerton. 1981. "Pitfalls in the Construction and
     Use of Effective Tax Rates," in Depreciation, Inflation, and the Taxation
     of Income from Capital, edited by Charles R. Hulten. Washington, D.C.:
     The Urban Institute Press.

Bulow, Jeremy I. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1984. "The Taxation of Risky
     Assets," Journal of Political Economy 92:1, 20-39.

Constantinides, George M. 1983. "Capital Market Equilibrium with Personal
     Tax," Econometrica 51: 611-636.

__________ and Jonathan E. Ingersoll, Jr. 1984. "Optimal Bond Trading with
     Personal Taxes," Journal of Financial Economics 13: 299-335.

DeAngelo, Harry and Ronald W. Masulis. 1980. "Optimal Capital Structure under
     Corporate and Personal Taxation," Journal of Financial Economics 8:3-29.

DeLeeuw, Frank and Larry Ozanne. 1979. "The Impact of the Federal Income Tax
     on Investment in Housing", Survey of Current Business, 59:12, 50—61.

Diamond, Douglas B., Jr. 1980. "Taxes, Inflation, Speculation and the Cost
     of Homeownership", Journal of the American Real Estate and Urban
     Economics Association, 8:3, 281-298.

Fullerton, Don and Roger H. Gordon. 1983. "A Reexamination of Tax
     Distortions in General Equilibrium Models," in Behavioral Simulation
     Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, edited by Martin Feldstein. Chicago: The
     University of Chicago Press.

Fullerton, Don and Yolanda Henderson. 1984. "Incentive Effects of Taxes on
     Income from Capital: Alternative Policies in the 1980s," in Charles R.
                                      —46-


     Hulton and Isabel V. Sawhill (eds.), The Legacy of Reaganomics: Prospects
     for Long Term Growth. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute Press.

Gilson, Ronald J., Myron S. Scholes, and Mark A. Wolfson. 1986. "Taxation
     and the Dynamics of Corporate Control: The Uncertain Case for Tax
     Motivated Acquisitions", Stanford Law School, Law and Economics Program,
     Working Paper No. 873, February.

Gordon, Roger H.  1982. "Interest Rates, Inflation, and Corporate Financial
     Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:461-488.

Gordon, Roger H. and Burton G. Malkiel. 1981. "Corporation Finance," in
     How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior, edited by Henry J. Aaron and Joseph
     A. Pechman. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Hall, Robert E. and Dale W. Jorgenson. 1967. "Tax Policy and Investment
     Behavior.", American Economic Review 57:391-414.

Hendershott, Patric H. 1986. "Tax Changes and Capital Allocation in the
     1980's," mimeo.

Hendershott, Patric H. and David C. Ling. 1984. "Trading and the Tax Shelter
     Value of Depreciable Real Estate," National Tax Journal 37:2, 213-223.

Hendershott, Patr-ic H. and James D. Shilling. 1982. "The Economics of Tenure
     Choice, 1955-1979", in Research in Real Estate, Vol. 1, edited by C.
     Sirmans. Greewich, Connecticut: JAI Press.

Hite, Gailen L. and Anthony B. Sanders. 1981. "Excess Depreciation and the
     Maximum Tax," Journal of the American Real Estate and Urban Economics
     Association 9:2, 134-147.

Hulten, Charles and Frank Wykoff. 1981. "The Measurement of Economic
     Depreciation", in Charles Hulten ed., Depreciation, Inflation, and the
     Taxation of Income from Capital. Washington: Urban Institute.

Jensen, Michael C. and William H. Meckling. 1976. "Theory of the Firm:
     Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure," Journal of
     Financial Economics 3: 305-60.

Litzenberger, Robert and Howard Sosin. 1977. "Taxation and the Incidence of
     Home Ownership Across Income Groups," Journal of Finance, 32, 261-275.

McCulloch, J. Houston. 1975. "The Tax Adjusted Yield Curve," Journal of
     Finance 30: 811-830.

Miller, Merton. 1977. "Debt and Taxes," Journal of Finance 32: 261—75.

Modigliani, Franco. 1982. "Debt, Dividend Policy, Taxes, Inflation and
     Market Valuation," Journal of Finance 37:255—73.
                                      —47—


Musgrave, John C. 1984. "Fixed Reproducible Tangible Wealth in the United
     States, 1980-83," Survey of Current Business 64:8 (August), 54-59.

Myers, Stewart C. 1977. "Determinants of Corporate Borrowing," Journal of
     Financial Economics 5:147—75.

Myers, Stewart and N. Majluf. Forthcoming. "Corporate Financing and
     Investment Decisions When Firms Have Information Investors Do Not Have,"
     Journal of Financial Economics.

Pellechio, Anthony J. 1985. "Taxation, Real Property Value, and Optimal
     Holding Periods: An Analytic Solution and Application to Tax Reform,"
     mimeo. August.

Poterba, James M. 1985. "How Burdensome Are Capital Gains Taxes?" MIT.
    Mimeo, August.

Poterba, James M. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1985. "The Economic Effects of
     Dividend Taxation," in Recent Advances in Corporate Finance, edited by
     Edward I. Altman and Marti G. Subrahmanyam. Homewood, IL: Richard 0.
     Irwin.

Rosen, Harvey. 1985. "Housing Subsidies: Effects on Housing Decisions,
     Efficiency, and Equity," in A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein (eds.),
     Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 1. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1983. "Some Aspects of the Taxation of Capital Gains,"
     Journal of Public Economics 21: 257-94.

Summers, Lawrence H. 1986. "Investment Incentives and the Discounting of
     Depreciation Allowances," mimeo, February.

Titman, Sheridan 0. 1982. "The Effect of Anticipated Inflation on Housing
     Market Equilibrium," Journal of the American Real Estate and Urban
     Economics Association 37:827-842.

U.S. Department of the Treasury. 1984. Tax Reform for Fairness, Simplicity,
     and Economic Growth: The Treasury Department Report to the President.
     Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Treasury. November.

Wales, Terence J. 1966. "Estimation of an Accelerated Depreciation Learning
     Function", Journal of the American Statistical Association 61: 9951009.

White, Michelle J. 1983. "Bankruptcy Costs and the New Bankruptcy Code,"
     Journal of Finance 38.

Williams, Joseph. 1981. "Trading Depreciable Assets," mimeo. New York:
     New York University School of Business, October.
                   Table 1: The Ownership of Structures in 1983


                                                                  Owner-Occupied
                                Corporate     Other Business         Housing




Total Structures                 1075.6           1124.4             2269.5
                                (24.19)          (25.2)              (5O.8)



Non-Residential Structures       1005.8            628.1              --
                                (61.6)            (38.4)



Residential Structures             69.8           496.3              2269.5
                                  (2.5)           (17.5)             (80.O)




Note: Figures in the table refer to current dollar net capital stocks.
       Numbers in parentheses are percentages of row totals. It is assumed
       that all corporate residential structures are rental properties.

Source: Musgrave (1984)
               Table 2: Structures Investment in 1980 and 1985
                      (Billions of Constant 1982 Dollars)


                                               1980                 1985



TOTAL STRUCTURES INVESTMENT                   273.8                338.9



Non—Residential Structures                    135.2                155.8


    Industrial Buildings                       16.0                 14.2
    Commercial Buildings                       34.7                 54.2
          Office Buildings                     15.3                 28.3
          Other                                19.4                 25.9
    Education, Religious & Hospital             7.9                  8.6
    Mining & Petroleum                         31.7                 39.8
    Public Utilities                           30.3                 31.8
    Farm Structures                             6.1                  3.4
    Other                                       9.5                 13.8



Residential Structures                        137.6                173.1

    Owner-Occupied                             60.7                 95.3
    Rental                                     76.9                 77.8




Source: unpublished data, Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of
Commerce.
  Table 3: Depreciation Benefits and Effective Tax Rates for Corporations


                                     Depreciation Method

                                                    Churning:
                    Accelerated            Effective Capital Gains Rate
Inflation Rate      Depreciation          0.14         0.21         0.28



                      Required Rate of Return = 0.02

 3%                    0.69               0.81         0.71         0.59
                       (37%)              (26%)        (36%)        (44%)

 6%                    0.58               0.60         0.48         0.36
                       (44%)              (43%)        (50%)        (55%)

10%                    0.47               0.41         0.33         0.24
                       (50%)              (53%)        (58%)        (59%)


                      Required Rate of Return = 0.04

 3%                    0.61               0.62         0.55        0.48
                       (35%)              (35%)        (38%)        (42%)

 6%                    0.58               0.47         0.40        0.36
                       (37%)              (42%)        (45%)        (47%)

10%                    0.43               0.38         0.33        0.27
                       (44%)              (46%)        (48%)        (50%)




Note: Top entry is the present value of depreciation benefits; bottom entry
       -in parentheses is the corresponding effective tax rate.
      Table 4: Depreciation Benefits and Effective Tax Rates for Individuals


                                       Depreciation Method

                                                      Churning:
                      Accelerated            Effective Capital Gains Rate
Inflation Rate        Depreciation          0.00         0.10         0.20



                        Required Rate of Return = 0.02

 3%                      0.69               1.06         0.90        0.75
                         (41%)             (-14%)        (18%)        (35%)

 6%                      0.58               0.85         0.68        0.53
                         (48%)              (26%)        (42%)        (51%)

10%                      0.47               0.69         0.48        0.36
                         (54%)              (41%)        (54%)        (59%)


                        Required Rate of Return = 0.D4

 3%                      0.61               0.75         0.66        0.57
                         (38%)              (29%)        (35%)        (41%)

 6%                      0.52               0.61         0.52        0.43
                         (44%)              (39%)        (44%)       (48%)

10%                      0.43              0.50          0.41        0.34
                         (48%               (45%)        (49%)       (51%)




Note: Top entry is the present value of depreciation benefits; bottom entry
       in parentheses is the corresponding effective tax rate.
               Table 5: Choice of Depreciation Method under ACRS
                          (Millions of Current Dollars)



                                    Corporat -ions

                                                      1981         1982

Total allocable 15-year real property
other than low—income housing and
public utility property                              24,836     25,276

         Accelerated depreciation                    15,474     16,923
         ()                                          (62.3)        (67.0)

         Straight-line



Unallocable property, foreign property,
and tax exempt organizations                          6,171        5,294



                                    Partnerships

                                                      1981         1982

Total allocable 15-year real property
other than low-income housing and
public utility property                              29,044     46,553

         Accelerated depreciation                    11,700     18,344
         (?)                                         (40.3)        (39.4)

         Straight—line                               17,344     28,209
         (9)                                         (59.7)        (6O.6)


Unallocable property, foreign property,
and tax exempt organizations                          1,879        1,492



Note: Entries correspond to dollar values of 15-year real property (other than
low—income housing and public utility structures) put in place and depreciated
by the indicated method in these years. Unallocable property could not reliably
be assigned to either the accelerated or straight-line depreciation category.
These data exclude investments for which the IRS was unable to determine from
the tax form which type of capital was being depreciated.

Source: unpublished preliminary data, Statistics of Income Division, Internal
Revenue Service.
              Table 6: Tenure Choice and Tax Status, 1965—1985
                                (Percentages)


                               Minimum Tax Bracket for Owner—Occupiers

                            Full Capital Gains       One-Half Capital Gains
                                 Liability                   Liability
         Maximum Personal    Risky      Riskiess      Risky        Riskiess
Year       Tax Bracket      Returns     Returns      Returns       Returns



1965          70               0          64            0           70+

1970          73              24         62           27            69

1975          70              59         59            59           59

1980          70              55         63           56           64

1981          69              53         56           53           56

1982          50              32         50+          41           50+

1983          50              28         50           38           50+

1984          50              19         34           37           44

1985          50              11         23           13           29



Note: Entries correspond to breakeven tax rates for tenure choice. Taxpayers
       with lower marginal tax rates will be renters, and those with higher
       marginal rates will be owner-occupiers.
