                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   FINANCIAL LITERACY AND HIGH-COST BORROWING IN THE UNITED STATES

                                        Annamaria Lusardi
                                    Carlo de Bassa Scheresberg

                                       Working Paper 18969
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18969


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2013




We gratefully acknowledge financial support from FINRA Investor Education Foundation. We thank
John Wall, Shanthi Ramnath, and participants to the APPAM 2012 Fall Research Conference in Baltimore,
MD, for comments. Audrey Brown provided excellent editorial assistance. All errors are the authors’
responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Annamaria Lusardi and Carlo de Bassa Scheresberg. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Literacy and High-Cost Borrowing in the United States
Annamaria Lusardi and Carlo de Bassa Scheresberg
NBER Working Paper No. 18969
April 2013
JEL No. D91

                                                ABSTRACT

In this paper, we examine high-cost methods of borrowing in the United States, such as payday loans,
pawn shops, auto title loans, refund anticipation loans, and rent-to-own shops, and offer a portrait of
borrowers who use these methods. Considering a representative sample of more than 26,000 respondents,
we find that about one in four Americans has used one of these methods in the past five years. Moreover,
many young adults engage in high-cost borrowing: 34 percent of young respondents (aged 18–34)
and 43 percent of young respondents with a high school degree have used one of these methods. Using
well-tested questions to measure financial literacy, we document that most high-cost borrowers display
very low levels of financial literacy, i.e., they lack numeracy and do not possess knowledge of basic
financial concepts. Most importantly, we find that those who are more financially literate are much
less likely to have engaged in high-cost borrowing. Our empirical work shows that it is not only the
shocks inflicted by the financial crisis or the structure of the financial system but that the level of financial
literacy also plays a role in explaining why so many individuals have made use of high-cost borrowing
methods.


Annamaria Lusardi
The George Washington University
School of Business
2201 G Street, NW
Duques Hall, Suite 450E
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
alusardi@gwu.edu

Carlo de Bassa Scheresberg
Global Center for Financial Literacy
George Washington University School of Business
2201 G Street, NW
Washington, DC 20052
cdebassa@gwu.edu
I.       Introduction

         The alternative financial services (AFS) industry has experienced tremendous
growth in the United States, particularly in the past twenty years. In 2009, the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) estimated this industry to be worth at least 320
billion in transactional services (FDIC, 2009). Other studies documented that some
segments of this industry, such as Internet-based payday lending, have experienced
yearly growth rates above 30 percent (Center for Financial Services Innovation, 2011).
While finding aggregate statistics has proven difficult, Stegman (2007) documents the
fast growth in both payday outlets and the quantity of loans made in many of the states
that allow them. As described in Bertrand and Morse (2011), in 2007 alone, Americans
paid an estimated $8 billion in financial charges to borrow $50 billion from payday
lenders at annual percentage rates (APR) often well over 400%. 2 Similar findings are
reported for other AFS providers. For example, in 2008, rent-to-own businesses and
pawnbrokers—which also tend to charge high interest rates—earned $7 billion and $4
billion in revenue, respectively (Rivlin, 2010).
         In this paper, we provide further evidence of the breadth of the AFS industry.
Using data from the 2009 National Financial Capability Study, we document that
borrowing through products such as payday loans, auto title loans, and refund
anticipation loans and using pawn shops or rent-to-own stores has become common in the
United States: about one in four Americans has used one of these methods in the past five
years. While a high proportion of those with low income borrow using these methods,
there is also a sizeable fraction of higher-income individuals who make use of AFS. The
young are also heavy AFS users; 34 percent of individuals aged 18–34 and 43 percent of
young respondent with a high school degree have used one of these methods. We also
find that these borrowers display very low levels of financial literacy: the majority lack
numeracy and basic knowledge of financial concepts at the basis of financial decision-
making. Most important, we show that financial literacy is strongly associated with AFS
use, even after controlling for a very rich set of demographic and economic
characteristics.

2
 Given that AFS products normally charge high interest rates, in this paper, we will refer to this industry as
AFS or high-cost methods of borrowing interchangeably.

                                                      2
           Three major findings emerge from our work. First, as mentioned above, high-cost
borrowing cannot be considered a “fringe” behavior that is limited to a specific and small
segment of the population; rather, it is firmly rooted in the American financial system and
is common even for households who are generally referred to as “middle-class” families.
For example, AFS products were used by more than 10 percent of survey respondents
with annual household incomes higher than $75,000 (in 2009 dollars), which is about
four times the poverty line for a standard household of three. 3 Second, this paper finds
that there is an educational divide, in particular among the young, in the use of high-cost
methods of borrowing: while only a relatively small percentage (17 percent) of young
individuals with a college degree have used high-cost methods of borrowing, a large
percentage (45 percent) of young individuals with a high school education or less have
relied on high-cost borrowing. Thus, among the young, borrowing using these methods
has become very common, particularly among those with lower educational attainment.
Third, consistent with other studies that document the effects of financial literacy on debt
behavior (Lusardi and Tufano, 2009a,b; Allgood and Walstad, 2012; Mottola, 2012; and
Disney and Gathergood, 2012), we find that numeracy and knowledge of basic financial
concepts is strongly negatively correlated with high-cost borrowing, even after
accounting for age, income, education, and many other variables that can proxy for
financial vulnerability and being hit by shocks.
           This paper adds to a burgeoning literature on the importance of financial literacy
in explaining financial behavior. While many papers have focused on the asset side of
household balance sheets, examining, for example, the effects of financial literacy on
retirement savings or investment in stocks, this paper shows we also need to look at the
liability side of the balance sheet, examining borrowing behavior and debt management.
Consistent with findings provided in the papers listed above, skills and knowledge in
dealing with debt can play an important role in explaining how individuals manage their
balance sheets.
           The paper is organized as follows. In section II, we provide a review of previous
research. In section III, we present the data from the 2009 National Financial Capability
Study. In section IV, we discuss the descriptive statistics and the sample demographics,

3
    http://aspe.hhs.gov/poverty/12poverty.shtml

                                                  3
and in section V, we present the empirical findings. In section VI, we discuss the
robustness of the estimates and in section VII, we summarize our main findings and
provide concluding remarks.


II.      Previous research

      A burgeoning literature has started to explore whether individuals are well-equipped
to make financial decisions. Bernheim (1995, 1998) was among the first to document that
many U.S. consumers display low levels of financial literacy. Hilgert, Hogarth, and
Beverly (2003) showed that most Americans fail to understand basic financial concepts,
particularly those relating to bonds, stocks, and mutual funds. Looking at younger
generations, the National Council on Economic Education’s 2005 report (Markow and
Bagnaschi, 2005) showed a widespread lack of knowledge regarding fundamental
economic concepts among high school students, confirming similar findings from the
Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy (Mandell, 2008).
      Lusardi and Mitchell (2008, 2011a,c) designed a pioneering set of questions to
measure basic financial literacy; these questions have now been used not only in many
surveys in the United States but also in a variety of countries around the world (Lusardi
and Mitchell, 2011b). They show that the capacity to do a simple interest rate calculation
and knowledge of inflation and risk diversification are strikingly low among large
segments of the population, not only among those with low income and education
(Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011a,c) but also among women, the young, and the elderly
(Lusardi and Mitchell, 2008; Lusardi, Mitchell, and Curto, 2010, 2012).
      Lusardi and Tufano (2009a,b) have looked at “debt literacy,” i.e., the knowledge of
concepts directly related to debt, such as the power of interest compounding, the
workings of credit cards, and the understanding of different methods of payment (paying
with a lump sum or in installments). They show that most individuals are ill-informed
about the basic concepts related to debt and debt management. As with financial
illiteracy, debt illiteracy is particularly severe among certain demographic groups, such as
the elderly, the young, women, minorities, and the divorced or separated (Lusardi and
Tufano, 2009a,b).



                                             4
   Financial literacy has been linked to several indicators of financial behavior. For
example, the less financially literate are found to be less likely to plan for retirement
(Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2011a,c), to accumulate wealth (Stango and
Zinman, 2009; Van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie, 2012), and to participate in the stock
market (Van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie, 2011; Yoong, 2011). Moreover, less literate
individuals are found to be less likely to choose mutual funds with lower fees (Hastings
and Tejeda-Ashton, 2008).
   Financial literacy can be linked not only on individual and household assets but also
on borrowing and debt. For example, Moore (2003) reports that respondents with lower
levels of financial literacy are more likely to have costly mortgages. Similarly, Campbell
(2006) shows that individuals with lower incomes and lower education levels—
characteristics that are strongly related to financial literacy—are less likely to refinance
their mortgages during a period of falling interest rates. Gerardi, Goette, and Meier
(2010) report that those with low literacy are more likely to take up sub-prime mortgages
and to default on them. Lusardi and Tufano (2009a,b) find that individuals with lower
levels of financial literacy tend to transact in high-cost manners, incurring higher fees and
using high-cost methods of borrowing. The less knowledgeable also report that their debt
loads are excessive or that they are unable to judge their debt position. Mottola (2012)
shows that women with low financial literacy are more likely to engage in costly credit
card behavior than men. Allgood and Walstad (2012) also linked financial knowledge to
a set of financial behaviors, including debt. The cost of ignorance is found to be high. For
example, Lusardi and Tufano (2009a) link data on financial literacy with credit card
behaviors that generate fees and interest charges. Specifically, they focus on charges
related to late payment of bills, going over a credit limit, using cash advances, and paying
only the minimum amount due. They found that while less knowledgeable individuals
account for only 28.7 percent of the cardholder population, they account for 42 percent of
these charges. Thus, those with low financial literacy bear a disproportionate share of the
costs associated with fee-inducing behaviors.




                                             5
    Data about AFS customers also point to financial illiteracy. 4 Elliehausen and
Laurence (2001) and Elliehausen (2005) report that most payday borrowers cannot
accurately recall annual percentage rates despite being able to report finance charges,
suggesting that most borrowers consider charges rather than APRs in making borrowing
decisions. Using UK household survey data that include information on high-cost
methods of borrowing, Disney and Gathergood (2012) show that consumer credit
customers systematically underestimate the cost of borrowing. Moreover, those with
lower levels of financial literacy are found to have higher average debt-to-income ratios.
McKernan, Lacko, and Hastak (2003) assess the effects of disclosures on AFS borrowing
and find that customers living in states with total cost label disclosure laws are less likely
to enter into rent-to-own agreements, suggesting that many customers may not fully
understand the costs of their borrowing.
    While the amount borrowed using, for example, payday loans, is often low (an
average of $300), many payday loans are made to individuals with five or more payday
loan transactions per year (Center for Responsible Lending, 2004). Agarwal, Skiba, and
Tobacman (2009) argue that payday borrowers may not take advantage of other, cheaper
opportunities to borrow. They looked at a sample of payday borrowers who also have
access to credit cards. As many as two-thirds of individuals in their sample have at least
$1,000 in credit card liquidity on the day they take out their first payday loan. This points
to a pecuniary mistake: given average charges for payday loans and credit cards and
considering a two-week payday loan of $300, the use of credit cards would save these
borrowers as much as $52. Since many payday borrowers repeatedly take out loans, the
savings that could be achieved borrowing via a credit card would be much higher.
According to the estimates reported by Agarwal, Skiba, and Tobacman (2009), over a
one-year period, typical credit card account holders would have saved almost $200 by
borrowing up to their credit card limits before turning to payday borrowing. Clearly,
these are only crude estimates, and there are reasons why individuals may want to keep
some liquidity on their credit cards. Nonetheless, the cost of borrowing can quickly
become high when people turn to payday loans. While the rationales for this sort of


4
 A review of the literature on alternative financial services providers is available in Theodos and Compton
(2010). See references therein.

                                                     6
borrowing behaviors are many, including the experience of unexpected shocks, Bertrand
and Morse (2011) document that at least part of the choice to use payday borrowing is
attributable to cognitive biases rather than to well-informed decision-making.
       An important issue when dealing with AFS use relates to customers’ access to
banking services. It is well documented (for example, FDIC, 2009; Stegman, 2007; Barr,
2012) that AFS use is particularly common among the unbanked and the under-banked.
Research has tried to establish whether such consumers are actually better off without
AFS products. For example, Morgan (2007) finds that in states that allow unlimited
payday loans, individuals with uncertain income or low education are less likely to report
being turned down for credit, but are not more likely to report higher debt levels or to
have missed a debt payment in the previous year. On the other hand, Melzer (2011) finds
no evidence that payday loans alleviate economic hardship; rather, he finds that loan
access leads to increased difficulty in paying mortgage, rent, and utility bills. Skiba and
Tobacman (2010) find that payday-loan approvals for first-time applicants increase
bankruptcy filing rates by about 2 percentage points. McKernan, Ratcliffe, and Kuehn
(2010) show that price caps and prohibitions are effective in diminishing the use of high-
cost borrowing methods and that restrictions on one product do not seem to lead to an
increased use of another AFS product. Lastly, Lusardi, Schneider, and Tufano (2011)
document a high degree of financial fragility among American families. In 2009, nearly
half of Americans were found to be financially fragile, with financial fragility being
defined as anticipated difficulty coming up with $2,000 to cover an unexpected expense.
Many respondents report they would cope with an unexpected expense by pawning their
possessions, selling their home, or taking out a payday loan.

III.      Data

The 2009 U.S. National Financial Capability Study (NFCS) consists of three linked
surveys: 5 (1) the National Survey, a nationally projectable telephone survey of 1,488
American adults; (2) the State-by-State Survey, a state-by-state online survey of
approximately 28,000 American adults (roughly 500 per state, plus the District of

5
 The data collection and design of the survey instruments was supported by FINRA Investor Education
Foundation.

                                                  7
Columbia); and (3) the Military Survey, an online survey of 800 military service
members and spouses 6. To ensure a sufficient number of respondents for the analysis,
African-Americans, Hispanics, Asian-Americans, and adults with less than a high school
education were oversampled. 7 A detailed analysis of the National Survey data is provided
in Lusardi (2011). In this paper, we use data from the large sample provided by the State-
by-State Survey but, at times, we also provide statistics from the National Survey.
         The overarching research objectives of the NFCS were to benchmark key
indicators of financial capability and evaluate how these indicators vary with underlying
demographic, behavioral, attitudinal, and financial literacy characteristics. Consistent
with surveys on financial capability that have been done in other countries (Atkinson,
McKay, Kempson, and Collard, 2007), the NFCS looks at multiple indicators of both
financial knowledge and capability, including how people manage their resources, how
they make financial decisions, the skill sets they use in making decisions, and the search
and information elaboration that goes into making these decisions.
    One of the innovative features of the NFCS is the provision of information on
financial behaviors related not just to assets and asset building but also to debt. The
survey includes a set of questions related to borrowing behavior and debt management,
including a question that asks about use of high-cost borrowing methods. The question is
asked as follows:


Please tell me if you’ve done any of the following in the past five years:

Have you taken out an auto title loan?
Have you taken out a short term "payday" loan?
Have you gotten an advance on your tax refund (This is sometimes called a “refund
anticipation loan” or “rapid refund”)?
Have you used a pawn shop?
Have you used a rent-to-own store?




6
  More information about the NFCS can be found at a; http://www.usfinancialcapability.org/. Note also
that the military survey is not necessarily representative of the armed forces and does not have weights to
make the sample representative of that population.
7
  The sample used in this study was weighted to match the adult US population (age 18 and up) by age by
gender, ethnicity, education and census division. For more information, see the report by FINRA Investor
Education Foundation (2009).

                                                      8
         This mirrors a question asked of respondents in the 2008 TNS survey, although a
longer time horizon is considered here (Lusardi and Tufano, 2009a,b). A detailed
description of each of these products is provided in Theodos and Compton (2010).
         The NFCS also reports information on financial literacy. Respondents were
exposed to a battery of questions covering fundamental economics and finance concepts,
expressed as they would be in everyday transactions. The survey included three questions
measuring financial knowledge that have become the standard in many countries, as
described earlier, and which are transcribed below to show how basic the concepts are. A
detailed discussion of the empirical evidence on financial literacy in the total sample and
across states is provided in Lusardi (2011) and Bumcrot, Lin, and Lusardi (2011). 8

1. Suppose you had $100 in a savings account and the interest rate was 2% per year. After 5
years, how much do you think you would have in the account if you left the money to grow?

    A.   More than $102
    B.   Exactly $102
    C.   Less than $102
    D.   Do not know
    E.   Refuse to answer

2. Imagine that the interest rate on your savings account was 1% per year and inflation was 2%
per year. After 1 year, how much would you be able to buy with the money in this account?

    A.   More than today
    B.   Exactly the same
    C.   Less than today
    D.   Do not know
    E.   Refuse to answer

3. Please tell me whether this statement is true or false. “Buying a single company’s stock usually
provides a safer return than a stock mutual fund.”

    A. True
    B. False
8
  There are two other financial literacy questions in the survey. However, they are less likely to be related
to decisions about high-cost methods of borrowing. Moreover, we cannot compare findings with other
studies using these other questions. We did not include them in our empirical work, but we use these
additional questions in the section on robustness checks to show that our findings are not dependent on the
measure of financial literacy used in the empirical work.

                                                      9
    C. Do not know
    D. Refuse to answer


As the wording makes clear, these questions measure basic concepts at the basis of
financial decision-making.


IV.     Descriptive analysis

        The traditional intertemporal model of consumption and saving predicts that
individuals will borrow to smooth consumption; if hit by an unexpected shock,
individuals may resort to borrowing if they do not have savings or have exhausted their
savings (given that the cost of borrowing is usually higher than the interest paid on
savings). There are also circumstances—for example when facing binding liquidity
constraints—that may rationalize why individuals are willing to borrow at very high
interest rates. Not just shocks to resources but also preferences, for example high degrees
of impatience, may explain why individuals prefer to shift consumption from the future to
the present. These simple models assume that individuals are well-informed about the
terms of borrowing and understand and can calculate the costs associated with borrowing.
We now turn to the data to assess whether these considerations are borne out empirically.
        We start our empirical analysis by providing a set of descriptive statistics on AFS
users. To construct our sample, we excluded respondents who did not provide
information about each of the five methods of borrowing listed in the questionnaire.
Moreover, we excluded those who did not report information on the other characteristics
we used in the descriptive tables. 9 Our final sample is composed of 26,364 observations.
One of the striking results of the survey is the sizable share of Americans who have
engaged in high-cost methods of borrowing in the past five years. As many as 24 percent
of respondents used at least one AFS product in the past five years (Table 1). While one

9
  Roughly 2.5 percent of respondents in the original sample has not responded to one or more of the
questions related to AFS use. Therefore our sample is reduced to 27,456 observations. We further exclude
from the sample 1,092 observations for which data is missing in one or more of these variables: banked
status, home ownership, income drop in the past twelve months, availability of precautionary savings,
health insurance coverage, and preference toward financial risk. We compared the two samples and we find
evidence that the observations we drop are more likely to represent vulnerable groups (such as low income,
female, low education, minorities, lower financial literacy individuals). Thus, our findings are likely to
underestimate the impact of financial literacy.

                                                   10
may worry that online surveys may not accurately measure those who rely on these
methods, in fact statistics are very similar between the National Survey (conducted via
telephone) and the State-by-State Survey (conducted online); both reported that the share
of AFS users is around 24% (see Lusardi, 2011, and FINRA Investor Education
Foundation, 2009).
         Table 1 provides a description of individuals using AFS. The young are heavy
users. Among those at the early stage of their working career (aged 25–34), as many as
35 percent have used high-cost methods of borrowing, and the share of AFS users is also
high (32 percent) among the very young (aged 18–24). The share of AFS users decreases
with age and reduces to 8 percent for those 65 or older. 10 It is worrisome that such a large
share of young people are AFS users and that their early experience with credit seems to
rely so much on these methods. We look exclusively at the young in the second column
of Table 1.
         AFS use varies markedly with education. Among those with less than a high
school education, a stunning 44 percent have used high-cost methods of borrowing in the
past five years. The percentage of users remains high not only among those who have a
high school education (30 percent) but even among those who have some college
education (25 percent). It is only when looking at college graduates or individuals with
advanced degrees that we find a lower proportion of high-cost borrowers. The “education
divide” among AFS users becomes particularly noticeable when looking at the young.
More than half of young respondents without a high school education (53 percent) have
used high-cost methods of borrowing and close to half of those with a high school
diploma (43 percent) have used these methods. One-third of the young with some college
education also engaged in high-cost borrowing. The proportion of young AFS users drops
substantially only when looking at individuals with a college education. In other words,
most of the young with low educational attainment make use of alternative financial
services.
         Another finding worthy of note relates to the fact that it is not just the poor who
resort to AFS; while about one-third of those with low income (lower than $25,000) use


10
  In a single cross-section, we cannot distinguish between age and generation effects, so we speak of these
two effects interchangeably.

                                                    11
AFS, one in five respondents with income between $50,000 and $75,000 have relied on
these products and one in ten respondents with higher income (higher than $75,000) have
used AFS. These patterns are similar among the young. A sizable proportion of young
higher-income respondents have relied on high-cost borrowing (potentially because they
were not high-income all of the past five years).
       High-cost borrowing is more prevalent among respondents who are separated or
single and much more frequent among non-Caucasian individuals, even though ethnicity
differences are not present among the young; among the young all ethnic groups rely
heavily on high-cost borrowing. These findings are consistent with other papers (Bourke,
Horowitz and Roche, 2012).
       As many authors had argued (FDIC, 2009), the use of high-cost methods of
borrowing is common among those who are unbanked (defined here as having neither a
checking nor a savings account); half of the unbanked use alternative financial services.
In fact, these services may well be what some groups use in place of banks. While a high
proportion of the unbanked use high-cost borrowing, even the banked make use of high-
cost methods of borrowing; more than 20 percent of the banked have relied on AFS and
as many as 32 percent of young respondents who have bank accounts have relied on these
services.. Moreover, 55 percent of high cost borrowers have at least one credit card, and
53 percent of the young high cost borrowers have a credit card.
       To study high-cost borrowing in more detail, in Table 2, we examine the
proportion of use of each form of high-cost borrowing. Pawn shops are used most
prevalently, followed by payday loans. These user rates are higher than rates recorded in
the National Survey (for which data is collected via telephone). National Survey data
show that pawn shop users and payday borrowers accounted for 8 percent and 5 percent
of total respondents, respectively (FINRA Foundation, 2009). The telephone survey,
however, consists of fewer observations, and we prefer to use the larger State-by-State
Survey in our analysis. Because the unbanked and the young are heavy users of AFS, we
examine the forms of AFS use among these groups. The unbanked report high pawn shop
use as well as use of rent-to-own shops, payday loans, and refund anticipation loans. The
young make heavy use of pawn shops and payday loans, in particular if they are
unbanked. This result implies that younger generations are becoming accustomed to


                                            12
borrowing from alternative financial services providers, a worrisome finding if we
consider that the young are increasingly burdened by student loans and credit card debt
(Sallie Mae, 2012).
           Table 3 reports AFS use across methods. As emphasized by Lusardi and Tufano
(2009a), most people use more than one AFS product. For example, many of those who
have used a pawn shop have also used payday loans and those who have used a rent-to-
own shop have also used a pawn shop. Those who use payday loans also use refund
anticipations loans, pawn shops, and rent-to-own stores. In other words, people who
engage in high-cost borrowing have used more than one AFS product. This again speaks
of the pervasiveness of debt among American families and the high costs often associated
with it.
           Most of the literature points broadly to three main determinants of high-cost
borrowing. First, several authors cite the difficulty or impossibility for AFS users to
borrow from traditional financing sources, such as banks (for example, Barr, 2009).
Second, preferences, such as impatience and desire for immediate gratification can play a
role (Laibson, 1997). Third, resources and economic circumstances can be a factor,
particularly in the midst of the recent financial crisis, during which many families
experienced shocks not just to income but also to wealth (Lusardi, Schneider, and
Tufano, 2011). While all of these explanations are potentially important and have merit,
we propose an additional explanation: lack of financial literacy. As emphasized in
Lusardi (2009, 2011), Lusardi and Mitchell (2007, 2008, 2011a,b,c), and Lusardi and
Tufano (2009a,b), many individuals do not seem familiar with even the most basic
financial concepts. Thus, a crucial question is whether individuals have full
comprehension of the costs associated with the use of alternative financial services and
the skills necessary to make savvy choices about debt and debt management. As
documented in Lusardi, Mitchell, and Curto (2010) and Lusardi and Mitchell (2011b),
financial literacy is particularly low among the young and those with low education and
low income, and these are the individuals most likely to rely on high-cost methods of
borrowing.
           In Table 4, we provide a simple classification of AFS users and a set of proxies
measuring preferences—the NFCS survey data provides information on respondent


                                              13
willingness to take financial risks (using a simple scale from 1 to 10)—and financial
fragility—whether the respondent is currently unemployed, whether his/her household
has experienced a large and unexpected drop in income, and whether he/she has health
insurance. We also consider some proxies for wealth, such as whether the respondent
owns a home and whether he/she has set aside emergency, or rainy day, funds that could
cover expenses for three months in case of sickness, job loss, economic downturn, or
other emergencies. 11 This latter measure can provide a proxy not only for financial
resources but also for preferences such as impatience and thriftiness.
           We find that most AFS users do not have precautionary savings; only about 18
percent have rainy day funds. AFS users are also less likely to have health insurance and
to own a house. Moreover, income shocks are a potential driver of high-cost borrowing:
more than half of AFS users have experienced unexpected and large shocks to income.
Finally, AFS users are more likely to be unemployed.
           As discussed earlier, financial literacy may also be an important factor in
explaining high-cost borrowing. In Table 5, we report that a sizable proportion of the
population does not know basic financial concepts. 12 Risk is the concept that seems most
difficult to grasp, and it is also the concept via which we are best able to distinguish
among degrees of financial knowledge (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011b,c). Note that in the
total sample, only 40 percent of respondents are able to correctly answer all of the three
financial literacy questions. Most important, financial literacy is very low among AFS
users; the proportion of those who answer all three questions correctly is only about a
quarter. Figures become alarming among young respondents, who display very low levels
of financial literacy in general and particularly among AFS users; only 19 percent of
young AFS users were able to correctly answer the financial literacy questions. While
there is a very strong correlation between financial literacy and AFS use, it is important
to examine whether this relationship continues to hold once we account for other
explanations for why individuals rely on AFS, to which we now turn.




11
     This is the wording used in the survey to measure these types of savings.
12
     A detailed discussion of financial literacy in the population is reported in Lusardi (2011).

                                                         14
V.      Empirical Results

        In Table 6A, we examine the relationship between AFS use and financial literacy
in a multivariable setting. Specifically, using the rich set of information that is present in
the State-by-State Survey, we examine whether the importance of financial literacy
continues to hold once we account for other determinants of high-cost borrowing. While
our previous tables uncover some important characteristics of AFS users, the key
question is what matters most when we consider all of these variables together. Given the
high level of AFS use among the young, we analyze high-cost borrowing in the
population and among this subgroup (Tables 6A and 6B).
        To construct our final sample for the empirical estimation, we exclude
respondents older than 65 as they should be in the decumulation phase of the life-cycle
and should dissave rather than borrow. The dependent variable in our empirical estimates
is a dummy variable which equals one if the respondent engaged in at least one of the
five high-cost borrowing behaviors in the past five years. Financial literacy is measured
by a dummy variable which equals one if the respondent correctly answered all three
financial literacy questions. As we explain later in the text, we use additional measures of
financial literacy to assess the robustness of our estimates. 13
        The first column of Table 6A shows the importance of financial literacy, as was
already documented in Table 5. Those who are more financially literate, i.e. those who
answer all three questions correctly, are 15 percentage points less likely to have engaged
in high-cost borrowing. In column 2, we add a set of demographic characteristics that
would be considered in a parsimonious intertemporal model of savings (considering debt
as negative savings). Because we examine specific methods of borrowing (i.e., high-cost
methods), we have to account as much as possible for extenuating circumstances and/or
high levels of impatience. Thus, we start by controlling for age, gender, race/ethnicity,
marital status, number of children, employment status, and income (column 2).
According to Lawrence (1991), these demographics can proxy for rate of time
preferences. They can also proxy for economic circumstances (Lusardi, 1999). Moreover,
we include a set of dummies for state of residence to control both for different economic

13
  We perform regressions using a linear probability model, but with our large sample, logistic regressions
give very similar results.

                                                    15
conditions across states and the fact that states differ in the regulation of use of
alternative financial services (McKernan, Ratcliffe, and Kuehn, 2010).
       The multivariable setting confirms some of the findings that we reported earlier.
Specifically, high-cost borrowing varies strongly with age, and age continues to be
statistically significant even after accounting for many demographic characteristics.
Moreover, both income and measures of financial vulnerability, such as having children
and being unemployed, separated, or widowed, matter in explaining high-cost borrowing.
However, even after accounting for this set of characteristics, financial literacy continues
to be important; those who are more financially literate are about 8 percentage points less
likely to engage in high-cost borrowing.
       In the third column, we add a set of dummies for educational attainment, which
could itself proxy for skills and financial knowledge. As mentioned earlier, education is a
strong determinant of AFS use. In the regressions as well we observe a strong and
monotonic relationship with education; those with high educational attainment are much
less likely to use high-cost methods of borrowing. Because we already account for
income, education is likely to proxy for something other than economic circumstances,
and it is noteworthy that it matters so much in explaining AFS use. Note, however, that
financial literacy continues to have predictive power above and beyond the effect of
education. Thus, not just general knowledge but specific knowledge of math and finance
play a role in affecting high-cost borrowing, as is reported in many other papers studying
the effect of financial literacy on saving behavior and portfolio choice (Van Rooij,
Lusardi, and Alessie 2011, 2012; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011a,b; and Behrman, Mitchell,
Soo, and Bravo, 2010).
       In the fourth column, we add variables controlling for a rich set of preferences, for
example preferences toward risk, economic shocks, and measures of financial fragility,
such as having rainy day savings, having health insurance, and owning a home. All of
these variables are predictors of high-cost borrowing. For example, those who are willing
to take risks and those who do not have health insurance are more likely to be AFS users.
Moreover, those who have experienced a sharp drop in income, who do not have rainy-
day savings, and who do not own a home are also more likely to use AFS. Note,
however, that even after we control for this additional set of variables, financial literacy


                                            16
continues to be statistically significant and important. Specifically, those who are
financially literate are 5 percentage points less likely to engage in high-cost borrowing.
The quantitative importance of financial literacy is high: given that, on average, 25.5
percent of the respondents have used high-cost borrowing, a 5-percentage point drop
represents a relative decrease of 20 percent. In other words, it is not just shocks and
economic resources that matter but also the ability to manage those shocks and resources.
       In the last column, we add a dummy for being unbanked. Many authors have
argued that this is the most important determinant of AFS and could be beyond the
control of respondents (particularly those who live in rural areas or areas with sparse
bank penetration). While we believe this variable to be endogenous, we add it to the
regression simply to study its effect on the financial literacy estimates. While bank status
is a very important determinant of high-cost borrowing, it does not take away the
importance of financial literacy; even accounting for whether the respondent has a
checking or savings account, those who are financially literate are still less likely to rely
on high-cost methods of borrowing.
       These estimates show that it is not just the financial structure and the choice
architecture that influence the way in which people borrow; financial knowledge is also
important. Moreover, while banking status is important, it is not the most important
predictor of AFS use. Education is the variable that matters most for explaining use of
high-cost methods of borrowing in a multivariable setting. For example, the coefficient
estimates of education (having some college degree or higher education) on AFS use are
higher than the coefficient estimates of being banked and the coefficient estimates of
having a home or precautionary savings. Again, it is the ability to manage resources in
addition to resources per se that is important in explaining the behavior of those who use
AFS. These results are consistent with the estimates provided by Lusardi (2010) using the
National Survey data. Thus, irrespective of the data collection methods, financial literacy
is found to be an important predictor of AFS use.
       Table 6B reports these regressions on the sample of the young only (aged 18–34).
As mentioned earlier, the young are heavy AFS users. Moreover, they have very low
levels of financial literacy. Our main findings are confirmed even when looking at this
subgroup of the population. For the young as well, economic resources and indicators of


                                             17
vulnerability, such as being separated, having children, being unemployed, having a low
level of income, having experienced income shocks, and being a homeowner play an
important role in explaining AFS use. Risk preference also matters, as does banking
status. However, both education and financial literacy play a very important part in
explaining AFS use among the young. For example, those who have a college degree are
17 percentage points less likely to engage in high-cost borrowing. Therefore, the
multivariate analysis continues to confirm the educational divide among the young in
explaining borrowing behavior. The economic importance of financial literacy is also
high; considering the last column of Table 6B in which we include the richest set of
controls, we find that young respondents who are financially literate are 7 percentage
points less likely to rely on high-cost borrowing. Consider that, on average 33.7 percent
of young respondents have used high-cost borrowing, a 7-percentage point drop
represents a relative decrease of 20 percent. Again, it is not just preferences, financial
resources, and financial inclusion but also skills and financial knowledge that play a role
in explaining high-cost borrowing.
        These findings are consistent with several other papers. For example, they are
consistent the evidence provided in Agarwal, Driscoll, Gabaix, and Laibson (2009) that
financial mistakes are prevalent among the young. They are also consistent with
Elliehausen, Lundquist, and Staten (2007) that credit counseling may improve the
behavior of borrowers. Finally, they are consistent with the paper by Mottola (2012) and
Allgood and Walstad (2012), who use the same data but different measures of financial
literacy and of borrowing behavior.

VI.     Extensions and Robustness Checks

        In this section, we report a variety of extensions and robustness checks. For
example, we examine which type of financial knowledge matters most for explaining
high-cost borrowing. Moreover, we consider expanded measures of financial knowledge
that include additional information available in the data set as well as simple measures of
math knowledge. Finally, we further extend the set of controls used in our empirical
work.



                                            18
           Given that the extended set of controls did not change our main findings, in our
robustness checks we use the parsimonious specification that was reported in column 2 of
Tables 6A and 6B. In the first column of Table 7A, we use a dummy for correctly
answering each financial literacy question included in our financial literacy measure. The
frequencies for each correct answer are reported in Table 5. We find that each type of
knowledge matters: numeracy, knowledge of the effects of inflation, and understanding
of risk diversification all have an effect on AFS use. As expected, knowledge of inflation
and understanding of risk are more important quantitatively as they tend to capture
sophisticated knowledge. These findings are consistent with other studies that make use
of these variables (see the overview in Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011a,b).
           There are two other questions measuring financial knowledge in the NFCS. One
question measures knowledge of the inverse relationship between bond prices and
interest rates. This question is particularly suitable to capturing very sophisticated
financial knowledge, which may be less applicable to AFS users, who tend to be young
and financially unsophisticated. The other question measures knowledge of the workings
of mortgages. 14 We construct an additional indicator of financial literacy, this time using
five rather than three questions measuring financial literacy and constructing a dummy
variable for those who correctly answer all five questions. In the sample, only 16 percent
are able to correctly answer all of the financial literacy questions. As reported in column
2 of Table 7A, financial literacy measured in this alternative way is still statistically
significant and important; those who can answer all five questions are more than 7
percentage points less likely to use alternative financial services. In the final column of
Table 7A, we use a simple measure of financial literacy, i.e., self-assessed knowledge of
math. The survey asked respondents to report, on a scale from 1 to 7, whether they are
“pretty good at math.” Math knowledge can be important because the capacity to do
calculations and to assess the high rates normally charged by AFS providers can play a
role in explaining borrowing behavior. The average self-assessed score in the total
14
     The precise wording of the questions is as follows:
If interest rates rise, what will typically happen to bond prices? They will rise; they will fall, they will stay
the same; there is no relationship between bond prices and interest rates; do not know; refuse to answer.
Please tell me whether this statement is true or false. A 15-year mortgage typically requires higher monthly
payments than a 30-year mortgage, but the total interest paid over the life of the loan will be less. True;
false; do not know; refuse to answer.

                                                        19
sample is 5.6. As reported in Table 7A, math knowledge does matter and this alternative
measure of financial knowledge also matters in explaining AFS use.
           In Table 7B, we redo the analysis using these different measures of financial
literacy for the young. Results are very similar to the total sample. We note that simple
numeracy (the capacity to do a 2 percent calculation) does not matter among the young,
but math knowledge continues to matter. Only a very small share—9 percent—of young
respondents were able to correctly answer five financial literacy questions, but those who
could are much less likely to engage in high-cost borrowing.
           An additional concern for the robustness of the estimates is that there could be
other factors determining the level of financial literacy and the extent to which an
individual uses high-cost borrowing. For example, one argument is that financial
illiteracy is more common among individuals with worse credit risk profiles. If these
individuals are not able to borrow via, for example, banks or credit cards, they may turn
disproportionately to AFS. While we have several controls that can proxy for credit risk
profiles, we do not have information about the full set of financial transactions that
people have made and that could have affected their AFS use, for example reaching the
limit on a credit card. 15 The NFCS provides information on credit scores, which is often
the best summary of an individuals’ financial standing. Given that the dependent variable
refers to the past five years while most of the control variables refer to the survey year
(2009), it is also important to add a variable that includes information about the past.
Information about credit scores is organized and collected as follows: those having scores
of 620 or lower, 630–710, and 720 or higher. Unfortunately, missing data for this item is
very high (about 60 percent). In Table 8A, we control for credit score data using a
dummy for the reported score and for those who reported missing values (column 2) and
restricting the sample to those who report the credit score only (column 3). We find that
credit scores matters for AFS; those who have a low score are more likely to engage in
high-cost borrowing. This result holds true in the total sample (Table 8A) and among the
young (Table 8B).
           Other concerns relate to the fact that financial literacy could be measured with
error (Alessie, Van Rooij, and Lusardi, 2012; Van Rooij, Alessie, and Lusardi, 2011,

15
     See also Bhutta, Skiba and Tobacman (2012).

                                                   20
2012; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2009). In the presence of classical measurement error,
estimates tend to be biased toward zero. It is not clear that the way in which financial
literacy is measured reflects a classical measurement error case. However, when studies
try to account for the measurement error problem in financial knowledge by using
Instrumental Variable estimation, they always report IV estimates of the effects of
financial literacy that are larger than the OLS estimates (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2009;
Alessie, Van Rooij, and Lusardi, 2012; Van Rooij, Alessie, and Lusardi, 2011, 2012). We
plan to address this issue in future work.



VII.   Discussion and Conclusion

In this paper, we examine high-cost methods of borrowing in the United States, and offer
a portrait of borrowers who tend to use these methods. We find that, on average,
individuals using alternative financial services have low income levels, are non-
Caucasian, are divorced or separated, and have children. Financial vulnerability and
banking status are also correlated with AFS use: those relying on high-cost borrowing
methods are disproportionately more likely to have been hit by shocks, to be
unemployed, to have exhausted (or to not have) precautionary savings, and to be
unbanked. While some of these findings may be expected, we highlight three important
and worrisome results. First, high-cost borrowing is pervasive among American
households; about one in four Americans has used these methods. Moreover, some
demographic groups make heavy use of AFS; as many as one-third of the young (aged
18–34) have used high-cost borrowing methods in the five years prior to the survey.
Thus, the young start their working life not only carrying debt but often paying a high
cost for it. Second, education plays a critical role in explaining AFS use. Both in the full
survey population and specifically among the young, a very high proportion of
individuals without a college degree have used high-cost borrowing. In the empirical
regressions and even after controlling for a rich set of demographic characteristics and
economic circumstances, education is the variable that matters the most in explaining
high-cost borrowing; it is more important than having been hit by shocks or being
unbanked. Third, having not just general knowledge, as proxied by education, but having


                                             21
specific types of knowledge, such as financial literacy, explains high-cost borrowing
behavior. One finding we highlight in the paper is that financial literacy is strikingly low
among AFS users; the large majority lack knowledge of basic financial concepts at the
basis of financial decision making. As documented in other papers (Lusardi, 2011;
Lusardi, Mitchell, and Curto, 2010; Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011b), financial literacy is
particularly low among the young and among those with low educational attainment, and
both groups have been found to be heavy AFS users. In the empirical work, we find that
low levels of financial literacy have strong links to AFS use. The quantitative importance
of financial literacy is high; according to our estimates, financial literacy accounts for 20
percent of the reduction in the use of high-cost borrowing. While in our empirical work
we use well-tested measures of financial literacy, our estimates are robust to different
measures of financial literacy.
       Our findings show that it is not only the shocks inflicted by the financial crisis,
the structure of the financial system, and the availability and cost of using banks that
matter but that the level of financial literacy also plays a role in explaining why so many
individuals have made use of high-cost borrowing methods. Thus, not just shocks to
resources but the capacity to manage those resources is important in explaining AFS use.
If we consider the role of specific knowledge (financial knowledge) as well as of general
knowledge (education), we find that these two variables can explain the lion’s share of
uses of high-cost methods of borrowing. This finding provides suggestions on how to
address interventions. For example, one way in which we may affect AFS use is through
promoting financial literacy and financial education. This could be particularly important
among the young, who are shown to be making heavy use of alternative financial
services. Our paper shows that such education-related intervention may affect not just
wages but also net worth and, in particular, the costs incurred in managing debt.




                                             22
                                   REFERENCES
Agarwal, Sumit, John C. Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson. 2009. “The Age of
    Reason: Financial Decisions over the Life Cycle and Implications for Regulation.”
    Brookings Papers of Economic Activities, Fall 2009, pp. 51–117.
Agarwal, Sumit, Paige M. Skiba, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2009. “Payday loans and credit
    cards: New liquidity and credit scoring puzzles?”American Economic Review
    Papers and Proceedings, 99(2), pp. 412-417.
Alessie, Rob, Maarten van Rooij, and Annamaria Lusardi. 2011. “Financial Literacy and
     Retirement Preparation in the Netherlands” Journal of Pension Economics and
     Finance 10(4): 527–545.
Allgood, Sam, and William B. Walstad. 2012. “The Effects of Perceived and Actual
     Financial Literacy on Financial Behaviors.” Paper presented to the National
     Financial Capability Study Roundtable, The George Washington School of
     Business, 2012.
Atkinson, Adele, Stephen McKay, Elaine Kempson, and Sharon Collard. 2007. “Levels
     of Financial Capability in the UK: Results of a Baseline Survey.” Public Money &
     Management 27(1): 29–36, February.
Barr, Michael S., Jane K. Dokko, and Benjamin J. Keys. 2009. “And Banking for All?”
      Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2009-34.
Barr, Michael S. 2012. No Slack: The Financial Lives of Low-Income Americans.
     Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Behrman, Jere, Olivia S. Mitchell, Cindy Soo, and David Bravo 2010. “Financial
    Literacy, Schooling, and Wealth Accumulation.” NBER Working Paper 16452.
Bernheim, Douglas. 1995. “Do Households Appreciate Their Financial Vulnerabilities?
     An Analysis of Actions, Perceptions, and Public Policy,” in Tax Policy and
     Economic Growth, American Council for Capital Formation, Washington, DC: pp.
     1–30.
Bernheim, Douglas. 1998. “Financial Illiteracy, Education and Retirement Saving,” in O.
     Mitchell and S. Schieber (eds.), Living with Defined Contribution Pensions.
     Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, pp. 38–68.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Adair Morse. 2011. “Information Disclosure, Cognitive Biases,
     and Payday Borrowing.” The Journal of Finance, 66 (6), pp. 1865-1893.
Bhutta, Neil, Paige M. Skiba, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2012. “Payday Loan Choices and
     Consequences.” Working Paper 12-30. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Law
     School.
Bourke, Nick, Alex Horowitz, and Tara Roche. 2012. “Who Borrows, Where They
     Borrow, and Why.” The Safe Small-Dollar Research Project, The Pew Charitable
     Trusts.
Bumcrot Chris, Judy Lin, and Annamaria Lusardi. 2011. “The Geography of Financial
    Literacy.” Rand Working Paper n. WR-893-SS, November 2011.


                                          23
Campbell, John. 2006. “Household Finance.” Journal of Finance, pp.1553–1604.
Center for Financial Services Information. 2011. “2010 Underbanked Market Size.”
     Knowledge Brief 09-11.
Center for Responsible Lending. 2004. “Quantifying the Economic Cost of Predatory
     Pay-Day Lending.” Durham, NC: Report.
Disney, Richard and John Gathergood. 2012. “Financial Literacy and Consumer Credit
     Portfolios.” Mimeo, University of Nottingham.
Elliehausen, Gregory, Christopher Lundquist, and Michael E. Staten (2007). "The Impact
      of Credit Counseling on Subsequent Borrower Behavior," Journal of Consumer
      Affairs, vol. 41(1), pp. 1-28.
Elliehausen, Gregory, and Edward Lawrence. 2001. “Payday Advance Credit in America:
      An Analysis of Customer Demand.” Working paper. Washington, DC: Credit
      Research Center, Georgetown University.
Elliehausen, Gregory. 2005. “Consumer Use of Tax Refund Anticipation Loans.”
      Working paper. Washington, DC: Credit Research Center, Georgetown University.
FDIC Unbanked/Underbanked Survey Study Group. 2009. FDIC National Survey of
    Unbanked and Underbanked Households. Washington, DC: Federal Deposit
    Insurance Corporation.
FINRA Investor Education Foundation. 2009. Financial Capability in the United States.
    National Survey - Executive Summary, December 2009.
Gerardi, Kristopher, Lorenz Goette, and Stephan Meier. 2010. “Financial Literacy and
     Subprime Mortgage Delinquency: Evidence from a Survey Matched to
     Administrative Data.” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper.
Hilgert, Marianne, Jeanne Hogarth, and Sondra Beverly. 2003. “Household Financial
     Management: The Connection between Knowledge and Behavior.” Federal Reserve
     Bulletin, 309–32.
Hastings, Justine, and Lydia Tejeda-Ashton. 2008. “Financial Literacy, Information, and
     Demand Elasticity: Survey and Experimental Evidence from Mexico.” NBER
     Working Paper 14538.
Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 112: 443–478.
Lawrance, Emily C. 1991. “Poverty and the Rate of Time Preference: Evidence from
    Panel Data.” Journal of Political Economy, 99, 54–77.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007. “Baby Boomers Retirement Security:
     The Role of Planning, Financial Literacy and Housing Wealth.” Journal of
     Monetary Economics 54: 205–224.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2008. “Planning and Financial Literacy:
     How Do Women Fare?” American Economic Review, 98(2): 413–417.



                                          24
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2009. “How Ordinary Consumers Make
     Complex Economic Decisions: Financial Literacy and Retirement Readiness.”
     NBER Working Paper no. 15350.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2011a. “Financial Literacy and Planning:
     Implications for Retirement Wellbeing,” in Olivia S. Mitchell and Annamaria
     Lusardi (eds.), Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the
     Financial Marketplace. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 17–49.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2011b. “Financial Literacy around the
     World: An Overview.” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 10(4): 497–
     508.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2011c. “Financial Literacy and Retirement
     Planning in the United States.” Journal of Pension Economics and Finance, 10(4):
     509–525.
Lusardi, Annamaria, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Vilsa Curto. 2010. “Financial Literacy
     among the Young.” Journal of Consumer Affairs, 44(2), pp. 358–380.
Lusardi, Annamaria, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Vilsa Curto. 2012. “Financial Sophistication
     in the Older Population.” NBER Working Paper, no. 17863.
Lusardi, Annamaria, Daniel J. Schneider, and Peter Tufano. 2011. “Financially Fragile
     Households: Evidence and Implications.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
     Spring: 83–134.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Peter Tufano. 2009a. “Debt Literacy, Financial Experiences,
     and Overindebtedness.” NBER Working Paper, no. 14808.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Peter Tufano. 2009b. “Teach Workers about the Peril of Debt.”
     Harvard Business Review, November, pp. 22–24.
Lusardi, Annamaria. 1999. Information, Expectations, and Savings for Retirement, in
     Henry Aaron (ed), Behavioral Dimensions of Retirement Economics, Washington,
     D.C.: Brookings Institution Press and Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 81–115.
Lusardi, Annamaria. 2010. “Financial Capability in the United States: Consumer
     Decision-Making and the Role of Social Security, MRRC Working Paper n 2010-
     226. September 2010.
Lusardi, Annamaria. 2011. “Americans’ Financial Capability.” NBER Working Paper n.
     17103.
Mandell, Lewis. 2008. “Financial Education in High School,” in Annamaria Lusardi
    (ed.), Overcoming the Saving Slump: How to Increase the Effectiveness of
    Financial Education and Saving Programs, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    pp. 257–279.
Markow, Dana, and Kelly Bagnaschi. 2005. “What American Teens & Adults Know
    About Economics.” National Council on Economic Education report.




                                          25
McKernan, Signe-Mary, Caroline Ratcliffe, and Daniel Kuehn. 2010. “Prohibitions, Price
   Caps, and Disclosures: A Look at State Policies and Alternative Financial Product
   Use.” Urban Institute Working Paper.
McKernan, Signe-Mary, James Lacko, and Manoj Hastak. 2003. “Empirical Evidence on
   the Determinant of Rent-to-Own Use and Purchase Behavior.” Economic
   Development Quarterly,17(1), pp. 33–52.
Melzer, Brian T. 2011. “The Real Costs of Credit Access: Evidence from the Payday
    Lending Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics; 126(1), pp. 517–555.
Moore, Danna. 2003. “Survey of Financial Literacy in Washington State: Knowledge,
    Behavior, Attitudes, and Experiences.” Washington State University: Social and
    Economic Sciences Research Center, Technical Report n. 03-39.
Morgan, Donald. 2007. “Defining and Detecting Predatory Lending.” Federal Reserve
    Bank of New York Staff Study 273.
Mottola, Gary. 2012. “In Our Best Interest: Women, Financial Literacy and Credit Card
     Behavior.” Insights, FINRA Investor Education Foundation.
Rivlin, Gary. 2010. Broke, USA: From Pawnshops to Poverty, Inc.—How the Working
     Poor Became Big Business. New York: HarperCollins Publishers.
Sallie Mae. 2012. “How America Pays for College”. Newark, DE: Report.
Skiba, Paige M., and Jeremy Tobacman. 2010. “Do Payday Loans Cause Bankruptcy?”
     Mimeo, Wharton School.
Stango, Victor, and Jonathan Zinman. 2009. “Exponential Growth Bias and Household
     Finance.” Journal of Finance, 64, pp. 2807–2849.
Stegman, Michael. 2007. “Payday Lending.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21, pp.
     169–90.
Theodos, Brett, and Jessica Compton. 2010. “Research on Financial Behaviors and Use
    of Small- Dollar Loans and Financial Services.” Washington, DC: The Urban
    Institute.
Van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie. 2011. “Financial Literacy and
    Stock Market Participation.” Journal of Financial Economics, 101(2), pp. 449–472.
Van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie. 2012. “Financial Literacy,
    Retirement Planning, and Households Wealth.” Economic Journal, 122, pp. 449–
    478.
Yoong, Joanne. 2011. Financial Illiteracy and Stock Market Participation: Evidence from
    the RAND American Life Panel. In Olivia S. Mitchell and Annamaria Lusardi
    (eds). Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement Security and the Financial
    Marketplace. Oxford University Press, pp. 76-97.




                                          26
Table 1. Percentage of AFS users in different demographic groups, total vs. ages 18 to 34

                                                    % of AFS Users
                                             Total sample Aged 18 to 34

                        Population               23.9%               33.7%

                           Age
                          18-24                  32.3%               32.3%
                          25-34                  34.7%               34.7%
                          35-44                  29.9%                 -
                          45-54                  23.2%                 -
                          55-64                  15.4%                 -
                           65+                   8.2%                  -

                   Education attainment
                   Less than high-school         43.8%               53.4%
                        High-school              29.7%               43.1%
                       Some college              24.8%               34.1%
                          College                15.8%               19.3%
                  Post-graduate education        9.7%                11.8%

                    Household income
                          < 25k                  33.7%               38.6%
                        25k-35k                  30.3%               41.7%
                         35-50k                  27.1%               37.6%
                        50k-75k                  19.9%               29.0%
                          >75k                   11.3%               17.2%

                      Marital status
                         Single                  29.4%               31.9%
                        Married                  20.2%               34.5%
                       Separated                 43.2%               55.6%
                       Divorced                  27.1%               45.7%
                       Widowed                   17.8%               58.1%

                         Gender
                         Female                  24.4%               36.2%
                          Male                   23.4%               31.2%

                        Ethnicity
                        Caucasian                20.4%               32.9%
                      Non-Caucasian              31.9%               34.5%

                    Financial inclusion
                         Banked                  22.6%               31.9%
                        Unbanked                 50.3%               52.5%

                            N                    26,364              7,475

                                Note: All statistics are weighted.




                                               27
                                 Table 2. AFS use by banked status

                                          Full sample                                 Aged 18-34
                               Total       Unbanked         Banked          Total    Unbanked       Banked
 Auto title loan                6.3%          6.8%           6.3%            8.0%      7.2%          8.1%
 Payday loan                    9.3%          14.9%          9.0%           11.7%     13.8%         11.5%
 Refund anticipation loan       5.7%          15.0%          5.2%            9.1%     15.4%          8.5%
 Pawn shop                     11.8%          37.4%         10.5%           19.5%     41.3%         17.4%
 Rent-to-own store              6.3%          15.2%          5.8%            9.5%     15.6%          8.9%

 One of these methods          23.9%          50.3%         22.6%           33.7%     52.5%         31.9%
 N                             26,364         1,281         25,083           7,475     641           6,834

                                        Note: All statistics are weighted




                                        Table 3. AFS use across products

                             Auto Title        Payday             Refund                           Rent-to-own
                                                                                     Pawn shop
                               Loan             Loan         anticipation loan                        store
Auto title loan               100.0%            32.5%              21.2%               32.9%          23.1%
Payday loan                    22.1%           100.0%              25.4%               43.7%          30.3%
Refund anticipation loan       23.5%            41.3%             100.0%               46.2%          34.7%
Pawn shop                      17.5%            34.2%              22.3%              100.0%          26.5%
Rent-to-own store              23.1%            44.5%              31.3%               49.7%         100.0%

                  Note: Percentages are calculated with respect to the product listed in rows.
                                                  N= 26,364




                                                       28
                              Table 4. Preferences and financial fragility

                                               Full sample                                Aged 18-34
                                  Total        non-AFS         AFS         Total       non-AFS
                                                                                                     AFS users
                                                 users         users                     users
          Preferences
   Preference toward fin. risk     4.33          4.34           4.31        4.77         4.78             4.74
            Std. dev.             [2.62]        [2.57]         [2.77]      [2.64]       [2.58]           [2.77]

       Financial fragility
           Unemployed             9.4%           7.8%          14.5%      13.0%         11.1%            16.8%
          Income shock            39.6%          35%           54.4%      40.9%         32.6%            57.1%
      Precautionary savings       36.5%         42.4%          17.8%      28.3%         32.7%            19.6%
        Home ownership            59.7%         66.3%          38.5%      32.2%         35.7%            25.3%
       No health insurance        19.5%         15.8%          31.1%      29.6%         25.6%            37.5%

                N                 26,364        20,060         6,304       7,475        4,957            2,518

                                           Note: All statistics are weighted




                                          Table 5. Financial literacy

                                               Full sample                                   Aged 18-34
                                 Total         non-AFS            AFS               Total     non-AFS             AFS
                                                 users           users                          users            users
Interest question correct        79.3%          81.1%            73.5%              77.0%      79.2%             72.5%
Inflation question correct       66.3%           70.0%           54.5%              50.1%        54.9%           40.5%
  Risk question correct          55.2%           58.9%           43.1%              45.8%        49.9%           37.8%
  All three q. correct           40.7%           45.2%           26.4%              29.0%        33.9%        19.3%


            N                    26,364          20,060          6,304              7,475        4,957            2,518

                                           Note: All statistics are weighted




                                                          29
                   Table 6A. AFS use and financial literacy

                                 (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)

Financial literacy
All three questions correct   -0.151*** -0.077*** -0.058*** -0.053*** -0.053***
                                (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)
Socio-demographic controls
Age 25-34                                 0.024**   0.039***    0.045***    0.045***
                                          (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)
Age 35-44                                  -0.006       0.003    0.022**     0.022**
                                          (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.010)
Age 45-54                               -0.046***   -0.040***      -0.010      -0.009
                                          (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)
Age 55-64                               -0.089***   -0.081***   -0.035***   -0.035***
                                          (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)
Female                                  -0.016***    -0.015**    -0.010*     -0.010*
                                          (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)
Non-White                               0.053***    0.057***    0.042***    0.042***
                                          (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.006)
Single                                      0.010     0.016**      -0.001      -0.003
                                          (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)
Separated                               0.063***    0.068***    0.041***    0.038***
                                          (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)
Widow                                   0.075***    0.079***    0.068***    0.068***
                                          (0.021)     (0.021)     (0.020)     (0.020)
One kid                                 0.097***    0.092***    0.085***    0.083***
                                          (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)
Two kids                                0.103***    0.099***    0.089***    0.087***
                                          (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)
Self-employed                               0.004       0.003      -0.009      -0.010
                                          (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)
Unemployed                              0.065***    0.056***     0.019**        0.012
                                          (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.010)
Retired                                  -0.027**    -0.030**      -0.009      -0.010
                                          (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.012)
Income USD 15-25k                       0.093***    0.100***    0.098***    0.107***
                                          (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)
Income USD 25-35k                       0.031***    0.044***    0.064***    0.074***
                                          (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)
Income USD 35-50k                          -0.000      0.018*   0.053***    0.064***
                                          (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)
Income USD 50-75k                       -0.075***   -0.050***       0.009     0.020*
                                          (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)
Income USD 75-100k                      -0.130***   -0.094***      -0.020      -0.010
                                          (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.013)     (0.013)
Income USD 100-150k                     -0.154***   -0.107***      -0.016      -0.007
                                          (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.014)     (0.014)
Income more USD 150k                    -0.190***   -0.130***      -0.024      -0.015
                                          (0.015)     (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.016)
High school                                         -0.097***   -0.090***   -0.076***
                                                      (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.016)
Some college                                        -0.132***   -0.129***   -0.111***
                                                      (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.016)
College                                             -0.196***   -0.180***   -0.162***


                                        30
                                                                (0.017)   (0.017)   (0.017)
         Post graduate                                        -0.210*** -0.194*** -0.177***
                                                                (0.019)   (0.019)   (0.019)
         Preferences
         Preference toward fin. risk                                      0.007***    0.008***
                                                                           (0.001)     (0.001)
         Financial fragility
         Income shock                                                     0.092*** 0.092***
                                                                            (0.006)   (0.006)
         Precautionary savings                                            -0.077*** -0.075***
                                                                            (0.006)   (0.006)
         Home ownership                                                   -0.125*** -0.122***
                                                                            (0.007)   (0.007)
         No health insurance                                               0.016**     0.011
                                                                            (0.007)   (0.007)
         Financial inclusion
         Banked                                                                    -0.102***
                                                                                     (0.013)
         Constant                      0.326***    0.344***   0.440***    0.410*** 0.481***
                                        (0.004)     (0.026)    (0.030)     (0.030)   (0.031)

         State dummies                    No          Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes
         Observations                   22,464      22,464      22,464     22,464      22,464
         R-squared                       0.028       0.124       0.132      0.165       0.167

Note: Weighted OLS regressions. Sample restricted to respondents aged 18-64. Coefficients for state
dummies and coefficients for 3 kids and 4 or more kids are not reported in the table. Baseline categories
dropped in the regression: age 18-24, income lower than 15,000 dollars, less than high school education,
respondent is married, no financially dependent children, and state of Alabama. Standard errors in
parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   31
                      Table 6B. Young adults:
    AFS use and financial literacy (sample restricted to ages 18-34)

                                 (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)

Financial literacy
All three questions correct   -0.159*** -0.102*** -0.071*** -0.069*** -0.068***
                                (0.012)   (0.012)   (0.012)   (0.012)   (0.012)
Socio-demographic controls
Age 25-34                                  -0.003      0.022*    0.025**     0.026**
                                          (0.012)     (0.013)     (0.012)     (0.012)
Female                                     -0.015      -0.008      -0.004      -0.006
                                          (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)
Non-White                                   0.006       0.012      -0.002      -0.003
                                          (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.011)     (0.011)
Single                                  0.040***      0.033**       0.020       0.016
                                          (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.014)
Separated                               0.079***    0.072***      0.046*        0.035
                                          (0.025)     (0.025)     (0.024)     (0.024)
Widow                                       0.041       0.041       0.116       0.124
                                          (0.130)     (0.129)     (0.126)     (0.126)
One kid                                 0.158***    0.140***    0.129***    0.126***
                                          (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.015)
Two kids                                0.182***    0.155***    0.137***    0.133***
                                          (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.017)
Self-employed                               0.030       0.021      -0.005      -0.005
                                          (0.022)     (0.022)     (0.022)     (0.022)
Unemployed                              0.092***    0.072***        0.023       0.014
                                          (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.016)
Income USD 15-25k                       0.162***    0.166***    0.158***    0.164***
                                          (0.018)     (0.017)     (0.017)     (0.017)
Income USD 25-35k                       0.066***    0.075***    0.091***    0.099***
                                          (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.018)
Income USD 35-50k                        0.044**    0.062***    0.083***    0.092***
                                          (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.018)
Income USD 50-75k                          -0.030      -0.005     0.033*     0.041**
                                          (0.019)     (0.019)     (0.019)     (0.019)
Income USD 75-100k                      -0.087***    -0.047**       0.003       0.009
                                          (0.022)     (0.022)     (0.022)     (0.022)
Income USD 100-150k                     -0.137***   -0.082***      -0.016      -0.010
                                          (0.025)     (0.026)     (0.026)     (0.026)
Income more USD 150k                    -0.104***      -0.039       0.037       0.040
                                          (0.034)     (0.034)     (0.034)     (0.034)
High school                                          -0.056**    -0.047*       -0.031
                                                      (0.026)     (0.025)     (0.025)
Some college                                        -0.111***   -0.108***   -0.086***
                                                      (0.026)     (0.025)     (0.025)
College                                             -0.206***   -0.190***   -0.168***
                                                      (0.029)     (0.028)     (0.028)
Post graduate                                       -0.248***   -0.234***   -0.211***
                                                      (0.034)     (0.033)     (0.033)
Preferences
Preference toward fin. risk                                     0.013***    0.013***
                                                                 (0.002)     (0.002)
Financial fragility


                                        32
         Income shock                                                     0.155*** 0.155***
                                                                            (0.011)   (0.011)
         Precautionary savings                                            -0.048*** -0.045***
                                                                            (0.012)   (0.012)
         Home ownership                                                   -0.087*** -0.085***
                                                                            (0.013)   (0.013)
         No health insurance                                                 0.008     0.003
                                                                            (0.012)   (0.012)
         Financial inclusion
         Banked                                                                    -0.100***
                                                                                     (0.019)
         Constant                      0.383***    0.306***   0.384***    0.294*** 0.358***
                                        (0.006)     (0.047)    (0.051)     (0.052)   (0.053)

         State dummies                    No         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
         Observations                    7,475      7,475       7,475       7,475       7,475
         R-squared                       0.023      0.121       0.134       0.171       0.174

Note: Weighted OLS regressions. Sample restricted to respondents aged 18-34. Coefficients for state
dummies and coefficients for 3 kids and 4 or more kids are not reported in the table. Baseline categories
dropped in the regression: age 18-24, income lower than 15,000 dollars, less than high school education,
respondent is married, no financially dependent children, and state of Alabama. Standard errors in
parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   33
         Table 7A. Sensitivity analysis with different measures of financial literacy

                                                  (1)           (2)              (3)

Financial literacy measures
Interest question correct                    -0.019***
                                               (0.007)
Inflation question correct                   -0.046***
                                               (0.007)
Risk question correct                        -0.045***
                                               (0.006)
Five questions correct                                       -0.076***
                                                               (0.008)
Self-assessed math knowledge                                                  -0.009***
                                                                                (0.002)
Socio-demographic controls
Age 25-34                                      0.024**         0.023**          0.021**
                                               (0.010)         (0.010)          (0.010)
Age 35-44                                       -0.003          -0.009           -0.012
                                               (0.011)         (0.011)          (0.011)
Age 45-54                                    -0.043***       -0.050***        -0.054***
                                               (0.011)         (0.011)          (0.011)
Age 55-64                                    -0.085***       -0.094***        -0.100***
                                               (0.012)         (0.012)          (0.012)
Female                                       -0.017***          -0.009           -0.004
                                               (0.006)         (0.006)          (0.006)
Non-White                                    0.053***        0.055***         0.058***
                                               (0.007)         (0.007)          (0.007)
Single                                           0.010           0.010            0.010
                                               (0.008)         (0.008)          (0.008)
Separated                                    0.064***        0.064***         0.064***
                                               (0.009)         (0.009)          (0.009)
Widow                                        0.076***        0.071***         0.074***
                                               (0.021)         (0.021)          (0.021)
One kid                                      0.095***        0.099***         0.100***
                                               (0.008)         (0.008)          (0.008)
Two kids                                     0.102***        0.107***         0.108***
                                               (0.009)         (0.009)          (0.009)
Self-employed                                    0.005           0.004            0.002
                                               (0.010)         (0.010)          (0.010)
Unemployed                                   0.065***        0.066***         0.068***
                                               (0.009)         (0.009)          (0.009)
Retired                                       -0.028**        -0.028**         -0.030**
                                               (0.012)         (0.012)          (0.012)
Income USD 15-25k                            0.095***        0.091***         0.092***
                                               (0.011)         (0.011)          (0.011)
Income USD 25-35k                            0.035***        0.029***         0.032***
                                               (0.011)         (0.011)          (0.011)
Income USD 35-50k                                0.004          -0.004           -0.007
                                               (0.011)         (0.011)          (0.011)
Income USD 50-75k                            -0.072***       -0.082***        -0.085***
                                               (0.011)         (0.011)          (0.011)
Income USD 75-100k                           -0.127***       -0.140***        -0.146***
                                               (0.012)         (0.012)          (0.012)


                                             34
Income USD 100-150k                               -0.151***           -0.165***           -0.174***
                                                    (0.013)             (0.013)             (0.013)
Income more USD 150k                              -0.188***           -0.200***           -0.213***
                                                    (0.015)             (0.015)             (0.015)
Constant                                          0.379***            0.328***            0.365***
                                                    (0.027)             (0.026)             (0.028)

State dummies                                        Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Observations                                       22,464               22,464              22,297
R-squared                                           0.124                0.121               0.119

Note: Weighted OLS regressions. Sample restricted to respondents aged 18-64. Coefficients for state
dummies and coefficients for 3 kids and 4 or more kids are not reported in the table. Baseline categories
dropped in the regression: age 18-24, income lower than 15,000 dollars, respondent is married, no
financially dependent children, and state of Alabama. Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   35
         Table 7B. Sensitivity analysis with different measures of financial literacy
                              (Sample restricted to ages 18-34)

                                         (1)                     (2)             (3)

Financial literacy measures
Interest question correct                         -0.011
                                                 (0.013)
Inflation question correct                     -0.075***
                                                 (0.012)
Risk question correct                          -0.040***
                                                 (0.011)
Five questions correct                                        -0.109***
                                                                (0.019)
Self-assessed math knowledge                                                  -0.010***
                                                                                (0.003)

Socio-demographic controls
Age 25-34                                         -0.004         -0.006          -0.011
                                                 (0.012)        (0.012)         (0.012)
Female                                          -0.019*          -0.005          -0.000
                                                 (0.011)        (0.011)         (0.011)
Non-White                                          0.007          0.010           0.016
                                                 (0.012)        (0.012)         (0.012)
Single                                         0.040***       0.041***        0.047***
                                                 (0.014)        (0.014)         (0.014)
Separated                                      0.080***       0.084***        0.088***
                                                 (0.025)        (0.025)         (0.025)
Widow                                              0.056          0.045           0.021
                                                 (0.130)        (0.130)         (0.130)
One kid                                        0.154***       0.162***        0.167***
                                                 (0.015)        (0.015)         (0.015)
Two kids                                       0.181***       0.189***        0.197***
                                                 (0.017)        (0.017)         (0.017)
Self-employed                                      0.032          0.033           0.033
                                                 (0.022)        (0.022)         (0.022)
Unemployed                                     0.089***       0.097***        0.098***
                                                 (0.016)        (0.016)         (0.016)
Income USD 15-25k                              0.164***       0.162***        0.161***
                                                 (0.018)        (0.018)         (0.018)
Income USD 25-35k                              0.067***       0.068***        0.068***
                                                 (0.018)        (0.018)         (0.018)
Income USD 35-50k                               0.046**        0.042**          0.039**
                                                 (0.018)        (0.018)         (0.018)
Income USD 50-75k                                 -0.028       -0.034*         -0.037**
                                                 (0.019)        (0.019)         (0.019)
Income USD 75-100k                             -0.085***      -0.095***       -0.100***
                                                 (0.022)        (0.022)         (0.022)
Income USD 100-150k                            -0.136***      -0.144***       -0.151***
                                                 (0.025)        (0.025)         (0.026)
Income more USD 150k                           -0.105***      -0.113***       -0.120***
                                                 (0.034)        (0.034)         (0.034)
Constant                                       0.339***       0.278***        0.306***
                                                 (0.048)        (0.046)         (0.050)



                                               36
State dummies                                        Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Observations                                        7,475               7,475                7,426
R-squared                                           0.122               0.116                0.115

Note: Weighted OLS regressions. Sample restricted to respondents aged 18-34. Coefficients for state
dummies and coefficients for 3 kids and 4 or more kids are not reported in the table. Baseline categories
dropped in the regression: age 18-24, income lower than 15,000 dollars, respondent is married, no
financially dependent children, and state of Alabama. Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                   37
                Table 8A. Sensitivity analysis: Controlling for credit score

                                         (1)                (2)                   (3)

Financial literacy measures
All three questions correct           -0.077***          -0.066***             -0.050***
                                        (0.006)            (0.006)               (0.009)
Socio-demographic controls
Age 25-34                               0.024**           0.023**                 -0.012
                                        (0.010)            (0.010)               (0.015)
Age 35-44                                -0.006             -0.007              -0.031**
                                        (0.011)            (0.010)               (0.015)
Age 45-54                             -0.046***          -0.045***             -0.061***
                                        (0.011)            (0.011)               (0.016)
Age 55-64                             -0.089***          -0.082***             -0.088***
                                        (0.012)            (0.012)               (0.017)
Female                                -0.016***          -0.018***             -0.029***
                                        (0.006)            (0.006)               (0.008)
Non-White                             0.053***           0.037***              0.025***
                                        (0.007)            (0.006)               (0.009)
Single                                    0.010              0.009                 0.006
                                        (0.008)            (0.008)               (0.011)
Separated                             0.063***           0.054***                  0.014
                                        (0.009)            (0.009)               (0.013)
Widow                                 0.075***           0.075***                  0.034
                                        (0.021)            (0.020)               (0.029)
One kid                               0.097***           0.086***              0.061***
                                        (0.008)            (0.008)               (0.011)
Two kids                              0.103***           0.091***              0.052***
                                        (0.009)            (0.009)               (0.012)
Self-employed                             0.004              0.003                -0.006
                                        (0.010)            (0.010)               (0.014)
Unemployed                            0.065***           0.060***                0.031**
                                        (0.009)            (0.009)               (0.015)
Retired                                -0.027**             -0.019                -0.025
                                        (0.012)            (0.012)               (0.017)
Income USD 15-25k                     0.093***           0.087***              0.105***
                                        (0.011)            (0.011)               (0.018)
Income USD 25-35k                     0.031***            0.027**              0.056***
                                        (0.011)            (0.011)               (0.018)
Income USD 35-50k                        -0.000             -0.002               0.038**
                                        (0.011)            (0.011)               (0.018)
Income USD 50-75k                     -0.075***          -0.063***                -0.026
                                        (0.011)            (0.011)               (0.018)
Income USD 75-100k                    -0.130***          -0.104***             -0.054***
                                        (0.012)            (0.012)               (0.019)
Income USD 100-150k                   -0.154***          -0.119***              -0.042**
                                        (0.013)            (0.013)               (0.020)
Income more USD 150k                  -0.190***          -0.143***             -0.074***
                                        (0.015)            (0.015)               (0.022)
Credit score
Credit score 630-710                                     0.083***              0.102***
                                                          (0.011)               (0.010)
Credit score 620 or lower                                0.308***              0.348***
                                                          (0.011)               (0.011)


                                               38
Credit score missing                                                0.109***
                                                                     (0.008)
Constant                                     0.344***               0.225***                0.161***
                                              (0.026)                (0.027)                 (0.038)

State dummies                                   Yes                    Yes                    Yes
Observations                                  22,464                 22,464                  9,182
R-squared                                      0.124                  0.153                  0.223

Note: Weighted OLS regressions. Sample restricted to respondents aged 18-64. Coefficients for state
dummies, coefficients for 3 kids and 4 or more kids, and coefficients for “do not know” or “prefer not to
say” answers to the credit score question are not reported in the table. Baseline categories dropped in the
regression: aged 18-24, income lower than 15,000 dollars, respondent is married, no financially dependent
children, credit score is 720 or higher, and state of Alabama. Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                    39
                Table 8B. Sensitivity analysis: Controlling for credit score
                            (sample restricted to ages 18-34)

                                         (1)                (2)                   (3)

Financial literacy measures
All three questions correct           -0.102***          -0.083***             -0.063***
                                        (0.012)            (0.012)               (0.017)
Socio-demographic controls
Age 25-34                                -0.003             -0.000              -0.031*
                                        (0.012)            (0.012)              (0.018)
Female                                   -0.015           -0.020*                -0.025
                                        (0.011)            (0.011)              (0.016)
Non-White                                 0.006             -0.005                0.010
                                        (0.012)            (0.011)              (0.017)
Single                                0.040***           0.036***                -0.002
                                        (0.014)            (0.014)              (0.019)
Separated                             0.079***           0.070***                 0.015
                                        (0.025)            (0.025)              (0.035)
Widow                                     0.041              0.058                0.112
                                        (0.130)            (0.128)              (0.213)
One kid                               0.158***           0.147***              0.110***
                                        (0.015)            (0.015)              (0.022)
Two kids                              0.182***           0.163***              0.078***
                                        (0.017)            (0.017)              (0.024)
Self-employed                             0.030              0.025               0.054*
                                        (0.022)            (0.022)              (0.031)
Unemployed                            0.092***           0.085***              0.089***
                                        (0.016)            (0.016)              (0.028)
Income USD 15-25k                     0.162***           0.153***              0.153***
                                        (0.018)            (0.017)              (0.030)
Income USD 25-35k                     0.066***           0.057***               0.064**
                                        (0.018)            (0.018)              (0.029)
Income USD 35-50k                      0.044**             0.035*               0.064**
                                        (0.018)            (0.018)              (0.029)
Income USD 50-75k                        -0.030             -0.025                0.007
                                        (0.019)            (0.018)              (0.030)
Income USD 75-100k                    -0.087***          -0.059***               -0.037
                                        (0.022)            (0.022)              (0.033)
Income USD 100-150k                   -0.137***          -0.100***               -0.024
                                        (0.025)            (0.025)              (0.036)
Income more USD 150k                  -0.104***             -0.052               -0.010
                                        (0.034)            (0.033)              (0.047)
Credit score
Credit score 630-710                                     0.128***              0.145***
                                                          (0.021)               (0.020)
Credit score 620 or lower                                0.341***              0.374***
                                                          (0.022)               (0.022)
Credit score missing                                     0.148***
                                                          (0.018)
Constant                              0.306***           0.143***                0.109
                                       (0.047)            (0.049)               (0.069)

State dummies                            Yes                Yes                   Yes
Observations                            7,475              7,475                 2,958


                                               40
R-squared                                      0.121                  0.149                  0.225

Note: Weighted OLS regressions. Sample restricted to respondents aged 18-34. Coefficients for state
dummies, coefficients for 3 kids and 4 or more kids, and coefficients for “do not know” or “prefer not to
say” answers to the credit score question are not reported in the table. Baseline categories dropped in the
regression: aged 18-24, income lower than 15,000 dollars, respondent is married, no financially dependent
children, credit score is 720 or higher, and state of Alabama. Standard errors in parentheses *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                    41
