NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FAMILY TIES
Alberto Alesina
Paola Giuliano
Working Paper 18966
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18966

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013

In preparation for the Handbook of Economic Growth. We thank Andrea Passalacqua for excellent
research assistantship. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Alberto Alesina and Paola Giuliano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Family Ties
Alberto Alesina and Paola Giuliano
NBER Working Paper No. 18966
April 2013
JEL No. J2,J6,O4,O5,Z1
ABSTRACT
We study the role of the most primitive institution in society: the family. Its organization and relationship
between generations shape values formation, economic outcomes and influences national institutions.
We use a measure of family ties, constructed from the World Values Survey, to review and extend
the literature on the effect of family ties on economic behavior and economic attitudes. We show that
strong family ties are negatively correlated with generalized trust; they imply more household production
and less participation in the labor market of women, young adult and elderly. They are correlated with
lower interest and participation in political activities and prefer labor market regulation and welfare
systems based upon the family rather than the market or the government. Strong family ties may interfere
with activities leading to faster growth, but they may provide relief from stress, support to family members
and increased wellbeing. We argue that the value regarding the strength of family relationships are
very persistent over time, more so than institutions like labor market regulation or welfare systems.

Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 210
Cambridge, MA 02138
and IGIER
and also NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu
Paola Giuliano
Anderson School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
C517 Entrepreneurs Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and IZA
and also NBER
paola.giuliano@anderson.ucla.edu

1. Introduction
Economists, sociologists and political scientists have long been interested in studying the
effect of different family structures on a variety of economic outcomes. There is hardly an aspect of
a society’s life that is not affected by the family.
The aim of this chapter is to review the role that family ties may play in determining
fundamental economic attitudes. The importance of the family as a fundamental organizational
structure for human society is of course unquestionable. Historical examples of attempts at
eliminating the family as an institution have been a catastrophic failure, think of the cultural
revolution in China or the Cambodian communism. In this chapter we investigate the effects of
different types of family values. In particular, we plan to investigate empirically an idea first
developed by political scientists and researchers in the late ‘60s and early ‘70s, on the importance of
family ties in explaining social capital, political participation and economic outcomes. The family
organization can take different forms, with very tight links between members or a more
liberal/individualistic structure even within a well structured and organized family. The idea that a
culture based on too strong family ties may impede economic development is not new. It goes back
at least to Weber (1904), who argues that strong family values do not allow the development of
individual forms of entrepreneurship, which are fundamental to the formation of capitalistic
societies. Another author who clearly described the relationship between family values and underdevelopment is Banfield (1958). In studying differences between the Southern and Northern part of
Italy, this author suggested that “amoral familism” was at the core of the lower level of development
of the South. He depicts “amoral familism” as a particular cultural trait: the “inability of the villagers
to act together for their common good or, indeed, for any end transcending the immediate, material
interest of the nuclear family. This inability to concert activity beyond the immediate family arises
from an ethos – that of “amoral familism […] according to which people maximize the material,
short run advantage of the nuclear family; and assume that all others will do likewise”. This is of
course an extreme, and in a sense degenerate, form of family relationship.
This extreme reliance on the family prevents the development of institutions and public
organizations, which, on the contrary, require generalized trust and loyalty to the organization. When
people are raised to trust their close family members, they are also taught to distrust people outside
the family, which impedes the development of formal institutions.
Strong family ties are not unique to the Italian case, but are also present in many Asian and
Latin American countries. Fukuyama (1995) for example argues that “though it may seem a stretch
to compare Italy with the Confucian culture of Hong-Kong and Taiwan, the nature of social capital
1

is similar in certain respects. In parts of Italy and in the Chinese cases, family bonds tend to be
stronger than other kinds of social bonds not based on kinship, while the strength and number of
intermediate associations between state and individual has been relatively low, reflecting a pervasive
distrust of people outside the family”. In a similar vein Putnam (1993) refers to many cases in Asia
and Latin America where the safety and welfare of the individuals are provided by the family, legal
authority is weak and the law resented.
When family ties are so strong the implications for the economy are pervasive. In this
chapter we review the literature on the topic, provide new evidence and explore macroeconomic
implications of the effect of family values. We start with within country-analysis. This will allow us
to include country fixed effects to isolate the impact of family values from other confounding effects
including national institutions. We analyze the relationship between family values and four different
types of societal attitudes that have been shown to be conducive to higher productivity and growth.
In particular, we look at political participation and political action, measures of generalized morality,
attitudes toward women and society, labor market behavior and attitudes toward work. We perform
our analysis using the combined six waves of the World Value Survey (WVS), a collection of surveys
administered to a representative sample of people in more than 80 countries from 1981 to 2010. We
find that on average familistic values are associated with lower political participation and political
action. They are also related to a lower level of trust, more emphasis on job security, less desire for
innovation and more traditional attitudes toward working women. On the positive side, family
relationships improve well-being as measured by self-reported indicators of happiness and subjective
health.
As a second step, we present cross-country evidence linking stronger family ties to economic
and institutional outcomes. One obvious limitation of this evidence is that family values may be an
outcome rather than a driver of economic development. While we do not offer any definite answer
to the question of causality, we do show that family values are quite stable over time and could be
among the drivers of institutional differences and level of development across countries: family
values inherited by children of immigrants whose forebears arrived in various European countries
before 1940 are related to a lower quality of institutions and lower level of development today. We
also show that the relationship between economic and institutional outcomes is fairly robust even
after controlling for legal origin, which has been shown to be an important historical determinant of
formal institutions across countries.
The chapter is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the literature on family ties. In
Section 3 we provide a logical framework for the empirical analysis, linking our paper to the
2

theoretical models analyzing the impact of culture on economic outcomes. In Sections 4 and 5, we
describe how family ties and family structures can be measured and review the deep historical
determinants of family ties. Sections 6 presents results from the within country analysis. Section 7
presents cross-country evidence linking stronger family ties to economic development and
institutions and also show the persistence of family values and their effect on institutions and
development today. Section 8 analyzes the impact of family ties on different measures of well-being
and Section 9 concludes.

2. Literature Review
There is surprisingly little systematic empirical evidence in economics on the role played by
different types of family values in determining either economic outcomes or attitudes which, in turn,
have an influence over economic development. Most of the research in economics indeed focused
its attention on institutions, such as political systems (Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001 and
2005), the legal rights of the individual (North, 1990), religion (Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales, 2006),
education (Glaeser et al. 2004), social capital (Putnam, 1993 and 2000), ethnic fractionalization
(Easterly and Levine (1997) and Alesina and La Ferrara (2005) for a survey) to explain a society’s
ability to generate innovation, wealth and growth. Yet, little attention has been devoted to the most
primitive societal institution, the family, and how this could be relevant in explaining a variety of
socio-economic outcomes.
The work on the relevance of the family starts with Banfield (1958) and Coleman (1990).
Both authors notice that societies based on strong ties among family members, tend to promote
codes of good conduct within small circles of related persons (family or kin); in these societies
selfish behavior is considered acceptable outside the small network. On the contrary, societies based
on weak ties, promote good conduct outside the small family/kin network, giving the possibility to
identify oneself with a society of abstract individuals or abstract institutions. This initial intuition has
been confirmed recently in an experimental setting by Enrich and Gambetta (2010). The authors use
a trust game, played by a representative sample of the British population, and find that people with
strong family ties have a lower level of trust in strangers than people with weak family ties.
After the seminal contribution of Banfield (1958) and Coleman (1990), some academics have
noted strong patterns of family structures and linked them to significant social and economic
outcomes. This includes work by Todd (1985 and 1990), Greif (2005, 2006) and Greif and Tabellini
(2012). Using data on family structures dating back to the Middle ages, if not earlier, Todd focuses
on the distinction between nuclear and extended family. These two family structures differ in the
3

degree of cooperation between subsequent generations, and in the authority exercised by parents. At
one extreme, nuclear families are those in which children are emancipated from their parents and
leave the household at the time of marriage or before. At the opposite extreme, the extended family
typically consists of three generations living together and mutually cooperating under patriarchal
authority.
Todd measures the diffusion of both family types across Western Europe and uses this
distinction to explain relative levels of diffusion or resistance to important societal changes such as
Protestantism, secularism or political ideology. His general idea is that the nuclear family’s tradition
of emancipation increases potential for movement away from the family home which can facilitate
the pursuit of independent economic opportunities. Also, the inability to rely on the family for
income and housing can generate a more entrepreneurial spirit of self-reliance as well as greater
motivation to work. Todd’s (1990) definition of family structures has been used more recently
(Duranton et al. 2009) to explain contemporary outcomes of European regions. The authors identify
important links between family types and regional disparities in household size, educational
attainment, social capital, labor force participation, sectoral structure, wealth and inequality.
Greif (2005) focuses its attention on the distinction between nuclear families and large
kinship groups. Like Todd, he emphasizes the sense of independence typical of nuclear family
structures. In particular, he describes how the latter in medieval times facilitated the establishment
and growth of corporations: “an individual stands to gain less from belonging to a large kinship
group, while the nuclear family structure increases its gains from membership in such a corporation
(Greif 2005: 1-2)”. Greif illustrates a feedback effect where causation works in both directions – on
the one hand, nuclear families facilitate the establishment of corporations; on the other the
economic and social transformation related to the development of corporations, encourage the
domination of the nuclear family across Europe. Nuclear families encourage both flexibility and
independence; corporations substitute for kinship groups and provide safety net, therefore
complementing the nuclear family. Greif and Tabellini (2012) distinguish two different modes of
sustaining cooperation in China and Europe. In China, the clan (a common descent group consisting
of families tracing their patrilineal descent back to one common ancestor who settled in a given
locality) was the fundamental institution, which had prevailed for more than 800 years, beginning
with the Song Dynasty. Clan-based organizations provided public goods and social safety nets. In
Europe, where the nuclear family was more prevalent, the locus of cooperation became the city,
whose members were drawn from many kinship groups. The authors show that in a clan, moral
obligations are stronger but are limited in scope, as they apply only toward the kin. In a city, moral
4

obligations are generalized towards all citizens irrespective of lineage, but they are weaker.2 They
refer to this distinction as limited versus generalized morality, which is strongly correlated in our
paper to the strength of family ties today. The authors show that the prevalence of one or the other
organizational form depends on the distribution of values in society. Like Greif (2005), they
recognize the existence of a feedback effect: subsequent social, legal and institutional developments
evolved in different directions in these two parts of the world, strengthening the clan in China and
leading to the emergence of strong and self-governed cities in Europe. The authors interestingly
exploit differences in the early family structures across different parts of Europe, taking family
structures as indicators of the scope and strength of kin-based relations. As expected, historical
patterns of urbanization within Europe reflect these different family traditions, with early
urbanization being much more diffused in the European regions, where families with weaker ties
were more prevalent.
Alesina and Giuliano (2010) analyze systematically the role of the family as primal institution
in a society, showing that the strength of family ties represents a fundamental trait shaping economic
behavior and attitudes. The authors do not distinguish between nuclear and extended families, like
Greif (2005) and Todd (1985 and 1990), but construct a subjective variable on the strength of family
ties using three different questions from the World Value Survey. These questions are meant to
measure the importance of the family, the love and respect that children are expected to have for
their parents, and the parental duties toward their children3. Alesina and Giuliano (2010) show that
strong family ties are positively correlated with home production (a result consistent with the in
depth case study of Italy by Alesina and Ichino (2009)), lower labor force participation of women
and young adults, and negatively with geographical mobility. In a companion paper (Alesina and
Giuliano, 2011), the authors also establish an inverse relationship between family ties, generalized
trust and political participation. Strength and weakness of family ties, defined as “cultural patterns of
family loyalties, allegiances and authorities” also help explaining living arrangements and
geographical mobility of young generations (Reher, 1998; Giuliano, 2007), larger fractions of family
firms across countries (Bertrand and Shoar, 2006) and cross-country heterogeneity in employment
rates (Algan and Cahuc, 2007).

See Tabellini (2008) for a model of limited versus generalized morality which sustains different types of cooperation.
In section 4, we show that there is indeed a strong correlation across countries between nuclear and extended family
and family ties as measured by subjective measures taken from the World Values Survey. Alesina et al. (2013) also show
that subjective measures of strong family ties are correlated with Todd’s definition of extended families at the regional
level, at least for the case of Europe.
2
3

5

While all the above mentioned papers take the strength of family values as given and
persistent, Alesina et al. (2013) go one step further and explore the presence of a feedback effect
between family ties and labor market institutions. The main idea is that in cultures with strong family
ties individuals are less mobile and prefer more regulated labor markets while weak family ties are
associated with more flexible ones, which then require higher geographic mobility of workers to be
efficient. In this setup, individuals inherit strong or weak family ties with a certain probability. Strong
family ties provide a certain utility to each individual, which is larger the larger is the share of
individuals with strong family ties in a society. Given their utility function, individuals vote with
majority rule on labor market regulation. There are two types of labor market policies: labor market
flexibility (i.e. laissez-faire) or regulation of wages and employment. Individuals with weak family ties
have a higher utility under flexibility, so this regime is voted if the society starts from a situation in
which the majority of the population has weak family ties. On the other hand, the utility of
individuals with strong family ties is always higher under regulation. Finally firms offer labor
contracts. A worker with weak family ties always find a job where he/she is paid for his/her
productivity since he/she has no mobility costs. A worker with strong family ties has a moving cost
related to the disutility to live far away from his/her family. Labor market regulations are precisely
put in place to protect those workers from the monopsony power of firms. The model generates
two stable Nash equilibria. One, where everybody chooses weak family ties and then votes for labor
market flexibility. In this case, labor market is competitive, everyone is paid his/her marginal
productivity and labor mobility is high. The other, where everyone chooses strong family ties and
then votes for stringent labor market regulations (firms have a monopsonistic power because
workers have a cost of moving away from their original family). If the majority of the population has
strong family ties, it is rational to prefer regulated labor markets. This result explains why these types
of regulation are hard to change even though prima facie they appear as suboptimal since they
generate lower equilibrium employment and wages.
Although the theoretical model points to the possibility of a feedback effect between labor
markets regulation and family ties, the empirical part of the paper presents suggestive evidence that
the correlation is more likely to run from cultural values to institutions. The authors present two sets
of evidence to make this point. First, they show a strong correlation between family structures today
and family structures in the Middle Ages. As a second step, the authors show that family values
inherited by immigrants arrived to the US prior to 1940 are correlated to labor market institutions
created after WWII.
6

Family relationships explain the preferences for other aspects of welfare systems. Focusing
on Europe, Esping-Andersen (1999) argues that citizens obtain welfare from three basic sources:
markets, family and government. Where family ties are stronger, social risks are more internalized in
the family by pooling resources across generations. His idea is that differences in family relations
were at the core of the different evolutions of welfare systems, observed after WWII. In particular
he distinguishes three different types of welfare states: the liberal welfare state (typical of countries
like the US), this is a regime that favors small public intervention under the assumption that the
majority of citizens can obtain adequate welfare from the market. The second example is the socialdemocratic regime, characterized by its emphasis on universal inclusion and its comprehensive
definition of social entitlements. This model, typical of the Nordic European countries, is
internationally unique in its emphasis on de-familizing welfare responsibilities, especially with regard
to care for children and the elderly. The third, and somewhat more heterogeneous, regime embraces
the majority of Continental European countries, Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Italy and Spain.
This regime is strongly familistic, assuming that primary welfare responsibilities lie with family
members.
Coleman (1988, 1990) also stresses the mutual insurance mechanisms provided by old and
young generations in familistic societies. He argues that family ties can strengthen the support
received by young generations from the old while, at the same time, representing an obstacle for
innovation and new ideas. Finally, Galasso and Profeta (2012) show that the strength of family ties is
related to the type of pension system chosen by a country. Societies dominated by absolute nuclear
families (or weak family ties, such as for example the Anglo-Saxon countries) facilitate the
emergence of a pension system which acts as a flat safety net entailing the largest within-cohort
redistribution than societies dominated by any other type of family.

3. Conceptual Framework
Many authors have stressed the relevance of the historical origins of (under)development
(North, 1981, Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001) but a still unanswered question is how
differences in historical experiences are perpetuated till today. A recent strand of literature focuses
on the importance of individual values to explain this persistence. One reason for why individual
values can be relevant is the observation that very often, inside the same country, similar institutions
work in a very different way. Putnam (1983) used the example of Italy. He pointed out that for
distant historical reasons local governments, courts, schools and even the private sector are much
less efficient in the South than in the North of Italy despite the presence of national institutions.
7

Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2008) recently pushed forward Putnam’s analysis confirming his basic
intuition. The authors show that inhabitants of Italian cities that had the status of free city-states at
the beginning of the first millennium, where citizens were deeply involved in political life, today also
have a higher level of social and civic capital, as measured by participation in elections and a variety
of associations, and a higher level of blood donation.
There are different values that can be relevant to explain the sources of underdevelopment
in a country. In this chapter we explore the idea that trust restricted only to family members
prevents the formation of generalized trust, which is at the core of many collective good outcomes,
from political participation to the formation of institutions to economic outcomes (Banfield (1958),
Gambetta (1988), Putnam (1993), Fukuyama (1995) and Coleman (1988, 1990). Also the
organization of the family as a strong “production unit” implies certain views about living
arrangements and the role of women in market activities versus home production (Alesina and
Ichino (2009)).
This chapter is part of a rapidly growing literature which emphasizes the relevance of
specific cultural traits for economic and political outcomes. Akerlof and Kranton (2010), Alesina et
al. (2013), Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2006), Fernandez and Fogli (2009), Gorodnichenko and
Roland (2013), Spolaore and Wacziarg (2009), Tabellini (2008, 2010) all provide extensive references
and illustrate different applications of this new line of research.
The basic idea underlying the empirical analysis of this chapter is that these normative values
evolve slowly over time, as they are largely shaped by values and beliefs inherited from previous
generations. In particular, a culture of familism, defined as individual values that stress the link
between parents and children and loyalty to the family is an important channel through which
distant history can explain the functioning of current institutions and economic development. We
explore this idea in two steps, we first use within country analysis to study the effect of family values
on other types of economic attitudes, which are relevant for growth. Although the issue of reverse
causality is an important one, we use established evidence that family values today are related to
ancient family structures (see Alesina et al. (2013), Duranton (2009), Galasso and Profeta (2012) and
Todd (1990)). As a second step, we discuss aggregate evidence looking at differences in institutions
and economic outcomes between weak and strong family ties societies. The correlations shown are
strong and consistent with the microeconomic data. Altogether they suggest that well functioning
institutions and development are often observed in countries or regions where individuals have weak
family ties.
8

Before looking at the empirical evidence, we review a logical framework according to which
cultural traits in general and family values in particular are relevant. The economics literature has
used the word culture with different meanings. According to one definition culture refers to the
social conventions and individual beliefs that sustain Nash equilibria as focal points in repeated
social interactions (Greif 1994). In more recent contributions, individuals’ beliefs are initially
acquired through cultural transmission and then slowly updated through experience from one
generation to the next. This line of argument has been pursued by Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales
(2010) who build an overlapping generation model in which children absorb their trust priors from
their parents and then, after experiencing the real world, transmit their (updated) beliefs to their own
children. An alternative interpretation is that culture refers to more primitive objects, such as
individual values and preferences (Akerlof and Kranton, 2000). This latter interpretation is
consistent with an emerging literature in psychology, sociology and evolutionary biology that
emphasizes the role of moral emotions in motivating human behavior and regulating social
interactions.
Following broadly this last approach, we view cultural beliefs as decision-making heuristics
or “rules-of-thumb” that are employed in uncertain or complex environments. Boyd and Richerson
(1985) show that if information acquisition is either costly or imperfect, it can be optimal for
individuals to develop heuristics or rules-of-thumb in decision-making. By relying on general beliefs
about the right thing to do in different situations, individuals may not behave in a manner that is
precisely optimal in every instance, but they save on the costs of obtaining the information necessary
to always behave optimally. In practice, these heuristics often take the form of deeply held
traditional values or religious beliefs (Gigerenzer 2007, Kahneman 2011).
The concept of culture as moral principles, rules of thumb or normative values that motivate
individuals is particularly appealing. Whereas social conventions sometimes change suddenly because
of strategic complementarities, and beliefs are updated as one learns from experience or from others,
individual values or rules of thumbs are likely to be more persistent and to change slowly from one
generation to the next. The reason is not only that normative values are acquired early in life and
become part of one’s personality but also that learning from experience cannot logically be exploited
to easily modify them. Thus, values are likely to be transmitted vertically from one generation to the
next, to a large degree within the family, rather than horizontally across unrelated individuals, and
also persist over time.
There are a number of reasons why we may observe persistence. First, the underlying
cultural traits maybe reinforced by policies, laws and institutions, which reinforce the beliefs. A
9

society with familistic values may perpetuate these beliefs by institutionalizing different forms of
welfare state, different maternal leave policies, different pension systems. Another source of
persistence can arise from a complementarity between cultural beliefs and industrial structure.
Beliefs on the importance of the family may cause a society to specialize in family based industries,
which reinforce the attachment to the family, therefore perpetuating this trait. A third explanation
that does not rely on these forms of complementarity is that cultural beliefs, by definition, are
inherently sticky. The benefit of decision-making rules-of-thumb is that they can be applied widely
in a number of environments, saving on the need to acquire and process information with each
decision.
Empirically, several studies have investigated the persistence of cultural traits by looking at
subnational analysis, therefore holding constant industrial structure, domestic policies and
institutions. More directly, looking at children of immigrants, the literature has held constant the
external environment. We follow this tradition. In particular, we use within country analysis to hold
constant the presence of institutions and policies. The concern of reverse causality is limited by the
fact that several papers have shown that values toward the family today are related to historical
family structures (see Alesina et al. (2013) and Galasso and Profeta (2012)). Another part of the
literature has also shown that many of the outcomes reviewed in this chapter tend to persist among
second generation immigrants in the US and other countries as a result of different values regarding
the strength of family ties (Alesina and Giuliano (2010) and Alesina et al. (2013).

4. How to measure family ties
In this section we describe different ways of measuring family ties using existing datasets.
One uses individual responses from the World Value Survey (WVS) (the measure used for the
empirical analysis of this chapter); the other is based upon the classification by Emmanuel Todd
(1983, 1990).
4.1. Measuring family ties using the World Values Survey
The WVS is a cross-country project carried out for more than twenty years. Each wave has
representative national surveys of the basic values and beliefs of individuals in a large cross-section
of countries. The questionnaires contain information about demographics (sex, age, education), selfreported economic characteristics (income, social class) and answers to specific questions about
religion, political preferences and attitudes. Bertrand and Schoar (2006), Alesina and Giuliano (2010)
and several others since, measure the strength of family ties by looking at three WVS variables
10

capturing beliefs on the importance of the family in an individual’s life, the duties and
responsibilities of parents and children and the love and respect for one’s own parents. The first
question assesses how important the family is in one person’s life and can take values from 1 to 4
(with four being very important and 1 not important at all). The second question asks whether the
respondent agrees with one of two statements (taking the values of 1 and 2 respectively): (1) one
does not have the duty to respect and love parents who have not earned it; (2) regardless of what the
qualities and faults of one’s parents are, one must always love and respect them. The third question
prompts respondents to agree with one of the following statements (again taking the values of 1 or 2
respectively): (1) Parents have a life of their own and should not be asked to sacrifice their own well
being for the sake of their children; (2) it is the parents’ duty to do their best for their children even
at the expense of their own well being. The questions can be combined by extracting the first
principal component from the whole dataset with all individual responses for the original variables.
Table 1 displays the correlation at the country level between the three original measures and
the first principal component. All the variables are highly and positively correlated amongst each
other. Figures 1-4 show map of each single question and the first principal component and Figure 5
displays the values of the measure of the strength of family ties (expressed using the first principal
component) at the country level4. The ranking generally reflects priors of the sociological literature.
Scandinavian countries and many Eastern European countries tend to have the weakest levels of
family ties. In a middle range are France, Canada, the United States and the United Kingdom. More
familistic societies are Italy and many Latin American countries including Colombia, Peru and Brazil.
In the extreme part of the distributions are some Latin America countries like Guatemala and
Venezuela, African countries like Egypt and Zimbabwe and Asian countries like Indonesia, Vietnam
and the Philippines.
The strength of family ties varies not only across countries, but also across regions of the
same country. Figure 6 represents the partial correlation of the relationship between generalized
trust and the strength of family ties for the case of Europe, after controlling for country fixed
effects. As it is apparent from the figure, even after controlling for country characteristics, the
variation in family ties across Europe is sufficient to explain differences in social capital inside
Europe. The difference in the strength of family ties inside the same country can be very
pronounced. In Italy the lowest level of family ties are in the northern region of Valle D’Aosta

4

The measure is calculated using the six waves from the WVS.

11

(where it is equal to -0.22, a level similar to some of the Swedish regions), the highest in the
Southern region of Calabria (where it reaches the high value of 0.44).
4.2. Todd’s classification of family structures
In his books, The invention of Europe (1990) and The Explanation of ideology: Family Structures and
Social Systems (1983), Emmanuel Todd classifies family structures according to two main organizing
principles. The first principle concerns the vertical relationship between parents and children, the
second the relationship between siblings.
With respect to the vertical relationship between parents and children, the family is defined
as “authoritarian” if children are subject to the parental authority even after marriage. The family is
defined as “liberal” if children become independent from the parental authority by leaving the
parental nest in early adulthood. To measure authoritarian versus liberal families, Todd looked at
data on cohabitation between generations within families, in particular between parents and their
married children. The family is authoritarian if the eldest son stays in the family when he marries and
remains under the authority of the father. Unmarried daughters remain in the family home under the
authority of the father or their brothers, when the father dies. In the “liberal” case, children leave the
parental home when they reach adulthood or after marriage.
When one looks at the relationship between siblings, the family is defined as “equal” if all
siblings are treated equally; it is defined as “unequal” if one particular child (most often the eldest)
has a privileged treatment. To measure equality Todd uses data on inheritance laws and practices. A
family is equal when family property is divided evenly between siblings and unequal if primogeniture (or in some cases ultimogeniture) exists. The information on the type of families for both
the vertical and the horizontal dimension is obtained by censuses and historical monographs that go
back more than 500 years.
The combination of the authoritarian/liberal vertical relationship with the equal/unequal
horizontal relationship gives rise to four types of family structures (depicted in Figure 7):
-

Absolute nuclear family: this family type is characterized by independent living
arrangements (children leave their family in early adulthood either before marriage or to
form their own family) and lack of stringent inheritance rules. In this type of family,
parents have no obligation to support their adult children; every person is independent
and has to rely on his/her individual effort. The United States, the UK, Australia, New
Zealand, the Netherlands and Denmark belong to this group. Interestingly, Laslett
(1983) has shown that this family characteristic makes young adult free to take residence
where job opportunities are best and thus has favored industrial development.
12

-

Egalitarian nuclear family: this family type is characterized by independent living
arrangements, like in the absolute nuclear family. The presence of egalitarian inheritance
rules, however, encourage the persistence of a strong relationship between parents and
children, who are inclined to stay at their parents place longer. To this group belong the
Southern European countries (Italy, Spain, Greece and Portugal), Romania, Poland,
Latin America and Ethiopia.

-

Stem or authoritarian family: this family type is characterized by the cohabitation of parents
and children. Inheritance rules are also not egalitarian. Countries belonging to this group
are Austria, Germany, Sweden, Norway, Czech Republic, Belgium, Luxembourg, Ireland,
Japan, Korea and Israel.

-

Communitarian family: this type of family is characterized by cohabitation of parents and
children and equal inheritance rules. This system characterizes countries like Russia,
Bulgaria, Finland, Hungary, Albania, China, Vietnam, Cuba, Indonesia and India5.

Galasso and Profeta (2012) compare Todd’s classification of family structures with the one
used in this chapter and also in Alesina and Giuliano (2010). In particular, they use the three above
described measures of family values taken from WVS and compare them with Todd’s classification
of family structures. They do run a model of the following type:
_
where

is the answer from the WVS to each of the three family measures,

is a set of

individual controls (a quadratic in age, income, education, political views). They include dummies for
the prevalent type of family in a country, where the absolute nuclear family is the excluded category.
Table 2 reports the results of their specification. Todd’s classification plays no role in explaining the
answer to the most general question on the importance of the family (column 1). However, strong
children-to-parents links are associated with communitarian and egalitarian nuclear families (column
2). Finally, authoritarian and communitarian families are associated with a prominent role of parents
in today’s societies. The authors conclude that current survey data broadly confirms the historical
types present in Todd’s analysis.

Note that Todd (1990) provides regional variations for most European countries, for example the communitarian
family was present in the center of Italy. Here we just report the data at the country level. The family type at the country
level is based on the type of family present in the majority of the population. For more details on the regional variation
of family ties see Duranton et al. (2009) and Todd (1990).

5

13

5. Where family ties come from?
A large literature in anthropology has documented that the type of family is related to
ecological features and means of subsistence in ancient times (Murdock, 1949). Typically agricultural
societies are characterized by large extended families; whereas the small nuclear family is more
prevalent among small hunting and gathering societies. The reason for that is that farming requires
the help of many people, usually children and kin, who cooperate to cultivate crops. Studies have
found that children in agricultural and pastoral societies are taught to be responsible, compliant,
obedient, and to respect the elderly and the hierarchy. Hunting or gathering as a mean of
subsistence, on the other hand, requires moving from area to area. Many hunting and gathering
societies do not have a permanent home, but temporary huts or shelters. Mobility means that the
small nuclear family is more adaptable for survival under these ecological restraints. Children in
hunting and gathering societies tend to be self-reliant, independent, and achievement oriented and
the family is less stratified.
We are not aware of formal test of whether these ecological features from the distant past
tend to persist to the modern times, after industrialization has taken place in many societies. The
only work which has studied the correlation between current measures of family ties and long term
historical characteristics is Durante (2010). He proposes a simple explanation of the emergence of
trust and different forms of family structures based on the need for subsistence farmers to cope with
weather fluctuations. The main idea is that a more variable environment should increase an
individual’s propensity to interact with non-family members and reduce their dependence on the
family for insurance purposes. Durante (2010) tests his prediction in the context of Europe,
combining high-resolution climate data for the period 1500-2000 with contemporary survey data on
family ties as measured in Alesina and Giuliano (2010) and also generalized trust, using the negative
expected relationship between these two variables. He finds that regions with greater inter-annual
fluctuations in temperature and precipitation have higher levels of interpersonal trust and weaker
family ties. This result is primarily driven by weather variability in the growing-season months,
consistent with the effect of climatic risk operating primarily through agriculture. He then replicates
the analysis using climate data for the period 1500-1750. The relationship between historical climatic
variability and trust and weak family ties is positive and significant, even after controlling for climate
variability between 1900-2000, which does not appear to have an independent effect on trust or
family ties. These findings support an explanation based on the historical formation and long-term
persistence of trust and family attitudes.
14

The results of Durante’s specifications for various regions of Europe are reported in Table 3.
In particular, in panel A we report Durante’s results for the period 1900-2000. The left hand side
variable is the principal component of the measures of family ties, whereas the dependent variable is
the annualized variability calculated using both precipitation (columns 1 and 2) and temperature
(columns 3 and 4). The coefficient on precipitation variability is positive and statistically significant
at the 5% level (column 1): in regions characterized by a more variable climate family ties are weaker.
The results are primarily driven by variability in precipitation during the growing season months,
whereas variability during the other months displays no significant effect (column 2). The results
obtained using temperature are analogous: higher inter-annual variability, particularly during the
growing season, corresponds to weaker family ties (columns 3 and 4).
Panel B reports the test Durante performs to show that differences in the strength of family
ties are related to historical rather than contemporary variability. Historical variability in the growing
season’s precipitation and temperature appear to have a negative, large and significant effect on the
strength of family ties (column 1). This effect remains and becomes even larger when controlling for
climate variability over the last century, which appears to have no significant (or even positive effect,
for the case of precipitation) effect. The magnitude of the coefficients on historical variability is
large: a one standard deviation in growing season variability corresponds to a 0.40 standard deviation
decrease in the strength of family ties, for precipitation, and a 0.38 standard deviation decrease for
temperature.

6. Empirical analysis
In this section we examine the relationship between family values and economic attitudes,
using within country analysis drawn from the WVS. Our measure of family ties is defined as the
principal component of three subjective measures regarding the role of the family, and the link
between parents and children, as described in Section 4.1. We use all available six waves, therefore
providing the most comprehensive analysis of the impact of family values on a variety of attitudes6.
The coverage of countries varies across surveys. The 1981-1984 wave covers 24 countries; the 19891993 wave covers 43 countries; the 1994-1999, 1999-2004, the 2005-2007 and 2008-2010 waves
cover respectively 54, 70, 57 and 47 countries.
The use of within country analysis allows us to control for country fixed effects, eliminating
the impact of other institutional variables. This approach underestimates the effect of family ties, to

6

Alesina and Giuliano (2010) only used four waves, having a substantially smaller sample size.

15

the extent that in the distant past they had an impact on current institutions. Nevertheless, the effect
can be attributed more credibly to this cultural trait. Omitted variables ad reverse causality can still
be a problem for this type of regressions, for this reason we prefer to interpret our results as more
precisely estimated partial correlations. We divide our dependent variables into four groups.
6.1.1.1.

Measures of interest in politics and political action

We begin with measures of people’s interest in politics and political action. The first variable,
which we label interest in politics, is based on the following question “How interested would you say
you are in politics?”, the response varies from 1 (not at all interested) to 4 (very interested). Variable
2, which we label discuss politics, asks the respondent “How often discusses political matters with
friends”, with the answer going from never (1), occasionally (2) to frequently (3). Variables 3 and 4
measure if the respondent belongs to political parties (the first question measures it with a dummy if
the person belongs to a political party and zero otherwise; the second question can take values from
0 to 2, with 0 (not a member), 1 (inactive member) and 2 (active member). The last five questions
measure different forms of political action, asking the respondent whether he/she has actually done
any of these things (taking the value of 3), whether he/she might do it (2) or whether he/she would
never do it (1): signing a petition, joining in boycotts, attending lawful/peaceful demonstrations,
joining unofficial strikes, occupying buildings or factories.
Understanding the origin of civic culture and of a well educated population is an important
prerequisite to a well-functioning and stable democracy (Lipset (1959), Almond and Verba (1963),
Glaeser et al. (2004), Glaeser et al. (2007), Persson and Tabellini (2009)).
6.1.1.2.

Measures of generalized morality and attitudes toward society

The second group of questions contains two measures of generalized morality (related to a
definition by Tabellini (2008), explained below), one question about trust in the family and three
questions about attitudes towards society. Variable one, trust, is based on the following question:
“Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you can’t be too careful
in dealing with people?”, the variable is equal to 1 if participants report that most people can be
trusted and zero otherwise. Variable 2 asks whether obedience is a quality that children can be
encouraged to learn at home, taking the value of 1 if the quality is mentioned and 0 otherwise.
Variable 3 asks how much the respondent trusts the family from “do not trust the family at all” (1),
“do not trust the family very much” (2), “neither trust nor distrust the family” (3), “trust the family a
little” (4), “trust the family completely” (5). The last three questions refer to attitudes about the
possibility of changing society. The first question asks on a scale from 1 to 10 whether “Ideas that
stood the test of time are generally best” (taking the value of 1) or whether “New ideas are generally
16

better than old ones”; the second question asks if “One should be cautious about making major
changes in life” (taking the value of 1) versus “You will never achieve much unless you act boldly”
(taking the value of 10). The third questions asks the respondent to choose between three basic
kinds of attitudes concerning society: “society must be valiantly defended” (taking the value of 1),
“society must be gradually improved by reforms” (taking the value of 2) and “society must be
radically changed” (taking the value of 3).
Amongst all the above variables “trust” measures a fundamental trait in a society. More than
35 years ago Kenneth Arrow (1972), recognizing the pervasiveness of mutual trust in commercial
and non-commercial transactions, went so far as to state that “it can be plausibly argued that much
of the economic backwardness in the world can be explained by the lack of mutual confidence “(p.
357). Since then, Arrow’s conjecture has received considerable empirical support. A vast literature
investigates the link between aggregate trust and aggregate economic performance, trust also
encourage welfare enhancing social interactions, such as anonymous exchange of participation in the
provision of public goods, and they are likely to improve the functioning of government institutions.
Starting with Banfield, it has also been postulated a negative correlation between trust in a small
related circle (like the family) and generalized trust. Platteau (2000) links lack of generalized trust to
the distinction between “generalized” versus “limited” morality. In hierarchical societies, trust and
honest behavior are often confined to small circles of related people (like members of the family).
Outside of this small network, opportunistic and highly selfish behavior is regarded as natural and
morally acceptable. These two measures have been defined to distinguish between values consistent
with “generalized” vs “limited” morality. Tabellini (2008) has shown that generalize morality is
fundamental to understand the origin of economic development across countries and also among
regions of Europe. We therefore look at the relevance of family ties in the formation of generalized
trust and trust toward the family (expecting a negative impact of family ties on generalized trust and
a positive impact on trust in the family). In strong family ties societies, individualism is also
mistrusted. In familistic societies, the role of parents is to foster obedience. Banfield emphasized the
relevance of obedience to claim that such coercive cultural environment reduces individual initiative
and cooperation within a group and can hurt growth and development.
The last three questions are related to Coleman’s idea (1988) that family ties can represent an
obstacle for innovation and new ideas.
6.1.1.3 Labor market and attitudes toward work
The third group of questions looks at the relationship between family values and the labor
market. We explore the correlation between female, youth and elderly labor force participation and
17

family ties. We also look at questions regarding the relationship between job security and family ties.
One question asks the respondent how important is job security in a job. In another one, the
respondent has to choose the most important thing in looking for a job, where a safe job with no
risk is one of five choices (the other four including a good income, working with people one likes,
doing an important job, do something for the community).
Employment rates vary dramatically across countries, but the bulk of the variation relies on
specific demographic groups: women, younger and older individuals. Looking at micro and macro
data for OECD countries, Algan and Cahuc (2007) show that differences in family culture can
explain lower female employment and also lower level of employment of young and older people in
Europe7. In the same fashion, Giavazzi, Schiantarelli and Serafinelli (2013) find that culture matters
for women employment rates and for hours worked. In a recent paper, Alesina et al. (2013) look at
the relationship between family ties and the labor market. The main idea is that in cultures with
strong family ties, moving away from home is costly. Thus individuals with strong family ties choose
regulated labor markets to avoid moving and limiting the monopsony power of firms, even though
regulation generates lower employment and income. We look at within country analysis on
preferences for job security that further limit the possibility that the results are driven by other
country characteristics.
6.1.1.3.

Measures of attitudes toward women

The fourth group of variables contains measure of people’s attitude toward women. The first
question asks the respondent whether he/she agrees with the statement “When jobs are scarce, men
should have more right to a job than women”. The other six variables come from the answer to the
question “For each of the following statements I read out, can you tell me how much you agree with
each. Do you agree strongly, agree, disagree, or disagree strongly”. The statements are: “A working
mother can establish just as warm and secure a relationship with her children as a mother who does
not work”, “Being a housewife is just as fulfilling as working for pay”, “On the whole, men make
better political leaders than women do”, “A university education is more important for a boy than
for a girl”, “A pre-school child is likely to suffer if his or her mother works”, “A job is alright but

Although the authors attribute the differences in employment rates to the presence of the nuclear versus the extended
family in different OECD countries, the effect on employment is not studied using different family structures but
considering some subjective measures. In particular they look at three questions: one asking the respondent whether
he/she agrees with the statement that “when job are scarce, older people should be forced to retire from work early”,
the second asking the respondent whether they agree with the statement that “Adult children have a duty to look after
their elderly parents” and finally a third question asking whether independence is a quality that children should be
encouraged to learn at home.

7

18

what most women really want is a home and children”. We recode the questions so that a higher
number means a more traditional perception of the role of women in society.
Gender role attitudes are relevant in explaining differences in female labor force
participation across countries (see Fortin (2005) and Fernandez and Fogli (2009)). In strong family
ties societies (Esping-Andersen 1999; Ferrera 1996; Castles 1995; Korpi 2000), family solidarity is
based on an unequal division of family work between men and women (what has been called the
“male-breadwinner hypothesis”): weak family ties will foster an egalitarian gender role in which men
and women participate equally in employment and housework, whereas strong family ties are based
on the “male-breadwinner hypothesis” in which men work full time and women dedicate themselves
to housework. In the more traditional, strong family ties societies is the woman who is supposed to
fulfill the family obligations and as such participate less in the market. According to EspingAndersen (1999), this gender relationship has been helped by a welfare state model that has
historically delegated family care services for children and the elderly to the family sphere and has
protected the male-breadwinner figure. Alesina and Ichino (2009) provide an in depth analysis of
this type of family organization with respect to Italy.
6.2. The impact of family ties
In Tables 4-7, we present our results on the overall effects of family ties. Each attitude is
regressed on our measure of family ties, some control variables (age, education, marital status and a
gender dummy8), country specific effects and wave dummies. The sample size differs across
regressions and range from a minimum of 26,974 to a maximum of 212,9319; therefore always
providing substantial variation in time period and number of countries.
Before we comment on the results on the impact of family ties, it is useful to discuss the
effect of our control variables. The results, which are of independent interest, are very reasonable
and provide credibility to the measure of family ties we are going to use. There is a hump-shaped
relationship in age between interest in politics, political participation and political action, and
between age and job security. There is also a hump-shaped relationship between age and trust,
whereas the level of trust in the family does not change with age. Emphasizing obedience is less
important among young people and it has a U-shaped relationship with age. The same U-shaped
relationship also exists for the attitudes looking at whether society should be defended versus
We do not include income in our regressions since in the next section we do find that family ties could explain part of
the differences in GDP per capita across countries. Our results are however robust to its inclusion.
9 The smallest sample is for labor force participation of the elderly (26,974), therefore the smaller sample size depends by
the fact the regressions are not run on the whole population. The variable trust in the family is the one with substantially
lower sample size, of around 10,000 observations.
8

19

whether it should be dramatically changed. Not surprising, young people believe that new ideas are
better than old ones and are more open to major changes in life. Attitudes toward women are not
systematically related to age. Gender and education also have the expected effects. Women are
generally less interested and involved in politics than men. They also trust less (gender like age,
however is not systematically related to the level of trust in the family, a more universal value that
does not change with specific demographics). Not surprisingly women have less traditional beliefs
about the role of women in society compared to their male counterparts (an indication that they
most likely suffer from the presence of traditional gender role attitudes). Education is positively
related to political interest and political action, a result supporting the model by Glaeser, Ponzetto
and Shleifer (2007). More educated people have a higher level of trust, less traditional attitudes about
the role of women in society; they also believe obedience is not an important quality to teach
children. Finally they are in support of new ideas but more conservative with respect to major
changes in life and in society10.
Let’s now consider the effect of family ties. Table 4, which relates to political participation
and political action, shows that family ties have a negative and highly statistically significant
coefficient. Regarding the magnitude of the effect, the beta coefficient of family ties on political
participation (the first four columns of Table 4) is equal for the four different measures to 0.01
(roughly to 1/5 of the magnitude of the beta coefficient of the middle level of education, which
ranges between 0.04 and 0.05)11. The magnitude of the beta coefficient for family ties is larger for
the measures of political actions. In this case the coefficient goes from 0.04 to 0.08 and it is between
1/3 or even the same effect of the middle level of education.
Table 5, which includes the same controls of Table 4, refers to those variables of
“generalized morality” (as in Tabellini (2008)) and openness to new ideas. The results are as
expected. Particularly important is the result of column 1 which shows a negative effect of family
ties on generalized trust, but positive on trusting family members (column 2). Strong family ties
imply teaching more obedience to children (column 3) and being relatively conservative in terms of
personal and social change (columns 4, 5 and 6). As for the magnitude of the effects: the beta
coefficients of family ties on trust is equal to -0.016 (half the coefficient of middle level of education,
10When we control for income as one of our robustness checks, we do find that income is positively correlated with trust
and trust in the family, like education. Similarly income is inversely correlated with the importance of obedience. Income
is however inversely correlated with the importance of new ideas and major changes in life, but positively correlated with
the belief that society should be changed.
11 We include two dummies for education: one for middle and one for upper level (the excluded group is lower level of
education). The sign of the middle and upper level of education coefficient is positive, as the excluded group is lower
level of education.

20

which has a positive effect compared to the lower level of education). The impact of family ties on
trusting the family is three times the effect of middle level of education; the magnitudes of middle
level of education and family ties are equivalent (but of opposite sign) for obedience and the three
attitudes on personal and social change (columns 4 to 6).
Table 6 looks at labor market of women, young adult and elderly. Individuals coming from
strong family ties have a lower level of labor force participation for women, young adults and older
people. This is consistent with the male-bread winner hypothesis according to which, women are the
one supposed to stay at home and take care of the family, together with older and younger people.
Consistent with the relationship postulated by Alesina et al. (2013), individuals with familistic values
consider job security the most important characteristic in a job. The impact of family ties on the
labor force participation of the three groups is small compared to the impact of education (the beta
coefficient is 1/10 when compared to the one on middle level of education). This is not surprising:
family ties are very relevant in the determination of labor market institutions (see Alesina et al.
(2013)) and the country fixed effects are most likely capturing part of that channel. The impact of
family ties on job security (columns 4 and 5) on the other hand is six times larger than the effect of
middle level of education.
Table 7 refers to the attitudes towards women. With the exception of column (2), in all other
columns the variable family ties has the expected sign and it implies a more traditional role of
women in the family. Indeed, this makes sense: with close family ties, the family needs someone who
organizes it, and keeps it together, typically the wife and mother. In this sense, the family becomes a
formidable producer of goods and services which are not counted in standard measure of GDP, like
childcare, care of the elderly and various other forms of home production.12 As for the magnitude of
the effects it goes from roughly ¼ of the effect of middle level of education (for the first four
columns) to being more or less of equivalent magnitude (for the last three columns).
Overall we find that different beliefs about the importance of the family in one person’s life
and the relationship among generations are relevant for the determination of values, which have
been proven to promote employment, innovation and growth. If values about the family are
transmitted from generation to generation and they move slowly over time, they could provide an
explanation on how the distant past can affect the current functioning of institutions. Indeed, several
papers have provided evidence that attitudes toward the family and different forms of family
structures are transmitted from generation to generation and affect the behavior of second
12

See Alesina and Ichino (2009) for an empirical estimate of the size of home production in a few countries with weak
or strong family ties.

21

generation immigrants, who still maintain the values and behavior of their parents despite living in
an institutional environment which is very different than their ancestor’s country of origin13. It is
also worth notice that all the results presented in this section are most likely a lower bound of the
effect of family ties. If family values become part of the national culture, this is captured by the
country fixed effects together with the impact of institutions and all other time invariant
characteristics.

7. Family ties, development and institutions
In this section we provide some suggestive evidence in support of the idea that family ties
are correlated with fundamental determinants of economic outcomes at the aggregate level. We
document a strong correlation between the strength of family ties, economic development and
quality of institutions. Countries with strong family ties have lower levels of per capita GDP and
lower quality of institutions.
We do our analysis in two steps. As a first step, we establish a basic correlation between the
strength of family ties, economic development and the quality of institutions. As a second step, a
small one towards establishing causation, we show that family values brought by immigrants who
arrived in several destination countries before 1940 are correlated with the level of development and
the quality of institutions today.
We measure economic development with real GDP per capita. As a measure of institutional
quality we use the Worldwide Governance Indicators (WGI) of the World Bank. The WGI reports
on six broad dimensions of governance for over 200 countries for the period 1996-2011. These
dimensions are: voice and accountability (the extent to which a country’s citizens are able to
participate in selecting their government, as well as freedom of expression, freedom of association
and a free media), political stability and absence of violence (measuring perceptions of the likelihood
that the government will be destabilized or overthrown by unconstitutional or violent means,
including politically-motivated violence and terrorism), government effectiveness (about the quality
of public services, the quality of the civil service and the degree of its independence from political
pressures, the quality of policy formulation and implementation, and the credibility of the
government’s commitment to such policies), regulatory quality (the ability of the government to
formulate and implement sound policies and regulations that permit and promote private sector
See Alesina and Giuliano (2010 and 2011) and Alesina et al. (2013). All these papers show that family ties have an
effect om the behavior of second generation immigrants in the US and a large set of European countries. This evidence
hints at the possibility that the partial correlations established in section 4 can have causal nature.

13

22

development), rule of law (capturing perceptions of the extent to which agents have confidence in
and abide by the rules of society, and in particular the quality of contract enforcement, property
rights, the police, and the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and violence) and control of
corruption (the extent to which public power is exercised for private gain, including both petty and
grand forms of corruption, as well as “capture” of the state by elites and private interests).
7.1. The correlation between family ties, economic development and

institutional quality
We first establish that countries with stronger family ties have lower economic development
on average, measured by GDP per capita (Table 8). We run cross-country regressions of GDP per
capita on our measures of family values14. We show that the coefficient from a regression of
logarithm of GDP per capita on the strength of family ties is highly negative and significant. A one
standard deviation increase in the strength of family ties (0.36) is associated with a reduction of the
log of GDP per capita of 0.71 (roughly equal to 44 percent of its standard deviation). The second
column controls for human capital, measured by the logarithm of the average schooling years in the
total population over age 15. By adding this variable, we might be over controlling since educational
choices might themselves be an outcome of family values. The strength of family ties is still very
strong although is magnitude is, not surprisingly, reduced.
The cross-sectional correlations live open the possibility that other omitted variables can
explain both the strength of family ties and differences in economic development across countries.
Using the combined waves of the WVS we can limit this possibility by looking at the correlation
between regional income and regional family ties, after controlling for country fixed effects. The
results are reported in Table 9. In order to maintain a very large sample (more than 1000 regions)
we constructed the income measure by collapsing the income variable from the WVS, instead of
using estimates of regional GDP which are available only for a limited European sample15. In
column 1, we report the correlation between regional income and the strength of family ties.
Similarly to the cross country regressions, the correlation is negative and significant at the one
percent level. This correlation also exists once we control for country fixed effects with a smaller but
still relevant magnitude: a one standard deviation increase in the strength of family ties (0.44) is
associated with a reduction in income of 0.152 (roughly equal to 14 percent of its standard
The measure of GDP is averaged between 1980 and 2010, the years in which the World Value Survey was taken. In
particular, before taking the average we match each country with the GDP corresponding to the year in which the survey
was taken.
15 The income variable in the dataset indicates income scales and it coded as a variable going from one to eleven, where
one indicate the lower step in the scale of incomes and eleven the highest.
14

23

deviation). It is also interesting to note that the correlation exists in all different continents. Columns
3 to 7 indeed show that the correlation is quite strong not only inside Europe but also inside Africa
and Asia16.
The next question is whether the negative relationship between GDP and family values is
also reflected in a negative relationship between family values and institutions. We explore this
question in Table 10. We find that the strength of family ties is associated with lower quality of
institutions. The effect is always negative and significant for all different types of institutions. The
effect is also sizeable: a one standard deviation increase in the strength of family ties (0.35) is for
example associated with a reduction of the control of corruption measure of 0.61 (roughly
equivalent to 54 percent of its standard deviation).
A recent literature has suggested that one important driver of many formal institutions is
legal origin. For example English (common) law countries have been shown to have higher levels of
investor protection, superior protection of property rights and a more efficient judicial system.
When we control for legal origin (Table 11), the negative association between family ties and the
quality of institutions stay virtually the same.
7.2. Inherited family values and current institutions and development
Our implicit assumption in all the empirical analysis is that family values change slowly, they
are transmitted from generation to generation and they have persisted through history to the present
day. This form of persistence seems intuitively likely given the probability that children are brought
up to consider the attachment to the family, the respect for parents and the belief that they will do
everything for their children as the natural state of the world. As a result, children will most likely
reproduce the same values and beliefs with their own children. The persistence may develop and it
can be facilitated through intermediate factors, such as the nature of political or economic
institutions, shaped first by family structures which, in turn, have continued to influence our society
today in a path-dependent manner.
In this section, we isolate the impact of cultural values on today’s institutions. Ideally we
would like to have measures of family values observed much before the measure of current
institutions. Family values going so far back in time cannot be observed directly, since there is no
survey available for that period of time. However, following Algan and Cahuc (2010) we can detect
family ties by looking at family values inherited by children of immigrants in several European
countries whose forbears arrived in Europe before 1940.
16 The results on North America and Oceania are not significant, most likely due to the small sample size. Similarly for
South America.

24

The idea behind this exercise is as follows: parental values are a good predictor of the values
of children. For that reason we can use the family values that European descendants have inherited
from their forebears who migrated to Europe from different countries before 1940 to know the
values for the period preceding the quality of institutions today. This method allows us to cope with
the lack of information on historical family values, by using the values that the descendants of
various immigrants groups have inherited from their ancestors’ countries of origin. This strategy is
very useful because by using the values that European immigrants have inherited from the home
country instead of the average values of the residents today, we can exclude reverse causality.
To perform our exercise we use data from the European Social Survey (ESS). The ESS is a
biennial cross-sectional survey administered in a large sample of mostly European nations. The
survey was conducted five times: in 2002/2003, 2004/2005, 2006/2007, 2008/2009 and 2010/2011.
The number of countries surveyed varies by wave. There are 22 countries included in the first round,
26 in the second, 25 in the third, 29 in the fourth, and 20 in the fifth. The sample size for a survey
differs by country depending on its size. They range from 579 for Iceland to 2,870 for Germany.
Our primary sample consists of children of immigrants. We define children of immigrants as
individuals born in a certain country but whose fathers were born abroad17. In order to get enough
observations, we use information on second generation immigrants born before 1940. In the
presence of cultural transmission children of immigrants should have inherited attitudes toward the
families from their parents (who should have arrived in the destination countries not later than 1940
but possibly much earlier), who came to the destination countries with cultural attitudes from their
countries of origin. Let’s consider for example the case of France. To calculate the historical family
values, we do consider children of French immigrants in a certain destination country. We do restrict
the sample to children of immigrants born before 1940 and calculate their family values. These
values are a reflection of their parental values who arrived from France before 1940, therefore the
values of children of immigrants are a reflection of French family values before 1940.
The European Social Survey does not contain the same variables on family ties as those of
the World Values Survey. To measure the strength of family ties we use a question asking the
respondent his/her level of agreement with the following statement: “A person’s family should be
the main priority in life” the answer can go from “disagree strongly” to “agree strongly” on a scale
from one to five.

17 When this information is not available we use the country of origin of the mother, if she is an immigrant. Natives are
excluded from the analysis.

25

There is a strong correlation between the inherited family ties of the children of immigrants
born before 1940 (as measured by the ESS question) and current family ties in the countries of
origin of their parents (as proxied by our measure of family ties calculated from the WVS). The
correlation is about 0.35, showing that there is a strong inertia in family values across countries.
We next discuss the correlation between the inherited family ties dating back to at least 60
years ago and current regulations in the home countries. Tables 12 and 13 show the OLS
estimations, with and without the inclusion of legal origin dummies. We do find a robust and
significant negative relationship between inherited family values and current institutions. The
relationship holds even after controlling for legal origin. We do the same exercise with the level of
development finding again a stable negative relationship between current development and inherited
family values (columns 3 and 4 of Table 8). Overall we do find that there is a long lasting effect of
family ties on the quality of current institutions.

8. Family ties and well-being
Strong family ties countries are characterized by less favorable economic outcomes and
attitudes. Unemployment rate, labor force participation and income per capita are worse in strong
family ties countries. Such unfavorable outcomes however do not seem to lead to dramatic
situations of economic need in the population or to social unrest. This observation seems to suggest
that in some sense those negative economic outcomes are less painful in strong family ties societies.
In this part we review existing evidence on the positive effects of familistic societies and provide
some additional one on the conjecture that family ties could indeed improve well-being.
Bentolila and Ichino (2008) study the relationship between unemployment and consumption
in four different countries: Spain, Italy, Great Britain and the US. Their empirical results indicate
that an increase in the duration of unemployment spells of male household heads is associated with
smaller consumption losses in Spanish and Italian households. They conclude that extended family
networks constitute the social institution which plays the crucial role of reducing the cost of
unemployment near the Mediterranean. In Spain and Italy, the family appears to supplement for the
lack of generosity of the welfare system and for the imperfection of capital markets. In this sense,
the Mediterranean family based solution seems to produce a desirable outcome from a welfare point
of view since it allows for more consumption smoothing.
Along similar lines, Alesina and Giuliano (2010) look at the amount of home production in
strong family ties societies. Societies with strong family ties are associated with more time spent at
home by wives/mothers and young adults living at home longer. This implies more home
26

production (in the form of child care, home cooking, caring for the elderly, house cleaning, etc.). In
addition, according to a more traditional role attributed to women in societies in strong family ties
societies, these activities should be mostly performed by wives and daughters. The authors indeed
find that the strength of family ties is relevant for the determination of home production of women,
but not of men as expected.
Alesina and Ichino (2009) present some detailed calculations of the value of home
production in four different countries: Spain and Italy with relatively strong family ties, the United
States with an intermediate level, and Norway with a low level of family ties. They use two
procedures in order to estimate the value of home production: the opportunity cost and the market
value. The first calculate how much market income is lost by various individuals by working a
certain number of hours at home rather than in the market, based upon characteristics such as their
age, level of education, wage value in the market. The second method is based upon how much it
would cost to hire from the market individuals to perform household duties like cooking, cleaning
etc.18 The authors find that home production is very large: it increases measured market income by a
minimum of 53 per cent to a maximum of 121 per cent depending on the country and method of
calculations. But more interestingly for our purposes the authors uncover very large difference
between strong and weak family ties countries. For instance, using the opportunity cost method,
Italian families exactly double their market income by working at home contrary to an increase of
about 74 per cent in the US. Using the market cost of services Italians more than doubles their
market income (+121 per cent) while Norwegians increase it by 80 per cent. These results suggest
that a market income measure tends to underestimate the wellbeing of strong family ties countries,
given that home production is not included in this measure.
These considerations open the question of the relationship between the strength of family
ties and alternative measures of wellbeing to which we now turn. Table 14 illustrates this relationship
using measures of subjective happiness and self-reported health. The first question asks the
respondent, on scale from 1 to 4, whether “Taking all things together, would you say you are”, very
happy (taking the value of 4), quite happy, not very happy, not at all happy (taking the value of 1).
The second question asks “All things considered, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole
these days?”, the answer goes from dissatisfied (taking the value of 1) to satisfied (taking the value of
10). The last question asks the respondent, on a scale from 1 to 5, “All in all, how would you
describe your state of health these days? Would you say it is Very good (taking the value of 5), good,

18

The authors discuss in the detail the properties and the pros and cons of the two methods.

27

fair, poor or very poor (taking the value of 1). The results in table 14 clearly show that, all in all,
although strong family ties can harm societies in a variety of ways, they can also have positive effects
in an individual’s life, as measured by happiness and self-reported measures of health. The
magnitude of the effect is also sizeable: the beta coefficients of family ties on the three measures of
wellbeing are equal to 0.08, 0.06 and 0.03 respectively (for a comparison, the impact of the highest
level of education is equal to 0.09, 0.04 and 0.08).
How can one interpret these results? One interpretation could be that well-being depends
essentially on the quality of social relationships and not only on individual income. From this
perspective, if social relationships are particularly good among family members, we should expect a
strong correlation between family ties and well-being. Second, these results on wellbeing may
capture the effect of stress and harder work (reflected in higher per capita income) in environments
with weaker family ties. Alesina and Ichino (2009) make this argument with explicit reference to
Italy. In a sense the strong family ties of this county may explain both its relative decline in a
globalized word but also the relatively high life satisfaction (at least for now) of Italians.

9. Conclusion
We show that differences in family values have an impact on attitudes and outcomes that are
relevant to explain differences in growth across countries and the quality of institutions. We study
attitudes toward working women, the society, generalized morality and civic engagement. Our
findings confirm an idea first developed by political scientists and sociologists: trust in the family
prevent the formation of generalized trust, which is at the core of many collective good outcomes,
from political participation to the formation of institutions to economic development. This should
not be taken of course as a “criticism” of the family as a fundamental institution of society but as an
analysis of the effect of different family arrangements. Our analysis indeed shows that family ties are
related to different measures of happiness, life satisfaction and self-reported health.

28

References
Acemoglu. D., S. Johnson and J. Robinson (2001), “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
Development: An Empirical Investigation”, American Economic Review, 91, 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S. and J. A. Robinson (2005), Institutions as the Fundamental Cause of
Long-Run Economic Growth”, in Handbook of Economic Growth, Philippe Aghion and
Stephen Durlauf editors, Amsterdam: Elsevier B. V., 385-472.
Akerlof, G. and R. Kranton (2000), “Economics and Identity”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115,
715-53.
Alesina, A., Y. Algan, P. Cahuc and P. Giuliano (2013), “Family Values and the Regulation of
Labor”, mimeo.
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano (2010), “The Power of the Family”, Journal of Economic Growth, 15: 93125.
Alesina, A. and P. Giuliano (2011), “Family Ties and Political Participation”, Journal of the European
Economic Association, 9(5): 817-839.
Alesina, A., P. Giuliano and N. Nunn (2013), “On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the
Plough”, forthcoming, The Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Alesina, A. and A. Ichino (2009), L’Italia fatta in casa, Mondadori, Milano.
Algan, Y. and P. Cahuc (2007), “The Roots of Low European Employment: Family Culture?”,
NBER Macroeconomic Annual, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Algan, Y. and P. Cahuc (2010), “Inherited Trust and Growth”, American Economic Review, 100:20602092.
Almond, G. and S. Verba (1963), The Civic Culture: Political Attitudes and Democracy in Five Nations,
Princeton University Press.
Arrow, K. (1972), “Gifts and Exchanges”, Philosophy and Public Affairs, 1(4), 343-362.
Banfield, E. (1958), The Moral Basis of a Backward Society, New York: Free Press.
Bentolila, S. and A. Ichino (2008), “Unemployment and Consumption Near and Far Away from the
Mediterranean”, Journal of Population Economics, 21, 255-280.
Bertrand, M. and A. Schoar (2006), “The Role of Family in Family Firms”, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 20 (2): 73-96.
Boyd, R. and P. J. Richerson (1985), Culture and the Evolutionary Process, London: University of
Chicago Press.
Castles, F. (1995), “Welfare State Development in Southern Europe”, Western European Politics, 18,
201-213.
29

Coleman, J.S. (1988), “Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital”, American Journal of Sociology,
XCIV, S95-S120.
Coleman, J. S. (1990), Foundations of Social Theory, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Durante, R. (2010), “Risk, Cooperation and the Economic Origins of Social Trust: An Empirical
Investigation”, Science Po, mimeo
Duranton, G. and A. Rodriguez-Pose (2009), “Family Types and the Persistence of Regional
Disparities in Europe”, Economic Geography, 85: 23-47.
Esping-Andersen, G. (1999), Social Foundation of Post-Industrial Economies, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Fernandez, R. and A. Fogli (2009), “Culture: An empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work and
Fertility”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1), 146-177.
Ferrera, M. (1996), “The Southern Model of Welfare in Social Europe”, Journal of the European Social
Policy, 1, 17-37.
Fortin, N. (2005), “Gender Role Attitudes and the Labour Market Outcomes of Women Across
OECD Countries”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 21, 416-438.
Fukuyama, F. (1995), Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity. New York: Free Press.
Galasso, V. and P. Profeta (2012), “When the State Mirrors the Family: The Design of Pension
Systems”, Bocconi University, mimeo.
Gambetta, D. (1988), ed. Trust: Making and Breaking Cooperative Relations, Blackwell.
Giavazzi, F., F. Schiantarelli and M. Serafinelli (2013), “Attitudes, Policies and Work”, Journal of the
European Economic Association, forthcoming
Gigerenzer, G. (2007), Gut Feelings: The Intelligence of the Unconscious, New York: Penguin Group.
Giuliano, P. (2007), “Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?”,
Journal of the European Economic Association, 5 (5), 927-952.
Glaeser, E., La Porta, R., F. Lopez de Silanes and A. Shleifer (2004), “Do Institutions Cause
Growth”, Journal of Economic Growth, 9, 271-304.
Glaeser, E., Ponzetto, G. and A. Shleifer (2007), “Why Democracy Need Education?”, Journal of
Economic Growth, 12 (2), 77-99.
Gorodnichenko, Y. and G. Roland (2011), “Culture, Institutions and the Wealth of Nations”, UC
Berkeley, mimeo.
Greif, A. (1994), “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Historical and Theoretical
Reflection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies”, Journal of Political Economy, 5 (102).
30

Greif A. (2005), “Family Structure, Institutions and Growth: The Origin and Implications of
Western Corporatism”, American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings.
Greif, A. (2006), Institutions and the Path to the Modern Economy: Lessons from Medieval Trade”, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Greif, A. and G. Tabellini (2012), “The Clan and the City: Sustaining Cooperation in China and
Europe”, Stanford, mimeo.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales (2006), “Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?”, Journal
of Economic Perspectives, Spring.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales (2008), “Long Term Persistence”, NBER WP 14278.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales (2010), “Social Capital as Good Culture”, Journal of the
European Economic Association, 6(2-3), 295-320.
Kanhneman, D.( 2011), Thinking, Fast and Slow, New York: Farar, Straus and Giroux.
Korpi, W. (2000), “Faces of Inequality: Gender, Class and Patterns of Inequalities in Different
Types of Welfare States”, Social Politics, 7, 127-191.
Lipset, S. M. (1959), “Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic Development and Political
Legitimacy”, American Political Science Review 53, 69-105.
Murdock, P. M. (1949), Social Structure, New York: Free Press.
North, D. (1981), Structure and Change in Economic History, Norton, New York.
North, D. C. (1990), Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Persson, T. and G. Tabellini (2009), “Democratic Capital: The Nexus of Political and Economic
Change”, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(2), 88-126.
Platteau, J. P. (2000), Institutions, Social Norms, and Economic Development, Academic Publishers and
Routledge.
Putnam, R. (1993), Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy, Princeton University Press.
Putnam, R. (2000): Bowling Alone: The collapse and revival of American community, New York, NY: Simon
and Schuster.
Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2009), “The Diffusion of Development”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
124 (2), 469-529.
Tabellini, G. (2008), “The Scope of Cooperation: Values and Incentives”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 123 (3), 905-950.
Tabellini, G. (2010), “Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of Europe”,
Journal of the European Economic Association, 8 (4), 677-716.
31

Todd, E. (1983), The Explanation of Ideology: Family Structures and Social Systems, New York: Basic
Blackwell.
Todd, E. (1990), L’invention de l’Europe, Paris: Seuil.
Weber, Max (1904), The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, New York: Scribner’s Press.

32

Figure 1
Strength of family ties, principal component

Source: Authors’ calculation from the World Value Survey

33

Figure 2
Family importance

Source: Authors’ calculation from the World Value Survey

34

Figure 3
Respect and love for parents

Source: Authors’ calculation from the World Value Survey

35

Figure 4
Parents’ responsibilities to their children

36

LTU
DNK
HKG
NLD
DEU
FIN
SWE
AUT
LVA
BLR
NOR
EST
CHN
JPN
CZE
RUS
ISL
CHE
KOR
LUX
BEL
GBR
AUS
MEX
NZL
HRV
HUN
IRL
BGR
GRC
FRA
SVK
AZE
SRB
UKR
PRT
BGD
SVN
URY
KGZ
MDA
CAN
ESP
IND
IRN
TWN
ROU
ARG
POL
ARM
TUR
USA
DOM
ITA
CHL
CYP
COL
PER
BRA
ALB
ZAF
BIH
MKD
UGA
MNE
TZA
GEO
DZA
SGP
PAK
SAU
JOR
VNM
MAR
SLV
PRI
MLT
IDN
NGA
PHL
VEN
EGY
ZWE
GTM

Figure 5
Strength of family ties

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

‐0.2

‐0.4

‐0.6

‐0.8

‐1

37

.4

Figure 6
Generalized trust and the strength of family ties, regional variation inside Europe
IRL

POL
LVA

ROU

ROU MDA
SWE
ROU
BGR
LVA
BGR
MDA
EST
IRL
CHE
IRLDNK
POL
UKR
LVA
LVA IRL BGR
CHE
POL
IRL LVAIRL
FIN
ESTIRL
LVA UKR POL
NOR
UKR
GBR
POL
DEU
BGR
ROUBELHRV
AUT
BGR
EST
POL
BGRPOL
HUNITA
HRV
POL
LVA
LVA
HRVCHE
LVA
ESP
GBR
SWE HRV
CHE
MDA
BEL
HUN
NOR
FIN
FIN
CHE
BGR
CHE
HUN
HUN
ROU
POL
ITA
SVK
ITA
POL
MKD
ROU
ITA
FIN
ROU
FIN
HUN
BGR
LVA
LVA
NLD
HRV
HUN
SWE
ESP
HUN
SWE
DEU
PRT
ROU
HRV
UKR
SWE
MDA
MDA
MDA
HUN
HRV
HRV
DNK
SWE
DEU
UKR
FIN
ITA
HUN
DEU
SVK
EST
LVA
LVA
ISL
SVN
POL
POL
FIN
FIN
BEL
POL
DEU
IRL
PRT
SVN
POL
POL
EST
IRL
NLD
NOR
DEU
FRA
POL
LTU
ESP
BEL
POL
SVN
NOR
HUN
LVA
ISL
ROU
DEU
ITA
FRA
UKR
HUN
LVA
SWE
BGR
CZE
AUT
HUN
CHE
RUS
POLIRL
POL
BGR
POL
RUS
POL
DEU
DEU
BGR
MDA
LTU
EST
DEU PRT
DEU
DEU
ROU
MDA
ALB
PRT
NLD
DEU FIN
BGR
POL
HUN
NOR
LTU
SWE
BEL
ROU
POL
ITA
ISL
GBR
NOR
NOR
RUS
GBR
CHE
ITA
BLR
AUT
SWE
SWE
LVA
HUN
NLD
ISL
ITA
LTU
UKR
ESP
SVN
DEU
FIN
BGR
DEU
FRA
SVK
UKR
NLD
NOR
PRT
POL
NLD
ISL
MKD
FIN
DNK
BLR
DEU
RUS
NOR
FIN
POL
BEL
AUT
DEU
HUN
SVK
NOR
POL
HUN
HUN
ROU
SWE
CZE
UKR
DNK
POL
SVK
MDA
DEU
EST
FIN
ITA
POL
BEL
CZE
FRA
ESP
IRL
NOR
MKD
SVN
UKR
ROU
POL
FRA
GBR
PRT
POL
NOR
SWE
PRT
LVA
DNK
DEU
CZE
ESP
BLR
ROU
MDA
HUN
SVN
ESP
BIH
ROU
ESP
EST
BGR
POL
CZE
HRV
DNK
DEU
IRL
ROU
FRA
HUN
BLR
DNK
GBR
EST
ESP
MLT
LUX
BLR
SVK
EST
POL
EST
ROU
MKD
DNK
UKR
HUN
ROU
ALB
ROU
DEU
UKR
SVK
UKR
CHEEST
HUN
BIH
LTU
GBR
RUS
UKR
HUN
CZE
CZE
RUS
SVN
GBR
ROU
FIN
SWE
PRT
DEU
ESP
FIN
SVK
BLR
IRL
SVN
BGR
ISL
SVN
DEU
LVA
HRV
MKD
POL
NLD
RUS
ALB
HUN
SWE
ESP
IRL
CHE
ROU
CZE
AUT
POL
MDA
BGR
DNK
HUN
ROU
EST
SVK
HUN
SVN
LTU
NOR
ROU
FIN
MDA
PRT
SWE
ROU
ROU
CZE
ISL
DNK
BGR
HRV
POL
IRL
ROU
ALB
POL
ROU
ITA
ESP
DEU
HRV
SWE
NLD
EST
HUN
LTU
FIN
FIN
CHE
BGR
SVN
POL
RUS
AUT
LVA
BGR
ITA
UKR
SVK
UKR
EST
SWE
SWE
SVK
POL
SWE
IRL
LVA
BGRLVA ROU
ISL
ITA
PRT
ITA
AUT
GBR
ITA
DEU
SWE
LTU
HRV
MDA
DEU
LTU
UKR
BGR
NLD
MDA
DEU
POL
GBR
SVK
FRA
HRV
NOR
FRA
ROU
ROU
POL
EST
EST
ROU
LTU
NLD
MDA
GBR
HUN
ESP
SWE
IRL
ESP
CZE
BEL
LVA
BGR
DEU
PRT
NLD
POL
LVA
UKR
HUN
MDA
SWE
RUS
HUN
ROU
AUT
FIN
MKD
SWE
UKR
ESP
MDA
UKR
FIN
BLR
BEL
POL
LVA
NOR
ESP
MKD
HRV
ROU
UKR
ROU
HRV
BGR
HRV
SVN
ISL
ESP
LVA
GBR
DNK
UKR
CHE
ROU
RUS
IRL
UKR
ROU
ROU
HRV
GBR
LVA
POL
DNK
POL
FIN
ROU
POL
CHE
CHE
ITA
PRT
ITA
DNK
UKR
LVA
HUN
POL
ROU
ROU
DEU
IRL
ROU
ISL
SWE
SWE
LVA
SVK
FRA
GBR
MDA
SWE
HUN
EST
NOR
ROU
POL
PRT
CHE
POL
LVA
ROU
HUN
NLD
ITA
FIN MDA
FIN
DEU
HRV FIN
BGR
SVN
POL
HUN
POL
LVA
NOR
LVA
FIN
DEU MDA BGR
IRL
ROU
ESTPOL
BGR
FINROU
BEL
MDA
POL
POL
HUN
HUN
BEL
POL
CHE
ITA
AUT
DNK
POL
IRL FIN
BGR
IRL
BEL
CHE
CHE
LVA ITANOR
ROU
LVA
BGR
DEU
UKR HUN HUN POL
DEU
UKR
MDA
IRL
HRV
MDA
MDA
IRLPOL
IRLNOR
POLDEU
LVAIRL
EST
MDA LVA
HRVBGR
BGR
POL
EST
CHE
BGR
LVA
LVA
IRL
LVA
POL

e(Generalized trust | X)
0

MDA

IRL

SWE

-.4

IRL

-2

0
e(Strength of family ties | X)

(coef = -0.064, t-stat = -3.61)

38

1

Figure 7
Family Structures, Todd’s classification

Source: Profeta and Galasso (2012)

39

Table 1
Correlation among family values
Family importance
Family importance

Respect and love
parents

Parental duties

Family ties
(princ. comp.)

1.0000

Respect and love parents

0.3446**

1.0000

Parental duties

0.5518***

0.3495**

1.0000

Family ties (princ. comp.)

0.7217***

0.7944***

0.7928***

1.0000

Table 2
Relationship between the strength of family ties (WVS) and Todd’s family structure
Communitarian family
Authoritarian family
Nuclear egalitarian family
Observations
R-squared

(1)
Family important
0.039
(0.040)
0.019
(0.033)
0.018
(0.035)
101,169
0.007

(2)
Respect and love parents
-0.135**
(0.065)
0.012
(0.088)
-0.142**
(0.065)
94,631
0.037

(3)
Parental duties
0.086***
(0.031)
0.163***
(0.049)
0.014
(0.025)
89,011
0.028

Source: Galasso and Profeta (2012). A higher number in their specification indicates weaker family ties. Data are taken
from the WVS. Each specification controls for a quadratic in age, education, income and political orientation. ***, **
and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.

40

Table 3
Family Ties and Climate Variability
PANEL A: Climate data: 1900-2000
Family Ties (principal component from WVS)
Climate data 1900-2000
Precipitation
Temperature
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Variability
-0.072**
-0.392*
(12 months)
(0.033)
(0.214)
Variability
-0.081***
-0.692***
(growing season months)
(0.029)
(0.219)
Variability
-0.004
0.063
(non-growing season months)
(0.024)
(0.130)
Observations
220
220
220
220
Number of clusters
24
24
24
24
R-squared
0.826
0.828
0.826
0.832
PANEL B: Climate data: 1500-1750 and 1900-2000
Family Ties (principal component from WVS)
Precipitation
Temperature
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Variability (growing season months)
-0.205**
-0.300**
-0.205**
-0.306***
(1500-1750)
(0.085)
(0.112)
(0.081)
(0.100)
Variability (growing season months)
0.129*
0.138
(1900-2000)
(0.074)
(0.081)
Observations
218
218
218
218
Number of clusters
24
24
24
24
R-squared
0.830
0.833
0.785
0.789
Source: Durante (2010). The regressions control for country fixed effects and for the following
regional controls: mean temperature, mean precipitation, average ruggedness index, soil suitability
(average and standard deviation), area, dummy for landlocked, distance of the region’s centroid
from the coast, number of major rivers passing through the region, latitude of the region’s
centroid. Robust standard errors clustered at the country level in parenthesis. ***, ** and *
indicated significance at the 1,5 and 10% level.

41

Table 4
Family ties and political participation

VARIABLES
Family ties
Age
Age squared
Female
Married
Education dummies
Country dummies
Wave dummies
Observations
R-squared

(1)

(2)

Interest in
politics

Discuss
politics

-0.010***
(0.002)
0.016***
(0.001)
-0.000***
(0.000)
-0.277***
(0.004)
-0.008
(0.011)
yes
yes
yes
212,931
0.136

-0.006***
(0.001)
0.018***
(0.000)
-0.000***
(0.000)
-0.189***
(0.003)
-0.016**
(0.007)
yes
yes
yes
220,148
0.115

(3)
Belong to
political
parties

(4)
Membership
political
party

-0.002***
(0.001)
0.002***
(0.000)
-0.000***
(0.000)
-0.034***
(0.001)
0.010**
(0.004)
yes
yes
yes
133,684
0.060

-0.004**
(0.002)
0.006***
(0.001)
-0.000***
(0.000)
-0.083***
(0.004)
0.009
(0.008)
yes
yes
yes
66,407
0.181

(5)

(6)

(7)

Sign
petition

Join in
boycotts

Attend
demonstrations

-0.029***
(0.002)
0.012***
(0.001)
-0.000***
(0.000)
-0.088***
(0.004)
0.002
(0.009)
yes
yes
yes
131,066
0.278

-0.046***
(0.002)
0.008***
(0.001)
-0.000***
(0.000)
-0.123***
(0.003)
0.023***
(0.009)
yes
yes
yes
127,491
0.182

-0.036***
(0.002)
0.009***
(0.001)
-0.000***
(0.000)
-0.155***
(0.004)
0.018**
(0.009)
yes
yes
yes
131,408
0.143

Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.

42

(8)
Join
unofficial
strikes
-0.041***
(0.002)
0.004***
(0.000)
-0.000***
(0.000)
-0.099***
(0.003)
0.044***
(0.008)
yes
yes
yes
126,513
0.096

(9)
Occupy
buildings
-0.026***
(0.001)
-0.000
(0.000)
-0.000***
(0.000)
-0.058***
(0.002)
0.029***
(0.006)
yes
yes
yes
125,180
0.096

Table 5
Family ties, generalized morality and attitudes toward society

Family ties
Age
Age squared
Female
Married
Education dummies
Country dummies
Wave dummies
Observations
R-squared

(1)

(2)

(3)
Children
qualities:
obedience

Trust

Trust the
family

-0.006***
(0.001)
0.002***
(0.000)
-0.000***
(0.000)
-0.006***
(0.002)
-0.013***
(0.005)
yes
yes
yes

0.069***
(0.008)
0.002
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.000)
-0.002
(0.014)
-0.083*
(0.043)
yes
yes
yes

0.024***
(0.001)
-0.004***
(0.000)
0.000***
(0.000)
-0.003
(0.002)
0.002
(0.005)
yes
yes
yes

217,647
0.104

9,802
0.057

220,639
0.111

(4)

(5)
Major
change in
life

(6)
Society
changed/society
defended

0.050***
(0.009)
0.027***
(0.003)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.090***
(0.019)
-0.002
(0.042)
yes
yes
yes

0.112***
(0.010)
0.015***
(0.004)
0.000
(0.000)
0.086***
(0.022)
-0.182***
(0.052)
yes
yes
yes

0.017***
(0.002)
-0.002***
(0.001)
0.000***
(0.000)
0.032***
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.008)
yes
yes
yes

81,640
0.131

69,736
0.083

110,077
0.050

New and
old idea

Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10%
levels.

43

Table 6
Family ties, labor market and attitudes toward work

Family ties
Age
Age squared
Married

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Female
LFP

Youth
LFP

Elderly
LFP

Job
security

-0.013***
(0.001)
0.063***
(0.001)
-0.001***
(0.000)
-0.006
(0.007)

-0.012***
(0.001)
-0.043***
(0.007)
0.001***
(0.000)
-0.060***
(0.007)
-0.268***
(0.003)
yes
yes
yes
44,336
0.269

-0.006**
(0.003)
-0.050
(0.043)
-0.000
(0.000)
0.028
(0.020)
-0.264***
(0.005)
yes
yes
yes
26,974
0.251

0.017***
(0.001)
0.003***
(0.000)
-0.000***
(0.000)
-0.000
(0.005)
-0.004**
(0.002)
yes
yes
yes
213,576
0.106

Female
Education dummies
Country dummies
Wave dummies
Observations
R-squared

yes
yes
yes
98,218
0.224

(5)
Job
security
in looking
for job
0.022***
(0.001)
0.004***
(0.000)
-0.000***
(0.000)
-0.001
(0.007)
-0.003
(0.003)
yes
yes
yes
99,749
0.049

Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate
significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.

44

Table 7
Family ties and attitudes towards women

Family ties
Age
Age squared
Female
Married
Education dummies
Country dummies
Wave dummies
Observations
R-squared

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)
Men
political
leaders

(5)
University
important
for girls

(6)
Child
working
mother

(7)
Women
home
children

Job scarce

Working
mother

Housewife
fulfilling

0.015***
(0.001)
0.001***
(0.000)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.117***
(0.003)
0.019***
(0.006)
yes
yes
yes

-0.002
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.000***
(0.000)
-0.154***
(0.005)
0.009
(0.012)
yes
yes
yes

0.044***
(0.002)
0.001*
(0.001)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.068***
(0.005)
-0.014
(0.012)
yes
yes
yes

0.023***
(0.003)
0.002
(0.001)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.279***
(0.006)
0.007
(0.013)
yes
yes
yes

0.008***
(0.003)
0.001
(0.001)
0.000*
(0.000)
-0.221***
(0.005)
0.032***
(0.012)
yes
yes
yes

0.043***
(0.004)
0.006***
(0.002)
-0.000
(0.000)
-0.109***
(0.009)
-0.005
(0.043)
yes
yes
yes

0.075***
(0.004)
0.003**
(0.002)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.068***
(0.009)
0.016
(0.049)
yes
yes
yes

118,200
0.234

133,811
0.086

130,836
0.092

100,679
0.203

103,027
0.123

29,929
0.169

29,153
0.190

Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.

45

Table 8
Family ties and per capita GDP
VARIABLES
Family ties

(1)
Log GDP

(2)
Log GDP

-1.984***
(0.383)

-0.969**
(0.441)

Inherited family values
Log (years of schooling)

Observations
R-squared

(3)
Log GDP

(4)
Log GDP

-0.860**
(0.428)

-0.786***
(0.285)
2.350***
(0.307)

122
0.064

100
0.522

2.414***
(0.498)
80
0.221

73
0.409

Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate
significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.

46

Table 9
Family ties and regional income
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Whole sample

Whole sample

Europe

Africa

Asia

-0.540***
(0.078)

-0.349***
(0.111)

-0.287**
(0.127)

-1.383***
(0.398)

no
1,197
0.047

yes
1,197
0.526

yes
661
0.466

yes
103
0.691

Family ties
Country fixed
effect
Observations
R-squared

(6)
North
America and
Oceania

(7)
South
America

-0.498**
(0.201)

-0.327
(0.408)

0.133
(0.444)

yes
255
0.482

yes
83
0.731

yes
86
0.354

Unit of analysis is a region in the World Value Survey. Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, ** and *
indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.

Table 10
Family ties and institutions

Family ties

Observations
R-squared

(1)
(2)
Control of Government
corruption effectiveness

(3)
Political
stability

(4)
Rule of
law

(5)
(6)
Regulatory
Voice and
quality
accountability

-1.729***
(0.308)

-1.575***
(0.266)

-1.576***
(0.212)

-1.595***
(0.281)

-1.199***
(0.239)

-1.428***
(0.239)

80
0.288

80
0.292

80
0.374

80
0.291

80
0.230

80
0.288

Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1,
5 and 10% levels.

47

Table 11
Family ties and institutions, controlling for legal origin

Family ties
Legal origin dummies
Observations
R-squared

(1)
(2)
Control of Government
corruption effectiveness

(3)
Political
stability

(4)
Rule of
law

(5)
(6)
Regulatory
Voice and
quality
accountability

-1.572***
(0.395)
yes

-1.504***
(0.357)
Yes

-1.368***
(0.278)
yes

-1.490***
(0.370)
yes

-1.205***
(0.309)
yes

-1.334***
(0.286)
yes

80
0.401

80
0.375

08
0.394

80
0.379

80
0.265

80
0.308

Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10%
levels.

48

Table 12
Inherited family values and institutions

Inherited family values

Observations
R-squared

(1)
(2)
Control of Government
corruption effectiveness

(3)
Political
stability

(4)
Rule of
law

(5)
(6)
Regulatory
Voice and
quality
accountability

-0.664***
(0.197)

-0.622***
(0.221)

-0.558***
(0.184)

-0.630***
(0.213)

-0.477**
(0.201)

-0.613***
(0.201)

128
0.090

129
0.081

129
0.068

129
0.083

128
0.053

129
0.082

Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10%
levels.

Table 13
Inherited family values and institutions, controlling for legal origin

Inherited family values
Legal origin
Observations
R-squared

(1)
(2)
Control of Government
corruption effectiveness

(3)
Political
stability

(4)
Rule of
law

(5)
(6)
Regulatory
Voice and
quality
accountability

-0.529***
(0.148)
yes

-0.509***
(0.174)
yes

-0.529***
(0.157)
yes

-0.525***
(0.163)
yes

-0.382**
(0.160)
yes

-0.499***
(0.164)
yes

122
0.340

122
0.309

122
0.260

122
0.320

122
0.235

122
0.263

Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, ** and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10%
levels.

49

Table 14
Family ties and happiness
(1)
(2)
Happiness Satisfaction
with life
Family ties
Age
Age squared
Female
Married
Education dummies
Country dummies
Wave dummies
Observations
R-squared

(3)
State of
health

0.057***
(0.001)
-0.006***
(0.000)
0.000***
(0.000)
0.014***
(0.003)
-0.013
(0.008)
yes
yes
yes

0.143***
(0.005)
-0.027***
(0.002)
0.000***
(0.000)
0.033***
(0.010)
-0.128***
(0.026)
yes
yes
yes

0.025***
(0.002)
-0.011***
(0.001)
-0.000***
(0.000)
-0.114***
(0.004)
-0.036***
(0.010)
yes
yes
yes

222,197
0.141

221,458
0.179

187,053
0.221

Coefficients are reported with robust standard errors in brackets. ***, **
and * indicate significance at the 1, 5 and 10% levels.

50

