                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   CAN SELF-HELP GROUPS REALLY BE "SELF-HELP"?

                                           Brian Greaney
                                         Joseph P. Kaboski
                                         Eva Van Leemput

                                       Working Paper 18970
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18970


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2013




Corresponding Author: Joseph P. Kaboski. Research funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
grant to the U. of Chicago Consortium on Financial Systems and Poverty. We are thankful for comments
received from presentations at BREAD/Federal Reserve Bank of Minnesota Conference and Clemson
University. We have benefited from help from many people at Catholic Relief Services, especially
Marc Bavois and Mike Ferguson. We have also benefitted from the work of excellent research assistants:
Luke Chicoine and Katie Firth in the data collection, and Melanie Brintnall in the data analysis. The
views expressed are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect official positions
of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, the Federal Reserve System, the Board of Governors, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Brian Greaney, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Eva Van Leemput. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Self-Help Groups Really Be "Self-Help"?
Brian Greaney, Joseph P. Kaboski, and Eva Van Leemput
NBER Working Paper No. 18970
April 2013
JEL No. O1,O12,O16

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper examines a cost-reducing innovation to the delivery of "Self-Help Group" microfinance
services. These groups typically rely on outside agents to found and administer the groups although
funds are raised by the group members. The innovation is to have the agents earn their payment by
charging membership fees rather than following the status quo in which the agents are paid by an outside
organization and instead offer free services to clients. The theory we develop shows that such membership
fees could actually improve performance without sacrificing membership, simply by mitigating an
adverse selection problem. Empirically, we evaluate this innovation in East Africa using a randomized
control trial. We find that privatized entrepreneurs providing the self-help group services indeed outperform
their NGO-compensated counterparts along several dimensions. Over time, they cost the NGO less
and lead more profitable groups; also, households with access to privately-delivered groups borrow
and save more, invest more in businesses, and may have higher consumption. Consistent with the theory,
these privatized groups attract wealthier, more business-oriented members, although they attract no
fewer members.


Brian Greaney                                         Eva Van Leemput
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis                     Department of Economics
Research Division P.O. Box 442                        University of Notre Dame
St. Louis, MO 63166                                   434 Flanner Hall
bgreaney1@gmail.com                                   Notre Dame, IN 46556
                                                      evanleem@nd.edu
Joseph P. Kaboski
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
434 Flanner Hall
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
jkaboski@nd.edu
       Over the past several decades micro…nance services have expanded tremendously in de-
veloping countries. An increasingly common method of providing access to micro…nance
to the “poorest of the poor” are Self-Help Groups (SHGs). In their most common form,
SHGs essentially act as tiny savings and loan cooperatives. Currently these SHGs reach
an estimated 100 million clients and this number has grown dramatically in recent years;
active plans will nearly double this number by 2017.1 Although SHGs are partially “self
help” in that funds are raised internally, they are not fully self-help, since the programs
generally depend on continued outside assistance from administrative agents in their found-
ing and administration. This motivates an important question, especially in the context of
the scalabilty and …nancial sustainability of these types of programs: Can cost reduction or
recovery be e¤ective in the delivery of these program? The question is common to many
aid programs, and the answer is not obvious. Recent research has shown that small costs to
clients greatly reduce both take up and program e¤ectiveness in other aid programs.2 We
provide some theory and evidence, however, that a cost-recovery approach can actually be
e¤ective in the context of SHGs.
   This paper examines an innovation to the provision of NGO-sponsored micro…nance
services in East Africa. The status quo delivery mechanism was a typical “continous subsidy”
program, in which, after training agents, the NGO would continually pay these agents a
wage for starting up a …xed number of SHGs and providing …nancial services. In contrast,
the innovation cut o¤ payments to these agents after training, forcing them to become
private entrepreneurs who start up any number of SHGs and earn their remuneration from
their members. The hope was to not only eventually lower costs to the NGO, but to also
expand access to services. Some programs already follow such an approach. A major World
Bank/Indian government initiative with goals of reaching 70 million new households is an
important example.3 Hence, both the type of program and innovation we study are of great
interest. We examine the impacts of this delivery innovation using a theoretical model and
a randomized control trial in which control areas received the status quo program, while
treatment areas received the private entrepreneur innovation.
       The results are powerful and encouraging for the prospects of self-help groups indeed
   1
      The National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) program in India alone has
grown from 146,000 clients in 1997 to 49 million in 2010.
    2
      See Kremer and Miguel (2007) for an example with deworming pills or Cohen and Dupas (2010)’s analysis
of insecticide-treated bednets.
    3
      The Rural Poverty Reduction Program in Andhra Pradesh, India, was a nearly $300 million project
betwen 2000-2009, which has trained 140,000 “community professionals” (privatized providers), reaching 9
million women through 630,000 SHGs. In 2010, it was expanded to a nationwide program, the National
Rural Livelihoods Mission, which is spending a combined $5.1 billion from the Indian government and $1
billion from the World Bank over seven years (World Bank, 2007, 2012).



                                                    2
being “self-help,” in the sense of …nancial independence. Our theory shows how a simple
method of cost-recovery via membership fees can actually help solve an adverse selection
problem that can plague credit cooperatives, especially when services are freely provided.
Empirically we …nd that the agents who charge membership fees, although their groups are
slower to grow initially, reach the same number of clients after a year as the status quo
agents who provide the services for free. The composition of the entrepreneurs’clientele is
very di¤erent, however, with the clients themselves being more business-oriented and having
a larger demand for …nancial services. The treatment e¤ects of these cooperatives reinforce
this selection. The private entrepreneurs’ groups are ultimately more pro…table, and the
households in the areas they serve shift even more toward business activity. More speci…cally,
the groups lead to higher levels of: savings from business activities; credit, especially to
business owners; employees; and business investment. They lead to households in these
areas spending a higher fraction (about 5 percentage points) of their time on their business,
while spending correspondingly less in agriculture. Finally, these impacts are witnessed
despite the fact that clients must pay for the services under the private entrepreneur model.
Nonetheless, the evidence suggests that these households in the treatment villages actually
spend and consume more.
       The speci…c variety of SHGs that we evaluate empirically are called SILCs (saving and
internal lending committees). SILCs are promoted by Catholic Relief Services (CRS), a ma-
jor non-governmental development organization, and are representative of other similar SHG
programs sponsored by other agencies in the developing world, including CARE, OxFam,
Plan, World Vision, and perhaps most importantly, NABARD, a large government agency in
India. In practice, SILCs are small groups of 10-25 members that typically meet on a regular
basis to collect savings, lend to members with interest, maintain an emergency “safety net”
fund, and share pro…ts from lending activity. They do not receive external …nancial resources
but only assistance from the outside agents who found and help administer the groups. In
this sense, they e¤ectively operate as small, independent, quasi-formal, self-…nancing credit
cooperatives.4
       To …x ideas, we develop a simple theory of SHGs as savings and loan cooperatives that
enable investment in larger-scale, more-productive activities. Investments are risky, however,
and the population of potential members varies in its inherent rate of success. This success
determines repayment; good types succeed and repay with a higher probability than bad
types. The bene…ts to joining the cooperative depend on the average repayment rate and,
   4
    The ”self-help”goals of these groups are not limited to only self-intermediation. (Indeed, mature groups
in some regions actually leverage their funds through outside loans.) They are also intended to help local
communities by building social capital, empowering women, and fostering improved collective action. These
aspects –at least in the data we study –are relatively minor compared with the …nancial activities.


                                                     3
therefore, the composition of the cooperative. Bad types have nothing to lose by joining
the cooperative, but since they succeed less often, their potential bene…ts are also relatively
small. In a cooperative with a high repayment rate, good types have potentially more to gain
since the more productive investment that the cooperative enables is more likely to succeed.
But they also have a higher outside option, so they can be worse o¤ in a cooperative with a
substantial amount of bad clients. Thus, bad types can drive out good types. However, since
bad types also have less to gain, a membership fee can drive them out of the cooperative. It
is perhaps not surprising to …nd that fees can discourage some people from joining; what is
surprising is that they can induce others (the good types) to actually enter by improving the
composition. In this way, membership fees can actually increase total surplus by mitigating
this selection problem.
    Empirically, we conducted a large randomized control trial involving 276 agents who
started a total of over 5700 groups serving over 100,000 members across 11 districts in Kenya,
Tanzania, and Uganda. All agents, drawn from local communities, spent one year working
as a “Field Agent” (FA), during which time they established and assisted a …xed number
of groups and received both training and compensation from CRS according to the status
quo. After completing this course and passing an examination, most agents immediately
became “Private Service Providers” (PSPs), essentially entrepreneurs needing to start new
groups and negotiate payments from the group members in order to receive remuneration.
They carried with them credentials showing their successful completion of training, but their
compensation from CRS was rapidly phased out. In contrast, a random sample was informed
that they would follow the status quo, remaining on as FAs for an additional year, receiving
a higher payment from CRS, but not allowed to charge their clients. This randomization
was performed at a geographic level, so that no PSPs were forced to compete with FAs.
   Our study uses several sources of data to evaluate the experiment. First, eight quar-
ters of accounting reports on the …nancials and membership of the groups themselves are
available through required quarterly reports to CRS. These data allow us to examine group
performance. Second, these data are supplemented semi-annually by a brief questionnaire
on the agent characteristics and experiences. Third, a baseline survey of village-level key
informants, and, fourth, a strati…ed two-period before-after panel of 10 households in each of
192 villages served by the program were conducted. These data allow us to assess the impact
of the innovation on the members themselves. Since each of the datasets also pre-date the
randomization, they are helpful in assessing whether the assignment was truly random ex
post. The data indeed show few signi…cant baseline di¤erences in observables across treat-
ment and control, certainly within the range of expected type I errors. We are therefore
con…dent that assignment was truly random.


                                              4
   Our analysis of the group- and agent-level accounting reports shows that, by one year,
PSP treatment increases group pro…tability by approximately 50%. After three months, a
PSP works with three fewer groups and 65 fewer clients than a traditional FA on average,
but this di¤erence shrinks over time and after one year the numbers become statistically
insigni…cant. The total amount of savings, number of loans, total credit disbursed, and
pro…ts all show similar patterns: they start out lower but increase over time, with the point
estimates actually becoming positive. The negative impacts early on are driven largely by the
lower number of groups; at the level of individual groups, PSP groups are indistinguishable
from FA groups early on. The relative increase re‡ects both “catch up” in the number of
groups, but also better performance of PSP groups over time. By 12 months PSP-run groups
intermediate substantially more savings and credit and are more pro…table. Nonetheless,
PSPs earn signi…cantly and substantially less than their FA counterparts. Accumulated
over the …rst year, they earn about a quarter of what FAs receive. Nevertheless, per group
payments converge by 12 months, and agent attrition is low. Overall, PSPs are substantially
more cost e¤ective, reducing costs of providing services by over 40 percent after two years.
  The question of how the bene…ts to households compared under the privatized entre-
preneur approach relative to the status quo is also important, however. Here the results
are even more encouraging. Under the PSP approach, members are required to actually
pay for services, and so one might have suspected that the bene…ts to households would be
smaller. Instead, we …nd that the PSP approach is signi…cantly more e¤ective in delivering
outcomes promoted by micro…nance. The PSP treatment leads to nearly $29 (or 70 percent)
more credit per household. Several measures of business activity are signi…cantly higher as
a result of the PSP treatment. About twice as much savings reportedly comes from business
pro…ts and nearly four times as much savings is reportedly done for the purpose of …nancing
existing businesses. These reports correspond with observed business decisions. Business
investment is nearly twice as high ($20 per household). Likewise, the number of employees
hired is twice as high as in the FA villages, although this number is still quite low (just 0.11
employees per household in FA villages). Households spend about 5 percent more of their
working time on business activities and the fraction of time spent in agriculture is corre-
spondingly lower. Although we do not measure signi…cant impacts on income, the measured
increases of over 10 percent for both total expenditures ($208) and consumption ($184) are
marginally signi…cant.
   In examining why the PSP groups not only ‡ourish but also lead to greater impact
on households, we …nd evidence in line with the above theory. Namely, the households
who join (and leave) SILC under the PSP program are di¤erent from those under the FA
program. The members of PSP SILCs tend to have higher pre-existing levels of income


                                               5
and savings. They were already more business oriented, with higher pre-existing levels of
business income and time spent working as entrepreneurs. Finally, they su¤ered less from
hyperbolic discounting preferences. Thus, it appears that PSPs, whether through intentional
targeting or simply because of the required fees, cater to a more a- uent, business-oriented
membership. Again, we stress that the fees did not change the fraction of people in a village
who were members but only their composition. The relative bene…ts of the PSP program
were also disproportionately concentrated on these higher income populations. Beyond this
selection story, we found no evidence in favor of other channels. PSPs do not appear to
work harder than FAs. Again, this may be the result of better targeting of services. We
also found no evidence that the members themselves work harder overall. They changed
the composition of their work hours (toward business and away from agriculture) but not
the total number of hours. This suggests that beyond the incentive to recoup costs, other
incentives that accompanied privatization may not have been important. In evaluating the
improvement, it is di¢ cult to determine whether privatization is necessary beyond simply
charging fees. Theory suggests that catering to local market demand by charging multiple
fees that screen could be bene…cial. Such catering might be di¢ cult in a centralized system.
We …nd high variability in the fees charged, and, consistent with this theory, the impacts of
the PSP program are closely tied with multiple fees being charged. However, we stress that
these last results are non-experimental.

   Related Literature
   The results of this paper contribute to several literatures.
   First, a number of recent papers have examined attempted moves toward …nancially self-
sustaining approaches in the provision of services in developing countries. The literature has
naturally found mixed results depending on the program and the context. Several authors
have emphasized that cost recovery can reduce access or take-up. Most relevant, Morduch
(1999) conjectured that an emphasis on cost recovery will limit micro…nance’s ability to
reach the poorest households. Our results that privatized groups serve di¤erent members
are consistent with the willingness-to-pay arguments against privatization. However, we also
…nd that overall membership is unchanged and that the groups themselves are more e¤ective.
In addition, the cost-savings itself is an important bene…t in expanding programs elsewhere.
Moreover, the theory suggests the possibility that the cost-savings and increased impact
could be achieved without privatization by the NGO simply charging membership fees, and
this is consistent with our lack of evidence on the importance of incentives of privatization
along other dimensions.
   Our …nding that attempts to recoup program costs actually improve the e¢ cacy of the
service without lowering the number of clients served is strikingly di¤erent from what has

                                              6
been found with cost-sharing in health-related services. Kremer and Miguel (2007) examined
economically “sustainable”deworming programs and found that a cost-sharing program for
deworming drugs reduced take-up by 80 percent, while educational programs were largely
ine¤ective. Cohen and Dupas (2010) …nd a 60 percent drop in uptake from introducing
a 10 percent cost recovery program for insecticide-treated bed nets. Problems with the
privatized investment and sustainability of clean water sources in developing countries have
also been well-examined (Kremer et al., 2011). Moreover, in health-related services, the
positive externality of treatment creates a public good aspect, improving the justi…cation
for high-coverage and sustained subsidies.5 Our theory and evidence shows that …nancial
services are qualitatively di¤erent along this dimension.
   Second, there is a burgeoning literature evaluating the impacts of a variety of micro…-
nance interventions in di¤erent countries. There are di¤erent theories of micro…nance. Some
follow the traditional narrative by modeling credit that enables entrepreneurship, invest-
ment, and growth (e.g., Ahlin and Jiang (2008), Buera et al. (2012)), while others emphasize
consumption smoothing or simply borrowing to increase current consumption at the expense
of future consumption (e.g., Kaboski and Townsend (2011), Fulford (2011)). The empirics
have yielded con‡icting results. In the Phillipines, Karlan and Zinman (2010) report that
micro…nance led to fewer businesses and fewer workers hired. In Thailand, Kaboski and
Townsend (2012) …nd large increases in consumption, hiring workers, and wages consistent
with the entrepreneurship story, but they …nd only small impacts on investment and no
signi…cant impact on entrepreneurship. Banerjee et al. (2011) measured only marginal in-
creases in investment and no impacts on consumption in India. In Morocco, Crépon et al.
(2011) found increases in income, expenses, and labor, but their study is not well-designed
for …nding increases in entrepreneurship, since nearly all households were already operating
their own technology. In Mongolia, Attanasio et al. (2011) measured substantial increases in
entrepreneurship, but only among females and the less educated and only when micro…nance
loans are joint liability. Field et al. (2009) showed that longer grace periods were associated
with more new businesses and higher business investment, though also higher default rates.
We note that the details or policy of the micro…nance institutions are important in these last
two studies, as also found in the earlier work of Kaboski and Townsend (2005). Consistent
with these papers, our results here suggest a possible explanation for the con‡icting results
in this literature: the delivery mode and incentives faced by institutions may greatly alter
the impact of micro…nance.
   5
    Not all prior empirical evidence has been negative, however, even for services with a public good aspect.
Focusing on Argentina, admittedly a middle-income country, Galiani et al. (2005) found that privatization
of water supplies reduced child mortality, especially in poor areas. We view the results on the PSP initiative
as another success story that can be informative for future decisions.


                                                      7
       Third, a large theoretical literature in development has examined the behavior of credit
markets in the presence of asymmetric information, including the design of cooperatives and
lending groups (e.g., Banerjee et al. (1994) and Ahlin and Townsend (2007), respectively).
The seminal works of Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) and De Meza and Webb (1987) analyze the
impact of adverse selection on the provision of credit, with the former showing how it could
lead to underprovision and underinvestment and the latter giving results for overprovision
and overinvestment. Our contribution is to show that two-part pricing can mitigate this
adverse selection. Although closer to De Meza and Webb (1987), we di¤er in an important
way. Namely, the outside option of projects varies by type. This unique feature drives our
results and precludes any possibility of overinvestment (unless one takes into account the
cost of intermediation), since the values of all projects exceed their opportunity costs.
   Finally, given the rising importance of SHGs, within the broader micro…nance literature
several other recent papers focus speci…cally on SHGs.6 Goldston (2012) examines the role
of local politicians and elections in determining the disbursal of credit in Indian SHGs. This
highlights another distinction between SHGs supported from the outside and privately de-
livered SHGs. Deininger and Liu (2008), Deininger and Liu (2009) evaluated the impact of
Indian SHGs using a propensity score matching approach in India. They …nd increases in
nutrition, income, and asset accumulation at 2.5-3 years of exposure, but …nd only increases
in nutrition and female empowerment over shorter horizons. Two recent randomized con-
trol trials of CARE’s VSLA (village saving and loan associations) program found signi…cant
positive short-run impacts on food consumption in Malawi (Ksoll et al., 2012), and consump-
tion, …nancial services, and assets in Burundi (Bundervoet, 2012). Evaluations of OxFam’s
SHG program are ongoing, but have found fewer impacts. These mixed results across dif-
ferent programs are not inconsistent with our …ndings that investment and expenditures
rely greatly on the incentives faced by the organizers. Fafchamps and La Ferrara (2011)
examine SHGs in an urban setting (Nairobi, Kenya) and emphasize the risk-sharing role of
SHGs. They show that group members do not assortatively match ex ante, but risk-sharing
creates high correlation ex post. In India, Casini and Vandewalle (2012) demonstrate that
SHG composition can be linked to how much collective action is taken toward the provision
of public goods. We show that the composition of members can be linked to the …nancial
bene…ts of membership.
   6
     There is a larger literature on rotating savings and credit associations (ROSCAs), where members
contribute …xed amounts in each meeting, and the total contribution is given to a di¤erent member of the
group each week. Since there is no standing fund, the administration of these organizations is dramatically
simpler (one only needs to keep track of who has already received the payment). Thus ROSCAs often arise
spontaneously. The potential uses of ROSCAs are more limited than SHGs, however. For example, there
is substantially less ‡exibility in the amount and timing of deposits and loans, and there is no net saving or
borrowing, even at the individual level.


                                                      8
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a simple theory of
a credit cooperative and the potential impact of membership fees. Section 3 describes the
program, experiment, data, and methods. Section 4 presents the results and analysis. We
conclude in Section 5.


1     Model
We present a simple model of a SHG, as a credit cooperative operating in the face of
adverse selection. The model is stylized, but it yields two important results. First, low-
quality members can drive out high-quality members, lowering aggregate output. Second,
membership fees can potentially solve this adverse selection and thereby increase aggregate
output.

1.1    Environment
Consider an economy with two stochastic project technologies that di¤er in their scale and
productivity. The small-scale project requires one unit of capital, which it transforms, when
successful, into A units of output. A large-scale project transforms k > 1 units of capital
into Ak units of output. The large-scale project is more productive in that A > A.
    There is a unit measure of individuals, who are each endowed with one unit of capital
available for operating the technologies. All individuals have access to the small-scale project,
but each person has access to the more productive large-scale project only with probability
 : The individuals are divided into two types, i 2 fL; Hg that di¤er in their inherent
probability of success. A measure       L   individuals have a lower probability of success in
production, pL , while the remaining 1        L  individuals succeed with probability pH > pL ;
where pL; pH 2 (0; 1). We assume that         L pL < (1      L ) pH , so that the total number of

potential successful type-H people exceeds the number of successful type-L people. When
individuals fail, production yields zero output. In order to yield interesting results regarding
adverse selection, we make the stronger assumption that pH A > pL A. That is, the expected
payo¤ of type-H individuals with the small-scale project exceeds type-L individuals with the
large-scale project.
    Since the large-scale project is more productive, but no individual is endowed with enough
capital to operate it, there is potential demand for intermediation services. We model the
timing and operation of a credit and savings cooperative as follows. Individuals decide
whether to become members of a cooperative before …nding out whether they have access
to the large-scale technology. Members of a credit cooperative deposit their capital into the
cooperative with a promised gross return of RD . Individuals then …nd out whether they

                                                  9
have access to the large-scale technology, and they make decisions of whether to borrow at
a gross interest rate of RB , which equates demand for loans with available deposits. The
cooperative is able to e¤ectively distinguish between individuals borrowing for large-scale and
those borrowing for small-scale production. The member’s type is unknown when making
loan decisions, however, so that all borrowers pay the same borrowing rate. Unsuccessful
members default on their loans and also forfeit their savings. Successful members repay their
loans and then receive the return RD on their savings, which e¤ectively dissolves the fund.
   Finally, consider that there is a minimum intermediation cost of C needed to remunerate
the agent administrating the cooperative, but we assume that this cost is paid by an outside
organization until Section 3.4.

1.2    Individual Decisions
Individuals simply maximize expected income. A member of the cooperative receives in
expectation

      pi Ak    RB k + RD                                                                   (1)

if she runs a large-scale project;

      pi (A   RB + RD )                                                                    (2)

if she runs a small-scale project; and

      RD ;                                                                                 (3)

if she simply saves. An individual not in the cooperative can neither invest in the large-scale
activity nor save, so that she simply earns

      pi A

which we refer to as her outside option.

1.3    Equilibrium
An equilibrium must satisfy three conditions: (1) individuals’choices regarding joining the
cooperative, whether and which project to undertake, must be optimal; (2) given RB and
RD , the cooperative must earn zero pro…ts; and (3) the market for funds must clear.
   Given individuals’optimization and RD , the demand for credit (per member) is a step
function as shown in Figure 1. The willingness to pay thresholds can be solved by equating
the value of borrowing and investing (i.e., (1) or (2) for the large- or small-scale projects,

                                              10
respectively) with the value of simply saving (i.e., (3)) and solving for RB .7 For any RD                    0,
type-H individuals with the large-scale opportunity have the highest willingness to pay
(RBH ) while type-L …nancing the small-scale project have the lowest willingness to pay
(RBL ).
       Whether type-L individuals have a higher willingness to pay for the large project than
type-H have for the small project depends on RD and parameter values. The interesting
case, which we have plotted, is RBL > RBH ; since it can lead to adverse selection; type-L
individuals have a higher willingness to pay, even though their expected payout is lower (i.e.,
pH A > pL A). This higher willingness to pay arises from the fact that large projects are
not fully collateralized. Type-Ls fail more often, and so they have less to gain, but limited
liability (from less than full collateral) can give them a higher willingness to pay. Indeed,
since 1=k is the collateral ratio for the large project, the RBL > RBH condition always holds
for su¢ ciently large k.8
       As Figure 1 illustrates, the demand for loans depends on the parameters governing loan
demand like and k: The total supply of savings (per member) in the cooperative is one.
These parameters determine the equilibrium RB (and RD ). If k is too large, then even a
small number of Type-H individuals in the group can use all the funds for the large-scale
project, RB = RBH , and there will be no adverse selection problem. Alternatively, if k is
su¢ ciently small, some type-H individuals will …nance the small-scale project, RB RBH ,
and so they can do no worse than their outside option. Hence, the presence of type-Ls cannot
inhibit type-Hs from joining.
       The interesting case occurs when RB = RBL . One can simplify the analysis of this
case, without losing the interest features of the equilibrium, with the following parameter
assumption:

           k=1       ":
   7
       The borrowing thresholds for type-i individuals for the large- and small-scale project, respectively, are

                           1    pi
         RBi    = A                  RD
                            pi k
                           1 pi
         RBi    = A                  RD.
                             pi

   8
    For RD = 0, the condition always holds. The following condition is su¢ cient to ensure that it holds for
any RD :

         1   pL     1     pH
           <                   :
         k   pH     1     pL

  This can be easily veri…ed by applying the formulas in Footnote 7.



                                                        11
                              Fig. 1: (Per Member) Demand for Loans


E¤ectively, market clearing is simpli…ed because the total demand for loans from those with
large-scale projects equals the supply of savings ( k ! 1).9
    De…ne fL as the fraction of members of the cooperative that are type L. The break-even
condition in per-member terms can be written and simpli…ed as

         fL pL kRB + (1         fL ) pH kRB = fL pL RD + (1            fL ) pH RD + (1     ) RD ;

where the left-hand side is total loan repayments and the right-hand side is return on savings
to depositors. We can de…ne pavg (fL )               fL pL + (1    fL ) pH as the average probability of
repayment, which is decreasing in fL . Simplifying yields


                pavg (fL )
                                  RB = RD                                                             (4)
          pavg (fL ) + (1       )
                             (fL )RB = RD :
                                        pavg (fL )
Here we have de…ned (fL )            pavg (fL )+(1   )
                                                         as the e¤ective repayment rate given the partial
collateral of savings. Note that        < 1; so that RB > RD . The e¤ective repayment is larger,
the higher the actual probability of repayment pavg (fL ) and the lower the fraction of type-L
in the cooperative, fL .
  9
      Formally, we analyze the model under the conditions lim"!0+ k + " and lim"!0       k + ".

                                                         12
    One can easily solve for RBL by setting (1) equal to zero for i = L and substituting in
(4):
                              pL Ak
        RBL (fL ) =                        :                                                                (5)
                      pL k + (1 pL ) (fL )
     Now de…ne B(fL ; p~i ) as the type-i individual’s net bene…t of joining the cooperative,
i.e., the di¤erence between the expected income as a member and expected income if not a
member of the cooperative. Since our focus on RB = RBL removes the small-scale project
as a relevant option inside the cooperative, this can be expressed simply as
        B(fL ; p~i ) =    p~i   A       RBL (fL ) k + RDL (fL ) + (1        ) RDL (fL )   p~i A
                     = p~i A        A + [(1       + p~i )     p~i ] RBL (fL );
where p~i indicates the success probability of the particular individual. In the case that
B(fL ; p~i ) > 0, the type-i individual joins. If B(fL ; p~i ) = 0, the individual is indi¤erent.
There are two forces at work in this equation. One force, clearly seen in the …rst term, is
the fact that the cooperative allows the more productive large-scale projects to be …nanced,
which is always an advantage; but this advantage is larger, the greater the individual’s
probability of success. The second term captures the compositional force, which depends on
the average success rate in the cooperative compared to the individual’s own success rate.
The smaller the average success rate, the larger the wedge between borrowing and savings
rates. For type-H individuals, this force is (weakly) negative, while, for type-L individuals,
it is (weakly) positive.
    Examination of B(fL ; p~i ) leads to the major results formalized in the following proposi-
tion.

Proposition 1 Given the assumptions above
(i) Type-L individuals always join, B(fL ; p~L ) > 0:
(ii) The net bene…t of joining declines in the proportion of membership that is type-L;
@B(fL ;~
       pi )
  @fL
              < 0.
                                                                                                  @B(fL ;~
                                                                                                         pH )
(iii) Type-H members are especially hurt by a high proportion of type-L members,                     @fL
                                                                                                                <
@B(fL ;~
       pL )
  @fL
            ,
           and their net bene…t from joining a cooperative of all type-L members is smaller,
B(1; p~H ) < B(1; p~L ).
(iv) For su¢ ciently low            (   less than some      2 (0; 1)), type-H individuals won’t join a
cooperative of all type-L members, B(1; p~H ) < 0.
(v) For su¢ ciently high        ( greater than some          2 (0; 1)), type-H individuals bene…t more
than type-L do from joining a cooperative of all type-H members, B(0; p~H ) > B(0; p~L ).
(vi) Intermediate values of   exist where both (iv) and (v) apply, in particular, if pL is
su¢ ciently low; if pL < pL ,           > .

                                                      13
       Proof of the proposition is straightforward and given in the appendix, but we o¤er some
simple intuition here. Type-L individuals can only do better by joining, since both of the
above mentioned forces are positive for them. A poor composition lowers the bene…ts of
joining because higher default rates lower the savings rate relative to the borrowing rate
(i.e., lower    ). This wedge matters more for type-H, however, since borrowers only pay
the borrowing rate and earn the savings rate when successful, and they succeed more often.
Moreover, the type-H individuals have a higher outside option, so they bene…t less from
joining a cooperative with poor composition. Type-Hs only bene…t by …nancing the large
project, so if the probability of getting a large project is small enough, they are worse o¤ as
members. Finally, when the composition is good, type-H individuals potentially have more
to gain from …nancing large projects, since they succeed more often and earn a premium
over the deposit rate. If they …nance large-scale projects with a high enough probability,
this more than compensates for their higher outside option.10
       The top panel of Figure 2 shows these results graphically for an intermediate value of
   2 ( ; ). In such a case, although type-L always join, type-H join only if type-L are
less than some f^L , de…ned by the root B(f^L ; p~H ) = 0. If the proportion of type-L in the
population is high enough, > f^L , then type-H never join and the equilibrium (denoted
fLE ) is fLE = 1. All type-L join, but type-H do not.11

1.4       Recouping Intermediation Costs
Now consider the possibility of recouping the intermediation cost, C, by introducing a ‡at
membership fee F . We show how this could actually increase total output and the surplus
of members.12
    In the case of the upper panel of Figure 2, the bene…t at lower levels of fL is higher
for type-H individuals. They therefore have a higher willingness to pay for membership in
a cooperative with a good membership, and a membership fee has the potential of driving
  10
      The requirement for intermediate values of underscores the fact that the results rely on individual’s
having uncertainty over being a net borrower or net saver. If the timing were such that individuals knew
whether they had a large- scale project before joining, then type-H individuals with the large-scale project
would always join.
   11
      If < f^L , multiple equilibria exist: two stable equilibria at either fL = 1 or fL = , and an equilibrium,
fL = f^L , that is unstable to perturbations around fL . Of course, in all cases there are also additional trivial
equilibria where no one joins.
   12
      For simplicity, we do not include the cost C in the capital resource constraint of the model in order to
maintain the simplicity of our stylized assumption that k " equals the amount of deposits available for
loans. One could motivate these by the additional stylized assumption: introduce an initial endowment of
D > C output. We need to further assume that it cannot be used for investment nor is it storable across the
period of the model. Otherwise, the fund could demand this as collateral. We stress that entry costs di¤er
from collateral in two important ways: (1) collateral is kept by the borrower in the case of repayment, and
(2) for small , entry costs are less than collateral.


                                                       14
                        Fig. 2: Bene…ts of Joining vs. Fraction Type-L


out type-L individuals, thereby inducing type-H individuals to join. De…ne B(f    ~ L ; p~H ) =
                                                      ~ L ; p~H ) = B(f
B(fL ; p~H ) F . The membership F can ensure that the B(f           ~ L ; p~L ) intersection is
less than zero. If the relative bene…ts of type-H are high enough, this can actually increase
average income even net of the payments. In such a case, illustrated in the lower panel of
Figure 2, the unique equilibrium value of fLE is then at the point where type-L individuals
                ~ L ; p~L ) = 0.13
are indi¤erent, B(f
       We summarize this in the following proposition.

Proposition 2 If 2 ( ; ) and > f^L , there exists a membership fee F that induces some
(or even all) type-L members to not join the cooperative and type-H members to join. For
su¢ ciently low pL and , intermediate values of (f^L < < ) exist, for which the total
income in the economy net of fees increases for some F .

   Of course, if C is too large (that is, if it exceeds the potential bene…ts of type-H members,
(1            ~H )) requiring the cooperative to recoup costs through a ‡at membership fee
     L ) B(0; p

would make the cooperative …nancially unsustainable.
  13
    Since total output is increasing the number of agents who …nance the large-scale project, the single fee
                                       ~ L ; p~H ) = B(f
that maximizes total output sets the B(f             ~ L ; p~L ) just below zero. This maximizes the number of
type-L who enter, while ensuring that all type-H enter. This leaves the members with no surplus, however.
  Since type-L members will never earn any surplus with the membership fee, the single fee that maximizes
total surplus to members is the one that makes type-L members indi¤erent at fL = 0.

                                                     15
       Consider now the optimal policy, optimal in the sense of maximizing total output. Total
output is increasing in the number of individuals who …nance the large-scale project, but
the average output gain is larger for type-H individuals. The optimal single fee sets the
 ~ L ; p~H ) = B(f
B(f            ~ L ; p~L ) in Figure 2 just below zero because it maximizes the number of type-
L who enter, while ensuring that all type-H enter. This fee leaves the members with no
surplus, however.
   Alternatively, we can solve for the equilibrium that maximizes total surplus. Under the
assumption that L < pLp+p H
                            H
                              ; type-H members joining adds more to surplus than type-L
members joining. In this case, the fee that maximizes total surplus to members is the one
that maximizing the surplus of type-H members. This is the lowest fee that keeps type-L
                                ~ p~L ) = 0. Call this F . The loss of type-L members
members out, that is, it solves B(0;
does not lower surplus because for any membership fee equilibrium in which type-H join,
the surplus of type-L members is zero.
       Finally, consider more ‡exible contracts that can achieve the …rst-best in the sense of
maximizing total output by having everyone join the cooperative. A cooperative could
e¤ectively screen by o¤ering two di¤erent contracts fF; g, which have the ‡avor of two-part
tari¤s, and we constrain F > 0. The cooperative can attract both types by o¤ering a large
F but smaller       that is attractive to type-H, and a small F but larger            that is attractive
to type-H; and there are many such contracts that would accomplish this.14 Naturally, the
output (net of fees) would be maximized since all individuals would be in the cooperative.
       A similar equilibrium, where total output is maximized and everyone joins the cooper-
ative, could also be achieved by instead starting two di¤erent cooperatives with di¤erent
membership fees. The contracts that maximizes the member surplus in the cooperative
attracting type-H members would charge F = F (and have (0) as an equilibrium, break-
even value), and the contract maximizing member surplus in the cooperative attracting
type-L would have F = 0 (and have (0) as an equilibrium, break-even value).
   Denoting the output (net of fees) under this equilibrium with two di¤erent cooperatives
as Y2 , the output (net of fees) under the single F fee equilibrium as Y1 , and the output
under no fees as Y0 . The following proposition summarizes how the bene…ts of the program
vary with fee structure for the examples discussed above.

Proposition 3 If         2 ( ; ) and       2    f^L ;        ; then the maximum output under two fees
exceeds that under the single fee F . Likewise, the maximum output under a single fee F
weakly exceeds that under no fee (Y2 > Y1 > Y0 ):
  14
    There is also the possibility of adjusting RB away from RBL , which we have focused on. In particular,
any RB 2 RBH ; RBH for the …rst contract and RB 2 RBL ; RBL for the second would accomplish. Since
individuals are risk neutral, this only a¤ects ex post inequality but not their ex ante valuation.


                                                        16
   The above proposition motivates a simple test in Section 3.3.
   Finally, we note that while the multiple fees could potentially increase total surplus of
individuals, by including both types, the true social surplus would be net of the cost of
…nancial intermediation, C. For a very high C, exceeding the bene…t of serving the type-
H population, (1      L ) pL (A   A), social surplus is maximized with no cooperatives and no
members. For a very low cost of intermediation C, less than the bene…ts of serving the type-
L population, L pL (A A), social surplus is maximized with two cooperatives and everyone
served. For intermediate values of C, social surplus is maximized with only one cooperative
serving the type-H individuals.
   One might therefore interpret the model as illustrating a rationale for potentially exclud-
ing the poorest of the poor from micro…nance: The bene…ts of their receiving micro…nance
do not exceed the costs, and their participation may actually drive out potential recipients
who would bene…t more.

1.5    Connection with Empirics and Extensions
The model is intentionally stylized, but one can consider interpretations and extensions that
motivate the empirical measures used in the next section. In the context of the empirical
setting, one might think of the small-scale project as a subsistence or self-employment work
and the large-scale project as a more entrepreneurial investment opportunity. The adverse
selection is captured by the probability of success in the model, but this can easily be
reinterpreted as simply an unobserved productivity parameter. Neither productivity nor
default rates are directly observed, however.
   Instead, we observe selection based on income, business income and hours, savings,
and discount rates. We also observe many of these same variables as outcome measures.
Extensions that are less transparent but straightforward in principle accomodate a clearer
mapping to these measures. Since the model works using a wedge between borrowing and
savings, heterogeneity in initial wealth (e.g., savings or income) would lead to similar results
as heterogeneity in productivity: That is, those with more assets would also have a higher
willingness to pay for membership in a well-composed cooperative. Similarily, in a two-period
model with both heterogeneous and stochastic discount factors, more patient individuals
have a higher willingness to pay, and as an outcome will tend to save more, which also
leads to more investment. In such a model, loans for low-probability-of-success projects
could be replaced by consumption loans. In any case, the critical assumption is that such
measures (income, savings, patience, etc.) are also positively correlated with the underlying
heterogeneity driving the adverse selection.
   For Proposition 3, the relative ranking predictions are on output, and the result captures

                                                17
the idea that the bene…ts of the type-H group are larger than the bene…ts to the type-L
group. We evaluate the predictions using measures of intermediation, which are available for
a larger sample. If, in practice, the better types also have higher wealth and therefore more
resources to save, borrow, etc., then such a test is natural. Again, higher levels of wealth
could re‡ect higher initial wealth or higher past accumulation due to either higher income
or higher savings rates.


2        Program and Methods
This section describes the operation of the SHG programs we study. We then document the
details of the experiment, our data, and our regression equations.

2.1       SILC Program and PSP Innovation
Recall that the SHGs promoted by Catholic Relief Services are called SILCs (savings and
internal lending committees). A typical SILC is a group of between 10 and 30 members (a
mean of 19) who meet regularly to save, lend to members, and maintain a social fund for
emergencies. In principle, SILCs allow those with limited access to …nancial services to save
and borrow in small amounts, earn interest on savings, and lend ‡exibly. SHGs have gained
wide support among development organizations because, in contrast to many traditional
micro…nance institutions, they emphasize savings as well as credit. Research has shown that
many people in developing countries lack adequate savings capabilities, and some even value
savings accounts that pay negative interest (e.g., Dupas and Robinson (2012)).
       Although SHGs often have broader missions, their primary operations are as ASCAs
(accumulating savings and credit associations).15 ASCAs are distinct from the more well-
known ROSCAs (rotating savings and credit associations). In ROSCAs, members bring
…xed contributions, one member receives the pot each meeting, and each member gets an
opportunity to be the recipient. The ROSCA arrangement requires little to no recordkeeping
and no central holding of funds. ASCAs instead operate like small credit unions: members
are allowed to save in ‡exible amounts and loans are also made ‡exibly. The advantage
over credit unions is that they are formed and meet locally, allowing members to avoid
transportation and transaction costs that are prohibitive for those who save and borrow
small amounts. For SILCs in Kenya, Uganda, and Tanzania, meetings are generally weekly,
and a typical (median) weekly deposit would be $1.25. A typical loan would be $20 for 12
  15
     These additional “self-help” objectives may be female empowerment, social outreach, assistance in in-
frastructure investments, provision of services such as techical training or marketing assistance, fostering of
participation in local politics, or simply fostering of stronger community bonds.



                                                      18
weeks at a 12-week interest rate of 10 percent. The loan would be uncollateralized except for
the personal savings in the fund. Not all funds are lent out as loans; a portion is retained as
a social fund available for emergency loans. Funds accumulate through savings, interest on
repaid loans, and …nes for late payments/other violations; and these funds are held centrally.
The funds follow cycles that are (typically) six months or a year long. At the end of each
cycle, all loans must be repaid, and the total fund is temporarily dissolved with payouts to
members made in proportion to their total savings contributed over the cycle. For SILC,
the timing of payouts is typically arranged to coincide with that of school fees, Christmas,
or some other time when cash is needed.
       Beyond their greater ‡exibility, the fact that funds can accumulate allows for some
members to be net savers; others may be net borrowers. The greater ‡exibility also makes the
administration of ASCAs far more complicated than ROSCAs. They require strict record
keeping to keep track of savings, loans, loan payments of various amounts, and payouts
due.16 They also require judgment of who should receive loans, how much they should
receive, and how to set interest rates. Risks of default are also potentially greater, since some
members may borrow disproportionately, and this magni…es the importance of decisions on
membership. Meetings are involved, requiring counting and verifying the starting fund,
member deposits of varying amounts, loan payments of varying amounts, as well as loan
disbursals; the complexity increases as the fund grows over the course of the cycle. Given
their complexity, ASCAs do not arise endogenously like ROSCAs do. Instead, the role
of trained …eld agents in founding, administering, and training the members themselves is
critical.17 The services provided by …eld agents to these groups include initial training and
then follow-up supervision in the areas of leadership and elections; savings, credit, and social
fund policies and procedures; development of a constitution and by-laws; record-keeping;
meeting procedures; and con‡ict resolution.
       CRS has traditionally catalyzed this process by training …eld agents (FAs) to start SILC
groups. FA trainees are recruited from the more educated segment of existing SILC members.
They receive initial training, begin forming groups within a month, and then receive refresher
training three additional times; they are also monitored by a supervisor over the course of a
year. CRS provides training to FAs in all of the above-mentioned services that they provide.
Monitoring is done by checking over the constitutions and record books and occasionally
sitting in on meetings of SILC groups of trainee FAs (generally at least once a month,
  16
     Each SILC keeps its records in a single ledger divided into seven sections: 1) Register, 2) Social Fund
ledger, 3) Savings Ledger, 4) Fines Ledger, 5) Loan Ledger, 6) Cash-Book, and 7) Statement of SILC Worth.
  17
     Additionally, funds require a means for safekeeping the unlent, accumulated savings. CRS provides
SILCS with an iron money box with three separate locks. One member holds the box, while three other
members hold the keys separately to ensure safety of the fund.



                                                    19
rotating groups). During the training phase, agents are required to form 10 groups. At the
end of the training phase, the agents take an exam; if they pass they are certi…ed. FAs
receive a monthly payment during the training phase ($48 in Kenya, $31.50 in Tanzania,
and $50 in Uganda), but this payment increases after completion of the training phase (to
$54, $59.50, and $65, respectively). The expected number of groups also increases to 10
additional groups. Both during and after the training phase, agents must report summary
accounting data for each group (e.g., group name, number of members, total loans, total
credit, pro…ts, payouts, defaults) on a quarterly basis following a standardized MIS system.
Beyond this data collection, there is little additional oversight from CRS after the training
phase.
    CRS introduced the PSP delivery innovation into this existing SILC promotion program;
in the new program, fully trained FAs are certi…ed as such and transition to being PSPs,
private entrepreneurs who earn payment for their services from the SILC groups themselves
rather than from CRS. PSPs negotiate their own payment from the SILC members, the most
common form of payment being a …xed fee per member per meeting.18 After certi…cation,
payments from CRS to PSPs are phased out linearly over four months (75 percent of the
training payment in the …rst month, 50 percent in the second month, etc.) CRS’ goal
with this innovation is to lower the required resources needed to subsidize SILCs, thereby
improving both the long-term sustainability of the groups and CRS’ability to expand the
program. A second goal is to develop local capabilities, and so the longer-term hope is to also
transition the training of FAs to an eventual network or guild of PSPs. The implementation of
this delivery model is a large-scale Gates Foundation-funded program that involves training
close to 750 agents who will found roughly 14,000 SILCs and reach nearly 300,000 members.
The FAs are recruited in three waves over three years, as di¤erent local partners (typically
Catholic dioceses) in di¤erent regions of Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda enter the expansion.

2.2      Experimental Design
The research focuses on the outcomes of a randomized set of FAs/PSPs from the …rst two
of these waves. Agents in the …rst wave were recruited and began training in January 2009.
This …rst wave was certi…ed in December 2009-January 2010. Agents in the second wave were
recruited in either October 2009 (Kenya and Tanzania) or January 2010 (Uganda).19 They
were certi…ed the following year in October and January 2011, respectively. The second
  18
     Fees vary considerably across groups and savings levels vary considerably across groups and members.
For those groups that charge fees, the median quarterly fee per member is $0.50, which amounts to about
three percent of the median member’s quarterly deposits.
  19
     The original plan was for all three countries to begin in October 2009, but the partners in Uganda
experienced operational delays.


                                                   20
wave of agents represented expansion of the program to new areas, typically new regions
in the country. After certi…cation, those randomized as FAs earned the above mentioned
monthly payments with the assignment of starting/assisting 10 additional groups, which was
chosen to compare well with anticipated PSP earnings after certi…cation. (Unfortunately,
PSP earnings fell short of these anticipations as discussed in Section 4.1.)
       The research includes data from Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda across multiple regions
within each country. Within each region, a local partner supervised the implementation of
the program in conjunction with CRS and our research team.20 The randomization was
strati…ed by country and assignment was done on a geographical basis, with all agents
within a given geographical entity receiving the same assignment (FA or PSP). Both partner
organizations and their agents were noti…ed of the particular randomized assignment just
prior to certi…cation. Out of concern for human subjects, the FAs were informed that
they would remain FAs for an additional 12 months before delayed PSP assignment. The
geographical level was chosen to ensure that FAs and PSPs would not be competing in the
same area: sublocation in Kenya, ward in Tanzania, and subcounty in Uganda. Relatively
more of these geographical regions were assigned to PSPs for two reasons. First, the PSP
program is less costly for the NGO. Second, the expectation was that the variance in outcomes
would be higher under the PSP program. The second wave added relatively more agents
into the evaluation sample, but similar numbers of FAs were chosen across each sample in
an attempt to spread the costs of randomization. Because the randomization was done at a
geographical level, the ratios of FAs to PSPs are not necessarily consistent across partners
or countries.
   From among the expansion agents recruited, the initial sample included all agents that
had not yet been certi…ed at the time of the initial randomization. A smaller sample of the
recruits were excluded due to death or dropouts. The original year-1 sample included 51
agents in Kenya and Tanzania. In Kenya the randomization yielded a total of 9 PSPs and
9 FAs spread across two partners, while in Tanzania there were 20 PSPs and 13 FAs spread
across two partners. The year-2 sample included 225 agents from Kenya, Tanzania, and
Uganda. In Kenya there were 71 PSPs and 24 FAs spread across 4 partners, in Tanzania
there were 44 PSPs and 19 FAs spread across three partners, and in Uganda there were 41
PSPs and 26 FAs spread across 4 partners.21
  20
     The …rst wave partners operated in Mombasa and Malindi (Kenya) and Mwanzaa and Shinyanga (Tan-
zania). Within Kenya, the second wave included expansion in Mombasa and Malindi, as well as new partners
in Eldoret and Homa Hills. In Tanzania, the second wave expanded in three existing areas and added a
partner in Mbulu. The Ugandan sample, all second wave, included partners in Gulu, Kasese, Kyenjojo, and
Lira.
  21
     The randomization contained only a fraction of the recruited agents, particularly in the …rst year, for
several reasons. First, the randomized evaluation was introduced somewhat late in the process (late December


                                                    21
    One downside of the experiment is that it lacks a “true”control, in the sense of a set of
villages receiving no SILCs whatsoever. Unfortunately, Catholic Relief Services was strongly
resistant to such a control. For that reason, we can only make statements about impacts
of the PSP program relative to the FA variety, but we have no experimental evidence on
absolute impacts.

2.3     Data
The data collected come from four di¤erent sources. First, the MIS system collects book-
keeping accounting data at the level of SILC group. These data (collected quarterly) include
total membership, savings, credit, losses, interest rates, pro…tability, and share outs, as well
as agent name. They were extracted from the MIS system into a rectangular database layout,
where each record is a group. In order to pool the data across countries, we use exchange
rates to put currency values into dollar equivalents. We analyze these data at the level of
the SILC groups, but we also aggregate to the level of the FA/PSP agents who operate them
and analyze at this level.
   The second source of data, an agent level survey, supplements the MIS with agent-level
characteristics (e.g., age, education, languages, work and family background, importance of
FA income and labor) as well as a smaller set of questions (e.g., questions on targeting of
groups, time spent with groups, and negotiation of payments) collected every six months;
additional group-level data were collected every 6 months that covered membership charac-
teristics, delivery of services, and compensation scheme. Unfortunately, response rates on
this survey were relatively low, so the sample is not as large and may su¤er from biases in
response rates.
  The third and fourth sources of data are based on a set of 192 randomly chosen villages.
The villages were selected as followed. A subset of 192 agents was chosen among the full-
year sample of 225 second-wave agents in April 2010. These agents were strati…ed across
country (83 of 96 in Kenya, 47 of 63 in Tanzania, and 62 of 67 in Uganda), but otherwise
chosen randomly. During this time, the agents were all in their training phase and had to
be noti…ed of their random assignment. For each of the 192 agents chosen, a village was
randomly selected among the list of villages in which they currently operated at least one
SILC. In May 2010, a key informant survey was administered to the village chief. This survey
2009). For the …rst wave, some partners had already certi…ed their trained FAs as PSPs, and these were
naturally excluded. Second, a small number were lost due to death or failure of the certi…cation test. Finally,
the initial randomized sample contained 268 agents, but unfortunately the agents from two of the partners in
Tanzania had to be dropped from the sample after the partners ignored randomization assignments. These
partners constituted 6 FAs and 8 PSPs in the …rst wave (from just one partner) and 29 PSPs and 6 FAs in
the second wave.



                                                      22
collected data on village infrastructure and proximity to important institutions (schools,
markets, health clinics, banks, etc.), chief occupations, history of shocks to the village, and
most importantly a village census of households.
  Village censuses were then matched with a list of known SILC members in order to
select a sample for the fourth data source, the household survey. From the list of SILC
and non-SILC members, a sample of …ve households with known SILC members and …ve
households without known SILC members were chosen with weights assigned appropriately
based on their proportions in the matched village census list. For households with known
SILC members, the respondent is the SILC member, while for the others it was generally
the spouse of the head of household (appropriate since SILC members are disproportionately
women). In June, July, and August of 2010, the baseline survey was conducted among
1910 households in Eastern Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, and Western Kenya, respectively.
(One village in Uganda was inaccessible and could not be surveyed.) In June and July
of 2011, a resurvey of the same households (including the Ugandan village not surveyed
in the baseline) was conducted in Kenya and Tanzania, approximately nine months after
the agents had received certi…cation. In October of 2011 Uganda was resurveyed, also nine
months after agents had received certi…cation. The household survey contained detailed data
on household composition, education, occupation and businesses, use of …nancial services
(especially SILC), expenditures, income, response to shocks, and time use, as well as some
gross measures of assets, indicators of female empowerment and community participation,
and questions about risk-aversion and discounting. Table 1 presents some summary statistics
in the baseline for households with SILC members and households without SILC members.
Although the population is quite poor, SILC members tend to be somewhat better o¤ on a
number of dimensions. Naturally, membership itself is endogenous, so we cannot distinguish
the roles of selection and impact.
   The data are high quality, but measurement error is always a concern with household-
level survey data in a developing country. Our working de…nition of "household" is self-
identi…ed based on joint concepts: both eating from the same pot and living in the same
home or compound. Among the data collected, expenditures, time use, and income are
the most di¢ cult to measure. Expenditures include broad measures of food; beverages and
tobacco (past week, both home produced, purchased, and received as a gift); non-durables
such as utilities, fuel, transportation, communication, health (including free health care), and
personal services (past 30 days); and, less frequently, more durable expenses such as clothing,
household items, education, land, agricultural investment, business investment, and social
expenses (e.g., funerals, bride price). Weekly time-use measures for the respondent were
constructed by asking for the number of rest days and work days in a typical week and then


                                              23
detailing the time-use separately for rest and work days across labor for own business, own
farm, home production/childrearing, and market labor.
    Our measures of income probably su¤er from the most measurement di¢ culties. Re-
call is one major issue. To account for seasonalities, we asked for income over the past 12
months in the following categories: business, agriculture, market labor (cash and in-kind),
gifts/transfers, and other sources. These data were collected separately for the respondent
personally and the household overall. Measurement of home production is another major
issue, especially for agriculture. It is likely that home production was not considered income
by respondents. Both income measures are substantially less than our measure of annual
purchases, which exclude home-produced and gratis consumption. Finally, reported house-
hold incomes were only marginally higher than reported income of respondents. Thus, it
appears there is also likely underreporting. We focus on the respondent’s income since it is
presumably better measured, and respondents (many of whom are SILC members) are more
likely to be impacted directly by SILC.

2.4      Empirical Methods
We use simple regression methods tailored toward the di¤erent data sets. We …rst present
our methods for estimating impact and then discuss our veri…cation of the randomization,
the validity of which those methods presume.

2.4.1    Measuring Impact

Our estimation approaches di¤er slightly depending on the data source.

   Agent and Group Impacts
   For the agent-level data, we use the following regression equations:


        Yidnt =       dt + Xi + wavei + P SPn + "itdn                                          (6)
                                        X4
        Yidnt =       dt + Xi + wavei +       s P SPns + "itdn                                 (7)
                                               s=1

   Here Yidnt represents the outcome for agent i in district d; subdistrict n at time t. The
outcomes we examine from the MIS data are total members, savings, number of loans, value
of loans, pro…ts, and agent pay. Here we control for several things by adding district-time
…xed e¤ects   dt ;   a dummy for the wave of agent i; wavei ; and the above agent i characteristics
(gender, age, schooling dummies, number of dependents, and number of children), Xi . Given
eight quarters of data, we look for both an overall e¤ect (top regression equation) and
duration s speci…c treatment e¤ects for each of the four treatment quarters.

                                                  24
   For the group level data, the data are no longer aggregated across agents. We use the
identical regression, however, except i now represents group i. For these regressions, the
standard errors on estimates are clustered by agent.
   Household-Level Data
   For the household-level data, we simply have two cross sections. Using the panel aspect of
the data is problematic along two fronts. First, the requirement of a balanced panel would
reduce the number of households by nearly 20 percent. Second, with two time periods,
allowing for household heterogeneity amounts to e¤ectively di¤erencing the data. This
exacerbates any measurement error issues. Instead, we focus on the endline data to estimate
impact using the following regression equation:

        Yjdn =   d   + Xj + P SPn + "jdn :                                                   (8)

   The outcomes Yjdn for household j; living in district d and subdistrict n; depend on a
district-speci…c …xed e¤ect and the characteristics of the household Xj (gender; age and
age-squared; schooling dummies; and the number of adult men, women and children in the
household). Again, is the measure of the treatment e¤ect. For the household data, we
cluster standard errors by village.
   Here the impact of treatment is evaluated at the village level, essentially, without reference
to SILC membership. The primary reason for this is that SILC membership itself is naturally
endogenous. A secondary reason is that some impacts may spillover to non-members.
   In the results section, we focus exclusively on the estimates of and s . However, tables 2,
3, and 4 give examples of the full regression estimates for the agents, groups, and households.

2.4.2     Baseline Randomization

The above methods rely on the exogeneity of the PSP treatment, P SP , which ought to
follow from our randomization. However, the success of the randomization must be …rst
veri…ed as well as possible, which we do using several methods.
    First, using the baseline data, we verify that the randomization was successful in terms
of observables. We do this using three data sets: the village-level key informant data, the
agent-level data (both MIS and agent characteristics), and the household data.
   For the agent-level data, we focus on a simple regression on the data used for explanatory
variables:

        Xi;n =   + wavei + P SPn + "i;n ;

where i again indexes the agent and n indexes the subdistrict in which the agent operates.
We present the results for our independent variables used below. We control for the wave

                                              25
using wavei . P SPn is a dummy for whether subdistrict n received the PSP program, so that
 = 0 is the null for the test of random assignment. For the agent-level data, we cluster the
standard errors by region, while for the household data, we cluster them by village.
   Table 5 shows the baseline estimates for agents operating in the treatment (PSP) and
control (FA) areas. We see no signi…cant di¤erences in gender, age, languages spoken, number
of children or dependents across the two samples. We do, however, see a signi…cantly higher
fraction of PSPs receiving secondary education and correspondingly a lower fraction of PSPs
with primary school completion as the highest schooling attained. We believe this to be a
purely random result rather than a problem with the implementation of the randomization.
   Scond, Table 6 presents the randomization results for 23 village characteristics from the
village key informant survey data. These data include the village population, the presence of
various infrastructure, services, and facilities in the village –including …nancial institutions
– and whether the village had experienced various natural disasters in the past …ve years.
The di¤erences between the control FA villages and treatment PSP villages are all small and
insigni…cant. The lone exception is animal disease within the past 5 years, which occured in
41 percent of PSP villages but only 21 percent of FA villages, statistically signi…cant at the
one percent level.
   For the household-level data, we use only the …rst wave, and data are weighted appro-
priately. Hence, a simple mean comparison su¢ ces:


      Xj;n =   + P SPn + "j;n :

Here j indexes household j, and the null of    = 0 is again the test for random assignment.
   Table 7 shows similar results for the household characteristics. Again, the assignment
of treatment appears to have been random with respect to the underlying characteristics of
households, with the exception of education. Here, we see that the fraction of people whose
highest attainment is primary school completion is signi…cantly lower (0.08), and some of
this is because the fraction with some secondary schooling is somewhat higher (0.02). Here
again, we believe this education result to be purely random.
   We do several exercises to ensure that our results are not driven by the higher schooling
of either the agents or recipients in PSP areas. First, in all regressions we include dum-
mies for highest education attained. Of course, if there are also signi…cant di¤erences in
unobservables, this would not be su¢ cient. Second, the signi…cant di¤erence in education is
concentrated in districts served by two partners: the Archdiocese of Mombasa in Kenya and
TAHEA in Mwanzaa, Tanzania. Without these two areas, the baseline analysis produces
insigni…cant di¤erences in both the agent or household databases. The only exception is the

                                              26
fraction of agents whose highest level of education is primary school completion; it is lower
for PSPs but only signi…cant at the ten percent level. All of our signi…cant results are robust
to dropping these two areas, as we show in Appendix A. Third, we examine the impact of
dividing the sample by average village education rather than PSP/FA treatment. We discuss
those results below.
       Finally, we verify that our outcomes from equation (8) do not show “impacts” in the
baseline household data, i.e., prior to treatment. Table 8 veri…es this for the 27 outcome
variables we examine. Again, we see that the di¤erences across the control and treatment
are small and insigni…cant. The only exception is income, which is substantially higher in
the PSP villages. This is only signi…cant at the ten percent level, and, again, we believe it
to be purely random.

2.4.3      Reasons for Impact

Although the theory in Section 2 suggests that the di¤erences could be driven by selection,
we explore three potential explanations for the impacts using multiple methods. The three
explanations are: (1) improved member selection by agent or households, (2) improved e¤ort
by agent, and (3) improved e¤ort by members.
  For the …rst explanation, our methodological approach is to interact a dummy for the
PSP treatment with baseline variables, which are exogenous with respect to the randomized
treatment, in regressions with endline membership measures. That is, we run
                                    baseline                baseline
         Mjvn =     v   + Xj +   1 Zj          +   2 P SPn Zj          + "jn ;                             (9)

where Mjvn is endline membership (of household j in village v and subdistrict n) and Zjbaseline
indicate various baseline household characteristics (income, business income, a dummy for
whether the household had positive savings, a dummy for whether the household had positive
hours in business, and dummies for whether the household’s estimated linear discount factor
and hyperbolic discount factor, respectively, are above the median).22 Note that the …xed
e¤ects v are village-speci…c, so that the coe¢ cient of interest 2 will be identi…ed from
within-village variation in membership. The               2   coe¢ cient estimates di¤erential selection in
PSP villages, i.e., the extent to which endline membership is more closely related to Zjbaseline
in villages with PSPs.
  22
    The hyperbolic ( hyp ) and linear ( lin ) discount rates are estimated by using indi¤erence valuations (V )
between time 0 and time t using the following formulas:
                hyper t
         V0 =             Vt :
  We obtained two estimates using two sets of questions: (1) tradeo¤s between the present 0 and 1 month
together with 12 and 13 months and (2) 0 and 3 months together with 12 and 15 months. We used the
average of the two estimates.

                                                        27
    For the second explanation, the agent questionniare gives several measures of agents’
behavior, including how households were targeted for new groups (based on demand, need,
proximity, local connections, etc.), and three measures of “e¤ort”: the frequency of services
provided to the group, the type of services provided, and the distance traveled to the group.
We examine these as outcome variables in the agent-level regression equations, equations (6)
and (7) above. The only di¤erence is that these data are only available every six months, so
our time-speci…c estimates in equation (7) are semi-annual rather than quarterly.
   For the third explanation, we have data on the total hours per week spent working from
the household time-use data. Although limited, hours working does give us some information
on the overall e¤ort levels of respondents.
   Finally, we look directly at payments themselves using the agent-level data. Although
the choice of payment is not randomized and so potentially endogenous, the model in Section
2 suggests that it should add insight into the mechanism. Through this lense, we view the
variation as potentially driven by exogenous di¤erences in intermediation costs (C) across
villages. These costs could re‡ect actual time/labor costs or the time and labor costs net of
any altruistic motive (e.g., family, friends) Variation in either could plausibly be exogenous.
We pursue this analysis by aggregating the data by village and distinguish villages where no
fees are charged, villages where a single uniform fee is charged, and villages in which multiple
fees are charged. We run regressions of the form

      Yvdt =      dt   + waved + $1 N oF eeP SPv
               +$2 U nif ormP SPv + $3 V ariableP SPv + "itdn;                             (10)

where Yvdt are the same MIS outcomes (total members, total groups, savings, number of
loans, value of loans, pro…ts, and agent pay) aggregated by village, v. We run these re-
gressions using both per-group values and village totals. The role of fees in the theory
suggests that for the per-group averages both $2 and $3 should be bigger than $1 . That
is, fees should enable higher levels of services, except perhaps for membership. For the vil-
lage totals, however, the theory suggests that the ability to vary fees should allow for more
intermediation through a greater number of groups. Thus, ! 3 should exceed $2 , including
for membership.


3     Results
We evaluate the impacts of the PSP program on …rst the groups and PSP agents themselves
and then on the households. Finally, we examine potential explanations for the di¤erential
impact of PSPs.

                                              28
3.1    Impact on Agents and Groups
Table 9 presents the agent-level results for various measures. The …rst row presents the
overall impact    from equation (6). The dependent variables are accumulated stocks in
Table 9. On average across the year, PSPs start 2.5 fewer groups, reach 46 fewer clients,
and earn $152 less in payments per quarter, all of which are signi…cant at the one percent
level. Based on these numbers, one might be skeptical that the PSP program will expand
SILC services as well as the FA program.
    The remaining rows, which present the duration-speci…c estimates of s from equation
(7), o¤er stronger insight, however: PSPs start o¤ more slowly than FAs, but they improve
over time. PSPs do signi…cantly worse over the …rst three quarters (nine months) in starting
groups, reaching members, and intermediating loans; but these di¤erences narrow over time
and by the fourth quarter of treatment are not statistically distinguishable. Indeed, the
point estimates are positive for savings, loans, and pro…ts (loan value, or total credit, follows
a similar pattern but is never statistically signi…cant). Thus, by the end of the year, PSPs
seem to be providing comparable levels of services as FAs. Payment for PSPs remains lower
than FAs, however, with the gap in cumulative payments widening over time. Indeed, the
average cumulative payment to PSPs at the end of the year is $540 less than the cumulative
earnings of FAs (who accumulate an average of $708).
   Clearly, PSPs are slower in starting groups, and a question is whether it is the number
of groups driving the dynamics in members, saving, and lending or whether the groups
that PSPs start are systematically di¤erent. To evaluate this, Table 10 presents the group-
level regressions. Here the dependent variables for savings, loans, loan value, pro…t, and
payment have been normalized by the number of weeks of the current cycle to make them
more comparable across groups started at di¤erent times. The impact coe¢ cient is therefore
the impact of PSPs on the typical group. We have multiplied the weekly ‡ows by 13 so
that they represent quarterly ‡ows. Overall, for members, savings, and credit, we don’t
see signi…cant negative di¤erences at the group level early on, indicating that the early
di¤erences in members, credit, and savings in Table 9 are indeed driven by the number of
groups. Nonetheless, we do see relative improvement of PSPs even at the group level. By
the fourth quarter, the typical individual group of a PSP has signi…cantly more savings,
more credit, higher pro…ts, and perhaps an extra member. In relative terms, these impacts
are considerable, nearly 50 percent higher than the control means for savings and pro…t and
over one-third higher for loan value. The point estimate for agent payment per group is still
negative in the fourth quarter, but it is much smaller and no longer signi…cant. In any case,
if PSP payment indicates a willingness to pay for services on the part of members, then the
fact that PSPs earn less per group even though their groups are more pro…table may imply

                                               29
that the FA remuneration exceeds the perceived value of services o¤ered to their members.
   In sum, PSPs appear to have slower starts, but within four quarters they appear to
be stastistically indistiguishable from FAs in terms of the number of groups they start or
clients they reach, the savings they mobilize, and the credit their groups provide. They earn
substantially less, especially starting out, but their groups are ultimately more pro…table.
   Nevertheless, given the substantially lower cost to the NGO of PSPs relative to FAs,
after only one year the PSP costs per member reached are substantially lower than the FA
costs. In the training year, both FAs and PSPs earn an average of $518. In the year after
certi…cation, the cost of FAs amounts to $660, while that of PSPs is only the phase-in value
in the …rst quarter, $83. Thus, over two years, the cost of PSPs is just about half (i.e.,
(518 + 83)=(518 + 660)) of the cost of FAs. Since the cost of additional years is zero for
PSPs, these numbers will almost certainly continue to fall over time. Averaged over the
course of the …rst year, PSPs reach about 10 percent fewer members (364 vs. 410 in the
fourth quarter), so the cost of PSPs per member reached is just over half (57 percent) of
what FAs cost. Since PSPs reach similar numbers of members by the end of the year, the
relative cost of PSPs per members reached will again almost certaily fall over time. If PSPs
continue to grow relative to FAs, then their relative cost could fall even more rapidly.
   A legitimate concern might be PSP retention, given their much lower earnings. However,
so far the data show very little dropout of PSPs or FAs. Indeed, this may indicate not that
PSP pay is too low, but that FAs were paid more than the minimum amount needed to
retain them.

3.2    Impact on Households
Although the PSP program appears to be cost e¤ective in reaching households and providing
services, another important question is whether it leads to similar impacts for those house-
holds. We now turn to the household data to evaluate the relative impacts of PSP-run SILCS
on households. We examine savings, credit, and productive decisions before examining an
overall impact on income and expenditures.
   Table 11 presents the impact estimates of        in equation (8) for savings behavior. We see
no impact on aggregate savings overall or on the savings of business owners, but the reported
source and use of savings are both impacted. The PSP program leads to an additional $16
of savings (per household in the village) coming from business pro…ts, but has no impact on
the amount of savings coming from agriculture or wage income. This estimate is signi…cant
at the 5 percent level. Similarly, an additional $16 per household was saved by households
reporting using savings for existing businesses, and this estimate is signi…cant at the 1 percent
level. These estimates are substantial in percentage terms, amounting to increases of over

                                               30
100 and 400 percent, respectively, relative to the FA villages. Thus, PSPs seem to have
important impacts on reported business-oriented savings.
    The impact on borrowing is examined in Table 12. Here we see that the PSP program led
to substantially higher levels of borrowing. The estimate of $29 amounts to an increase of
almost 70 percent, and it is signi…cant at a 5 percent level. The comparably-sized estimate
of $27 for reported business owners amounts to an even higher percentage increase, and
it is highly signi…cant at the 1 percent level despite the much smaller sample size. The
additional credit does not come exclusively from SILC, although per-household levels of
credit from SILC are $5 higher in PSP villages (signi…cant at the 5 percent level). We see
that borrowing from informal sources is actually playing a larger role, with a coe¢ cient of
$8 that is strongly signi…cant at the one percent level. The point estimate on formal credit
is also larger, signi…cant at the ten percent level. The reported purpose for borrowing is
also impacted by the PSP program with an additional $8 of credit for agricultural activities
and $10 of credit for existing businesses (both signi…cant at the one percent level). Both of
these are increases of over 200 percent. In contrast, there is no impact on credit for new
businesses.
       Table 13 delves more deeply into the impact of PSPs on the productive decisions of
households. In general, PSPs lead to relatively more positive impacts on business e¤orts
but, if anything, fewer positive impacts on agriculture. We …nd no signi…cant impact of
the PSP program on new business starts (although the power of the test is clearly weak).23
We do, however, …nd signi…cant impacts on the intensive margins of business. Business
investment rises by $20 per household in response to the PSP treatment. Thus, business
investment under the PSP treatment is roughly twice its level with the FA control. Likewise,
time spent in business is higher by 3 hours per week, a di¤erence of about 33 percent relative
to FA control villages. The number of non-household members employed by the households
in the sample is low overall (0.19 per household) with most households employing no outside
workers. Still, the coe¢ cient of 0.12 employees per household, signi…cant at a 5 percent
level, represents an increase of over 50 percent relative to the FA level. We do not see a
corresponding signi…cant increase in the hours spent as an employee, however. Respondents
may be less likely to work as employees than other household members. The point estimate
is positive but insigni…cant and small relative to the mean. Finally, we look at agricultural
decisions. Although credit for agricultural activities had been positively impacted by PSPs,
the relative e¤ect on agriculture investment is insigni…cant, and agricultural investment
  23
     The insigni…cant point estimate would indicate that the fraction of households starting new businesses
in PSP areas was 6 percentage points higher. The rates of business ownership and business starts are high
in the data. In the endline sample, 42 percent of households own a business and 24 percent reported starting
a new business in the past 12 months.


                                                    31
remains substantially larger than business investment. PSPs lead to fewer hours spent in
agriculture relative to FAs, however. The coe¢ cient of -3 (hours per week of the respondent)
nearly o¤sets the positive impact on hours spent in business.
   In Table 14, we examine two simple summary measures of welfare: income and ex-
penditures. The evidence is somewhat weak, and our experiment lacks power along these
dimensions. For both total income and business income, the point estimates are substantial
but entirely insigni…cant. The point estimates for total expenditures (consumption plus in-
vestment) and for just consumption are positive and substantial, and marginally signi…cant
at the ten percent level. The values indicate that average annual household expenditures
and consumption were $208 and $184 higher in PSP villages, increases of over ten percent
relative to expenditures and consumption in FA villages. We do not want to overstate these
point estimates. Their signi…cance is marginal, and to attribute them to the increased sav-
ings or investment and labor in business, returns on investment and labor would need to be
extremely high. (Although we do not present regressions using the components of consump-
tion, much of the increase in consumption is food expenditures, which are measured on a
weekly basis and multiplied by 52.)
    One concern we had was that the PSP-led groups might have a greater impact on business-
oriented behavior, but that this may come at the expense of other potential bene…ts of the
program, such as risk-sharing or consumption smoothing. To evaluate this, we looked at
several measures, including (1) probability of “ever going to sleep hungry,” (2) probability
of experiencing and various adverse shocks, and (3) “number of weeks until …nances returned
to normal”following an adverse shock.24 The point estimates on PSP were generally positive,
but none were signi…cant. That is, we certainly see no evidence that PSPs underperform
along this dimension. Instead, we view the two programs as comparable along this front.

3.3     Reasons for Di¤erential Impact
In this section, we evaluate the evidence for di¤erential selection motivated by the theory in
Section 2. We also explore alternative hypotheses. According to the theory, PSP-led SILCs
may cater to di¤erent members than FA-led SILCs. If PSP members are more …nancially
sound, then the SILCs themselves may be more pro…table and may provide stronger inter-
mediation among the more entrepreneurial population. We …nd strong suggestive evidence
along this dimension and weak evidence for the e¤ect of incentives on other dimensons.
   Table 15 presents the results of …xed-e¤ect regressions of endline membership on baseline
household characteristics and their interaction with the P SP treatment following equation
  24
     The one exception was probability of business failure. If business investments are risky as our theory
assumes, this is understandable, since the PSPs are making more business investments.


                                                    32
(9). The …rst row presents the estimates of direct impact of the household characteristic
(^1 ). It shows that in general, characteristics such as income, business income, positive hours
working in business, positive savings, and discount rates do not strongly predict membership
(with the exception of the linear discount factor, where less-patient households are likely to
be members of SILCs). The second row shows the di¤erential selection within P SP treated
villages (^1 ). Here higher baseline incomes, higher baseline business incomes, spending time
working in business, having positive levels of savings, and having higher hyperbolic discount
factors (i.e., su¤ering less from hyperbolic discounting) were all associated with higher prob-
ability of SILC membership in PSP villages. These impacts are statistically signi…cant. Not
only are these coe¢ cients statistically signi…cant, but they are also economically signi…cant.
The mean impacts on the probability of membership range from 0.05 (business income) to
0.09 (income and hyperbolic discounting).
   Table 15 represents only a selection of the most salient results from our selection analysis.
We conducted a wide variety of alternative speci…cations including many di¤erent selection
variables (i.e., Zjbaseline ) such as hours spent in agriculture or wage labor, presence and levels
of credit, levels of savings, business investment, expenditures, and consumption. We also ran
separate regressions, replacing membership with dummies for leavers (baseline members but
endline non-members) or joiners (baseline non-members but endline members) separately
and running regressions without …xed e¤ects. Signi…cance varied considerably across these
di¤erent exercises, but overwhelmingly both the signi…cant results and insigni…cant point
estimates support the story of the results presented in Table 15. The PSP groups appear
more attractive to agents that are wealthier (higher consumption, higher savings and credit)
and more business-oriented (fewer hours in wage labor and agriculture, more investment).
Finally, we note that the results are equally strong when village …xed e¤ects are included, in-
dicating that the selection we uncover is driven by patterns within the village, not di¤erential
membership rates across villages.
   Nonetheless, we investigate alternative hypotheses. The …rst alternative hypothesis is
that PSPs behave di¤erently in either their targeting or e¤ort because, as private entrepre-
neurs, their pay depends on their performance. The top panel of Table 16 shows no evidence
that PSPs behave di¤erently in targeting services to villages closer to their home (proxim-
ity), villages with existing connections, or villages with greater perceived need (potentially
altruism-driven) or demand (presumably pro…t-driven). In the bottom panel, we …nd little
evidence of greater e¤ort, using several measures: distance traveled to SILCs, infrequency
of services provided (attending meetings at least biweekly rather than less frequently), and
number of services provided. Indeed, the only signi…cant estimates in Table 16 show that
PSPs are more likely to work only part-time, less likely to work full-time, and more likely to


                                                33
meet with their groups at least biweekly.
       The second alternative hypothesis is that the clients themselves put forth more e¤ort,
perhaps as a wealth e¤ect response to the cost of services or for behavioral reasons (people
may work harder when they actually pay for services). To evaluate this hypothesis, we can
only focus on the total time spent working per week. While the composition of hours was
impacted by the PSP program (recall Table 13), the overall total number of hours was not
signi…cantly a¤ected.
    In sum, we …nd no evidence that either the agents or members worked harder in response
to the incentives of the PSP program, but we do …nd substantial evidence that the PSPs pro-
vide services to a wealthier, more business-oriented population. We interpet this population
as the type-H individuals of our theory.
    Whether this selection is driven by PSPs themselves or is simply a result of the fees
charged is certainly still an open question. However, we pursue this further by looking at
variation in fees o¤ered across and within villages.
   We …rst show the high level of fee variation across groups. To narrow our focus, we
use only those groups that charged fees in the fourth quarter of the randomization, and we
trim the lower and upper 5 percent of outliers. Nonetheless, Table 17 shows the substantial
variation in fees in the data. The average fee is $5.80/quarter per group, the standard
deviation is $4.60 per quarter, and the interquartile ratio is 3.1. Finally, a regression of
group fee on village …xed e¤ects explains 56 percent of the variation, indicating that just
over half of the variation is across villages and just under half is within villages. Agent-
speci…c …xed e¤ects explain less than 40 percent of variation.                 Thus, the data indicate a
high degree of price targeting.
   We further examine how the level of intermediation services varies by the actual fees
o¤ered by PSPs. The fact that fees were not part of the randomization is an important caveat.
We report the estimates from equation (10), which uses the group-level data aggregated
within a village but distinguishing between villages where no groups charge fees (413 villages),
villages where all groups charge the same fee (367 villages), and villages where di¤erent
groups are charged di¤erent fees (428 villages).25 Recall that these coe¢ cients are all relative
to the FA villages. The dependent variables for the results in Table 18 are all per-group
values. Thus, they show how the typical group varies by the fees charged in the village.
  25
     An assessment of baseline household characteristics of variable and uniform fee villages yielded signi…cant
di¤erences, but they don’t follow a clearly discernible pattern. Of the 28 outcome and control variables,
9 were signi…cant; households in villages with variable fees had higher baseline levels of saving and more
male-led households, but they had less business investment, less business credit, lower expenditures, lower
consumption, and lower education levels (more primary as highest grade completed and less secondary and
tertiary completed).



                                                      34
Except for pro…t, the positive estimates are all concentrated on the villages that charge
fees, especially those with variable fees. Thus, fees seem to be closely related to the level
of services that individual groups provide. Both variable and uniform fees are positively
related to higher credit, membership, and savings. The groups in PSP villages where no
fees are charged are not statistically distinguishable from those in FA villages, except that
the groups earn more pro…ts (signi…cant at the ten percent level). These villages may be a
combination of villages where PSPs o¤er free services out of social connections or altruism
and villages in which PSPs anticipate introducing fees at a later date.
    The role of variable fees becomes of greater interest when examining the results in Table
19, where the dependent variables are aggregate village totals. Here the positive estimates
are almost exclusively in the villages where variable fees are charged. Indeed, uniform fees
are associated with fewer groups, members, and services than in FA villages, but variable
fees are associated with more groups, members, savings, loans, credit, and pro…ts. This is
consistent with the theory in which variable fees can cater to larger populations than uniform
fees, yielding higher levels of intermediation and larger total impacts (recall Propostion 3).
Although fees (rather than other aspects of PSP behavior) seem to be closely related to
impacts, the high level of variability in fees suggest that it might be di¢ cult to replicate the
results of the privatization scheme by using a centrally mandated uniform fee, for example.
A randomization on the fees themselves would add greater insight into these questions,
however.


4     Conclusion
We have presented evidence for a theory of adverse selection in credit cooperatives and
evidence from a randomized experiment of an innovation for privatized entrepreneurs and
member-purchased self-help group services. The somewhat surprising results indicate that
these micro…nance services can indeed be “self-help,”in the sense that after initial training,
the group administration can be …nanced through client-based fees. Relative to the con-
tinuously NGO-subsidized model, the private entrepreneurs expanded services more slowly
but ultimately reached similar numbers of people. Moreover, the groups they founded and
administered ultimately led to more credit and were more pro…table. The privately provided
groups also had relatively stronger impacts in terms of the narrative micro…nance dimensions
of business entrepreneurship and investment, perhaps even increasing levels of consumption
substantially.
    The program is an important example of a successful privatization program –cost e¤ective
in terms of enabling NGO resources to stretch further, reaching greater numbers of people.


                                               35
The apparent channels are also potential lessons for current and future SHG programs. It
does not appear that it was driven by the increased e¤ort from improved incentives toward
agents or members putting forth greater e¤ort.
   Instead, it appears to be driven by a di¤erence in the population served by privatized
providers. PSPs cater to a more business-oriented population. On the pro-side, this may
target the services to those who bene…t most from them, and indeed better targeting may help
improve the functioning of the groups. On the other hand, it may create problems of cream-
skimming, especially if NGOs are still interested in providing services to the truly poorest of
the poor. Such considerations may be more broadly important in moves toward sustainability
or privatization. The distribution of bene…ts across the population and subpopulations is
therefore an ongoing project of further investigation. A larger question is whether or not it
is advisable to provide micro…nance services to the less business-oriented populations.
   Another remaining question is whether privatization matters beyond the incentives to
charge fees that it provides. If not, as the theory suggests, the favorable outcome and
reduced costs could be attained by NGOs without privatizing by simply charging membership
fees. If the incentives do matter, then heterogeneous responses of PSPs to these incentives
may provide insights. Unfortunately, our current data do not o¤er exogenous variation in
payments or PSP behavior to further evaluate these issues. A structural model of agent and
household behavior may provide insights.


References
Ahlin, C. and N. Jiang (2008): “Can Micro-Credit Bring Development?” Journal of
 Development Economics, 86, 1–21.

Ahlin, C. and R. M. Townsend (2007): “Using Repayment Data to Test Across Models
  of Joint Liability Lending,”Economic Journal, 117, F11–51.

Attanasio, O., B. Augsburg, R. De Haas, E. Fitzsimons, and H. Harmgart
  (2011): “Group Lending or Individual Lending? Evidence from a Randomised Field
  Experiment in Mongolia,” Working Papers 136, European Bank for Reconstruction and
  Development.

Banerjee, A. V., T. J. Besley, and T. W. Guinnane (1994): “Thy Neighbor’s Keeper:
 The Design of a Credit Cooperative with Theory and a Test,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 109, 491–515.

Banerjee, A. V., E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and C. Kinnan (2011): “The Miracle


                                              36
  of Micro…nance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation,” Manuscript, Massachusetts
  Institute of Technology.

Buera, F. J., J. P. Kaboski, and Y. Shin (2012): “The Macroeconomics of Micro…-
  nance.”Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bundervoet, T. (2012): “Small Wonders? A Randomized Controlled Trial of Village Sav-
 ings and Loans Associations in Burundi.”Manuscript, International Rescue Committee.

Casini, P. and L. Vandewalle (2012): “Public Good Provision in Indian Rural Areas:
  the Returns to Collective Action by Micro…nance Groups,” Manuscript, University of
  Namur and Georg-August-Universitat Gottingen.

Cohen, J. and P. Dupas (2010): “Free Distribution or Cost-Sharing: Evidence from a
 Randomized Malaria Prevention Experiment,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125, 1–45.

Crépon, B., F. Devoto, E. Duflo, and E. Parienté (2011): “Impact of Microcredit
  in Rural Areas of Morocco: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation,”Manuscript.

De Meza, D. and D. C. Webb (1987): “Too Much Investment: A Problem of Asymmetric
  Information,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102, 281–292.

Deininger, K. and Y. Liu (2008): “Economic And Social Impacts Of Self-Help Groups
  In India.”World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series 4884.

— — — (2009): “Longer Term Impacts of Self Help Groups in India.” World Bank Policy
  Research Working Paper Series, 4886.

Dupas, P. and J. Robinson (2012): “Savings Constraints and Microenterprise Develop-
 ment: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya.”Tech. rep., UCLA.

Fafchamps, M. and E. La Ferrara (2011): “Self-Help Groups And Mutual Assistance:
  Evidence From Urban Kenya.”C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers, 8452.

Field, E., R. Pande, and J. Papp (2009): “Does Micro…nance Repayment Flexibility
  A¤ect Entrepreneurial Behavior and Loan Default?” Manuscript, Harvard University.

Fulford, S. L. (2011): “Financial Access, Precaution, and Development: Theory and
  Evidence from India.”Department of Economics Working Paper 741, Boston College.

Galiani, S., P. J. Gertler, and E. Schargrodksy (2005): “Water for Life: The
  Impact of the Privatization of Water Services on Child Mortality,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 113, 83–120.

                                           37
Goldston, J. (2012): “Two Commitment Problems Are Better than One: Credit and
  Local Politics in Rural India,”Tech. rep., Brown University.

Kaboski, J. and R. Townsend (2005): “Policies and Impact: An Analysis of Village-
  Level Micro…nance Institutions,”Journal of the European Economic Association, 3, 1–50.

— — — (2011): “A Structural Evaluation of a Large-Scale Quasi-Experimental Micro…nance
  Initiative,”Econometrica, 79, 1357–1406.

— — — (2012): “The Impact of Credit on Village Economies,”American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, Forthcoming.

Karlan, D. and J. Zinman (2010): “Expanding Microenterprise Credit Access: Using
 Randomized Supply Decisions to Estimate the Impacts in Manila,” Manuscript, Yale
  University.

Kremer, M., J. Leino, E. Miguel, and A. Peterson Zwane (2011): “Spring Clean-
 ing: Rural Water Impacts, Valuation, and Property Rights Institutions„” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 126, 145–205.

Kremer, M. and E. Miguel (2007): “The Illusion of Sustainability,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 122, 1007–1065.

Ksoll, C., H. B. Lilleor, J. H. Lonborg, and O. D. Rasmussen (2012): “The
 Impact of Community-Managed Micro…nance in Rural Malawi. Evidence from a Cluster
  Randomized Control Trial.”Manuscript, University of Southern Denmark.

Morduch, J. (1999): “The Micro…nance Promise,” Journal of Economic Literature, 37,
 1569–1614.

Stiglitz, J. E. and A. M. Weiss (1981): “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect
  Information,”American Economic Review, 71, 393–410.

World Bank, S. A. R. (2007): “SAR Regional Strategy Update,”Tech. rep., World Bank.

— — — (2012): “IndiaŠs National Rural Livelihoods Mission an Overview,”Tech. rep., World
  Bank.




                                             38
5      Appendix
We present some more details of the model results.
   First, we derive the bounds for and in Proposition 1. We start with : De…ne the
additional bene…t of type-H members as (fL ) = B(fL ; p~H ) B(fL ; p~L ). It is trivial to show
       d (fL )
that    dfL
                 < 0 as stated in Propositon 1. We need to derive the conditions for               (0) > 0.

          (0) = (pH        pL )   A   A +(           (0)   1) RBL (0) > 0

Substituting in RBL (0) = pL Ak= (pL k + (1                pL ) (0)) and simplifying yields

          pL Ak +      A     A + pL A       (0) > 0

Now substituting in (0) = pH = ( pH + (1                    )) and simplifying yields

                     pL A
          >                    =            2 (0; 1) :
              pH    A A + pL A

    Now consider . We can solve by deriving the conditions for B(1; pH ) < 0; which is

       B(1; pH ) = pH A           A + [(1            + pH ) (1)     pH ] RBL (1) < 0

                                                                                             pL
    Again, substituting RBL (1) = pL Ak= [pL k + (1                pL ) (1)] and (1)      pL +(1    )
                                                                                                        yields,
after much simpli…cation

                     pH A pL A
          <                                      =    2 (0; 1) :
              pH    A A + pH A            pL A

    Clearly,       >    if and only if

       pH A        pL A > pL A:

    Here left-hand side measures the (per unit) capital production loss of adverse selection,
while the right-hand side is the outside option of type-L. This condition always holds as
pL ! 0, and the upper bound on pL is

                             A
       pL < pL = pH                   .
                            A+A

   Next, we derive from Proposition 2. First, notice that total surplus (net of F ) is
higher under F if and only if total output (net of F ) is higher under F , since output is
only distributed among members, and the outside options are always the same. Knowing



                                                           39
that F leads to fL = 0, we can express the condition that total output is higher under the
F as:

     (1       ) pH A            F    + pL A > (1                 ) pH A + pL A.

Substituting in F = B(0; p~L ) and simplifying yields
                  pH A          A            B(0; p~L )
        <                                                       =       2 (0; 1).
            (pL + pH ) A             A             B(0; p~L )

   Next, we need to show that there exists an f^L such that:
                                                                                                       1
                                                                             A      A    p2H + pH pL
     B f^L ; p~H = 0                                 , f^L =                                               1
                                                                                                               .
                                                                 (pH             pL ) p2H A    A + pL A

   Then, substitute in for B (0; p~L ) and derive a condition for which f^L < . One can show
that this holds when the following inequality is satis…ed:

     p3H pL         A       A        A         A            A       A

     +p2H p2L       2   2
                            A        A +A               A       A + A (1              ) 3A      2A + A A           A
                n                                                                   h                2
                                                                                                       i                      o
     +pH p3L        A       A            2          A     A         + (1           ) 3AA (1      ) A +A            3A

        p4L AA (1               )2 > 0.
   As pL is su¢ ciently close to 0, a su¢ cient but not necessary condition for f^L <                                   is:
                                                                                                A
        A     A     > A              A                                              ,     <        :
                                                                                              2A A
   Recall that we already de…ned an upper bound , and it is straightforward to show that
the above bound exceeds this upper bound, i.e.:
        A                             pH A pL A
           >                =                                                .
      2A A                      pH   A A + pH A                     pL A

Therefore the previous su¢ cient condition for f^L <                                 is always satis…ed as pL ! 0:
   Finally, the results from Proposition 3 are straightforward. Using Y2 ; Y1 and Y0 to denote
total maximum output under two, one and zero fees, we have :

     Y2     = (1            ) pH A             F      + pL A
     Y1     = (1            ) pH A             F      + pL A
        Y0 = (1             ) pH A + pL A:

   Y1 > Y0 , follows from the assumption that (1                                        ) pH > pL ; while Y2 > Y1       follows
from A > A.

                                                                        40
                                      Table 1: Summary Statistics SILC versus non SILC
                                                     SILC                   Non-SILC       SILC - Non-SILC
                                             Mean     Std. Dev.       Mean     Std. Dev.       Mean 4
                    Savings                   153           371       131         263             24
                    Credit                     48           165        45         236             1.2
                    Income                    289           485       356         665            -68*
                    Consumption               1477       1573         1466       1616             11
                    Business Owner            0.55          0.5       0.36       0.48           0.19***
                    No Schooling              0.22       0.41         0.21       0.41            0.01
                    Some Primary              0.26       0.44         0.22       0.41            0.04*
                    Primary Completed         0.4        0.49         0.44        0.5            -0.04
                    Secondary                 0.11       0.32         0.10       0.31            0.01
                    Tertiary                  0.02       0.13         0.03       0.16            -0.01
                    Observations              968                     951

***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.




                                                                  1
                                             Table 2: Sample Agent Level Regression
                                                                       Payment
                                             Age                       9***
                                                                       (3)
                                             Age Squared               -0.08***
                                                                       (0.04)
                                             Gender                    11
                                                                       (8)
                                             Primary Complete          45***
                                                                       (19)
                                             Secondary                 51***
                                                                       (21)
                                             Tertiary                  69***
                                                                       (24)
                                             Languages                 -14**
                                                                       (7)
                                             Children                  -2
                                                                       (1)
                                             Financial Dependents      -0.25
                                                                       (1)
                                             Cohort                    -230***
                                                                       (33)
                                             PSP * Quarter 1           -210***
                                                                       (11)
                                             PSP * Quarter 2           -290***
                                                                       (12)
                                             PSP * Quarter 3           -420***
                                                                       (16)
                                             PSP * Quarter 4           -540***
                                                                       (17)
                                             Observations              1080
                                             R Squared                 0.84

    ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
    The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of cumulative agent payment on the stated independent variables. The
baseline education level is less than primary complete. The regression is weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors are robust.




                                                                2
                                               Table 3: Sample Group Level Regression
                                                                         Profit
                                               Age                       3
                                                                         (2)
                                               Age Squared               -0.02
                                                                         (0.03)
                                               Gender                    3
                                                                         (7)
                                               Primary Complete          7
                                                                         (12)
                                               Secondary                 13
                                                                         (13)
                                               Tertiary                  33**
                                                                         (16)
                                               Languages                 2
                                                                         (6)
                                               Children                  -3**
                                                                         (2)
                                               Financial Dependents      2**
                                                                         (1)
                                               Cohort                    3
                                                                         (10)
                                               PSP * Quarter 1           13
                                                                         (12)
                                               PSP * Quarter 2           -7
                                                                         (10)
                                               PSP * Quarter 3           9
                                                                         (8)
                                               PSP * Quarter 4           25***
                                                                         (10)
                                               Observations              18813
                                               R Squared                 0.03

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of group profit on the stated independent variables. The baseline education
level is less than primary complete. The regression is weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors are robust standard errors clustered
by agent.




                                                                   3
                                          Table 4: Example of a Household Level Regression
                                                                Total Credit
                                          Treatment             29***
                                                                (11)
                                          Age                   7***
                                                                (3)
                                          Age Squared           -0.07***
                                                                (0.02)
                                          Gender                -2
                                                                (12)
                                          Some Primary          47**
                                                                (19)
                                          Primary Complete      8
                                                                (9)
                                          Secondary             152***
                                                                (41)
                                          Tertiary              243**
                                                                (100)
                                          # Adult Males         -4
                                                                (4)
                                          # Adult Females       20***
                                                                (8)
                                          # Children            0.22
                                                                (3)
                                          Observations          1891
                                          R Squared             0.08

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of total credit on the stated independent variables. The baseline education
level is no schooling. The regression is weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors are robust standard errors clustered by villages.




                                                                     4
                                            Table 5: Agent Level Randomization Results
                      Age      Gender    Primary     Primary      Secondary    Tertiary    Languages    Children    Financial
                                                     Complete                                                       Dependents
    Treatment         -0.03    -0.07     -0.002      -0.13***     0.14***      -0.007      0.09         -0.09       -0.32
                      (1)      (0.07)    (0.01)      (0.05)       (0.07)       (0.05)      (0.06)       (0.23)      (0.41)
    Observations      236      241       240         240          240          240         241          241         240
    Control Mean      36       0.69      0.01        0.46         0.43         0.10        2            5           6

    ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
    The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome on a PSP dummy and the following controls: age, age
squared, gender, dummies for schooling i.e. primary completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of less than primary complete,
number of languages spoken, number of children, number of financial dependents, cohort, and location fixed effects. The regressions
are weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors are robust standard errors clustered by location.




                                                                 5
                                          Table 6: Key Informant Mean Comparisons
                                                     PSP                            FA                PSP-FA
                                         Mean     Std. Dev.     Obs.    Mean     Std. Dev.     Obs.   Mean 4
                 Population              1292        1466       139      1120       1166        55     171
                 Power Grid               0.27       0.44       139      0.22       0.42        55     0.04
                 Months Inaccessible       2.8        3.8       139       2.6        2.9        55     0.22
                 Bank Distance             27         28        139       23         17         55      3.5
                 Primary                  0.74       0.44       139      0.65       0.48        55     0.09
                 Secondary                0.36       0.48       138      0.34       0.48        55     0.02
                 Post Secondary           0.06       0.24       136      0.07       0.25        54     -0.01
                 Hospital                 0.43       0.50       137      0.44       0.50        55     -0.01
                 Factory                  0.06       0.23       137      0.05       0.23        53     .0004
                 MFI                      0.14       0.35       136      0.23       0.43        52     -0.09
                 Bank                     0.02       0.15       137      0.02       0.14        54     0.003
                 ROSCA                    0.76       0.43       132      0.65       0.48        52     0.11
                 ASCA                     0.66       0.48       123      0.61       0.49        49     0.05
                 SACCO                    0.16       0.37       138      0.11       0.32        55     0.05
                 FSA                      0.05       0.23       122      0.06       0.23        51    -0.004
                 Mobile Money             0.12       0.33       137      0.10       0.31        55     0.02
                 Moneylender              0.19       0.39       132      0.15       0.36        54     0.04
                 Drought                  0.58       0.35       121      0.61       0.38        51     -0.03
                 Flood                    0.49       0.35        92      0.55       0.38        36     -0.06
                 Crop Failure             0.51       0.34        88      0.52       0.39        37     -0.01
                 Animal Disease           0.41       0.32        68      0.21       0.24        30    0.20***
                 Bandits                  0.29       0.31        36      0.19       0.24        20     0.10
                 Violence                 0.77       0.32        12      0.67       0.45        6      0.10

***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.




                                                                6
                                Table 7: Household Level Randomization Results - Demographics
                                                     PSP                             FA               PSP-FA
                                         Mean     Std. Dev.     Obs.     Mean     Std. Dev.    Obs.   Mean 4
                 Age                      43          14       1362       42          13       536      0.31
                 Age Squared             2014        1284      1362      1986       1319       536      29
                 Gender                  0.61        0.49      1363      0.58        0.49      534      0.03
                 # Adult Men              1.6        1.1       1380       1.5        1.10      539      0.06
                 # Adult Women            1.5        0.92      1380       1.6        0.95      539     -0.05
                 # Kids                   2.6        2.0       1380       2.7        1.9       539     -0.07
                 No Schooling            0.22        0.41      1363      0.19        0.40      534      0.02
                 Some Primary            0.23        0.42      1363      0.21        0.41      534      0.02
                 Primary Completed       0.41        0.49      1363      0.49        0.50      534    -0.08***
                 Secondary               0.11        0.32      1363      0.09        0.29      534      0.02
                 Tertiary                0.03        0.16      1363      0.02        0.13      534      0.01

***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.




                                                                7
                                      Table 8: Household Level Randomization Results - Outcomes
                                                          PSP     s.e.      FA mean    Sample mean      Median      Obs.
            Total Savings                                  -3     (20)        137           137            49       1877
            Savings for Business Owners                    -9     (22)        156           156            75       865
            Savings from Business Profits                  -5     (10)        35             32             0       1877
            Savings from Agric. Profits                    3          (9)     25             29             0       1877
            Savings from Salary/wage                       -4         (8)     16             17             0       1877
            Savings used for New Agric. Activity           -7     (15)        40             38             0       1877
            Savings used for New Non-Agric. Activity       4          (4)      5             8              0       1877
            Savings used for Existing Business             2          (9)     16             20             0       1877
            Total Credit                                   3      (14)        42             47             3       1877
            Credit for Business Owners                     14     (17)        41             54             6       865
            Credit from SILC                              0.48    (0.92)      3.7            4              0       1877
            Credit from Formal Lenders                     6      (13)        26             33             0       1877
            Credit from Informal Lenders                   -3         (3)     12             10             0       1877
            Credit used for Agric. Activity                5          (6)      7             11             0       1877
            Credit used to Expand Business                 7          (5)      6             11             0       1877
            Credit used to start New Business             0.14    (0.78)       1             1              0       1877
            Start New Business                            0.03    (0.04)     0.25           0.26            0       1877
            Business Investment                            -3         (1)     42             40             0       1877
            Hours spent in Business                       0.53        (2)     15             15             4       1877
            Non-HH Employees                              -0.12   (0.21)     0.42           0.32            0       1877
            Hours spent in Employee                        0.6        (2)     15             16            12       1877
            Agric. Investment                              6      (10)        48             53            11       1877
            Hours spent in Agric.                         -0.47       (2)     27             27            25       1877
            Total Income                                  98*     (57)        274           346            189      1877
            Business Income                                9      (15)        59             65             0       1877
            Total Expenditure                              73     (118)      1454           1519          1118      1877
            Total Consumption                              74     (116)      1400           1466          1074      1877

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     Notes: The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome on a PSP dummy and the following controls:
age, age squared, gender, number of men, woman and children in the household, dummies for schooling i.e. some primary, primary
completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of no schooling. The regressions are weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors
are robust standard errors clustered by villages.




                                                                  8
                                                       Table 9: Agent Level Results
                                     Groups     Members       Savings     Loans       Loan Value   Profit   Payment
                  All Quarters       -2.5***    -46***        -540        -27***      -430         -210     -370***
                                     (0.5)      (13)          (430)       (9)         (420)        (170)    (10)
                  Quarter 1          -3.3***    -65***        -920*       -42***      -910         -110     -210***
                                     (0.8)      (20)          (550)       (15)        (650)        (270)    (11)
                  Quarter 2          -2.4***    -50**         -1250       -38**       -1170        -670*    -290***
                                     (0.9)      (22)          (800)       (17)        (780)        (390)    (12)
                  Quarter 3          -3.0***    -52**         -650        -29         -700         -340     -420***
                                     (1.0)      (26)          (810)       (19)        (760)        (320)    (16)
                  Quarter 4          -1.3       -19           600         0.8         980          270      -540***
                                     (1.1)      (27)          (980)       (20)        (910)        (310)    (17)
                  Observations       1080       1080          1080        1080        1080         1080     1080
                  Control Mean       19         410           7140        220         6570         1960     450

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome on a PSP or PSP*Quarter dummy and the following
controls: age, age squared, gender, number of languages spoken, number of children, number of financial dependents, dummies for
schooling i.e. primary completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of less than primary complete, cohort, and location-date fixed
effects. The regressions are weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors are robust.




                                                                      9
                                                     Table 10: Group Level Results
                                           Members      Savings    Loans     Loan Value     Profit    Payment
                         All Quarters      0.6          62         1         38             10        -5***
                                           (0.4)        (41)       (1)       (24)           (8)       (1)
                         Quarter 1         0.3          26         -1        3              13        -9***
                                           (0.5)        (51)       (1)       (35)           (12)      (1)
                         Quarter 2         0.5          28         1         14             -7        -7***
                                           (0.4)        (43)       (1)       (22)           (10)      (1)
                         Quarter 3         0.7          65         2*        44             9         -4***
                                           (0.5)        (44)       (1)       (28)           (8)       (1)
                         Quarter 4         0.8*         110***     2         77***          25***     -1
                                           (0.4)        (45)       (1)       (31)           (10)      (2)
                         Observations      19509        18813      18813     18813          18813     17455
                         Control Mean      21           250        10        220            51        10

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome on a PSP or PSP*Quarter dummy and the following
controls: age, age squared, gender, number of languages spoken, number of children, number of financial dependents, dummies for
schooling i.e. primary completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of less than primary complete, cohort, and location-date fixed
effects. The regression is weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors are robust standard errors clustered by agent.




                                                                  10
                                                Table 11: Household Savings Results
                                Savings                    Source                                   Purpose
                        Total      Business   Business   Sell Agric.    Salary or   New Agric.   New Non-Agric.      Existing
                                    Owners     Profit     Product        Wage        Activity        Activity       Business
       PSP                16          -3       16**          7             8           0.25             -2            16***
                         (16)        (22)       (7)        (13)            (7)         (11)             (2)            (5)
       Control mean      132         156        15           41            10          39                4              4
       Sample mean       141         153        24           37            15          37                3              15
       Median             61          83         0           0             0            0               0               0
       Observations      1891        865       1891         1891          1891        1891             1891           1891

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     Notes: The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome on a PSP dummy and the following controls:
age, age squared, gender, number of men, woman and children in the household, dummies for schooling i.e. some primary, primary
completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of no schooling. The regressions are weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors
are robust standard errors clustered by villages.




                                                                   11
                                                     Table 12: Household Credit Results
                                       Credit                    Source                             Purpose
                               Total      Business     SILC     Formal      Informal    Agric.    Expanding   Start New
                                          Owners                                       Activity    Business   Business
              PSP              29**        27***        5**      17*         8***       8***        10***        2
                                (11)        (8)          (2)     (10)         (3)         (3)        (3)         (1)
              Control mean      41          32           7        22          10           4          4          2
              Sample mean       56              50       10       30          16           9         10          3
              Median            11              15       0        0            0           0          0          0
              Observations     1891         865         1891     1891        1891         1891      1891        1891

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     Notes: The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome on a PSP dummy and the following controls:
age, age squared, gender, number of men, woman and children in the household, dummies for schooling i.e. some primary, primary
completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of no schooling. The regressions are weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors
are robust standard errors clustered by villages.




                                                                       12
                                         Table 13: Household Productive Decisions Results
                         Start New      Business     Hours spent        Employees   Hours spent     Agric.      Hours spent
                          Business     Investment    in Business        (non-HH)    as Employee   Investment      in Agric.
        PSP                 0.05         20***           3**             0.12**        0.97            4             -3*
                           (0.06)          (6)           (2)             (0.05)        (2)            (9)            (2)
        Control mean         0.2           22             9               0.11          14            67             31
        Sample mean         0.24           35             12              0.19          15            69             29
        Median                0            0              0                0            10            28             30
        Observations        1891          1891           1891             1891         1891          1891           1891

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     Notes: The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome on a PSP dummy and the following controls:
age, age squared, gender, number of men, woman and children in the household, dummies for schooling i.e. some primary, primary
completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of no schooling. The regressions are weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors
are robust standard errors clustered by villages.




                                                                   13
                                                Table 14: Household Income Results
                                                  Total    Business        Total           Total
                                                 Income     Income      Expenditures   Consumption
                               PSP                131         11           208*             184*
                                                  (85)       (12)          (113)           (111)
                               Control mean        358        54           1598             1561
                               Sample mean         451        62           1717             1664
                               Median             196         0            1394             1356
                               Observations       1891       1891          1891             1891

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     Notes: The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome on a PSP dummy and the following controls:
age, age squared, gender, number of men, woman and children in the household, dummies for schooling i.e. some primary, primary
completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of no schooling. The regressions are weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors
are robust standard errors clustered by villages.




                                                                   14
                                 Table 15: Endline Membership Selection on Baseline Characteristics
                                              Business    Positive       Positive Hrs.   Linear Discount      Hyperbolic
                                  Income       Income     Savings        in Business        Factor,β       Discount Factor, δ
          Characteristic           5e-06       -2e-06      -0.005            0.01            -0.12*              -0.06
                                  (3e-06 )     (0.0001)    (0.09)           (0.06)           (0.07)              (0.05)
          PSP*Characteristic     0.0002***     0.0003*     0.23**           0.12*             0.07              0.17***
                                  (6e-06 )     (0.0002)      (1)            (0.07)            (0.9)              (0.06)
          Observations              1877        1877        1877             1877             1877               1877

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     Notes: The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of endline membership on on the stated baseline outcome, their
interaction effects with a PSP dummy and the following controls: age, age squared, gender, number of men, woman and children in the
household, dummies for schooling i.e. some primary, primary completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of no schooling. The
regressions are weighted by sampling weights and include village fixed effects. Standard errors are robust standard errors clustered by
villages.




                                                                    15
                                      Table 16: Effect of PSP Treatment on Agent Effort / Behavior
          Targeting
                             Proximity      Connections     Need          Demand       Other
          All Quarters       0.05           0.00            -0.03         -0.01        -0.01
                             (0.07)         (0.05)          (0.04)        (0.04)       (0.01)
          Quarters 1 & 2     0.01           0.02            -0.04         0.03         -0.01
                             (0.06)         (0.07)          (0.05)        (0.05)       (0.01)
          Quarters 3 & 4     0.11           -0.02           -0.03         -0.05        -0.01
                             (0.09)         (0.09)          (0.07)        (0.06)       (0.01)
          Observations       4250           4250            4250          4250         4250
          Control Mean       0.34           0.55            0.85          0.30         0.01
          Effort / Work Time
                             Average        Average #       Work l.t.     Work Half    Work g.t.     Work Full     Biweekly
                             Distance       Services        Half Time     Time         Half Time     Time          Meetings
          All Quarters       0.5            -0.07           0.21***       -0.05        -0.18**       0.02          0.06*
                             (0.6)          (0.23)          (0.06)        (0.08)       (0.08)        (0.05)        (0.04)
          Quarters 1 & 2     -0.4           0.14            0.26***       -0.09        -0.23**       0.06          0.03
                             (0.6)          (0.24)          (0.08)        (0.10)       (0.10)        (0.06)        (0.05)
          Quarters 3 & 4     2**            -0.50           0.11*         0.03         -0.08         -0.05         0.11**
                             (1)            (0.49)          (0.06)        (0.05)       (0.12)        (0.10)        (0.05)
          Observations       162            162             151           151          151           151           4222
          Control Mean       5              3               0.06          0.21         0.67          0.06          0.41

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome on a PSP or PSP*Half dummy and the following
controls: age, age squared, gender, number of languages spoken, number of children, number of financial dependents, dummies for
schooling i.e. primary completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of less than primary complete, cohort, and location-date fixed
effects. The regressions are weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors are robust standard errors clustered by agent.




                                                                     16
                                         Table 17: Variation in Fees Charged by PSPs
                                         Mean                                 5.8
                                         Standard Deviation                   4.6
                                         Interquartile Ratio                  3.1
                                         Fraction Within-Village Variation    0.44
                                         Fraction Between-Village Variation   0.56
                                         Fraction Within-Agent Variation      0.62
                                         Fraction Between-Agent Variation     0.38

    These summary data are based on fees charged in the 4th quarter. We use only data from PSP groups that charged fees, and we
trim the lowest and highest five percent tails.




                                                               17
                                     Table 18: Effect of “Village Type” on Per Group Outcomes
                                        Members      Savings     Loans     Loan Value     Profit    Observations
                     No Fee             -0.1         32          1         23             22*       413
                                        (0.4)        (35)        (1)       (25)           (13)
                     Uniform Fee        2.2***       39*         1         64***          17***     367
                                        (0.4)        (22)        (1)       (20)           (5)
                     Variable Fee       2.0***       120***      4**       120***         24***     428
                                        (0.4)        (36)        (2)       (32)           (7)
                     Observations       1864         1864        1864      1864           1864
                     Control Mean       21           250         8         200            50

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome (aggregated at the village level and divided by the
number of groups operating in the village) on a village type dummy, location-date fixed effects, and the cohort of the agent working in
that village. The baseline village type is village served by an FA. The regressions are weighted by sampling weights.. Standard errors
are robust.




                                                                  18
                                          Table 19: Effect of “Village Type” on Total Outcomes
                                  Groups       Members     Savings       Loans   Loan Value      Profit   Observations
                No Fee            -0.4***      -9***       57            -0.2    11              54       413
                                  (0.2)        (3)         (115)         (3)     (86)            (47)
                Uniform Fee       -1.1***      -20***      -190***       -7***   -170***         -43***   367
                                  (0.1)        (3)         (53)          (2)     (48)            (12)
                Variable Fee      1.9***       43***       990***        32***   940***          180***   428
                                  (0.2)        (5)         (150)         (6)     (130)           (29)
                Observations      1864         1864        1864          1864    1864            1864
                Control Mean      2.4          51          610           21      530             120

    ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
    The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome (aggregated at the village level) on a village type
dummy, location-date fixed effects, and the cohort of the agent working in that village. The baseline village type is village served by
an FA. The regressions are weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors are robust.




                                                                    19
Appendix (Not for Publication)
                                      A1: Randomization Results Excluding Mombassa and Tahea
                       Age    Gender      Primary   Primary      Secondary     Tertiary   Languages     Children    Financial
                                                    Complete                                                        Dependents
     Treatment         -1     -0.11       0.01      -0.08*       0.08          -0.01      0.02          -0.15       -0.16
                       (1)    (0.08)      (0.01)    (0.05)       (0.06)        (0.06)     (0.05)        (0.27)      (0.50)
     Observations      193    197         196       196          196           196        197           197         196
     Control Mean      35     0.72        0         0.32         0.55          0.13       2             5           6

    ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
    The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome on a PSP dummy and the following controls: age, age
squared, gender, dummies for schooling i.e. primary completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of less than primary complete,
number of languages spoken, number of children, number of financial dependents, cohort, and location fixed effects. The regressions
are weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors are robust standard errors clustered by location.




                                                                 20
                                       A2: Agent Level Results Without Mombassa and Tahea
                                     Groups     Members      Savings      Loans    Loan Value     Profit   Payment
                   All Quarters      -3***      -52***       -220         -25***   -17            -34      -360***
                                     (0.6)      (14)         (460)        (11)     (470)          (170)    (11)
                   Quarter 1         -4***      -75***       -970         -45***   -950           -94      -210***
                                     (1)        (22)         (590)        (16)     (730)          (300)    (12)
                   Quarter 2         -3***      -53**        -820         -33*     -630           -420     -290***
                                     (1)        (24)         (800)        (18)     (820)          (310)    (15)
                   Quarter 3         -3***      -58**        -83          -31      -250           -48      -410***
                                     (1)        (29)         (890)        (22)     (900)          (280)    (19)
                   Quarter 4         -2         -22          980          6        1720           430      -540***
                                     (1)        (30)         (1180)       (24)     (1080)         (370)    (19)
                   Observations      874        874          874          874      874            874      874
                   Control Mean      21         430          7480         230      6830           1940     440

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome on a PSP or PSP*Quarter dummy and the following
controls: age, age squared, gender, number of languages spoken, number of children, number of financial dependents, dummies for
schooling i.e. primary completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of less than primary complete, cohort, and location-date fixed
effects. The regressions are weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors are robust.




                                                                     21
                                       A3: Group Level Results Without Mombassa and Tahea
                                         Members       Savings    Loans      Loan Value     Profit    Payment
                       All Quarters      0.8*          78*        0.6        50*            16*       -4***
                                         (0.5)         (46)       (1)        (27)           (9)       (0.8)
                       Quarter 1         0.4           37         -2         9              17        -9***
                                         (0.5)         (56)       (1)        (39)           (13)      (0.5)
                       Quarter 2         0.7           37         0.3        23             -4        -6***
                                         (0.5)         (48)       (1)        (25)           (12)      (0.7)
                       Quarter 3         1*            82         1          55*            16*       -2***
                                         (0.5)         (50)       (1)        (33)           (9)       (0.9)
                       Quarter 4         0.9*          140***     2          98***          31***     0.1
                                         (0.5)         (52)       (1)        (37)           (11)      (2)
                       Observations      16251         15721      15721      15721          15721     14424
                       Control Mean      21            260        10         230            50        9

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome on a PSP or PSP*Quarter dummy and the following
controls: age, age squared, gender, number of languages spoken, number of children, number of financial dependents, dummies for
schooling i.e. primary completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of less than primary complete, cohort, and location-date fixed
effects. The regressions are weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors are robust standard errors clustered by agent.




                                                                  22
                                     A4: Household Savings Results Without Mombassa and Tahea
                                Savings                    Source                                   Purpose
                        Total      Business   Business   Sell Agric.    Salary or   New Agric.   New Non-Agric.      Existing
                                    Owners     Profit     Product        Wage        Activity        Activity       Business
       PSP               31*          -8       15**          10           12*           6              0.03           19***
                         (16)        (24)       (8)         (15)           (6)         (10)             (2)            (6)
       Control mean      113         148        20           39            8           32                3              6
       Sample mean       134         144        29           41            16          35                2              18
       Median             50          64         0           0             0            0                0              0
       Observations     1720         783       1720         1720          1720        1720             1720           1720

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     Notes: The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome on a PSP dummy and the following controls:
age, age squared, gender, number of men, woman and children in the household, dummies for schooling i.e. some primary, primary
completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of no schooling. The regressions are weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors
are robust standard errors clustered by villages.




                                                                   23
                                      A5: Household Credit Results Without Mombassa and Tahea
                                       Credit                 Source                            Purpose
                               Total      Business   SILC   Formal      Informal    Agric.    Expanding     Start New
                                          Owners                                   Activity    Business      Business
              PSP              31**        27**      5**      20*         6**       10***       11***            2
                                (13)        (12)     (2)     (12)         (3)        (4)          (4)           (1)
              Control mean      46              38    9       26          10          6            5             2
              Sample mean       63              54    12      35          15         11           11             3
              Median           11.8         16        0        0           0          0            0             0
              Observations     1720         783      1720    1720        1720       1720         1720          1720

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     Notes: The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome on a PSP dummy and the following controls:
age, age squared, gender, number of men, woman and children in the household, dummies for schooling i.e. some primary, primary
completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of no schooling. The regressions are weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors
are robust standard errors clustered by villages.




                                                                   24
                            A6: Household Productive Decisions Results Without Mombassa and Tahea
                         Start New      Business     Hours spent        Employees   Hours spent     Agric.      Hours spent
                          Business     Investment    in Business        (non-HH)    as Employee   Investment      in Agric.
        PSP                 0.07*        19***           4**             0.14***        -2             5             -2
                           (0.04)          (7)            (1)            (0.05)         (2)          (12)            (2)
        Control mean         0.2           28             11               0.1          17            72             29
        Sample mean          0.2           39             13               0.2          15            73             29
        Median                0            0              0                 0           9             21             30
        Observations        1720          1720           1720             1720         1720          1720           1720

     ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
     Notes: The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome on a PSP dummy and the following controls:
age, age squared, gender, number of men, woman and children in the household, dummies for schooling i.e. some primary, primary
completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of no schooling. The regressions are weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors
are robust standard errors clustered by villages.




                                                                   25
                                    A7: Household Income Results Without Mombassa and Tahea
                                                    Total    Business         Total            Total
                                                    Income    Income       Expenditures    Consumption
                                PSP                  151         13            174              149
                                                    (116)       (16)          (142)            (134)
                                Control mean         393         65           1696             1595
                                Sample mean          488         69           1759             1647
                                Median               165         0            1387             1266
                                Observations        1720       1720           1720             1720

    ***, **, * indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence level, respectively.
    Notes: The results are estimated coefficients for a regression of the stated outcome on a PSP dummy and the following controls:
age, age squared, gender, number of men, woman and children in the household, dummies for schooling i.e. some primary, primary
completed, secondary, and tertiary with a baseline of no schooling. The regressions are weighted by sampling weights. Standard errors
are robust standard errors clustered by villages.




                                                                      26
