                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    WOMEN'S EMANCIPATION THROUGH EDUCATION:
                           A MACROECONOMIC ANALYSIS

                                           Fatih Guvenen
                                          Michelle Rendall

                                        Working Paper 18979
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w18979


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2013




For helpful discussions and comments, we thank seminar participants at European University Institute,
Goethe University Frankfurt, Toulouse School of Economics, Universite Catholique de Louvain, University
of Zurich, NBER's Aggregate Implications of Microeconomic Consumption Behavior in Cambridge,
and the SED conference. For financial support, Guvenen thanks the National Science Foundation (Grant
No 0814030) and Rendall thanks the European Research Council (ERC Advanced Grant IPCDP-229883).
The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Fatih Guvenen and Michelle Rendall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Women's Emancipation Through Education: A Macroeconomic Analysis
Fatih Guvenen and Michelle Rendall
NBER Working Paper No. 18979
April 2013
JEL No. D13,E24,J12

                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper, we study the role of education as insurance against a bad marriage. Historically, due
to disparities in earning power and education across genders, married women often found themselves
in an economically vulnerable position, and had to suffer one of two fates in a bad marriage: either
they get divorced (assuming it is available) and struggle as low-income single mothers, or they remain
trapped in the marriage. In both cases, education can provide a route to emancipation for women. To
investigate this idea, we build and estimate an equilibrium search model with education, marriage/
divorce/remarriage, and household labor supply decisions. A key feature of the model is that women
bear a larger share of the divorce burden, mainly because they are more closely tied to their children
relative to men. Our focus on education is motivated by the fact that divorce laws typically allow spouses
to keep the future returns from their human capital upon divorce (unlike their physical assets), making
education a good insurance against divorce risk. However, as women further their education, the earnings
gap between spouses shrinks, leading to more unstable marriages and, in turn, further increasing demand
for education. The framework generates powerful amplification mechanisms, which lead to a large
rise in divorce rates and a decline in marriage rates (similar to those observed in the US data) from
relatively modest exogenous driving forces. Further, in the model, women overtake men in college
attainment during the 1990s, a feature of the data that has proved challenging to explain. Our counterfactual
experiments indicate that the divorce law reform of the 1970s played an important role in all of these
trends, explaining more than one-quarter of college attainment rate of women post-1970s and one-half
of the rise in labor supply for married women.


Fatih Guvenen
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
4-151 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN, 55455
and NBER
guvenen@umn.edu

Michelle Rendall
University of Zurich
Muehlebachstr. 86
8008 Zurich
Switzerland
michelle.rendall@econ.uzh.ch
1     Introduction

    In this paper, we study the role of education as insurance against a bad marriage.
Historically, disparities in earning power and education across genders have contributed to
creating a vulnerable economic position for married women. Women in bad marriages are
faced with suﬀering one of two fates: either they get divorced (assuming it is available) and
struggle as low-income single mothers, or they remain trapped in the marriage. To establish
these ideas, the following two examples are instructive.
    First, writer Ilka Perez recounts her own experience as an uneducated divorced mother:
      Stress and struggle came with independence. When my daughter was young, I worked
      two jobs and still did not have enough money. Every month, I paid my rent extremely
      late. I had to go to food pantries or to my mother’s house for food.... I shed so many
      tears that I tried my best not to let my children see. I just kept telling myself, “I will
                                                              1
      do well by my children by first doing well by me.”

    The second excerpt describes being trapped in a bad marriage as an uneducated woman:

          Fraidy was 19 when her family arranged for her to marry a man who turned out to
      be violent. But with no education and no job, and a family that refused to help her,
      she felt stuck. Still stuck at age 27, Fraidy defied her husband and relatives to become
      the first person in her family to go to college. She graduated from Rutgers University
      at age 32 as valedictorian.... Fraidy went on to a career as an investigator at Kroll,
      the world’s largest investigations firm, and then at a private firm in New York. At the
      same time, Fraidy managed to get divorced, win full custody of her children and get
                                                          2
      a final restraining order against her ex-husband.

Examples similar to these are abundant and are familiar to all. In both of these cases
described above, education can provide a route to emancipation for women. The goal of
this paper is to quantify this insurance demand for education and to better understand its
interaction with some dramatic changes in the socio-economic status of American women
since the 1950s:

    I. Changes in marriage/divorce rates: The marriage rate fell by almost half between
      1950 and 2000, and the divorce rate doubled during the same time (Figure 1).
  1
    Ilka Perez, “What’s Worse Than Being a Single Mother?” Motherlode: Adventures in Parenting, New
York Times, May 22, 2012.
  2
    Biographical sketch of Fraidy Reiss, founder/executive director of Unchained at Last, accessed
April 8, 2013, http:www.unchainedatlast.org/.

                                                  2
  II. Reversal of the college-gender gap: The fraction of women with a college degree rose
       substantially: during the 1950s, for every college-educated woman, there were about
       two college-educated men; today, the college-gender gap is reversed, with more women
       than men graduating from college (Figure 2).

 III. Changes in female labor force participation: Married women started joining the labor
       market in droves, causing the average hours worked by this group to increase fourfold
       since 1950, an increase that far exceeds the change in any other demographic group.

This paper builds an overlapping generations search model—with marriage/divorce/remar-
riage, education, and household labor supply decisions—in which these three sets of trends
are intimately related to each other. The main focus of the paper is on two types of
asymmetries between men and women—gender-specific wage paths and, more importantly,
diﬀerent shares of divorce burden borne by each spouse—and on how these asymmetries
are amplified by the equilibrium interactions to generate powerful socio-economic changes.
    The story we investigate is a simple and, we believe, plausible one. Our point of de-
parture is that, when it comes to caring for children, women shoulder a larger share of the
burden relative to men. Therefore, any disturbance in a mother’s life that makes it harder
for her to care for her children is extremely costly (in utility terms), which makes her de-
mand insurance against such disturbances, such as divorce (more so than men). In this
context, education provides a valuable insurance for at least two reasons. First, without
the higher wages associated with higher education, a divorced mother would have to rely
on her ex-husband and face added uncertainty about whether her ex-husband would take
care of their children (via alimony or child support).3 Second, divorce laws typically allow
spouses to keep the full future returns from their human wealth upon divorce unlike their
physical assets (see, e.g., Bahr (1983)), making education a good insurance against divorce
risk. Put diﬀerently, educated women, being better able to survive divorce, are less likely
to be trapped in a bad marriage.
    In the model, marital bliss (i.e., love in marriage) fluctuates over time, which causes
each spouse to reevaluate individual marital options. Upon divorce, an individual faces
two types of cost. One, any subsequent household formed by a divorced individual has a
lower economies of scale parameter (i.e., is less eﬃcient), due to the diﬃculties of running
separate households and, upon remarriage, dealing with a stepparent and stepchildren.
   3
     In 1986, only 42% of individuals who were eligible for alimony (overwhelmingly women) were able to
receive it on a regular basis; 31% never received it, and the rest received only occasionally. (Source: General
Social Survey 1986, available at NORC at University of Chicago, http://www3.norc.org/GSS+Website/.)


                                                      3
                                                           Marriage rate                                                                                                      Divorce rate
                                                                                                                                                              Ages 15 and older, US data
                                                                                   Ages 15 and older, US data                                                 Ages 20 to 34, US data
Marriage Rate p er 1000 Unmarried Woman




                                                                                                                                                       40




                                                                                                                Divorce Rate p er 1000 Married Woman
                                          250                                      Ages 20 to 34, US Data



                                          200
                                                                                                                                                       30


                                          150


                                                                                                                                                       20
                                          100



                                           50
                                                                                                                                                       10


                                            0                                                                                                          1940      1950       1960       1970      1980   1990   2000
                                           1940     1950   1960   1970      1980         1990         2000
                                                                     Year                                                                                                                 Year




Figure 1: Marriage and Divorce Rates. Data for the population ages 15 and older are obtained
from the National Vital Statistics. Statistics for the group ages 20 to 34 are constructed by the authors
using data from the National Center for Health Statistics.


Because mothers overwhelmingly have the custody of children after divorce, we assume
that women bear a disproportionate share of this cost. In a robustness analysis, we explore
alternative assumptions. A second type of cost is that divorced individuals are less eﬃcient
than singles at meeting new prospective spouses.
                                                Whether a divorce actually takes place also depends on the legal system. Under the
consent divorce regime, the weaker spouse is protected from the involuntary dissolution of
marriage by the requirement that both spouses consent to divorce. In a unilateral regime,
divorce is granted upon the application of one spouse. As we review in the next section,
the consent regime was the predominant legal framework in virtually all US states before
the 1960s. However, the 1970s have witnessed a rapid transformation of state laws, leading
to the current widespread prevalence of unilateral divorce.
                                                The utility function for couples features perfect substitutability in home production and
perfect complementarity between the two spouses’ leisure times. This structure generates
specialization in the division of labor (à la Becker (1981, chap. 2)), giving rise to low-
wage spouses (most likely the wife in the 1950s) staying out of the labor market. As
the gender wage gap closes, married women start joining the labor market, which in turn
makes their wages matter to prospective spouses in the marriage market. This eﬀect is
substantially amplified in the presence of divorce risk, which leads more women to obtain
more education and earn higher wages. This, in turn, causes the earnings gap between
spouses to shrink, leading to more unstable marriages, further increasing divorces and the

                                                                                                                4
demand for education. This chain of events creates a powerful amplification mechanism.4
       The widespread change in divorce laws in the 1970s—what we will refer to generally as
divorce reform—is incorporated into our model as one of the main driving forces. A second
driving force is the changes in the relative wages of workers by gender and education.5 We
estimate the structural parameters of this model using a method of simulated moments
estimator. With the exception of two moments, all the rest are computed from the US
economy in 2005. We then study how the model performs in explaining the three sets of
socio-economic trends described above from 1950 to 2005.
       The estimated structural model generates several plausible empirical patterns. For ex-
ample, the divorce rate rises very slowly in the 1950s and 1960s, then surges during the
1970s, and then declines very gradually after the 1980s, as in the US data. The latter de-
cline is due to the better matching of spouses in new marriages formed under the unilateral
regime (i.e., the selection eﬀect). The marriage rate in the model also falls throughout the
period under study, by a magnitude similar to that in the data. The model also generates
other well-documented trends, such as the assortative matching patterns by education, the
rising age at first marriage over time, remarriage rates declining since the 1960s, and the
correct fraction of men and women who never marry, who divorce at least once, and so on.
       We now turn to education. One of the main results of the paper is that the estimated
model generates the reversal of the college-gender gap, matching both its magnitude and its
timing in the US data. Furthermore, in Section 8, we show that the OECD countries with
the largest rise in divorce rates from the 1960s to the 2000s also witnessed the largest decline
in male-to-female ratio of college attainment rates, as predicted by our model. Finally, the
model generates about 90% of the (large) rise in the labor supply of married women and
little change for single men and women, as in the US data. A shortcoming of the model,
however, is that it predicts a decline in the labor supply of married men over this period,
which is not borne out in the data.
       We conduct counterfactual experiments to gauge the importance of various driving forces
in the model. Our decompositions show that divorce reform is responsible for some of the
most important trends, such as the reversal of the college-gender gap, the rise in the divorce
rate and the fall in the marriage rate, and the rise in married women’s labor supply.
   4
    It also raises the possibility of multiple equilibria, which we check for and investigate numerically.
   5
    Although in the main analysis we take these wage trends to be exogenous with respect to the model,
in Appendix A we present an extension of our model in which both sets of wage trends can be generated
through skill-biased technical change in a two-factor human capital model.



                                                    5
   We also quantify two separate benefits of education. First, we measure the insurance
value against a bad marriage by asking how much educated married individuals would need
to be compensated in an economy where they expect to live as an uneducated person once
they divorce. The measured welfare benefit ranges from 22% to 40% of average market
hours for women, is higher for women than for men, rises significantly over time, and also
rises with the ability level of the woman. For a woman with a median ability level, the
monetary value is more than $11,000 per year in post-1975 cohorts (Table VIII). Second,
we measure the value of education for attracting a better spouse. Although this eﬀect has
been noted in theoretical work before (Chiappori et al. (2009)), we are not aware of an
empirical estimate of its value in the literature. We find that this eﬀect too is nonnegligible,
ranging from one-half to one-third of the benefit of the insurance channel. It also increases
over time and it is somewhat higher for women than for men, but it does not vary by the
ability of the individual.

1.1    Related Literature

A growing literature studies socio-economic questions in which families play a central role.
In terms of methodology, our paper is most closely related to the quantitative search and
matching models of the marriage/divorce process, starting with original contributions by
Aiyagari et al. (2000), Caucutt et al. (2002), and Chade and Ventura (2002), among others.
Aiyagari et al. (2000) were the first to build a prototypical search model of marriage and
divorce and examine its quantitative implications for intergenerational mobility of earnings.
Caucutt et al. (2002) and Chade and Ventura (2002) studied, respectively, the timing of
fertility in households and the eﬀect of income taxation on household formation.
   Little research has focused on the feedback between education choice and divorce de-
cision, especially in the context of the socio-economic trends studied in this paper. A
notable contemporaneous paper is Greenwood et al. (2012), which examines diﬀerences in
marriage/divorce patterns by education levels. Their main emphasis is on improvements in
household technologies and how these interact with stronger diminishing marginal utility in
home-produced goods relative to market goods. They do not study the impact of divorce
reform and its interaction with the asymmetric costs of divorce across spouses, which is
the main hypothesis explored in our paper. To explain the reversal of the college-gender
gap, Chiappori et al. (2009) emphasize the higher returns to education for women in the
marriage market. They theoretically show that if the gender wage gap is smaller for women
with higher education and household labor hours decline over time, the combined eﬀect can

                                               6
lead to higher educational attainment for women.
    Two recent papers also explore the implications of divorce reform on family outcomes
using structural models. Marcassa (2009) argues that changes in property division after
divorce are key to understanding the rise in divorce rates, especially for educated couples
with children. Similarly, Voena (2012) provides a careful structural empirical analysis that
focuses on the interaction of divorce reform with state laws on the division of property in
order to tease out the distortions in household intertemporal savings behavior. Here, we
abstract from saving in physical assets (partly because the typical couple at the median
divorce age in the United States has little physical wealth) and instead focus on human
capital (whose present discounted value is substantial for most individuals) and how that
choice is aﬀected by divorce risk. Therefore, our paper is complementary to these two
papers in analyzing diﬀerent aspects of divorce reform on family outcomes. Finally, Salcedo
et al. (2012) study the rise in single household families since the 1850s, by modeling how
economies of scale in home production improve over time.
    Finally, an ongoing debate in the literature attempts to empirically establish whether
divorce reform has increased divorce rates (indicating that Coasian bargains are not taking
place; see note 9 for details). Although the literature broadly agrees that divorce rates rose
significantly in the short run after reform, the long-run eﬀects of divorce reform are the
source of heated debate. Our findings are more in line with Wolfers (2006), but our results
reveal only a partial reversal of the initial surge in divorce rates, whereas Wolfers argues
for a full reversal. By bringing in a structural model and spelling out the diﬀerent driving
forces and mechanisms that operate in response to reform, our analysis provides insights
that cannot be gleaned from reduced-form empirical analysis alone.


2     Empirical Trends
This section presents the empirical trends in marriage and divorce, in college attainment
rates by gender, and in labor supply that we shall study in the empirical analysis.6

2.1     Historical Background on US Divorce Laws

In the United States, the power to legislate in the area of marriage and divorce rests with
the states, which historically gave rise to (often significant) variation in divorce laws across
   6
     All statistics reported in this section are computed from the 1962–2005 Current Population Survey In-
tegrated Public Use Micro-data Samples (CPS-IPUMS), unless otherwise noted. Further details of variable
construction and data issues are discussed in Appendix C.


                                                    7
states. The origins of divorce laws go back to the 19th century, when most states adopted
laws that were strongly influenced by the English canon law, which allowed divorce only
if one spouse could be shown to have committed a serious marital fault that qualified as
grounds for divorce. With few exceptions, the only acceptable grounds for divorce were
adultery, desertion (for extended periods of time), and extreme physical cruelty (Freed and
Jr. (1969)). These limited grounds for divorce made terminating a marriage diﬃcult even
when both spouses wished to divorce.
       After World War II, with changing social norms, many couples (or one of the spouses)
found themselves trapped in marriages they wanted to terminate. This development led to
couples colluding to concoct evidence of adultery, or one spouse condoning the oﬀense, or
conniving the other spouse into committing the oﬀense to be able to divorce (see Jacob-
son (1959), Freed and Jr. (1981), and Jacob (1988) for many examples).7 Courts became
complicit in these schemes to circumvent the laws, and divorce rulings increasingly went
unchallenged by third parties. There was also a significant amount of migratory divorce
(couples crossing state lines to obtain divorce), whose importance grew substantially during
the postwar period. Nevada, with its short six-week in-state residency requirement for di-
vorce, became a Mecca for divorce seekers. In his aptly titled book The Road to Reno, Blake
(1962) estimated that about 60% of all divorces granted in Nevada before the 1960s were
to couples from New York and New Jersey—states that had narrow definitions of grounds
for divorce and required extended separation. As a diﬀerent measure, Jacobson (1959) es-
timated that between one-third and one-half of all divorces obtained by New Yorkers were
obtained outside of that state.8 Because these schemes made divorce de facto possible when
both spouses agreed to a divorce, scholars of family law consider mutual-consent to be the
key condition and not the presence of fault (Freed and Jr. (1969)). Following this tradition,
we refer to this earlier period as the consent regime.
       The growing gap between the laws in the books and society’s (including the judges’)
interpretation of what is right and fair began to exert increasing pressure on state legislatures
to expand the grounds for divorce. In a watershed development, the state of California
adopted the Family Law Act in 1969, which instituted one neutral condition for divorce:
   7
     To be clear, some of these schemes were well known and were used even in the 18th century. For
example, in the 1830s, the New York state supreme court justice James Kent observed that some individuals
were committing adultery simply to obtain a divorce warrant (Jacobson (1959)). The prevalence and
sophistication of such schemes grew dramatically in the 20th century and especially in the postwar period
(see Jacob (1988) for details).
   8
     Since migratory divorce is typically quite costly, low-income husbands instead chose to desert their
family and move west, an action that was dubbed “poor men’s divorce.”


                                                   8
“irreconcilable diﬀerences leading to the irremediable breakdown of the marriage.” Around
the same time, the American Bar Association and the National Conference of Commissioners
on Uniform State Laws formed a joint commission to work on the Uniform Marriage and
Divorce Act, which was intended as a harmonized framework for state legislatures that
considered reform. The 1970s witnessed a rapid adoption by states of some version of these
no-fault/unilateral divorce laws. By 1980, all states other than Illinois and South Dakota
had some form of no-fault divorce (Freed and Jr. (1981)).9
    In this paper, divorce reform will be modeled as a one time change from the consent
regime to the unilateral regime that happened in 1975. We have also experimented with a
more gradual change that happened from the late 1960s until the early 1980s (following the
fraction of states that reformed in each year), which yielded very similar results. Therefore,
for the sake of simplicity, we only present the case with a one-time change.

Was Divorce Reform Anticipated Before it Happened? When one reads through
the historical evidence, some of which has been summarized above, it is hard to imagine that
individuals living through those changing times and witnessing the growing social pressures
for change were surprised by the subsequent reforms. Hence, our baseline assumption is
that divorce reform was not expected before 1950; during the 1950s and 1960s, however,
individuals came to anticipate future reforms (even though the then-current laws required
mutual consent). In Appendix D, we study the case with no prior anticipation of divorce
reform. As should be evident, these expectations can have an eﬀect on the transition path
before reform, but have little eﬀect on the statistics pertaining to the latter period (2000s),
since the pre-1970s cohorts make up a small part of the population by that time.

Marriage and Divorce Rate Trends. By every measure, the marriage rate declined
significantly in the second half of the 20th century (see the left panel of Figure 1). For
example, in 1950, the annual marriage rate was about 90 marriages per 1,000 unmarried
adult women (defined as women aged 15 and older). By 2005, this rate had dropped by
more than half, to slightly more than 40 marriages per 1,000.10 Restricting attention to
   9
     A famous theoretical result, known as the Becker-Coase theorem, states that if spouses can costlessly
bargain, changes in divorce laws that assign the right to divorce should have no eﬀect on divorce rates
and welfare. Chiappori et al. (2008) review the existing empirical evidence, which casts doubt on the
assumption of costless bargaining and, consequently, on the empirical applicability of this result. They
further provide a careful theoretical analysis to show that the Becker-Coase theorem itself holds only under
quite restrictive assumptions, especially when spouses consume a public good. Consistent with this view,
we adopt a non-Coasian perspective in this paper and analyze its implications.
  10
     Source: National Vital Statistics. The statistics reported here are for legally married individuals,
leaving out cohabitation. The latter has been on the rise, which can partly oﬀset the decline (to the extent

                                                     9
young women (ages 20 to 34) reveals a similarly dramatic drop. For this group, we do
not have statistics for the entire length of this period, but we have been able to compute
marriage and divorce rates from 1968 to 1995 using data from the National Center for
Health Statistics. The marriage rate for this group declines from 250 marriages per year
in 1968 to less than 100 marriages by 1995, with an especially steep fall during the 1970s,
which coincides with the timing of the divorce reforms.
    Next, we turn to divorce (Figure 1, right panel). The 1950s and 1960s witnessed a low
and slowly increasing divorce rate (around 10 to 12 divorces per year per 1,000 married
adult women). The divorce rate started climbing rapidly in the 1970s to reach about 28
divorces by 1980 and subsequently fell slowly to about 25 divorces by 2005. The same
pattern is observed for young women, with a higher level throughout the period.
    It is worth adding that the same trends in marriage and divorce described here have
been observed in a broad set of developed countries since the 1950s, which provides further
data points to study. Although a full cross-country analysis is beyond the scope of this
paper, we take a first look at the implications of our model for these data in Section 8.

2.2     College Attainment and the Gender Gap

Figure 2 plots the college attainment rate, which is measured as the fraction of individuals
(male or female) ages 25 to 29 with a four-year college degree. We take away two main
facts from this graph. First, in 1950 men were much more likely than women (almost
twice as likely) to have completed college. In fact, changing the definition of attainment
to include two-year colleges raises the ratio to 2.3 men for one woman in 1950. Second,
although college attainment has risen strongly for both groups until the mid-1970s, men’s
college enrollment became stagnant after that time, whereas women’s enrollment continued
to grow. By the early 1990s, the gap had vanished, and it has reversed since then. In 2005,
only 85 men for every 100 young women had a college degree.11
    Interestingly, this trend too has not been limited to the United States. Goldin et al.
(2006) study 17 OECD countries and note that in 1985, only 4 of these countries had a
that we view cohabitation as a substitute for marriage). Data on cohabitation are diﬃcult to come by in
earlier periods, but we can measure it for the period between 1995 and 2005 using CPS data: on average,
93% of all couples living together were legally married. Given the more transitory nature of cohabitation as
well as the substantial magnitude of the overall decline in marriage rates between 1950 to 2005, this eﬀect
seems modest.
   11
      As emphasized by Goldin et al. (2006, p. 138), this reversal of the college-gender gap cannot be
explained by compositional changes (e.g., changes in mix of ethnicities or types of schools attended), since
it has been pervasive across the population and observed in all types of postsecondary schools.

                                                    10
                                          Female/Male Wage Ratio                                                                                        College Attainment by Gender

                                                                                                                                              0.4
                          0.85
                                                                                                                                                      Females
                                   Uneducated workers, US data
                                                                                                                                                      Males
                                   Educated workers, US data                                                                                 0.35




                                                                                                  Fraction College Educated, Ages 25 to 29
                           0.8
 Female/Male Wage Ratio




                                                                                                                                              0.3

                          0.75
                                                                                                                                             0.25


                           0.7                                                                                                                0.2


                                                                                                                                             0.15
                          0.65

                                                                                                                                              0.1
                           0.6

                                                                                                                                             0.05

                          0.55
                            1950       1960        1970          1980   1990   2000   2010                                                     0
                                                                 Year                                                                          1950        1960   1970     1980   1990   2000   2005
                                                                                                                                                                         Year



Figure 2: Gender Gaps in Wages and College Attainment. Source: Authors’ calculations
from the Current Population Survey’s IPUMS data.


men-to-women attainment ratio below one, whereas this number increased to 15 countries
by 2002 (and the remaining 2 countries—Turkey and Switzerland—witnessed a falling ratio
during the period). They conclude by saying that “any explanation of how U.S. women
have caught up and surpassed men in college trends should be consistent with this common
pattern of international changes (p. 138).” As we shall see below, the dependence between
divorce rates and education choice oﬀers a possible explanation for the reversal of the
college-gender gap that is consistent with these trends.
                           Finally, and as previously mentioned, some papers have explained this reversal by ap-
pealing to the higher returns women receive from education in the marriage market (e.g., by
allowing them to better compete for desirable spouses). This channel will be active in our
model as well. However, notice that since the 1970s increasing college attainment for women
has been accompanied a declining marriage rate, which suggests that some additional forces
are at play. Furthermore, even today, women’s wages and labor force participation rates
are lower than those for men for all education levels, which can make the reversal of the
education gap seem puzzling.

2.3                                Wage Trends: College Premium and Gender Wage Gap

During much of the period under study, women’s wages were catching up with those of
men, even within education groups, as shown in Table I. We normalize the average wage for
males with a (four-year) college degree in 1950 to 1.0. The table also reports the implied
compounded annual growth rates in wages from 1950 to 2005. Two important points should

                                                                                             11
            Table I: Wages and Wage Growth Rates by Gender and Education
                 Gender/Education Group    1950    2005      Average annual
                                                             growth rate (%)
                 Male       College        1.00    1.83           1.10
                            No College     0.70    1.03           0.70

                 Female     College        0.67    1.34           1.27
                            No College     0.45    0.79           1.03


be noted. First, the rise in the college wage premium is evident, particularly for women,
with a 0.27% higher growth rate per year for college graduates from 1950 to 2005. Second,
the gender wage gap has closed more slowly among college-educated workers, with women’s
wages growing annually 0.17% faster than educated men’s wages, compared with a 0.33%
growth diﬀerence for uneducated individuals. In Appendix A, we describe a simple model
of wages by gender and education, which generates these trends from skill-biased technical
change. In the main text, we will keep that model in the background and take the wage
trends as exogenous driving forces of our model.

2.4    Labor Force Participation and Labor Supply

The second half of the 20th century has witnessed a dramatic increase in the labor supply
of married women, leading Becker (1994) to declare this trend “the most important labor
force change during the past twenty-five years.” Specifically, the average market hours of
married young women (ages 25 to 34) rose from about 8 hours per week in 1950 to about
26 hours by 2005. Similarly, the labor force participation rate of married women increased
from 33% in 1960 to almost 70% in 1990. At the same time, market hours has remained
fairly steady (increasing by about 2-3 hours per week) for both married and single men as
well as for single women.
   Although the main focus of this paper is on marriage/divorce and education, these
substantial changes in married women’s time allocation away from home production and
leisure to market work is impossible to ignore because these changes are an integral part of
the transformation of women’s role in society. We shall therefore investigate labor supply
patterns over time as an auxiliary implication of the model we study.




                                            12
3     Model
Consider an overlapping generations economy, populated with equal numbers of men and
women in each cohort. Individuals live for T < 1 periods and make (i) a static time
allocation decision—between market work, home production, and leisure—every period, (ii)
a dynamic marriage/divorce decision every period, and (iii) a one-time education decision
when young. We begin by describing individuals’ preferences and then turn to each one of
these three decisions and describe them in more detail.

3.1    Preferences

Each individual has three uses for his/her time: market work, ni ; home production, hi ; or
leisure time, `i ; where i = 1, 2 indexes each spouse. Hence, we have

                                      hi + ni + `i = 1,                                   (1)

where the total discretionary time endowment is normalized to one for convenience.
    Spouses derive utility from a composite consumption good, c, which is produced by
combining market goods (k) and each spouse’s home production time, hi , according to the
following constant elasticity of substitution (CES) technology:
                                                                     1
                            c = ( k ↵ + (1       ) (A(h1 + h2 ))↵ ) ↵ .


    Notice that spouses are assumed to be perfectly substitutable in home production, re-
flecting the view that household chores/tasks can be shared between spouses and performed
individually, without requiring much input from the other spouse. This assumption also
allows us to generate specialization in market work in a simple fashion: the spouse with a
higher wage will work full-time (i.e., h = 0) before the other spouse joins the labor market.
With a positive gender wage gap, this mechanism generates a lower labor force participation
rate for women than for men, consistent with the data. Although this assumption is not
necessary and can be relaxed, it is convenient for generating the significant nonparticipation
by married women, especially in the 1950s.
    The home production function for singles (including divorced individuals) has the same
form but adjusts for the lack of a spouse:
                                                               1
                                c = ( k ↵ + (1       ) (Ah)↵ ) ↵ .

                                             13
       Individuals are assumed to spend their entire income every period (i.e., no saving tech-
nology), so spending on market goods is given by k = (w1 n1 + w2 n2 ) for couples and k = wn
for singles. During marriage, spouses also enjoy the company of each other, which is modeled
here as perfect complementarity between spouses’ leisure times: v(`1 , `2 ) = min(`1 , `2 ).12
Although the assumption of perfect complementarity is not necessary—and some substi-
tutability can be allowed for—it simplifies the solution of the model. One empirical moti-
vation for this specification is the well-documented fact that on average, men and women
enjoy similar amounts of leisure, which is true not only over time but also across education
levels.13

Loves Me, Loves Me Not. A match-specific, time-varying stochastic term, b, aﬀects
the value of the leisure activity: b ⇥ min(`1 , `2 ). Its initial value (when two singles first
meet) is drawn from a normal distribution: b0 ⇠ N (µb ,               2
                                                                      b ).   During marriage, bt evolves as
a random walk process:

                             bt+1 = bt + ⌘t+1 ,        where ⌘t+1 ⇠ N (0,        2
                                                                                 ⌘ ).                        (2)


       Note that in this formulation, the initial draw b0 has a permanent eﬀect on the value of
love during a marriage. The innovations during marriage, ⌘t , have zero mean and variance of
 ⌘.    Thus, there is no presumption that bt will always be positive (marital bliss or love)—it
 2

can also be negative (marital distress).
       To our knowledge, the modeling of love as a term that interacts with a couple’s en-
dogenous decisions is novel to this paper and serves several purposes. First, it captures the
adaptable nature of marriage that makes it more resilient to fluctuations in love: couples
can mitigate marital distress (bt < 0) by setting `1 = `2 = 0 or further amplify the eﬀects
of love through their choices of leisure. With marital distress, spouses get no joy living to-
gether but may nevertheless stay married because of the income/home production benefits
of marriage. The fact that negative values of bt are irrelevant to the couple motivates our
use of love or bliss to describe it, even though it can be negative.
  12
      An alternative interpretation/motivation for this specification is that even if leisure times are not spent
jointly, spouses do not enjoy their free time (guilt?) when their partner has little of it. Or, perhaps, as the
old maxim goes: You can never be happier than your spouse—hence the “min” operator.
   13
      For example, Aguiar and Hurst (2007a, Table V) report that, even though men and women have
diﬀerent hours of market work and home production (which also varies over time and across education
levels), when the two components are added, they add up almost to the same figures, leaving both genders
to enjoy slightly more than 100 hours of leisure per week.



                                                       14
   Second, this specification also implies that how much love matters in marriage depends
on the economic environment and alternative uses of time. For example, a couple that
struggles financially and therefore has both spouses working long hours would find love
to be a luxury that plays a small role in their life. Hence, depending on the choice of
parameters, marriages can evolve over time from being mainly productive (i.e., home or
market production) to being mainly hedonic (i.e., love and play), as suggested, for example,
by Stevenson and Wolfers (2007). We will return to this point in Section 6.4 and measure
the extent of this transformation.

Putting the Pieces Together

To summarize, in its most general form, the utility of an individual—whether single, mar-
ried, or divorced—can be written as
                                                                      1
                                               (c(k, h1 , h2 )/ i )
                p
              U (k, h1 , h2 , `1 , `2 ; b, ) =                                    +     p
                                                                                            b ⇥ min (`1 , `2 ) .                 (3)
                                                      1 {z                                      | {z }
                                               |                          }                           Leisure
                                                Utility from Home Production



   The economies of scale parameter,                  i
                                                          (where i indexes household type as described
below), converts total household consumption into per-spouse units. For example, because
couples typically have children, the total consumption good c will need to be divided among
several household members. The typical assumption that                            i
                                                                                      is smaller than the number of
family members implies economies of scale in household consumption (which we will allow
for in the empirical analysis).
   The utility function for singles can be obtained from (3) by setting                                   s
                                                                                                              = 1 (superscript
s indicating “single”), n2 = 0, `1 = `2 = `, and b = 1:
                                                                              1
                                               ( k ↵ + (1         )(Ah)↵ )        ↵
                             U s (k, h, `) =                                          +      s
                                                                                                 `.                              (4)
                                                            1

   Finally to obtain balanced growth, At is assumed to grow at the same rate as wages
                                                            p
(which we denote with 1 + g), while              s
                                                 t   and    t   grow over time at rate (1 + g)(1                     )
                                                                                                                         .

Cost of Divorce.             The utility function of divorced individuals is the same as that of
singles (4), with one important exception: to capture the higher divorce costs for women,
we will consider       d,f
                             >   d,m
                                       =   s
                                               = 1 for currently divorced individuals and                           p,d
                                                                                                                             >   p,s
                                                                                                                                       ,
where   p,d
              is for a married couple in which the wife was previously divorced and                                 p,s
                                                                                                                             is for a

                                                           15
couple with a previously unmarried wife. These specifications treat divorced and remarried
men just like singles, which is an important source of asymmetry between the two sexes.

3.2       Dynamic Marriage/Divorce Decision

Since love evolves over the life of a marriage, it causes spouses to reevaluate every period
whether or not they want to divorce. Whether divorce actually takes place or not also
depends on the legal system. As discussed earlier, under consent divorce laws (prevalent
before the 1970s), a divorce request is granted only when both spouses prefer to separate
(or one spouse is shown to be at fault). If only one spouse wants to divorce, he/she will
be trapped in the marriage. Under the unilateral divorce regime, which is the norm today,
divorce can be granted upon the request of only one spouse.

Timing of Events. To understand the notation in the upcoming equations, we need to
be clear about the timing of events. First, each new cohort enters the economy in a year
divisible by five, that is, in 1940, 1945,..., 2000, 2005, and so on. Second, individuals can
only marry someone in their own cohort. This assumption is made for technical convenience
and is not too unrealistic (the average age diﬀerence between spouses is less than four
years throughout our sample period). Third, the aggregate equilibrium functions in the
model are computationally very costly to solve for, so allowing these aggregates to change
every year makes the analysis intractable. Therefore, we shall assume that all aggregate
equilibrium functions (and most important, the marriage market matching functions) evolve
slowly—getting updated every five years. However, individuals make all their decisions—
marriage/divorce and labor supply—every year. Furthermore, for a given cohort, age and
time are perfectly correlated, so t denotes both variables when writing one cohort’s problem.
       Now let z denote the suﬃcient state vector that summarizes all information for a given
individual (male or female) at age t: z ⌘ (hh, e, w), where hh is an indicator for household
type of the individual (married, single, or divorced), e is the education level (1 if college
graduate or 0 if no college graduate), and w is his/her wage rate. Now let                            t
                                                                                                      m (zm ; ef )
denote the probability for a woman of education type ef of meeting a man (both age t)
with characteristics given by zm . Let         f (zf ; em ) be defined
                                               t
                                                                         analogously for men. From the
discussion above, it should be clear        that 1f ⌘ 2f ⌘ ... ⌘ 5f      6=   6
                                                                              f   ⌘   7
                                                                                      f ...,   and so on.14
  14
    Clearly, these are restrictions on equilibrium objects. So, the assumption is that individuals slowly
update their beliefs about the correct fractions of each type over time. It turns out in the estimated model,
the equilibrium fractions indeed change slowly in years not divisible by five, so this is not necessarily a bad
assumption.


                                                      16
       As seems plausible, we assume that the likelihood of meeting an eligible person (i.e.,
single or divorced) in the dating market depends on the fraction of eligibles in the economy.
To capture this in a simple way, we assume that each eligible woman meets a man with
certainty, but can marry only if the person she met is not already married (thus, eligible).
Therefore, the actual probability of a useful meeting is less than one. That is:
                       X                                               X
                               t
                               m (zm ; ef )   = 1 and                              t
                                                                                   m (zm ; ef )   < 1,
                        zm                                      zm (hh6=married)


where the second summation is taken across all elements of zm that excludes married indi-
viduals. An analogous condition holds for men. (We describe the dynamic problems from
the perspective of women. Analogous equations for men are easily understood.)

Assortative Meeting. We allow the meeting rates of individuals by education level to
diﬀer from what would be implied by purely random meetings across all individuals. Specif-
              e ef
ically, let ✓mm      > 0 be a scaling factor that drives a wedge between the population fraction
of males with education em and the probability that a woman with education ef meets such
                               e em
males. Similarly, let ✓ff             be the analogous scaling factor for men. The probability of a
woman with education ef meeting a man with education em is

                                              t                 e ef
                                              m (zm ; ef )   = ✓mm     ⇥ Pmt (zm ),

where Pmt (zm ) denotes the population fraction of men with characteristics zm at age t.
Assortative meeting means ✓m
                           11
                              > 1. We also assume that the probabilities for the same type
of women meeting uneducated men are scaled down appropriately, so that the probabilities
add up to one. That is,
                                                     P            11
                                                1               [✓m   ⇥ Pmt (zm )]
                                       01
                                      ✓m  ⌘          Pzm ,em =1     t
                                                                                   .
                                                       zm ,em =0 [Pm (zm )]


       Finally, the population fractions of each group in equilibrium also impose the following
                     e ef
restriction:15 ✓mm          ⇥ max(Pmt , Pft )  1.
  15
    To see why this condition is needed, suppose, for example, that there are 100 males and 100 females,
with 20 educated males and 30 educated females. Assuming that each educated female meets an educated
male with a probability higher than 66.6% is not meaningful. To be consistent with this assumption, there
would need to be more than 20 educated males or more than one meeting per period, neither of which we
allow. An analogous condition from the men’s perspective must also be satisfied. Both of these sets of
conditions are satisfied when the condition given in the text holds.


                                                               17
Value Functions and Decision Thresholds. First, substituting the static optimal
choices (for leisure as well as home and market hours) into the period utility functions (3)
or (4) yields indirect utility functions, which we denote with V s (wf ), V d (wf ;                       d,f
                                                                                                                ) for single
and divorced women, respectively, and V (b, zm ; zf ,  p              p
                                                                          ) for married couples. Notice that a
married couple’s (static) indirect utility depends on the relevant economies of scale, which
itself depends on each spouse’s marital history.
       Now, let J f (b, zm ; zf ,   t
                                    m)   denote the value function of a woman with characteristics zf
married to a man with characteristics zm when the love level is b. Further, let S f (zf ,                            t
                                                                                                                     m)   de-
note the value function of the same individual when single and Df (zf ,                       t
                                                                                              m)   when divorced.16
(It is understood that the component of z denoting partnership status matches up with the
value function type in each case.)
       Now let bf (zm ; zf ) denote the threshold level of love, above which a woman with char-
acteristics zf prefers to marry a man of type zm over staying single. Formally:

                      bf (zm ; zf ) = min b        s.t. J f (b, zm ; zf ,    t
                                                                             m)   S f (zf ,   t
                                                                                              m ).



       Let bm (zf ; zm ) denote the analogous threshold for the man who meets the very same
(type of) woman. Clearly, the two thresholds can diﬀer. We assume, as seems plausible,
that a meeting turns into a marriage if both potential spouses prefer marriage over being
single. So, let B p (zf , zm ) ⌘ max(bm , bf ) be the threshold that determines the marriage
between these two individuals. Similarly, we can define thresholds for married individuals
contemplating divorce. Specifically, for the wife:

                     bd,f (zm ; zf ) = min b        s.t. J f (b, zm ; zf ,   t
                                                                             m)    Df (zf ,    t
                                                                                               m );


and bd,m (zf ; zm ) is analogously defined for her husband.

When Does Divorce Take Place? Unlike marriage, divorce does not always require
both spouses’ agreement. In the consent regime, both spouses must jointly want to divorce,
so the divorce threshold is determined by the spouse that is more willing to remain married:

                                          B cd (zf , zm ) = min(bd,m , bd,f ),
  16
    Notice that the two value functions will not be identical, i.e., S f ⌘ Df , even when             d
                                                                                                          = , because a
divorced individual has to wait before he/she can reenter the marriage market.




                                                           18
where the superscript “cd” stands for “consent divorce.” In the unilateral regime, the divorce
threshold for love has the same form as the marriage threshold, but with diﬀerent arguments:

                                               B ud (zf , zm ) ⌘ max(bd,m , bd,f ),

where the superscript “ud” stands for “unilateral divorce.” 17 Therefore, as soon as marital
bliss falls below this threshold, the spouse with the higher love threshold would file for,
and be granted, divorce. Other variables are defined analogously. Finally, we assume that
individuals can marry and divorce over the same period that they are potentially in the
labor market: t = 1, 2, . . . , T .18 For a single woman with education level i, the dynamic
program is
                                 0                                               1
                                                   X
Stf (zf ,   t
            m)   =V s (wf ) +    @1                             t           A f
                                                                m (zm ; ef ) St+1 (zf ,
                                                                                                   t+1
                                                                                                   m )
                                          zm (hh6=married)
                                                          "Z                                                     Z                                      #!
                           X                                   1                                                     Bp
                                                                     f                                                        f
                 +                         t
                                           m (zm ; ef )             Jt+1 (b0 , zm ; zf ,      t+1      0
                                                                                              m )dF0 (b )    +               St+1 (zf ,   t+1      0
                                                                                                                                          m )dF0 (b )        ,
                     zm (hh6=married)                          Bp                                                    1

                                                                                                                                                   (5)

where the arguments of B p are suppressed. For a married woman living under a unilateral
divorce regime, the problem is
                                                                                 Z    1
                 Jtf (b, zm ; zf ,   t
                                     m)
                                               p
                                          = V (b, zm ; zf ;          p
                                                                         )+                   f
                                                                                             Jt+1 (b0 , zm ; zf ,    t+1      0
                                                                                                                     m ) dF (b |b)
                                                                                      B ud
                                                                    Z                                                #
                                                                         B ud
                                                                                 f               t+1      0
                                                               +                Dt+1 (zf ,       m ) dF (b |b)           ,                         (6)
                                                                         1


where F (b0 |b) is the conditional distribution that describes the evolution of marital bliss
during marriage, and again, the arguments of B ud are suppressed. The problem for the
consent regime is obtained by replacing the limits of the integration with B cd .
       Finally, recall that one cost of divorce is that individuals stay out of the marriage market
for a certain amount of time. We model this process as follows, which captures the main idea
and is much more computationally tractable than alternatives. We assume that divorced
individuals can only meet potential spouses every five years (divisible by five). So, whereas
a single person can meet a potential mate every year, a divorced individual can do that
every five years: if an individual divorces in 1982, she has to wait three years until she
  17
     Notice again that even when d,f = s = 1, we would not have B ud = B p for the same reason explained
in note 16.
  18
     It is straightforward to add a retirement period, but not much is likely to be gained from this additional
generality.


                                                                          19
reenters the dating market. During this waiting period, the value function evolves as

                          Dtf (zf ,   t
                                      m)   = V d (wf ;    d,f        f
                                                                ) + Dt+1 (zf ,   t+1
                                                                                 m ).                (7)


   The value functions at death are all normalized to zero: JTf +1 ⌘ 0, STf +1 ⌘ 0, and so on.
Spouses are assumed to exit the economy together at age T + 1.

3.3    Education Decision

At the beginning of their economic life (which corresponds to the real-life age of 19 in the
empirical analysis), individuals make a one-time education choice, by comparing the total
cost of education to the lifetime benefits it brings.
   Attending college entails two types of costs: (i) a monetary cost, denoted with ce , which
corresponds to tuition plus room and board, and is common to all prospective students;
and (ii) a utility cost, denoted with , which is drawn by each individual from the normal
distribution, N (µ ,    ).   In the estimation, we shall allow the cost distributions to diﬀer
between men and women. Facing these costs, young individuals make their college decision
before they observe their own ability—basing their decision on the average wages of each
education group. Those who choose to attend college spend five years in school during
which time they can work (at the average uneducated wage rate) and can participate in the
marriage market. Each graduate draws a fixed ability upon graduating—that is at age 5.
Those who choose not to attend college draw their ability at age 1. This ability determines
the worker’s fixed ranking in the gender-specific wage distribution. So, although the gender-
and education-specific wage distributions vary with time, each individual’s relative place in
those distribution remains fixed. This specification allows us to account for the changes in
the college premium and the gender wage gap during the period under study.
   After the education choice has been made, each individual enters the marriage market
and meets a prospective spouse every period until he/she marries. A single woman indexed
by i will choose to go to college if and only if
                         ⇣                               ⌘          ⇣                        ⌘
                i + Et=1 Se1f (s, 1, wfi ),        1
                                                    m         > Et=1 S1f (s, 0, wfi ),   1
                                                                                         m       ,

where the expectations are taken over the appropriate gender- and education-specific wage
distributions; Se1f is the solution to the same problem as S1f , given in (5), except that the



                                                         20
                                    Figure 3: Timing of Events

wage rate is set to E(wfi |e = 0) in the first five years19 and then switches to the stochastic
draw, wfi , from the wage distribution of educated workers. The terms on the left-hand side
represent the lifetime utility if a young woman gets a college degree, and the right-hand
side represents the same if she does not. It is clear that the future benefit of education
depends on both (i) the average wages of college graduates versus high school graduates,
and (ii) the marriage market prospects of both education groups, which can be seen by the
dependence of the value function on          m.
                                             1
                                                  Finally, to be consistent with balanced growth,
the utility cost  is assumed to grow at the annual rate of (1 + g)(1           )
                                                                                    .
   Note that if n2 > 0, the prospective secondary worker’s wage matters to the primary
earner, since it does contribute to family resources. In this case, if women have lower wages,
education not only benefits women when they are single but also makes them more desirable
spouses. Thus, educated women will have a higher divorce threshold, since their outside
option (determined both by their wage as single women and by their subsequent marriage
prospects) looks better. We will return to this mechanism in Section 6.4. Therefore, as
education rises, the same variance of so-called love shocks may lead to more divorces. A
rise in returns to human capital should then increase female education demand more so
than male education even in the face of lower returns to education. The divorce rate and
female labor force participation should also rise.
  19
     Recall that college students work at the uneducated wage rate. In addition, tuition is deducted from
their annual income.


                                                   21
       Figure 3 summarizes the timing of events over the life cycle.

3.4       Equilibrium in the Marriage Market

This basic framework generates several interesting feedbacks between the education choice
and marriage/divorce decisions. One mechanism that we are particularly interested in is
the following. Suppose that in the 1950s, women come to expect that the divorce rate
will rise in the future.20 Since education provides insurance against divorce (in the form of
higher income), this expectation will increase the demand for education for young women
in the 1950s. (Although these eﬀects are similar for men, they are not symmetric—both
because of the diﬀerent costs of divorce by gender and because of the gender wage gap.)
But higher income in turn reduces an important benefit of marriage for women, by closing
the income gap between the spouses, which then—now endogenously—raises the divorce
rate. This happens because some women who previously did not agree to divorce (despite
a low value of b) are now willing to divorce and stay single since, they are able to support
themselves with their higher income. Thus, the higher education of women, which was
supposed to insure against divorce risk, itself creates more divorce, which in turn generates
more demand for education by women. This amplification mechanism means that a small
exogenous rise in divorce risk can result in a larger rise in actual divorce rates as well as in
women’s educational attainment in equilibrium.21
       Also instructive is examining what happens with an exogenous change from consent
to unilateral divorce law in this model. Consent divorce law requires b < min(bd,m , bd,f ),
whereas unilateral divorce requires only b < max(bd,m , bd,f )), which implies that the divorce
rate will rise quickly after the change in the law (from consent to unilateral), consistent
with what has been observed in the US data during the 1970s. However, because the new
marriages formed under the unilateral law will involve better selection, the rise in the divorce
rate is followed with a subsequent but smaller decline.
       Finally, the interaction of education and the marriage market also creates an externality
eﬀect: when there are more educated men than women, some educated men are likely to
  20
      This expectation can be due to, for example, an anticipation of the divorce reform, a rise in female
educational attainment (which makes women financially more independent), even an expected fall in fertility
(which makes divorce less costly), and so on. The precise reason for such an expectation is not crucial at
this point. We are interested in certain amplification channels that will be active within this framework.
   21
      As can be anticipated from this discussion, this framework is open to the possibility of multiple equilib-
ria, although this is nothing new in search models of the marriage market. Although we have not detected
any signs that this posed a problem in the neighborhood of the parameter space around the estimated
parameter vector (despite careful investigation), this issue still requires care.


                                                      22
marry uneducated women (rather than remain single), which lowers the returns on education
for women. However, as more women get educated, attracting an educated man becomes
more diﬃcult for an uneducated woman to attract, which increases the education demand
of all women. Thus, the returns to education can easily be increasing in the supply of
educated women, which fuels demand for education. Therefore, a change in quality of the
marriage market toward high education can lead to an increase in women’s educational
attainment.


4          Econometric Analysis

We conduct the empirical analysis in two stages. In the first step, we fix some parameters
based on external estimates. Then in the second step, we estimate the remaining parameters
by matching a variety of data moments using method of simulated moments (MSM).

4.1         First Stage

A model period corresponds to one year of calendar time. As noted earlier, individuals are
economically active between ages 20 and 64 (i.e., for 45 model periods). We set                     = 0.98,
↵ = 0.45 (Aguiar and Hurst (2007a)), and ce = 0.105. The tuition cost is equal to one-third
of average educated wage earnings, taking into account average hours worked.22
         The empirical wage distributions that are fed into the structural model are obtained by
fitting lognormal distributions to each year of the CPS data, separately for each education
and gender group and then computing five-year moving averages. As for the growth rate
of wages, g, the US data show a clear trend break around 1975, so a constant growth rate
seems grossly counterfactual. Therefore, we set g = 1.87% (computed from 1950 to 1974)
per year for before that date and g = 0% (1985–2005 average) after that date (including
into the future after 2005). Furthermore, the gender- and education- specific wages are
assumed to grow at the 1980–2005 average rate into the future.23

Economies of Scale. An important set of parameters in the model measures the economies
of scale for diﬀerent household types. Following much of the literature, we measure economies
of scale using the number of adults and children in a household. In particular, we take the
view that the cost of divorce is heavily influenced by the presence of children, who have to
    22
    This number is in line with Gallipoli et al. (2010), who report a figure of 30% of median labor earnings.
    23
    Because there is no capital accumulation, and in fact the only dynamic decisions are marriage/divorce
and education, the change in the balanced growth path does not present any technical challenges.


                                                     23
cared for when spouses are divorced, as well as cared for in newly formed households by
the biological parents and stepparents in the case of remarriage. To this end, we use the
Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) to compute the number of children
living in a household for previously divorced versus never-divorced couples (of women ages
20–34). Moreover, the data also allow us to distinguish between biological and stepchil-
dren. The economies of scales computed from the SIPP are detailed in Appendix C. The
resulting economies of scale parameters are                   p,s
                                                                    = 2.36 for married households in which
the wife was previously never married (regardless of the husband’s history),                              p,d
                                                                                                                = 3.06
for married households with a previously divorced woman, and                           d,f
                                                                                              = 1.64 for currently
                    24
divorced women.
       As discussed in Appendix C.2, the 3.06 figure for               p,d
                                                                             is based on the number of children
(under age 18) living with a currently divorced woman. However, because remarriage is non-
random with respect to the number of children, divorced women who end up remarrying
have fewer children. Therefore, measuring the number of children who live in a household
in which the mother was a previously divorced woman, we get                           p,d
                                                                                             = 2.71. Because the
computation of these numbers relies on several nontrivial assumptions and some of the
results below seem sensitive to the value of                   , we shall conduct the analysis for both of
these values and discuss them further below. The model in which we set                           p,d
                                                                                                       = 3.06 will be
referred to as the HiF i model (i.e., high–            p,d
                                                             ), and the one with        p,d
                                                                                              = 2.71 is called the
LoF i (i.e., low–    p,d
                           ) model. Table II summarizes the relevant values for the LoF i model.
       Finally, notice that these choices for      p,d
                                                         imply that divorce has a permanent cost that
extends into subsequent marriages. This assumption reflects the view once succinctly sum-
marized by novelist Nora Ephron, who famously said that “marriages come and go, but
divorce is forever.” For comparison, we also explore the view that the suﬀering from divorce
ends once somebody remarries: e.g.,          p,d
                                                   =     p,s
                                                               = 2.36. We shall refer to this version as the
temporary divorce cost model (hereafter, the TDC model).

Cohort Size Variation. Cohort sizes vary over time to capture the baby boom and
other variations observed in the US data. This variation could be important because the
propensity to marry and divorce clearly varies over the life cycle and, as the age composition
of the population changes over time, this could create changes in marriage and divorce
  24
    Since in the US data most children live with their mother, economies of scale for divorced men are
close to one. For simplicity we therefore set the economies of divorced men equal to those for single, never
married men and women, = 1, and the economies of scale for remarried divorced men equal to those for
married couples who have never been divorced.



                                                         24
              Table II: Economies of Scale by Household Type (LoF i Model)
                         Single       1st marriage                  Divorced                 2nd+ marriage
            Woman          1.0              2.3                       1.64                     2.71
            Man            1.0              2.3                       1.0                 2.36 (w/ single)
                                                                                         2.71 (w/ divorced)

      Note: The computation from the SIPP yields values for of 1.08 for divorced man, 1.18 for
      single woman, and 1.07 for single man. We round these figures down to 1.0 to keep track of
      fewer numbers. The economies of scale parameters for the HiF i model are the same as those
      reported here, except that the 2.71 figures are replaced with 3.06.




patterns, which we wish to account for. Furthermore, in our analysis below, we focus
on individuals ages 20–34 so as to further mitigate changing age structure on observed
statistics. Notice that because marriage is only allowed within cohorts, there is no explicit
dependence (i.e., general equilibrium feedbacks) across cohorts.

Divorce Laws and Expectations. All individuals live under a consent law regime until
1975 and then switch to a unilateral regime after that year. Before 1950, the economy
grows along a balanced growth path where individuals expect to remain in a consent regime
in the future. Expectations change after 1950, and individuals become aware of the future
reform as well as the future path of wages. Below, we also examine the results under myopic
expectations regarding both wages and divorce reform. The nonstationary changes in the
economy (including those in wages) last from 1950 to 2005, after which time wages revert
to growing at a constant rate, leading to a new balanced growth path equilibrium once the
cohorts that entered the economy in 2005 exit (in 2050).

4.2       Second Stage: MSM Estimation

The remaining parameters are estimated by matching a number of important moments of
the US data. Specifically, the structural parameters to be estimated are stacked in a q ⇥ 1
vector:
                                  ⇥         s
                                                                                        ⇤0
                            ✓⌘        , ,       , ✓ee , µb ,   b,
                                                                         m    f
                                                                    ⇣ , µ , µ ,           .

   Let m(X) be an R ⇥ 1 vector of data moments (with R > q) and let f (Xsim (✓)) be the
same moments obtained from the simulated data of the economic model when the structural




                                                         25
parameter vector is given by ✓. More specifically, we have
                           2            3                   2                    3
                               m1 (X)                            f1 (Xsim (✓))
                       6                7                   6                    7
                       6 m2 (X)         7                   6 f2 (Xsim (✓))      7
                     m=6
                       6    ..          7
                                        7           f (✓) = 6
                                                            6       ..           7.
                                                                                 7
                       4     .          5                   4        .           5
                                                                   sim
                         mR (X)                               fR (X (✓))

   Under the null hypothesis that the structural model is correctly specified, we have R
moment conditions: E(m          f (Xsim (✓0 ))) = 0. The MSM estimator is

                       b = arg max[m
                       ✓                    f (Xsim (✓))]0 W[m     f (Xsim (✓))].


   We choose the weighting matrix, W, such that the objective function is the squared
sum of percentage deviations between the model and the data moments.25 . The 10-element
vector of structural parameters is estimated by matching 12 empirical moments of the US
data. Ten of these moments pertain to year 2005 and two of them pertain to 1950. All
moments are computed for young individuals. For most of the moments studied in this
paper, we take these to be individuals ages 20 to 34. The only exception is the labor supply
of young workers, which we compute for 25- to 34-year-old individuals (because many of
those younger than 25 are still in school). The moment conditions in m are as follows:

   I. Four targets on marriage/divorce: (i and ii) the fraction of single individuals in 1950
      and 2005 (two moments), (iii) the fraction who are married in 2005, and (iv) the
      marriage survival probability into the 15th anniversary (last available year, 1995).

  II. Five targets on education and marriage: (i and ii) the fraction of young women
      and men in 2005 that are college graduates (two moments), (iii) the fraction of
      college-educated young women in 1950, (iv) the fraction of married couples where
      both spouses are educated in 2005, and (v) the fraction of marriages between an
      uneducated man and an educated woman in 2005.

 III. Three targets on labor supply (all in 2005): (i) the average annual hours worked
      of married men, (ii) the ratio of annual hours worked in the labor market to hours
      worked at home for single women, and (iii) the average hours worked by single men.
  25
     Using an identity matrix instead tends to overemphasize moments that are larger in absolute value,
which we wish to avoid. Based on Altonji and Segal (1996)’s findings, we also avoid using the optimal
weighting matrix, which can be seriously biased in small samples.


                                                  26
5        Empirical Results: Fit of the Model

We begin by presenting and discussing the estimated structural parameters and model fit
to the data moments for the three diﬀerent versions of the model (HiF i, LoF i, and TDC ).
We then turn to a series of implications of the estimated model for the behavior over time.



5.1      HiFi and Preferred LoFi Models

Structural Parameter Estimates

We begin with the parameter estimates (Table III). The bootstrapped standard errors in-
dicate that all parameters are estimated quite precisely. The curvature on the consumption
is greater than one, around 1.3, indicating slightly higher curvature than log preferences.
Consequently, individuals value leisure more over time relative to composite consumption.
The utility weight on market goods,         , is about 0.6, implying a weight of 0.4 on home
production. An important parameter is the assortative meeting term for women, ✓m
                                                                               11
                                                                                  , which
is estimated to be close to 3, the interpretation being that the chance that an educated
woman will meet an educated men is three times higher than what would be predicted by
purely random meetings.26 Finally, the estimated mean utility cost of getting educated
(i.e., µ ) is higher for women than for men. This finding is in contrast to some recent
papers (e.g., Heathcote et al. (2010)) that try to match the higher college attainment rate
of women relative to men, which required the opposite to be true. We believe that the
diﬀerence is because our model features additional benefits of education coming from the
marriage/divorce process, and these benefits are higher for women, who end up choosing
more education despite a higher µ than men.

Moments

Table IV presents the results from the estimation of the HiF i model in columns 3 and 4. The
targeted empirical moments are indicated with an asterisk (⇤) in columns 1 and 2. Glancing
at the objective values in the bottom row of Table III makes it clear that this version of the
    26
    This estimate implies that, for example in 1950, she has a 2.99 ⇥ 15.7 = 47% chance of meeting an
educated man. Therefore, normalizing the total number of men and women to 100 individuals each, the
total number of educated women meeting educated men is 47% ⇥ 5.9 = 2.8 (using the 5.9% figure from
Table IV). This in turn implies that educated men have a 2.4/15.7 = 15.2% chance of meeting educated
women. So the relevant assortative matching term for men is ✓f11 = 15.2/5.9 ⇡ 2.57.



                                                 27
                           Table III: Estimated Structural Parameters
                                                                       Model Version
 Parameters                                              HiF i        LoF i     MFD             TDC
                                                          (1)          (2)       (3)             (4)
          (Curvature on cons. composite)                 1.27         1.29      1.02            1.34
                                                         (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.042)      (0.011)
          (Weight on market consumption)                  0.59         0.58         0.60         0.59
                                                         (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.003)      (0.001)
   s
          (Leisure weight for singles)                    2.22         2.15         2.24         2.65
                                                         (0.013)      (0.016)      (0.199)      (0.059)
  11
 ✓m       (Degree of assortative matching)                2.99         2.96         2.59         2.48
                                                         (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.102)      (0.059)
 µb       (Mean of initial love draw)                     1.46         1.36         -1.70        1.26
                                                         (0.023)      (0.022)      (0.261)      (0.179)
  b       (Std. dev. of initial love draw)                0.71         0.69         3.06         4.26
                                                         (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.158)      (0.144)
  ⌘       (Std. dev. of love innovation)                  1.37         1.33         1.78         3.03
                                                         (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.156)      (0.082)
 µm
         (Men’s mean psychic cost of educ.)             15.60        15.70        12.01        19.18
                                                         (0.194)      (0.207)      (1.226)      (0.647)
 µf      (Women’s mean psychic cost of educ.)           17.55        17.75        12.40        16.41
                                                         (0.152)      (0.175)      (0.758)      (0.533)
         (Std. dev. of psychic cost)                    10.58        10.85         7.25         9.54
                                                         (0.160)      (0.173)      (0.443)      (0.370)
 Objective Value                                         2.399        10.55        20.49        36.59
       Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Models HiF i and LoF i have costs of divorce that
       are, respectively, p,d = 3.06 and p,d = 2.71. See Section 7.4 for descriptions of the MFD
       and TDC models.




model easily fits the selected moments better than any alternative. But to anticipate what is
coming up below, we will see that the LoF i model will have more plausible implications for
a range of overidentifying restrictions, so we will spend time comparing these two versions
in what follows.
   We begin with the moments related to marriage and divorce. The fraction of young
individuals that are single is 47.8% in the US data in 2005, which the model matches well
(45.8%). Similarly, singles make up 20.6% of the population in the data in 1950 and this
figure is matched fairly well (21.1%) by the model.
   Turning to divorces, we see that the fraction who are divorced is 7.5% in the data

                                                   28
and is quite close—at 7.9%—in the model. The model also does a reasonably good job of
matching related statistics on divorce rates—the fraction of 30- to 34-year-olds who were
ever divorced (17.4% vs. 17.3%) and the divorce rate in 2005 (3.4% vs. 3.3%). But it
understates the divorce rate in 1950, which we discuss further below. Third, and finally,
an important moment that helps us pin down the dynamics of marriage and divorce is the
fraction of marriages that survive into the 15th anniversary. This figure is matched fairly
well: it is 63.7% in the data vs 62.8% in the model.
    The second important dimension of the data concerns educational attainment. The
model matches all three educational attainment targets—the fractions of young educated
females in 2005 and 1950 and the fraction of young educated males in 2005—quite well.
This good fit was facilitated by the fact that the model has three parameters that are
directly linked to the cost of education (µm
                                            , µ ,
                                                f
                                                      )   and have little other impact on any
other dimension of the model. Turning to the interaction of education and marriage, we
see that the calibration targeted two types of couples by education level: first, the fraction
of couples in which both spouses are educated and, second, the fraction of couples with an
uneducated male and educated female. Both targets are matched well: the former fraction
is 21.5% in the data and 22.8% in the model, and the latter is 10.5% in the data and 10.8%
in the model.
    Third, we turn to labor supply. For both married and single males, the model broadly
matches the empirical targets, whereas for single females the model slightly underpredicts
the ratio of market to home production hours: the ratio is 1.20 in the data versus 1.15 in
the model. Among the nontargeted moments, the married female hours is a bit understated
(26.2 vs. 22.8 hours per week), whereas the single female hours is overstated (32.2 vs. 36.9).


6    Trends over Time

After having verified that the model does a fairly good job of matching the data targets in
2005, we now turn to the main question of interest: how well does the model perform in
explaining key empirical trends over time? Two of these trends will be fit by design—e.g.,
choice of moments in the estimation. The rest will serve as overidentifying restrictions of the
model. For many trends, the HiFi and LoFi models have similar quantitative implications,
so for brevity we only discuss the numbers from the HiFi model. The two versions also
diﬀer in important ways along certain dimensions, as we point out below.



                                              29
                               Table IV: Key Moments: US Data vs. Estimated Structural Model
                                                    US Data                                         Model
                                                                           HiFi                   LoFi               Counterfactual :
                                                                                                                    No divorce reform
                                                  1950     2005        1950     2005       1950       2005                2005
                                                   (1)      (2)         (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)                 (7)

      Fraction single                            20.6⇤    47.8⇤        21.1     45.8       23.1       46.3                  25.2
      Fraction divorced                           3.0†     7.5⇤         0.0      7.9        0.0        8.7                   0.0
      Fraction ever divorced (30-34)                      17.4          0.0     17.3        0.0       19.7                   0.0
      Divorce rate                                2.4a     3.4a         0.0      3.3        0.0        3.8                   0.0
      Survival to 15th anniversary               86.7     63.7⇤        99.9     62.8       99.9       57.0                  99.9
      Fraction married                           75.1     44.8         78.9     46.4       76.9       44.9                  74.7
      Marriage rate                              24.0a     9.5a        22.5      9.1       20.9        9.0                  19.7




30
      Young educ. women                           5.9⇤    33.0⇤         5.9     33.4        6.0       33.4                  19.2
      Young educ. men                             9.6     28.7⇤        15.7     29.1       16.1       29.1                  33.2
      Couples ed./ed.                             3.1     21.5⇤         2.5     22.8        2.7       24.3                  16.0
      Couples ed./uned.                           6.8      8.4         14.8      5.6       15.4        6.3                  17.9
      Couples uned./ed.                           1.7     10.5⇤         3.5     10.8        3.4       11.4                   1.5
      Couples uned./uned.                        88.5     59.7         79.1     60.8       78.4       58.1                  64.6

      Married male hours                         42.3     42.0⇤        62.9     39.2       64.3       39.2                  57.3
      Single male hours                          34.5     36.1⇤        36.8     37.9       36.9       38.2                  37.3
      Married female hours                        8.1     26.2          7.1     22.8        6.7       23.4                  14.3
      Single female hours                        29.2     32.2         34.1     36.5       34.2       36.8                  35.3
      Single female market/home hours                      1.20⇤        1.02     1.15      93.6        1.04                 1.02
         Notes: All cells in the top two panels report results in percentage terms. The bottom panel reports results in hours per week.
     The last line is a ratio. ⇤ Moments targeted in the MSM estimation. a Moments computed for 1968 (instead of 1950) and 1995
     (instead of 2005) due to data availability. † The fraction divorced for young in 1940 is 1.7% and in 1960 it is 4.4%. The cell reports
     the average of these two figures.
6.1       Marriage and Divorce

The model generates patterns that are qualitatively consistent with the trends in the data: a
rise in the fractions of singles and divorced individuals, and a fall in the fraction of married
individuals and in the survival probability of marriages to the 15th anniversary. Before
delving into the details, we note that (perhaps contrary to what it might seem) the rising
divorce rate and falling marriage rate are not very closely linked to each other. It is entirely
possible—and we shall see examples below—to modify the model to generate one trend but
not the other. So the marriage and divorce trends should be viewed as two separate sets of
facts to be explained and understood.
       Turning to specific quantitative figures, we note that the eﬀects are comparable to what
we see in the data. First, as mentioned above, the rise in the fraction who are single is
matched to its empirical counterpart by choice of moments. Second, the fraction divorced
rises from 3.0% to 7.5% in the data, compared to a rise from approximately 0% to 7.9% in
the model. In this case, the model overstates the rise observed in the data by generating
too few divorces in the early period but closely matching the rate in 2005.27 Third, the
fraction married falls from 75.1% to 44.8% in the data and from 78.9% to 46.4% in the
model, which is comparable.
       Figure 4 provides a summary view of how the composition of all three groups of individuals—
married, single, and divorced—evolves from 1950 to 2005. The model counterparts track
the broad shapes of the data patterns well, with the exception that the model predicts
somewhat faster changes in the 1970s. This exception is probably due to the modeling
choice we made about the sudden change in the divorce laws, whereas the changes have
been more gradual in the US data. Notice also that the model does capture one salient
feature of the data that has been much discussed in the literature: the fraction of divorced
individuals rises strongly in the 1970s and subsequently falls slowly in the 1980s and 1990s.
The model captures both parts of the transition rather well. Finally, the data show a signif-
icant decline in the stability of marriages: the fraction surviving into the 15th anniversary
falls from 86.7% to 63.7% from 1950 to 2005 and declines from 99.9% to 62.9% in the model.
Overall, the model generates plausible empirical trends along these four key dimensions.
  27
    Part of this understatement in 1950 is due to a combination of factors. First, the model misses the
timing of divorces over the life cycle in the early period. In the 1950 steady state, even though the divorce
rate is close to zero before age 35, about 4.8% of individuals in that cohort divorce after that age. Second,
the divorce rate of young individuals in 1950 is itself an outlier and is partly raised by the spike in divorce
rates at the end of World War II. (The divorce rate is flat from 1940 until 1965 except for this spike around
1945.) In 1940, the fraction of young individuals that was divorced was only 1.7%.


                                                      31
                                                      Figure 4: Fraction of Individuals by Marital Status
                                                 1
                                                                                              Mar r ied, US data
                                                0.9                                           Single, US data
                                                                                              Divor ced, US data
                                                                                              Mar r ied, LoFi Model
                                                0.8
                   Fraction by Marital Status                                                 Single, LoFi Model
                                                                                              Divor ced, LoFi Model
                                                0.7

                                                0.6

                                                0.5

                                                0.4

                                                0.3

                                                0.2

                                                0.1

                                                 0
                                                 1950          1960      1970          1980    1990          2000
                                                                                Year




Patterns over the Life Cycle

Beyond the broad aggregate statistics matched by the model in the estimation, it is impor-
tant to examine whether the model has plausible implications for the dynamics of marriage,
divorce, and remarriage over the life cycle. We now analyze a number of these key predic-
tions of the model.

Remarriage Rates. An important feature of our model is that there is an active remar-
riage market for divorced individuals. Empirical facts and trends about remarriage rates
have been relatively unexplored in the academic literature (for a rare exception, see Isen and
Stevenson (2010)). Here we examine three such facts: (i) average remarriage rates are quite
high, (ii) men have a higher probability of remarriage than women, and (iii) remarriage
rates have been trending down since the 1960s.
       To investigate these questions, one useful statistic is the cumulative remarriage rate—
that is, the fraction of individuals who remarry (at least once) after their first divorce. For
the cohort of individuals who were between 50 and 59 years old in 2009, this remarriage rate
was 58.5% for women and 66.5% for men.28 The corresponding statistics in the LoFi model
are 42% for women and 46.2% for men. Although these figures are not as high as in the
data, they are still substantial for both genders. Notice that matching the remarriage rate is
  28
    We computed these statistics using the figures reported in Kreider and Ellis (2011, table 6). We have
not been able to find comparable statistics for earlier periods.


                                                                                32
                      Table V: Annual Remarriage Rates by Gender, 1975–2005
                                         Female                        Male
                                     Data    Model                Data    Model
                          Year:
                          1975        17.1            11.8         23.2      13.1
                          1985        15.6            10.7         16.4      11.4
                          1995        10.6            9.6          10.9      10.1
                          2005         9.0            9.1           9.7       9.6


quite diﬀerent from matching the overall marriage rate (which was targeted in calibration),
because the majority of that statistic is driven by first marriages. To further clarify this
point, we note that even though the HiF i model also matches the marriage rate in 2005—
in fact matches it even more closely than does the LoF i model—that model implies a
much lower remarriage rate—around 20% for women and 29% for men. Thus, the lower
permanent cost of divorce (i.e, low          p,d
                                                   ) in the LoF i model is essential for generating the
higher remarriage rates observed in the US data.
       Second, the remarriage rate is higher for men in the data, which is also true in the model.
The rate is higher because women bear a disproportionate share of the cost of divorce (e.g.,
high      p,d
                ), which is also permanent. Third, a clear downward trend in remarriage rates
can also be observed in the data since the 1960s. Although data availability restricts our
ability to compute cumulative remarriage rates in earlier periods, we can compute annual
remarriage rates going back to the 1970s using SIPP Wave 2 modules. Table V reports the
figures from US data and from the model. The features emphasized above can also be seen
here for the annual rates—the downward trend in remarriage rates and the fact that men
have higher remarriage rates than women.29

Age Patterns in Marriage and Divorce. A well-documented trend has been the grad-
ual rise in the median age of first marriage since the middle of the 20th century.30 For
men, the median age rose almost monotonically from 24 years in 1960 to 28.5 years in 2010
(Table VI). For women, the median age rose from 21 years to 27 years. Similarly, in the
model, the median age climbs from 23 years for both genders in 1960 to 28 years in 2005
for men and 27 years for women.
  29
    These findings are consistent with the five-year remarriage rates reported in Kreider (n.d.).
  30
    Source: Elliott et al. (2012). The available decennial census data goes back to 1890 and show a slight
decline in the median age until 1950.



                                                       33
Duration of Marital States. Next, we turn to the durations of various marital states
that individuals go through. The Census Bureau reports that in 2009, the “median duration
of first marriage for those whose first marriage ended in divorce” was 8.0 years for both
men and women. The corresponding number is precisely 8 years in our model. Another
relevant statistic concerns the time it takes individuals to remarry. Again, the Census
Bureau reports that the “median duration between first divorce and remarriage for those
whose first marriages ended in divorce and who had remarried” was 3.8 years for both men
and women in the US data. The corresponding figure is quite a bit longer—10 years—in
our baseline model. This is largely because we assume divorced individuals participate
in the marriage market every 5 years, which extends the duration they remain divorced.
(Shortening this duration to reentry is feasible, at additional computational cost.)
   Finally, another statistic of interest is the fraction of individuals who never marry
throughout their lifetime (which we take to mean up to age 59). This figure has increased
from 4.2% in 1960 to 9.5% in 2010 for women (Kreider and Ellis (2011, Table 2)). The
model counterpart is similar: it rises from 4.9% to 8.6% during the same period. A diﬀer-
ent statistic of this sort is the fraction of ever-married women that divorces at least once.
The fraction is reported in the same source to be 44.1% for women 45 to 55 years of age in
the year 2004. The same statistic in 2005 is 55.9% in our model. Although the match is
clearly not perfect, the model is consistent with the rough magnitudes in the data.
   Collectively, these results show that the estimated structural model makes plausible
predictions for important aspects of the marriage/divorce/remarriage process that are not
directly targeted in the estimation, as well as for how these behaviors changed over time.

6.2    Education Trends
Reversal of the College-Gender Gap

We now turn to the reversal of the college-gender gap, which happened during the 1990s.
Recall that the estimation targeted educational attainment rates for men and women in
2005 and for women in 1950. Thus, the model matches—by construction—the fact that
women have a higher college attainment rate than men in 2005. The question then is, do
we see the opposite pattern in 1950? And the answer is “yes.”
   In the model, the college attainment rate in 1950 is 16.1% for men and 6.0% for women.
The corresponding figures are 9.6% and 5.9% in the data. Thus, women experienced an
increase of 27.4 percentage points compared to 13.0 percentage points for men from 1950


                                             34
                    Table VI: Life Cycle Patterns in Marriage and Divorce
   Median Statistics                                             US Data       LoFi Model

   Age at first marriage (1960/2010)
     Men                                                          24/28.5         23/28
     Women                                                        21/27           23/27
   Duration of first marriage                                        8               8
       for those who divorced
   Duration between first divorce and remarriage                    3.8             10
        for those who divorced/remarried
   Fraction never-married women by age 59 (1986/2004)             4.2/9.5        4.9/8.6
   Fraction ever-divorced women of those ever-married (2004)       44.1            55.9
         Note: US data statistics are from the Census Bureau.




to 2005, a trend leading to the reversal of the college-gender gap. In terms of timing, the
crossover of college attainment rates happened in the US data around 1993 to 1995, when
the attainment rates of both men and women overlapped and rose together from 24.2% to
25.1% during these three years, after which time the women’s attainment rate decisively
overtook that of men’s. The HiF i model predicts the crossover to happen a bit earlier, in
1990, and underpredicts the level by 2% in those years. The LoF i model instead matches
both the timing (1995) and the level (about 25% attainment rate) in the data.

Who Marries Whom: Couple Types by Education

In the US data, the fraction of educated couples (i.e., both spouses have a college degree)
rose from 3.1% to 21.5% over the sample period, which is matched well by the model, with
a rise from 2.5% to 22.8%. Similarly, the fraction of couples with two uneducated spouses
fell from 88.5% to 59.7% in the data, compared to a fall from 79.1% to 60.8% in the model.
Although some of this success is driven by the fact that we targeted the college attainment
rate for both genders in 2005, this fact alone is not suﬃcient: without the flexibility aﬀorded
by assortative matching (✓m
                          11
                             > 1), the model can still match the attainment rates but fails to
generate the correct composition of couple types. (Results available upon request.) Finally,
the model also generates the correct fractions of mismatched couples (by education), with
the exception of couples with an educated male and uneducated female in 1950, which is
overestimated significantly (14.8 in the model vs. 6.8 in the data), mainly because the

                                                       35
model also overestimates the number of educated males in that year. Overall, however,
the model is not grossly inconsistent with the data when it comes to the composition of
households by education type.

6.3    Auxiliary Implications: Labor Supply and Leisure

For reasons explained earlier, labor supply is also of interest for our analysis, given that the
income benefit of education is realized in proportion to how much labor is supplied. Thus,
looking at the trends in labor supply for diﬀerent types of agents is useful. First, little
change has occurred in the labor supply of singles (of both genders) during the last 50 years
(already well documented in earlier work; see, e.g., Jones et al. (2003)). To be more precise,
a small rise occurred for both groups: from 34.5 hours per week to 36.1 for males and from
29.2 hours per week to 32.2 for females. But overall, these changes are quite modest. This
pattern is also true in the model, with weekly hours increasing from 36.8 to 37.9 for males
and from 34.1 to 36.5 for females.
   The real interesting and significant trend in the data has been observed in the hours of
married women, rising from 8.1 hours in 1950 to 26.2 hours in 2005. The model generates a
rise from 7.1 hours to 22.8, which is a fairly good fraction of the change in the data—a rise of
about 15.7 hours compared to 18.1 in the data, or about 87% of the empirical value. Recall
that neither set of statistics was targeted in the estimation—yet the initial magnitude in
1950 is not too far oﬀ.
   One notable failure of the model happens for the labor supply of married men, which
falls from 62.9 hours per week in 1950 to 39.2 hours in 2005. In the data, no comparable
downward trend can be seen—if anything the labor supply of this group is quite stable
(around 42 hours per week). The reason for the downward trend in the model is the strong
assumption of perfect complementarity in leisure, coupled with the low wages of women in
the 1950s and perfect substitution in the home. To see why this matters, notice that with
perfect complementarity in leisure, the market and home production hours of both spouses
must add up to the same number. Because of the large gender wage gap in 1950, women
work very little and thus specialize almost completely in home production, which makes
their husbands specialize in market work and supply too much labor compared to the data.
We conjecture that introducing some curvature into the home production hours of spouses
(as opposed to perfect substitution as currently assumed) could mitigate this problem.
   Turning to empirical trends regarding leisure, we note that Aguiar and Hurst (2007b,
Table V) document that leisure time has increased in the United States since the 1950s

                                              36
for both men and women and for all education groups. Furthermore, most of this increase
happened between 1965 and 1985. It turns out that this trend is also true in the estimated
model, although we overstate the magnitude of rise compared to the US data for married
individuals with the change in divorce laws compared to the data. The implication is that
couples consume too little leisure in 1950 in the model, so men specializing in the market
means they supply too much labor. Overall, though, the model provides one explanation
for the jump in leisure by married households during the 1970s.

6.4    What’s Love Got to Do With It?

Before concluding this section, it is useful to examine the role of love in marriages over
this period. Many commentators have emphasized the rising importance of love in modern
marriage over more pragmatic needs such as providing shelter, taking care of household
chores, and child rearing. Stevenson and Wolfers (2008) summarize this view:

      So what drives modern marriage? We believe that the answer lies in a shift from
      the family as a forum for shared production, to shared consumption. In case the
      language of economic lacks romance, let’s be clearer: modern marriage is about love
      and companionship. Most things in life are simply better shared with another person:
      this ranges from the simple pleasures such as enjoying a movie or a hobby together, to
      shared social ties such as attending the same church, and finally, to the joint project
      of bringing up children. Returning to the language of economics, the key today is
      consumption complementarities—activities that are not only enjoyable, but are more
      enjoyable when shared with a spouse. We call this new model of sharing our lives
      “hedonic marriage.”

Recall that we specified the household production function to allow for such sharing, which
we called “love.” Despite its prevalence in popular discussions, we are not aware of any
attempt to quantify the extent of this shift from production to love, very likely because
quantifying involves elements, such as love, that are very hard to directly measure. The
estimated model, however, presents one reasonable way to approach this question, which
we undertake in this section.


All You Need Is Love?

As a first measure, Figure 5 plots diﬀerent measures of love relevant for diﬀerent individuals.
The dashed (blue) line and the dash-dot (brown) line plot the median love thresholds for

                                                37
                                   Figure 5: Evolution of Love over Time




                  4.00000
                  3.00000
                  2.00000
                  1.00000




                            1940             1960                  1980                      2000
                                                            Year

                                        F cutoff                          F first year marriage
                                        F married                         M cutoff
                                        M first year marriage             M married




women and men, respectively, that determine each gender’s acceptance decision for the first
marriage. As seen here, the threshold is higher for men before the 1970s, but rises much
more slowly compared to that of women, who overtakes men after that time. The dotted
line in the middle (and the thin solid line it overlaps) plot the median value of love for men
and women in their first year of marriage. When we eyeball this plot, we clearly see that
it has a pattern very similar to the maximum of the cutoﬀs for each gender, which makes
sense, since marriage is determined by the joint agreement of both spouses. Finally, the two
lines at the top (dashed grey and solid green) plot the median love level for all currently
married individuals in a given year. This graph is almost constant before 1975 but then
jumps quickly with divorce reform.
   Two forces lead to the rising prominence of love during this period. The first and rather
obvious one is that divorce reform makes the less happy spouse decide the divorce. Hence,
a marriage will quickly lead to divorce unless it starts out suﬃciently strong, meaning a
higher average level of love during the marriage. Notice also that because divorce leaves
more of a permanent mark on women than it does on men, the individual threshold for
women rises strongly with the change in divorce law, which is not the case for men; again,
see figure 5. Second, and less obvious, the threshold love levels continue rising after reform
because of the rising education and wages of women, which leads them to reject marriage
oﬀers unless they are attractive in terms of love.


                                                           38
                Table VII: Percentage of Marriages with No Love (b < 0)

                                      Couple types by education (M/F)
                                 Ed-Ed     Ed-Un         Un-Ed     Un-Un
                 1955             42.8       42.7         40.8       40.0
                 1965             42.7       43.4         42.8       39.9
                 1975             25.9       25.5         35.7       23.5
                 1985             22.0       23.5         36.7       21.3
                 1995             20.8       23.1         38.7       21.4
                 2005             20.4       19.2         39.6       22.0



    Another way to see the rising prominence of love is by measuring the fraction of mar-
riages that are loveless (i.e., marriages that have negative love, leading to no consumption
of leisure). These families are essentially home production units, where spouses are co-
parenting and jointly producing without enjoying any leisure time together. Table VII
reports the proportion of such families by the education level of each spouse. Two conclu-
sions can easily be seen. First, for all couple types, except for those with an educated wife
and an uneducated husband, the fraction of loveless families falls from about 40+% of all
marriages in 1955 to almost half—about 20%—in 2005. Therefore, love plays a more impor-
tant role for many more families today than it did in the 1950s. This pattern is consistent
with the shift from productive marriages to hedonic ones, as suggested by Stevenson and
Wolfers (2007). Second, and curiously, the only exceptions are households with an educated
woman married to an uneducated man, for whom the fraction stays at 40% throughout.


7    Counterfactuals: Understanding the Mechanisms

In this section, we present counterfactual experiments to quantify various channels that
operate in this model. First, we quantify the eﬀect of divorce reform in shaping key socio-
economic trends, by studying a counterfactual history in which no divorce reform takes
place. Second, we measure the value of education as insurance against a bad marriage,
which is one of the main questions this paper addresses. Third, we quantify the value of
education in the first marriage market as a tool for attracting better spouses. Although
this eﬀect is widely noted in popular discussions and in the academic literature, to our
knowledge this analysis is the first attempt to rigorously measure this eﬀect. Fourth, and
finally, we study the eﬀect of persistent divorce costs as opposed to temporary ones. A


                                             39
fifth counterfactual—one that assumes myopic expectations—is presented in Appendix D
to save space here.

7.1    Quantifying the Eﬀects of Divorce Reform

This section quantifies the contribution of divorce reform to observed trends during the
second half of the 20th century. To this end, we compare the preferred model LoFi to an
alternative history of the United States, in which there was no divorce reform in 1975. All
calibrated parameters remain as in the LoF i economy, including the wage trends by gender
and education. Notice that the LoF i model assumed no anticipation before (and including)
1950, so all the statistics in that time period remain the same under the counterfactual as
well. Column (7) of Table IV displays the statistics for 2005.
   First, marriage and divorce trends are substantially muted in the absence of divorce
reform: the fraction married is 74.7% in 2005 compared to 44.8% in the baseline and 76.9
in 1950. So, almost no decline in the marriage rate takes place without the trigger of
divorce reform. Similarly, the divorce rate remains unchanged at approximately zero from
1950 to 2005. Although it may sound obvious that divorce reform would have a large eﬀect
on marriage/divorce statistics, notice that other dramatic changes—in the gender wage gap
and college wage premium—are still observed in this counterfactual economy, and they seem
to have little eﬀect in driving marriage and divorce outcomes. Perhaps more interesting, the
middle panel of column 7 displays the college attainment rates: although more individuals
choose to become educated during this time (thanks to the growing college wage premium),
this eﬀect is much weaker for women, and the reversal of the college-gender gap disappears.
   More specifically, without divorce reform, only 19.2% of young women would have a
college degree in 2005, compared to 33.4% in the baseline model and in the data. Fur-
thermore, 33.2% of young men would have a college degree, higher than the 29.1% in the
baseline model (and the US data). Thus, absent divorce reform, no reversal in the college-
gender gap would occur. Further, one in seven young women (14.2 = 33.4          19.2) would
not have obtained college education, were it not for the social transformation unleashed
by divorce reform. Similarly, the rise in married women’s labor hours would be mitigated:
married women would work 9 hours less per week (14.3 vs. 23.4) than in the baseline econ-
omy. In other words, whereas the baseline model explains 93% of the rise in hours for this
demographic group, without divorce reform it would explain only 42%. This counterfactual
analysis shows that divorce reform played a key role in shaping some of the most important
socio-economic trends observed in the United States since World War II.

                                            40
              Table VIII: Welfare Benefits of Education in the Marriage Market

                                                              Women                Men
                                                              Being Trapped in a Marriage
        Cohorts              Wage Percentile              % hours⇤    $       % hours     $
                                                               (1)           (2)              (3)          (4)
        Pre-1975                    P10                       22.2    3,224       15.9                   5,543
                                    P50                       25.9    5,143       19.7                   9,454
                                    P90                       26.8    7,155       21.4                   14,108
        Post-1975                   P10                       36.2    7,982       17.5                   6,105
                                    P50                       38.7   11,643       25.5                   12,262
                                    P90                       40.0   14,986       32.2                   21,330
                                                                 Attracting Better Spouse
                                                           % hours      $       % hours                     $
        Pre-1975                    P10                     10.4      1,492        7.7                    2,662
                                    P50                     10.6      2,091        7.4                    3,520
                                    P90                     10.0      2,709        7.3                    4,773
        Post-1975                   P10                     15.0      3,307        9.8                    3,364
                                    P50                     15.0      4,534       11.2                    5,309
                                    P90                     14.4      6,027       11.2                    7,296
      Note: ⇤ Columns 1 and 3 express the welfare benefit in terms of leisure hours divided by the average market
      hours of the applicable gender averaged across all ability levels. For example, in the first column, last row of
      the top panel, the benefit is equal to 40% of average market hours of women in the post-1975 cohorts. The
      $ column reports the corresponding dollar value (with year 2000 as basis), by evaluating the hours at the
      corresponding hourly wage for that percentile, assuming a full-year (52 weeks) worker.




7.2    Education as Insurance against a Bad Marriage

The story of Fraidy Reiss in the introduction provides one example in which education
allowed a woman to improve her outside options and avoid being trapped in a bad marriage.
In general, this outside option depends on the divorced individual’s wage as well as his/her
opportunities in the remarriage market. In this section we quantify this insurance value
of education. What if married women believed that a divorce would leave them with
little income and worse remarriage options? Would educated women stay longer in bad
marriages? Would they search longer in the first marriage market?
   These questions maybe answered by taking diﬀerent approaches. Each approach sheds
light on a diﬀerent aspect of the problem. We proceed in three steps. We describe each ex-
periment from a woman’s perspective, with the understanding that each experiment is also
conducted symmetrically for men. Furthermore, we conduct the experiments for women

                                                            41
in the 10th, 50th (median), and 90th percentiles of the ability distribution and for cohorts
who turn age 20 before and after 1975 separately. To convert the welfare eﬀect into easily
understandable terms, we ask how much each hypothetical woman would need to be com-
pensated in units of leisure hours at every date and state so as to be indiﬀerent between
the baseline economy and each counterfactual economy.

Experiment 1.       First, suppose that all individuals make their first marriage decisions
as in the benchmark model (LoF i). Upon marriage, however, each educated woman comes
to believe that if she were to divorce, her future path would be the same as an uneducated
woman (with the corresponding value function and a wage that corresponds to her actual
ability percentile but drawn from the wage distribution of uneducated women). In this first
counterfactual, we assume that these beliefs are incorrect and that if these educated women
were to actually divorce, their subsequent lives would be the same as educated women (with
the correct wage and remarriage probability). We make this assumption because we simply
want to measure the eﬀect of this fear factor.
   Under this scenario, we find that educated women are more likely to be trapped (to
spend a longer duration in a bad marriage) when their ability is higher: for women in the
90th percentile, the average length of the first marriage would increase from 25.5 years to
28.6 for the post-1975 cohorts, and from 29.5 to 31.1 for earlier cohorts. Moreover, fewer
of these first marriages now end in divorce, declining from 56% in the LoF i model to 45%.
However, for women in the 10th percentile of the ability distribution, there is virtually
no eﬀect on the length of marriages or divorce probabilities. Clearly, this is because after
divorce reform, recall that there is no protection from an involuntary divorce. Therefore,
even though these low-wage women may not want to divorce, their husbands still might.

Experiment 2.        A second version of this experiment now assumes that upon divorce
educated women actually face the same prospects of uneducated women (so, not only ex-
pectations but also actual paths are changed). Perhaps unsurprisingly, educated women
are now trapped in worse marriages for longer durations and spend more years as divorced
individuals with low incomes. Specifically, women in the 90th percentile in the post-1975
cohorts spend 13.5 years as divorced individuals, compared with 9.38 years in the LoF i
model, and the fraction remarried drops from 83% to 61%. Similarly, women in the median
spend 15.5 years as divorced individuals (compared with 11.6), and the fraction remarried
drops from 76% to 58%. Again, the eﬀect would be smallest for women at the 10th per-
centile, where years divorced would increase from 14.11 to 15.84 and the fraction remarried


                                            42
would drop from 66% to 57%. In contrast, for men in this same scenario, the years spent
as divorced individuals actually decrease. This is because men do not suﬀer from a perma-
nent loss of economies of scale upon divorce (although they still face less eﬃcient matching).
Welfare losses from this counterfactual are highest (64% of baseline leisure hours) for women
in the 90th percentile for the post-1975 cohorts.

Experiment 3 (Preferred Counterfactual).                Notice that the previous two exper-
iments assumed that women were completely oblivious to the cost of divorce until after
entering a marriage—an assumption leading to potentially large welfare losses. A third
experiment now allows women to correctly anticipate their future expectations before en-
tering their first marriage. Welfare losses are still quite large. We view this experiment as
the most complete of the three and report the full results in the top panel of Table VIII.
Comparing columns 1 and 3, it becomes clear that the welfare benefits are much larger for
women than for men in the post-1975 cohorts at low ability levels, but the gap closes as we
go up the ability scale or consider earlier cohorts (or both). Therefore, consistent with our
hypothesis, education is a better insurance against divorce especially for low-ability women,
and it has become even more important over time.
   In addition to the large welfare eﬀects, women remain married longer as before (29.4
vs. 25.5 years) and spend a longer time as divorced individuals (11.5 years for women in
the 90th percentile after 1975). Women also wait to marry longer, with the average age at
first marriage increasing from 23.4 to 25.2. In contrast, men marry slightly sooner (at 23.1
in the benchmark compared to 22.3 here). What were women waiting for? A higher love
draw, that is, a healthier marriage. Nonetheless, although initial love is higher, average
love at the date of separation is lower in the counterfactual compared to the benchmark.
Even though women would wait for a better match, they still spend more time in a worse
marriage. The large welfare losses for men, especially in the 90th percentile, are explained
not by a larger cost in the marriage market for men but by the larger college premium for
men than for women.

7.3    How Eﬀective Is Education for Attracting Better Spouses?

It is often remarked that education is an eﬀective tool for meeting and attracting educated
spouses (e.g., Chiappori et al. (2009)). The model features two channels through which this
eﬀect could work: (i) assortative meeting and (ii) higher wages that attract better spouses,
especially when women participate in the labor force.


                                             43
   To quantify this potential benefit, we conduct the following thought experiment. Sup-
pose that an educated woman was unable to experience the marriage market benefit, which
we think of as follows: (i) an educated woman meets educated men at the rate of an unedu-
cated single woman (e.g., her meeting probability is computed with ✓m
                                                                    10
                                                                       instead of ✓m
                                                                                   11
                                                                                      ), and
(ii) when a man meets this woman, he will view her as an uneducated woman (with a wage
that is in the same percentile distribution of her true wage, but drawn from the uneducated
females’ wage distribution). We assume that this incorrect perception is limited to the first
marriage market and disappears afterward. In reality, the woman will still receive her ac-
tual educated wage throughout her life and choose her labor supply accordingly. Moreover,
once she does marry, the husband will find out the true type of his wife, and labor supply
and subsequent divorce decisions (if any) will be determined accordingly. Therefore, this
experiment intends to isolate the benefit of education solely as a device for (potentially)
attracting a better spouse. We repeat the same experiment for males.
   The bottom panel of Table VIII displays the results. As seen here, the welfare benefits
are quite large, ranging from about one-third to one-half of the benefits of the insurance
value of education. Again, the benefits are also higher for women compared with men,
increase over time, but it do vary noticeably with the ability level of individuals.

7.4    Alternative Formulations

Matching the Fraction Divorced in 1950 (The MFD Model)

One notable drawback of both the HiFi and LoFi models was that they failed to generate
divorces in the earlier part of the sample. One question this raises is, what if we directly
target the fraction of individuals who are divorced in 1950 in our estimation, instead of
the fraction who are single (as done above)? This exercise gives a useful idea about the
trade-oﬀs inherent in the model.
   Columns (3) and (4) in Table IX report the results. Although this change allows the
model to match the fraction of individuals that are divorced in 1950 (3%) and thus also
nicely match the rise in divorces over time, it also fails to generate any decline in the
marriage rate and a rise in the fraction of individuals that are single. These are key failings
in our view, since these latter two trends are central to our purposes. Apart from these
failings, however, this alternative model continues to generate the reversal of the college-
gender gap and the rise in labor supply for married women (although the magnitudes of
both are quite a bit smaller than in both the HiFi and LoFi models). Overall, we conclude

                                              44
                               Table IX: Alternative Specifications: Key Moments of the Data
                                                    US Data               MFD                  TDC           Myopic LoFi
                                                   1950    2005       1950     2005       1950    2005       2005     2005
                                                    (1)     (2)        (3)      (4)        (5)     (6)        (7)      (8)
          Fraction single                         20.6     47.8       32.8    32.0       23.5     22.0       26.5     23.8
          Fraction divorced                        3.0      7.5        3.0     6.9        3.5      7.5        0.1     7.4
          Fraction ever divorced (30-35)           n.d.⇤   17.4        6.4    15.2        7.4     16.3        0.1     16.2
          Divorce rate                             2.4      3.4        1.1     2.5        1.1      2.3        0.0     2.3
          Survival to 15th anniversary            86.7     63.7       86.1    66.4       84.9     67.2       99.9     66.2
          Fraction married                        75.1     44.8       64.2    61.1       73.0     70.5       73.4     68.8
          Marriage rate                           24.0      9.5       14.1    14.2       19.0     19.4       18.4     18.3

          Young educ. women                        5.9     33.0        5.1    33.4        6.2     33.4        6.1     33.4




45
          Young educ. men                          9.6     28.7       11.7    29.1        6.8     29.1       11.5     29.1
          Couples ed./ed.                          3.1     21.5        1.6    18.7        1.0     17.6        1.7     18.4
          Couples ed./uned.                        6.8      8.4       10.8     7.0        6.2      8.6       10.6     8.7
          Couples uned./ed.                        1.7     10.5        3.7    10.4        5.4      9.7        4.5     10.0
          Couples uned./uned.                     88.5     59.7       83.9    64.0       87.4     64.0       83.3     62.9

          Married male hours                      42.3     42.0       51.6    40.5       46.2     37.1       49.4     37.4
          Single male hours                       34.5     36.1       27.7    28.1       35.7     35.9       38.5     38.7
          Married female hours                     8.1     26.2        6.3    16.7        6.2     13.7        6.0     14.0
          Single female hours                     29.2     32.2       23.9    25.7       33.8     36.1       36.0     40.1
          Single female market/home hours          n.d.     1.20       1.07    1.26       1.04     1.20       1.00    1.20
         Notes: The MFD and TDC models have previously been defined in the text. The Myopic LoFi model assumes myopic
     expectations regarding wage paths (in terms of deviations from the balanced growth path), but is otherwise identical to the
     preferred LoFi model. ⇤ n.d. stands for “no data” to indicate that no data were available to compute the relevant statistic.
that forcing the model to match the high divorce rate in the 1950s stretches the model’s
abilities and yields an overall degradation in its performance.

Temporary Divorce Cost (TDC) Model

Another key assumption we have made so far is that the eﬀects of divorce last into any
subsequent remarriage. However, one could argue that the main cost of divorce is borne
while ex-spouses remain divorced, and a remarriage erases the past cost of divorce. To
explore this alternative view, we estimate a modified model, where we continue to keep
 d,f
       = 1.64 but now set      p,d
                                     =   p,s
                                               = 2.36. As noted earlier, this is the TDC model. The
results are reported in columns (5) and (6) of Table IX.
    The changes from the baseline model are a mixed bag. On the one hand, the model
is now able to generate a sizable fraction of individuals that are divorced in 1950 and,
in fact, matches the data values in both time periods. But at the same time, the model
now completely fails to generate the fall in the marriage rate and the rise in the fraction
of people who remain single (even though these statistics are explicitly included as data
targets to match). Both shortcomings are related to the fact that when the cost of divorce
is tightly linked to remaining a divorced individual, one can minimize this cost by remarrying
quickly. This approach eﬀectively makes marriage a less risky proposition, encouraging lots
of people to marry even in more recent times. The other implications of the model are
also less consistent with the data—in fact, quite similar to the previous exercise (the MFD
model). Overall, the TDC specification shows that the persistent costs of divorce are key
for delivering the trends observed in the US data, regarding marriage and divorce behavior
as well as the reversal of the college-gender gap.


8      Cross-Country Evidence: A First Look
Before concluding the analysis, we return to the observation (first noted in Section 2.2) that
the reversal of the college-gender gap has been observed in most developed countries since
the 1970s.31 Although a full cross-country examination of these trends is beyond the scope
of this paper, this section provides a first look at international data to test our model’s
   31
      Although it is tempting to view cross-state diﬀerences in marriage and divorce trends to also provide
data points to analyze, as noted earlier, the residents of one state can be strongly aﬀected by laws and social
norms in nearby states, which makes it hard to view a state as an isolated/disconnected unit. Moreover, it
is often diﬃcult to find data about the state in which a divorce took place for individuals (instead, the CPS
reports current state of residence and current marital status, but does not report which state the divorce,
when applicable, was granted). Therefore, we shall not attempt a cross-state analysis in this paper.

                                                      46
Figure 6: Cross-Country Data: Change in Divorce Rates vs Change in College-Gender Gap




                  Change in Female College Attainment Rate Relative to the Change in Males’:
                                                                                                                           Correlation: 0.51
                                                                                                                                                                 Data
                                                                                               2.6                                                               Regression line

                                                                                                                                    ICE
                                                                                               2.4
                                                                                                                                                                     UK
                                                                                               2.2
                                                                                                                                                 SWE
                                                                                                                                                           NOR
                                                                                                2                                          LUX
                                                1965 to 2005



                                                                                               1.8

                                                                                               1.6
                                                                                                                                    CHE      NET
                                                                                               1.4                                                         BEL
                                                                                                                              AUS
                                                                                               1.2              GER

                                                                                                1                                                          FIN
                                                                                                     FRA

                                                                                               0.8

                                                                                               0.6
                                                                                                 0     1             2               3              4            5                 6
                                                                                                           Change in Divorce Rates, 1960/69 to 1990/2003




implication that the extent of this reversal is correlated with a rise in divorce rates. To
this end, we first obtained data on the fraction of 30- to 34-year-old males and females who
completed a college equivalent (tertiary education) from the Barro-Lee data set. The divorce
rate data are obtained from González and Viitanen (2009). We take the early period to
correspond to 1960–1969 and the later period to correspond to 1990–2003 (years for which
data are reported in the aforementioned paper). We exclude four countries—Ireland, Spain,
Portugal, and Italy—where divorce was illegal in the 1960s. For the enrollment rate data,
the early period refers to 1965 and the later period to 2005.
   First, we compute the cross-sectional correlation of divorce rates and female college
attainment rates. In this sample of 12 countries, the correlation is 0.57. Second, and more
important, we examine the change in divorce rates over this period and how it is related
to the change in female attainment rates. The correlation is 0.49. Third, to examine the
most specific prediction of our model, we compute the cross-country correlation between
the change in the college-gender gap (male/female college attainment rate) and the change
in the divorce rate. This correlation is 0.51. Figure 6 plots the data for each country in the
sample. Except for Iceland and Finland, the remaining 10 countries line up nicely along the
regression line. Although preliminary, this evidence suggests that socio-economic trends
involving divorce rates could be an important component for understanding male versus
female college attainment rates over time.



                                                                                                                              47
9    Conclusions

This paper studied the role of education as insurance against a bad marriage, against
the backdrop of some prominent socio-economic trends since the 1950s. The estimated
structural model shows that the interaction of divorce reform with asymmetric costs of
divorce can explain both the timing and the magnitude of the reversal of the college-gender
gap. This interaction also seems essential for generating the large magnitudes of some other
trends—such as the large decline in the marriage rate and the substantial rise in the divorce
rate, as well as the large rise in employment for married women.
    The estimated model also allowed us to quantify the insurance value of education. For
women, the value of education for preventing being trapped in a marriage is very large, is
significantly higher for younger cohorts (born after 1975), and rises with women’s ability
level. The same general pattern also holds for men, with a somewhat smaller magnitude.
The corresponding dollar values are substantial, ranging from $7,000 to $11,600 per annum
for median women and as high as $15,000 for high-ability women (in the 90th percentile).
It is even higher for men in dollar terms, given their higher wage rates. The value of
education for attracting a better spouse is also higher for more recent cohorts and higher
for women than for men, but it does not display a clear trend by workers’ ability level. To
our knowledge, our paper is the first to empirically quantify both of these welfare eﬀects.
    In keeping with the existing literature, one assumption we maintained in this paper is
that divorce reform was exogenous with respect to the model. However, given the central
role our analysis attributes to the reform, thinking about how this assumption might be
relaxed is a useful step. In ongoing work, we explore the thesis that the divorce reform itself
can be generated endogenously in a framework similar to the one studied here but in which
a social planner is maximizing a utilitarian objective, by choosing (every period) between
the consent and unilateral regimes. As the gender wage gap starts to close and divorce rates
start to rise slowly, the welfare loss from individuals stuck in marriages under the consent
regime grows to the point where switching to the unilateral regime becomes optimal. The
social planner then adopts the reform, which in turn triggers much larger changes in divorce
rates as observed in the US data. Although preliminary, we believe this work provides a
sensible first step to acknowledging that laws also change for a reason—typically, in response
to societal demands.




                                              48
References
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst, “Life-Cycle Prices and Production,” American Economic
  Review, December 2007, 97 (5), 1533–1559.

      and    , “Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time over Five Decades,”
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (3), 969–1006.

Aiyagari, S Rao, Jeremy Greenwood, and Nezih Guner, “On the State of the Union,”
  Journal of Political Economy, April 2000, 108 (2), 213–244.

Altonji, Joseph G and Lewis M Segal, “Small-Sample Bias in GMM Estimation of
  Covariance Structures,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, July 1996, 14 (3),
  353–366.

Bahr, Stephen J., “Marital Dissolution Laws: Impact of Recent Changes for Women,”
  Journal of Family Issues, 1983, 4 (3), 455–466.

Becker, Gary S, A Treatise on the Family, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
  1981.

  , Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special Reference to Edu-
  cation, 3rd ed., Chicago, IL: University Chicago Press, 1994.

Blake, Nelson Manfred, The Road to Reno: A History of Divorce in the United States,
  New York, NY: Macmillan, 1962.

Caucutt, Elizabeth M, Nezih Guner, and John Knowles, “Why Do Women Wait?
  Matching, Wage Inequality, and the Incentives for Fertility Delay,” Review of Economic
  Dynamics, October 2002, 5 (4), 815–855.

Chade, Hector and Gustavo Ventura, “Taxes and Marriage: A Two-Sided Search
  Analysis,” International Economic Review, 2002, 43 (3), 955–986.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, Murat Iyigun, and Yoram Weiss, “Public Goods, Trans-
  ferable Utility and Divorce Laws,” Working Paper, Columbia University, 2008.

  ,     , and   , “Investment in Schooling and the Marriage Market,” American Economic
  Review, December 2009, 99 (5), 1689–1713.



                                            49
Elliott, Diana B, Kristy Krivickas, Matthew W Brault, and Rose M Kreider,
  “Historical Marriage Trends from 1890-2010: A Focus on Race Diﬀerences,” SEHSD Work-
  ing Paper 2012-12, 2012.

Freed, Doris Jonas and Henry H Foster Jr., “Divorce American Style,” Annals of the
  American Academy of Political and Social Science, 1969, 383 (1), pp. 71–88.

   and    , “Divorce in the Fifty States: An Overview,” Family Law Quarterly, 1981, 14
  (4), 229–283.

Gallipoli, Giovanni, Costas Meghir, and Giovanni L Violante, “Equilibrium Eﬀects
  of Education Policies: A Quantitative Evaluation,” Working Paper, New York University,
  2010.

Goldin, Claudia, Lawrence F Katz, and Ilyana Kuziemko, “The Homecoming of
  American College Women: The Reversal of the College Gender Gap,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives, 2006, 20 (4), 133–156.

González, Libertad and Tarja K Viitanen, “The Eﬀect of Divorce Laws on Divorce
  Rates in Europe,” European Economic Review, February 2009, 53 (2), 127–138.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Nezih Guner, Georgi Kocharkov, and Cezar Santos, “Tech-
  nology and the Changing Family: A Unified Model of Marriage, Divorce, Educational At-
  tainment and Married Female Labor-Force Participation,” NBER Working Paper 17735,
  January 2012.

Guvenen, Fatih and Burhanettin Kuruscu, “A Quantitative Analysis of the Evolution
  of the U.S. Wage Distribution: 1970-2000,” in “NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009,
  Volume 24,” University of Chicago Press, September 2010, pp. 227–276.

Heathcote, Jonathan, Kjetil Storesletten, and Giovanni L Violante, “The Macroe-
  conomic Implications of Rising Wage Inequality in the United States,” Journal of Political
  Economy, 08 2010, 118 (4), 681–722.

Isen, Adam and Betsey Stevenson, “Women’s Education and Family Behavior: Trends
  in Marriage, Divorce and Fertility,” in “Demography and the Economy” NBER Chapters,
  National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, September 2010, pp. 107–140.

Jacob, Herbert, Silent Revolution: The Transformation of Divorce Law in the United
  States, Chicago, IL: University Chicago Press, 1988.

                                            50
Jacobson, Paul H., American Marriage and Divorce, New York, NY: Rinehart, 1959.

Jones, Larry E, Rodolfo E Manuelli, and Ellen R McGrattan, “Why are Married
  Women Working So Much?,” Staﬀ Report 317, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
  2003.

Kreider, Rose M, “Remarriage in the United States.” Poster presented at the annual
  meeting of the American Sociological Association, Montreal, August 10-14, 2006.

Kreider, Rose M. and Renee Ellis, “Number, Timing, and Duration of Marriages and
  Divorces: 2009,” Current Population Reports P70-125, US Census Bureau, May 2011.

Marcassa, Stefania, “Divorce Laws and Divorce Rate in the U.S,” PSE Working Paper
  2009-52, 2009.

McGrattan, Ellen R. and Richard Rogerson, “Changes in Hours Worked Since 1950,”
  Quarterly Review, 1998, 22 (1), 2–19.

Rendall, Michelle, “Brain vs Brawn: The Realization of Women’s Comparative Advan-
  tage,” IEW Working Paper 491, Sep 2010.

Salcedo, Alejandrina, Todd Schoellman, and Michèle Tertilt, “Families as Room-
  mates: Changes in U.S. Household Size from 1850 to 2000,” Quantitative Economics,
  2012, 3 (1), 133–175.

Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers, “Marriage and Divorce: Changes and Their
  Driving Forces,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2007, 21 (2), 27–52.

  and     , “Marriage and the Market,” Cato Unbound Online, January 18 2008.

Voena, Alessandra, “Yours, Mine and Ours: Do Divorce Laws Aﬀect the Intertemporal
  Behavior of Married Couples?,” SIEPR Discussion Paper 10-022, 2012.

Wolfers, Justin, “Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce Rates? A Reconciliation
  and New Results,” American Economic Review, 2006, 96 (5), 1802–1820.




                                           51
SUPPLEMENTAL APPENDIX

 NOT FOR PUBLICATION




          52
A      Extended Model with Skill-Biased Technical Change
Educational attainment and the evolution of the gender wage gap are central in this framework.
Although the benchmark model uses both exogenously closing gender wage gap and rising college
premium, the model is easily amendable such that the general wage trends are the results of a
general equilibrium model. The underlying mechanism for the closing gender wage gap and rising
college premium is as follows.
    Assume that men and women are born with two factors of production—human capital (brain)
and raw labor (brawn), as in Guvenen and Kuruscu (2010) and Rendall (2010). A linear combina-
tion of these two labor inputs determines the wage rate an individual can earn in the labor market.
Specifically, individuals are born with a fixed amount of brawn, r, that is the same within each
gender but can diﬀer across genders. In addition, individuals are born with some initial brain, h0 ,
and can acquire more by attending college and acquiring education, e. The exogenous driving force
we are interested in is a specific form of skill-biased technical change (SBTC), which we model as
a rise in the wage of brain relative to brawn. Table A.1 summarizes the key parameters by gender
and education level.


                 Table A.1: Labor Market Endowments for Men and Women

                              Uneducated                        Educated
                   Men          r , h0                           r , eh0
                    Wage wt ((1 ✓t ) r + ✓t h0 )          wt ((1 ✓t ) r + ✓t eh0 )
                   Women        ↵r, h0                           ↵r, eh0
                    Wage wt ((1 ✓t ) ↵r + ✓t h0 )         wt ((1 ✓t ) ↵r + ✓t eh0 )


   It can be shown that, with this structure, SBTC results in a closing of the gender wage gap
and rising college premium. More specifically, we perform an experiment using a simplified model.
Abstracting from the marriage market and the initial education decision, what would men and
women’s initial endowments and SBTC have to be in order to mimic the observed wage trends?
    The simple model requires us to set six parameters {r, ↵, h0, , e, ✓1950 ,   ✓ }.   We match the fol-
lowing targets:

    1. Male brawn endowment, r, is set to match uneducated male wages in 1950;

    2. Relative female brawn endowment, ↵, is matched to uneducated female wages in 1950;

    3. Education factor, e, is matched to educated male wages in 1950;

    4. Initial human capital, h0 , initial brain prices, ✓1950 , and the five-year growth rate of brain
       prices, ✓ , are set to match the general wage trends of educated, uneducated men and women
       from 1950 to 2005.



                                                  53
                          Figure A.1: Wages, US data and Simulation
                                                2



                                               1.8



                                               1.6



                                               1.4



                          N ormal i zed Wage   1.2



                                                1



                                               0.8



                                               0.6

                                                                                                          Educated Men, US data
                                               0.4                                                        Uneducated Men, US data
                                                                                                          Educated Women, US data
                                                                                                          Uneducated Women, US data
                                                                                                          Educated Men, Simulated
                                               0.2                                                        Uneducated Men, Simulated
                                                                                                          Educated Women, Simulated
                                                                                                          Uneducated Women, Simulated
                                                0
                                                1950   1955   1960   1965   1970    1975   1980    1985    1990    1995     2000    2005
                                                                                       Year




Since this exercise is illustrative and it abstracts from the marriage market and education decisions,
and, therefore, also from any selection eﬀect into the labor market, it will not be able to generate
the precise wage trends. For this reason, wage trends from 1950 to 2005 are linearized (smoothed).
As in the remainder of the paper, wages are assumed to have a general growth trend of 1.87% per
year until 1975 and 0% thereafter. Figure A.1 plots the US linearized wage trends by gender and
education with the simulated trends assuming a five-year growth rate of ✓ = 0.013 (our SBTC
measure). The remaining parameters are the initial human capital level of h0 = 1.137, an education
factor e = 2.324, male brawn endowment of r = 0.452, gender diﬀerences in brawn of ↵ = 0.316,
and initial brain prices of ✓t = 0.250.
    The simulated wage trends clearly illustrate how this simple mechanism can capture most of
the closing gender wage gap and rising college premium. Of course, since this simple computation
has abstracted from the marriage market and education choice (ignoring any selection eﬀects), the
trends are linear in nature. With these caveats in mind, the experiment does remarkably well in
matching the observed wage trends by gender and education.



B     Population Dynamics and Equilibrium
Since individuals only marry within their cohort, we only need to keep track of the evolution of
for a given cohort. Recall that

                                                              t                        e ef          t
                                                              m (zm ; ef )         = ✓mm          ⇥ Pm (zm ),

where Pm t (z ) denotes the population fraction of men with characteristics z at age t. The initial
             m                                                                m
share of educated women Pf0 (zf ) follows simply from the education decision. The share of educated

                                                                                     54
women in a cohort is
                               ⇣       ⇣                                   ⌘            ⇣                                 ⌘     ⌘
        Pf0 (s, 1, wuf ) = P       Et=1 Se1f (s, 1, wfi ),          1
                                                                    m               Et=1 S1f (s, 0, wfi ),          1
                                                                                                                    m         > .


    All educated women at the beginning of college are single and earn wuf (the average wage
conditional on no education). For uneducated women, the initial population only diﬀers in that
individuals have already drawn their actual ability level,


                                        Pf0 (s, 0, w) = 1          Pf0 (s, 1, wuf ) gfu (w),

where gfu (w) is the probability density of ability for an uneducated female.
    The fraction of females that are single tomorrow is determined by two terms: females who do
not meet any eligible men this year and those who meet eligible men but decide to remain single.
That is:


                                   2
                                        X XZ
          Pft+1 (s, ef , w) = 4                              1      t
                                                                    m (zm ; ef )       dGm (wm )
                                       hh=s,d em       wm
                                                                                                           3
                                    X XZ                                   Z   Bp
                               +                            t
                                                            m (zm ; ef )            dF0 (b)dGm (wm )5 Pft (s, ef , w),                   (8)
                                   hh=s,d em       wm                          1


where tm (zm ; ef ) is as defined above (and throughout we suppress the arguments of the limits
of integration as before). Similarly, the fraction of divorced females tomorrow depends on those
currently divorced and do not marry between today and tomorrow, those that do not meet anyone,
and the newly divorced. Since divorced individuals only meet somebody every five periods, we do
not need to keep track of how long individuals have been divorced, but simply track the periods
in the model. Also note that Pf0 (d, ef , w) = 0 by definition. Thus, we have the following:
                      2                                                                                                                            3
                           X X ✓Z                                                           Z
                                                                                                                    R Bp
                                                                                                                                               ◆
 Pft+1 (d, ef , w) = 4                             1        t (z ; e )
                                                            m m f              dGm (w̃) +            t (z ; e )
                                                                                                     m m f               1 dF0 (b)dGm (w̃)
                                                                                                                                                   5
                          hh=s,d em          w̃                                                 w̃
                                                                                                   "                                             #
                                               ⇣                                                  ⌘ XZ R
                                                                                                         1
                      ⇥Pft (d, ef , w) + 1              Pft (d, ef , w)         Pft (s, ef , w)                     Bd   dF (b|b   1 )dGm (w̃)       ,
                                                                                                      em       w̃
                                                                                                (9)
where w̃ denotes men’s wage in the integration. Last, we allow for cohorts to be of diﬀerent sizes.
Since the equilibrium should be stationary, we normalize the population size to one every period.
Relative cohort sizes are given exogenously. The analogous expressions hold for men.

Equilibrium An equilibrium is a set of decision rules for women’s college choice, ef ; time al-
     location decisions for single and divorced women that depend on their own state vector,
     hif (zf ), `if (zf ), and nif (zf ) for i = s, d, and when married that depend on both spouses’


                                                                  55
       state vectors, hpf (zm , zf ), `pf (zm , zf ), and npf (zm , zf ); the same set of decision rules for men,
       defined analogously; marriage thresholds, B p (zf , zm ), and divorce thresholds, B cd (zf , zm )
       and B ud (zf , zm ); value functions for women when they are married, single, and divorced,
       J f (b, zm ; zf , tm ), S f (zf , tm ), and Df (zf , tm ); value functions for men defined analogously;
       and the distribution of married, single, and divorced women, Pft (zf ) for hh = p, s, d; and the
       same for men, such that

          • The value functions and decision rules solve individuals’ utility maximization problems:
            5-7; and
          • Individuals’ optimal choices are consistent with aggregate equilibrium shares: Pm
                                                                                            t (z )
                                                                                                m
            follows the laws of motion in (8) and (9); and symmetrically for men.



C      Data Appendix
US targets (data) reported throughout the paper are obtained from four sources.

    1. National Vital Statistics System of the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS): mar-
       riage and divorce rates;

    2. Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP): survival of marriages until 15th an-
       niversary, remarriage rates, share of first marriages before age 34, fraction ever divorced,
       economies of scale;

    3. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series - Current Population Survey (IPUMS-CPS): all other
       data post-1968; and

    4. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series - Census (IPUMS-USA): same as IPUMS-CPS for
       1950 and 1960.


C.1      NCHS’s Marriage and Divorce Data 1968-1995
The National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) hosts marriage and divorce data from the
National Vital Statistics System of the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). The data
contain information from marriage and divorce certificates. For small states it includes all records,
for larger states it includes a sample. Due to a lack of funding by NCHS, data files are not available
for years after 1995. For our purposes, the dataset records the date of marriage/divorce, education
and age of bride and groom/divorced individual. The education of spouses is not reported after
1990. Population weights are available to obtain state-specific population sizes. Using the CPS, we
compute current marital status-, (education-) and age-specific population sizes by state. Note that
during the late 1960s through the 1970s the CPS aggregates smaller states into broader groups.
The specific years when states were combined varies across regions of the United States. We use
relative population shares from before and after the combined periods to assign population sizes

                                                      56
to each grouped state. Combining the inflated NCHS weights by state and the CPS marital status
and age specific population by state yields the denominator for each age-specific/education-specific
marriage and divorce rate. Five-year moving averages for marriage rates per 1,000 unmarried (by
age group 20-34 and education [college graduate versus noncollege degree]) are reported.


C.2     SIPP 1984–2008
The SIPP surveys 1984-2008 report the beginning and separation dates for up to three marriages
each survey. Furthermore, age, gender, and educational attainment are reported. By nature,
most marital information is retrospective. However, only weights for the current survey year are
available. Since all surveys have retrospective information, we compute specific statistics for a
given year from several diﬀerent surveys to check for inconsistencies in retrospective information.


Survival until 15th Anniversary. For each individual in the sample, the SIPP records the
beginning and ending years for each of their marriages (up to three). The survival rate until the 15th
anniversary for individuals ages 20-34 is computed by tracking individuals whose marriages started
when they were between 20 and 34 years of age. With the first survey recorded in 1984, it is possible
to compute the survival rate starting in 1950 for individuals by tracking the marriage history of
individuals ages 54–68 in 1984. Using the SIPP provided weights, five-year moving averages are
reported. The resulting survival probabilities are comparable to existing National Vital Statistics
(NVS) data for the whole population (ages 15 and above). Checking for robustness, the largest
discrepancy across survey computation occurs in 1979, where the average survival rate across six
surveys is 66.06% (with a minimum of 63.03 and a maximum of 69.97) and the standard deviation
is 3.05%. In general, the standard deviation ranges from 3.05% to 0.17%, with the average standard
deviation being 1.27 percentage points.


Remarriage Rates. The NVS reports remarriages for divorced and widowed women. We do
the same here—although, note that the number of widowed individuals ages 20-34 is generally
negligible. Individuals who have at least one previously failed marriage and have not yet remarried
are assumed to be eligible to remarry. For the actual marriages, the same strategy as for the
survival rate is used: we use the retrospective martial history information to track the number
of remarriages in a given year for all individuals that were ages 20-34 at the time of remarriage.
Remarriage rates are available from NVS reports from 1900 to 1988 for women ages 18-54. Com-
puting remarriage rates using our method, the data coincide going back only until 1970. Using
retrospective information and current survey year SIPP weights for the remarriage rates is less
accurate than for survival until the 15th anniversary. For the survival rate, we only need to track
how long marriages that started in a certain year lasted. For the remarriage rate, we need to know
the number of divorced individuals for each year we want to compute the remarriage rate. Since
weights are not retrospective, using the weights of, for example, individuals in their 60s in 1986
to compute the number of divorced individuals in 1950 may be unreliable. Therefore, we only use
10 years of retrospective information in computing remarriage rates. With 10 retrospective years

                                                 57
   Table A.2: Children at Home and Economies of Scale by Marital Status and Gender
                                                                              Economies of Scale
      Marital Status              Own Children    Step or Other Children      Base Alternative
      Married                        1.31                  0.09               2.42      2.36
      Married (Div Woman)            0.94                  0.78               2.71      3.06
      Divorced Man                   0.26                  0.03               1.13
      Divorced Woman                 1.28                  0.04               1.64
      Single Man                     0.04                  0.01               1.02
      Single Woman                   0.36                  0.02               1.18


the results are robust. For example, for women ages 20-34 the average standard deviation across
diﬀerent survey years for a given data point is 1.76 percentage points.32


First Marriages. To compute the share of individuals who marry before age 34, we compute
the ratio of individuals who married before age 34 to individuals who married at least once by
the age of 54. Again, as before we use the retrospective marital information to determine when
individuals married for the first time.


Fraction Ever Divorced. We use the current survey year and retrospective martial history
to determine the fraction of individuals that has been divorced at least once, regardless of their
current marital status.


Economies of Scales. The economies of scales are computed using individuals ages 25 to
34. SIPP surveys report the number of biological as well as stepchildren living at home. We
compute the average number of children from 1984 to 2008 living at home by current marital
status and past divorce history. To compute the economies of scales, it is assumed that the second
adult adds 0.7 equivalent members to a household, each biological child adds 0.5, and a stepchild
or other child adds 0.7 members to a household. An alternative computation is provided for
married couples. Since married couples have a small share of children 0.09 that are not biological
children, in the alternative computation we drop these children. For couples where the woman
was previously divorced, the alternative computation uses the number of children a single divorced
woman lives with 1.28, assuming these children will become stepchildren once the woman remarries
(1.7 + 0.94 ⇥ 0.5 + 1.28 ⇥ 0.7 = 3.06).
    In general, couples that remarry tend to have more children living with them, since they
have similar numbers of biological children than never-divorced couples, but also tend to have
stepchildren living with them. Table A.3 details the number and type of children by current and
prior marital status for all individuals ages 25-64. The table reports averages from the 1984 to
2008 surveys.
  32
     The standard deviations across sample are, in relative terms, about three times larger than for the
survival rates.


                                                  58
                 Table A.3: Children by Marital Status and Gender (25-64)

                                              Children type:
                            Total Own Own at Home Step at Home               Other at Home
   Marital Status:
   Married                      2.00            1.30             0.02              0.06
   Married (Div-Div)            1.91            0.44             0.57              0.08
   Married (Div M)              1.83            1.02             0.10              0.06
   Married (Div F)              1.31            0.84             0.41              0.10
   Divorced Man                 1.70            0.26             0.01              0.02
   Divorced Woman               1.99            0.99             0.01              0.05
   Single Man                   0.26            0.05             0.00              0.01
   Single Woman                 0.65            0.37             0.00              0.02

C.3     IPUMS-CPS and Census
All remaining US data are obtained from IPUMS-CPS 1968 to 2005 and IPUMS-USA 1950, 1960
surveys. For all computations we use individuals aged 20 to 34, except for the hours targets where
we use individuals ages 25 to 34, assuming most individuals have completed their education by age
25. Individuals in the armed forces, currently at school, or widows are dropped from the sample.
As are all individuals with missing education information. All summary statistics use weights
provided by the CPS or Census Bureau.


   Stock of Divorced, Married, and Single. In computing stocks of individuals by mar-
ital status, we make the following assumptions regarding status. In the CPS and Census data the
category “separated” pertains only to married persons who were legally separated or parted because
of marital discord. Therefore, we treat both separated and divorced individuals as divorced. Fur-
ther, the distinction between "married, spouse present" and "married, spouse absent" was made
during the interview itself. The second category included individuals that stayed most of the week
at a diﬀerent residence. Therefore, we treat both categories as married in the paper. Unmarried
respondents in households with unrelated adults have been asked about cohabitation only since
2007. Therefore, cohabiting individuals are classified as either single, divorced, or separated.


   Education. All individuals with at least four years of college or a bachelor’s degree are
coded as having a college degree. Individuals aged 25 to 34 are used to compute the fraction of
college-educated individuals each year, assuming most individuals have finished their education by
age 25 to 34. The same education classification is used when computing couple types by educational
attainment.


   Hours Worked. Hours are computed for all individuals (including those who did not work).
IPUMS-CPS reports usual hours worked per week in the last year starting in 1976. Prior to 1976

                                               59
Figure A.2: Eﬀect of Anticipation of Divorce Reform on College Attainment Prior to 1970s
                                                       0.4
                                                               Females, Divorce reform unanticipated
                                                               Females, LoFi Benchmark
                                                      0.35
                                                               Males, Divorce reform unanticipated


                    Fraction College Educated Young
                                                               Males, LoFi Benchmark
                                                       0.3


                                                      0.25


                                                       0.2


                                                      0.15


                                                       0.1


                                                      0.05


                                                        0
                                                        1950          1960            1970             1980   1990   2000
                                                                                                 Year




only hours worked last week are reported. We follow McGrattan and Rogerson (1998) to compute
a constant hours measure over time.


    Wages. Weekly wages are computed for full-time workers, that is, individuals that worked
at least 1,400 hours, using hours information from above and weeks worked last year. Top-coded
observations on earnings are multiplied by 1.45. All wages are deflated by the US Bureau of
Labor consumer price index. Assuming a 40-hour workweek, weekly wages of less than half of the
minimum wage, at the time, are dropped from the sample. Variance in wages in logarithm is equal
for all gender and education groups and set at 0.25, roughly the average.



D      Alternative Assumptions

D.1     Unanticipated Divorce Reform
As seen in Figure A.2, when individuals do not anticipate divorce reform and the related rise in
divorce risk (in equilibrium), the educational choices of men and women before the 1970s would
have been quite diﬀerent. But the eﬀect would be in opposite directions. Whereas anticipating
higher divorce risk caused women to increase their education level in the 1950s and 1960s, it had
the opposite eﬀect on men: they lowered their education level. This is because women have a
stronger incentive to insure against divorce by accumulation education (i.e., divorce risks played a
central role in explaining the reversal of the gender education gap).




                                                                                               60
