                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                PATENT TRADING FLOWS OF SMALL AND LARGE FIRMS

                                            Nicolas Figueroa
                                            Carlos J. Serrano

                                         Working Paper 18982
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18982


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2013




We thank Victor Aguirregabiria, Amitay Alter, Flor Gragera de León, Anna Lejpras, Anna Levine,
Glenn Macdonald, and Matt Mitchell. We also thank conference and participants at University of Toronto,
University of Alberta, Washington University in St. Louis - Olin School of Business, University of
Chile, and IIOC Conference, CEA Meetings, SEA Meetings, and EARIE meetings. Nicolás Figueroa
is an Assistant Professor of Economics at the Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile. Carlos J. Serrano
is an Assistant Professor of Economics and Business at the Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Research Associate
at the Rotman School of Management - University of Toronto, and a Faculty Research Fellow at the
NBER. Corresponding author: Carlos J. Serrano, carlos.serrano@upf.edu. We are grateful for financial
support from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Nicolas Figueroa and Carlos J. Serrano. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Patent Trading Flows of Small and Large Firms
Nicolas Figueroa and Carlos J. Serrano
NBER Working Paper No. 18982
April 2013
JEL No. L22,L24,O32,O34

                                              ABSTRACT

This article presents the results of an analysis of the patent trading flows of small and large firms and
the determinants of these firm's patent sale and acquisition decisions. We also examine whether these
transactions lead to an excessive concentration of patent rights. We show that small firms disproportionately
sell and acquire more patents than large firms, and find no evidence that patent trading brings about
a significant concentration of patent rights in the hands of large firms. We find that the match between
new patented innovations and the original inventor's patent portfolio plays an important role in how
successful firms are at generating value from their patents, and in the decision to sell a patent. And
among the traded patents, we show that patent acquisitions respond to complementarities between
the acquired patented innovation and the buyer's technological capabilities to adopt it. Our empirical
analysis uses a new, comprehensive data set that matches information on patent trades and the identity
of patent owners over a patent's lifetime.


Nicolas Figueroa
Instituto de Economía
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
Casilla 76
Correo 17, Santiago de Chile
CHILE
nicolasf@uc.cl

Carlos J. Serrano
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and Universitat Pompeu Fabra
and also NBER
carlos.serrano@utoronto.ca
1        Introduction

What is the extent to which small firms specialize in the creation of patented innovations that
are sold to large firms? Do these transactions lead to an excessive concentration of patent rights?
Does the match between new innovations and the original inventor’s complementary assets play a
role in how successful firms are at generating value from their patents; or possibly the sale to other
firms? And among traded patents, do patent acquisitions respond to complementarities between
the acquired patented innovation and the buyer’s technological capabilities? This paper presents
the results of an analysis of the patent trading flows of small and large firms and the determinants
of these firms’ patent sale and acquisition decisions. We use a new, comprehensive data set that
matches information on patent trades (Serrano, 2010) and the identity of patent owners over a
patent’s lifetime, involving patents initially owned by businesses in the United States during the
period 1988-2001.
        An influential literature in economics and management has contributed to the understanding
of the market for innovations. This literature, which has primarily focused on the licensing of
patents, shows that small firms are both more likely to license the use of their technology than
large firms (see e.g., Anand and Khanna (2000) and Arora, Fosfuri, and Gambardella (2001)) and
to perform a larger share of the R&D activities in a strategic alliance (Lerner and Merges, 1998). It
also shows that the lack of specialized complementary assets (e.g., manufacturing or technological
capabilities) increases a firm’s propensity to license a patented innovation (Teece, 1986; Arora and
Ceccagnoli, 2006), and that conditional on technology licensing, external knowledge acquisition
and internal R&D activities are complements (Arora and Gambardella, 1994; Cassiman and
Veugelers, 2006).
        At the same time, the findings about the licensing of patents do not necessarily expand to the
trading of patent rights. First, the acquisition of a patent does not only convey the right of use over
the patented technology (as the licensing transaction does), but also the control rights to let other
firms use the technology, the right to enforce the patent against infringers, as well as the option
to transfer all these rights, including the patent ownership, to any other firm. Second, there is an
increasing concern in academic and policy circles that firms acquire patents not to use technology,
but to block competitors and stifle follow-on innovation. This can occur if patent sales lead to
an excessive concentration of patent rights (Hahn, 1984), or if buyers have the incentive and the
ability to hold up rivals (Lemley and Shapiro, 2005; FTC, 2012). Third, the legal requirement
that all patent assignments1 have to be filed with the USPTO in order to be legally binding
    1
    Patent assignments acknowledge the transfer by a party of the rights, title, and interest in a patent or bundle
of patents.


                                                        1
(Dykeman and Kopko, 2004)2 can facilitate the systematic study of transactions in the market for
innovation.3 Put together, the distinctive features of patent sales indicate that their analysis can
have important implications for understanding the role that the market for innovation plays as a
source of incentives to invest in R&D, and how transactions in patent rights shape the nature of
competition between small and large firms (Gans, Hsu, and Stern, 2002). Moreover, it is common
for patents to be sold, about 13.5 percent of all granted patents are sold, and this rate is even
higher for small firms or weighted by patent "value" (Serrano, 2010). Therefore it makes sense to
devote some eﬀort to the study of patent sales, especially the patent trading flows of small and
large firms.
       In this paper we study the patent trading flows of small and large firms, and assess the de-
terminants of the firm’s patent selling and acquisition decisions. The main focus of our analysis
is to study empirically the extent to which small firms specialize in the creation of patented in-
novations, that are then sold to other, maybe large, firms. We also examine whether this patent
trading leads to an excessive concentration of patent rights in the hands of large firms. Moreover,
we analyze the role that the match between new patented innovations and the original patentee’s
patent portfolio (patentee fit) plays in the sale of patents, and study whether patent acquisitions
respond to complementarities between a patented innovation and the buyer’s technological capa-
bilities to adopt it (technology linkages). To do so, we construct a comprehensive data set that
matches information on patent trades and new data we have obtained about the identity of patent
owners over a patent’s lifetime, involving all patents initially applied for and granted to businesses
in the United States during the period 1988-2001.
       The empirical challenge is to identify the firms’ size on both sides of the transactions. Patent
assignment data provides detailed information on the timing of change in patent ownership, but it
lacks standardized information on the identity of the patent’s buyer, an issue that has limited the
scope of analysis of previous studies (see e.g., Serrano, 2006, 2010). To link this assignment data
with size of buyers and sellers, this paper exploits a provision in U.S. patent law that allows us to
use information regarding the payment of maintenance (renewal) fees to identify whether a patent
owner is either a small or large firm. Under Section 41 of the U.S. Patent Act, small entities enjoy
a 50% reduction over what large entities pay for application and renewal fee amounts. Among
   2
      In the context of a patent trade, only transactions of patents recorded at the USPTO act as evidence of a bona
fide purchase in courts (Dykeman and Kopko, 2004).
    3
      Instead, most existing studies on the licensing of patents use data from licensing and strategic alliances activ-
ities reported to the U.S. Security and Exchange Commission (SEC). These transactions are not systematic, they
typically involve transactions that are significant in value, in which at least one party is a publicly traded firm
(i.e., larger firms). At the same time, the transaction provide rich information about the terms of the contractual
relationship between the licensor and licensee.



                                                          2
patents owned by businesses, small entity status is assigned to firms with less than 500 employees
(including all subsidiaries); the rest are classified as large. Renewal fees are due no later than the
end of the fourth, eight, and twelfth year following the patent’s grant date. Moreover, the patent
application and grant data contains detailed information on the name of the original patentee–
the first potential seller– which allows us to construct the original patentee’s patent portfolio.
We have obtained the renewal fee records from the USPTO and merged them to the patent
assignment, patent application and grant data. This empirical strategy means that we can only
identify whether a patent was sold and the size of the original patentee and subsequent patent
owners as of each renewal date, but we cannot identify the names of patent owners other than
the original patentee. This paper is the first research attempt to document patent trading flows
between small and large firms.
    To guide our empirical analysis, we develop a dynamic model of the market for patents that
focuses on how firm size and the uncertainty about the scope of utilization of new innovations
aﬀect the decision to sell and acquire patented innovations. The idea we formalize is that bigger
firm size, and thus broader research activities, equip large businesses with a superior ability to
reallocate innovations within the firm to their best productive use.4 Our model shows that, under
a number of general assumptions, small firms not only are more likely to sell their patents, but may
also disproportionately acquire more patents than large firms. Moreover, we prove that among
the traded patents, large firms are more likely to buy patents of high value. These predictions are
the result of proving that, when market transaction costs are significant, scale economies in the
reallocation of new innovations within the firm facilitate large firms to retain the highest value
patents in their portfolio. The mechanism ultimately induces large firms to be on average more
selective than small firms in their patent acquisitions.
    The main empirical findings of the article are the following. First, we find that small firms
disproportionately sell and acquire more patents than large firms. Moreover, we show that among
the patents sold by small firms, they are not disproportionately acquired by large firms. Our
findings also indicate that the patent trading of small and large firms has not led to an excessive
concentration of patent rights in large firms. The traditional theory of the division of labor
   4
     There is evidence supporting the importance of the flow of information across business units of large conglom-
erates (Miller, Fern, and Cardinal, 2007). Organizational behavior scholars have also found that knowledge transfer
within firms contributes to the performance of businesses both in manufacturing and the retail sector (see e.g.,
Argote and Ingram (2010) and Argote, Ingram, Levine, and Moreland (2000) for a survey). Anecdotal evidence
also suggests that management takes into account the importance of the flow of information across business units.
For instance, the VP of Corporate Leadership Development and chief learning oﬃcer, General Electric Corporation,
stated that "As to moving ideas around diverse businesses that don’t have a lot in common, General Electric does
this because it has to. If it doesn’t, then it is just a holding company. . . ." (as quoted in Miller, Fern, and
Cardinal, 2007).



                                                        3
guides how to interpret why small firms are more likely to sell their patents (see e.g., Arrow
(1983), Teece (1986), Holmstrom (1989)). This work suggests that small firms specialize in the
creation of patented innovations that are then sold to other firms, perhaps to large firms as they
often have a comparative advantage in their development, commercialization, or enforcement. We
find something diﬀerent: small firms disproportionately acquire more patents than large firms,
especially patents from other small patentees. Nonetheless, this discrepancy may reflect that ideas
and/or patented innovations are distinct to traditional goods and services (Arrow, 1962; Teece,
1986; Anton and Yao, 1994; Rosenberg, 1996; Gans, Hsu, and Stern, 2008; Gans and Stern, 2010;
and Moser, 2013). The remaining of our empirical analysis presents possible factors aﬀecting the
patent trading flows that account for this discrepancy.
    Second, we find that patents with a lower match with the patentee’s patent portfolio, which
is our measure of fit between a firm’s new innovation and its complementary assets, are more
likely to be sold; and among patents that were not sold, the ones with the lowest fit are more
likely to be discontinued.5 We also show that small firms’ patent portfolios are characterized by
a lower fit between the new patented innovations and the patentee’s portfolio than those of the
large firms. These findings are consistent with our hypothesis that the match between a patent
and the patentee plays a crucial role in the success of a firm at generating value from its patented
innovations. Put together, they account for the reason why small firms disproportionately sell
more patents than large firms.
    Third, we show that among traded patents the likelihood of being acquired by a large firm
increases with the number of patent citations received (which is our proxy for patent value).6 This
finding is consistent with the idea of economies of scale in the reallocation of innovations within
the firm. Large firms take advantage of bigger size to reallocate innovations within the firm to
their the best use, which in turn allows them to hold a better portfolio and are therefore more
selective in their patent acquisitions. Indeed, this mechanism is also consistent with the fact that
small firms disproportionately acquire more patents than large firms. This finding also suggests
that at least for the most valuable patents the direction of the trading flows can be consistent
with the traditional theory of the division of labor. Nonetheless, the mechanism cannot account
for why among the traded patents, small firms acquire disproportionately more small firm patents
than large firm patents. The next finding actually helps us account for this issue.
    Finally, we present evidence showing that among traded patents the probability of being
   5
     In our empirical analysis, the share of patent citations made to the patentee’s patent portfolio among all patent
citations made captures the match of a patent with a patentee’s patent portfolio.
   6
     A commonly used proxy for patent value is the number of patent citations received (Hall, Jaﬀe, and Tratjenberg,
2001).



                                                          4
acquired by a small firm increases with the match between the patent and the technology profile
of existing small buyers relative to the one of large buyers. The finding is consistent with recent
literature analyzing the degree of complementarity between own R&D and technology acquisition
strategies (see e.g., Cohen and Levinthal (1990), Arora and Gambardella (1994), and Cassiman
and Veugelers (2006)).
   Regression analysis confirms the robustness of these patterns to a number of controls and
econometric specifications.
   Taken together, a new implication from our findings is that market transaction costs create a
disproportionate "reallocation tax" on small firms. Because small firms have a relative disadvan-
tage over large firms to match new patented innovations with complementary assets within the
firm, significant market transaction costs can potentially discourage small firms’ entry and growth
opportunities, and ultimately distort the degree of competition between small and large firms in
an industry (Gans, Hsu, and Stern, 2002). Our findings suggest that a major policy leverage to
increase the incentives to innovate in R&D for early-stage businesses would be to establish clear
patent rights’ boundaries, and to make information on patent sales, including transaction prices,
available through a public registry (Lemley and Myhrvold, 2008). This will take diﬀerent forms
than the typical policy levers to stimulate R&D investment.
   This paper contributes to a nascent literature studying the sale of patents using patent as-
signment data. Seminal work by Lamoureaux and Sokoloﬀ (1997, 1999, 2001) used a sample of
sales of private-inventor patents to provide a historical account of whether organized markets for
technology existed in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. More recently, Serrano (2006, 2010)
documented the eﬀects of firm size, patent technology class, patent age, and patent citations
and generality on the sale of patents for all U.S. patents granted during 1983-2001. In Serrano
(2012), some of these patterns were used to estimate a model of patent trading and renewal, that
under some assumptions, allows the author to quantify the gains from trade in the market for
patent rights. Finally, Galasso, Schankerman, and Serrano (2013) identify a new source of gains
from trade in patents, which is comparative advantage in patent enforcement, and show that
this mechanism accounts for the observed lower litigation risk that follows after a patent sale on
average. The lack of detailed systematic information on the identity of the firms’ size on both
sides of the transactions has hampered the analysis of the patent trading flows of small and large
firms. Moreover, previous work on patent sales has not examined whether the match between new
patented innovations and a firm’s complementary assets play a role in the sale and acquisition of
patent rights.
   This article is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe a model of patent trading flows


                                                5
of small and large firms, and derived some key testable implications. Section 3 describes the
data. In Section 4 we present the patterns of the patent trading flows of the small and the large
firms. Section 5 develops some basic facts about the determinants of these patent trading flows.
In Section 6, we present the baseline econometric model to empirically assess the robustness of
the patent trading flows and factors that influence it. Brief concluding remarks close the paper.


2    A model of patent trading flows of small and large firms

This section presents some intuitive guidance on how one might interpret the empirical regu-
larities that we establish in the following sections. Our analysis focuses on how firm size and
the uncertainty about the usefulness of new innovations aﬀect the decision to sell and acquire
patented innovations. The key idea we consider is that bigger firm size, and thus broader research
activities, equip large businesses with a superior ability to reallocate innovations within the firm
to the best productive use.7
    Consider an economy populated by a finite number of small and large firms. Small firms own
one research lab while large firms own two or more. Each lab produces innovations at a fixed rate,
which is independent of the owner’s size, and each lab allows the firm to put one innovation to a
productive use. To keep things simple, we assume that each innovation is useful (i.e., it is a good
“fit”) for only one lab in the economy, and that the matching process between a new innovation
and a lab is completely random. While this assumption is somewhat extreme, it captures the
idea that firms conduct R&D “in the shadow of uncertainty”, and find it hard control ex-ante the
exact nature, scope, and value of new innovations (Rosenberg, 1996). This gives rise to possible
gains from trade ex-post and generates a role for the market for patents. However, there exists a
transaction cost when acquiring an innovation that was generated outside the firm. This captures
direct costs like capital and organizational costs to adopt a new patented innovation and the
hiring of intermediaries such as patent lawyers and brokers, and market frictions arising from
expropriation risk (see e.g., Arrow (1962), Anton and Yao (1994), and a recent survey by Moser
(2013)).
    We also consider that innovations diﬀer in quality, and that the value of an innovation, con-
ditionally on being a good fit for a firm, is increasing with quality. There is extensive evidence
indicating that the value of patented innovation is highly heterogeneous (Pakes, 1986). The het-
erogeneity in innovation quality, and thus value, play an interesting role in the firm’s decision to
acquire external patented innovation. Since firms have a limited capacity for putting innovations
   7
     A formal dynamic model of the market for patents, including the proofs of the implications presented in this
section, can be found in the appendix.


                                                       6
to a productive use (given by the amount of labs they own), a new innovation with a good fit
for them is useful only if it is better than the worst innovation they currently own. Given the
transaction costs, the leap in quality to acquire an external innovation must be significant, even
under the assumption that the buyer makes a take it or leave it oﬀer, eﬀectively capturing the
whole surplus.
    Finally, we assume that once created, innovations only change their quality through obsoles-
cence, and that there is a positive discount factor between periods.
    To illustrate the decision of a patentee, which will in turn determine the patent trading flows
between firms in this economy, consider an innovation characterized by its value, the lab from
which it originates, and the lab for which it is useful. If the innovation has a good fit with a
lab owned by the same firm that originates it, the firm may keep it (if it is an improvement) or
discontinue it (i.e., not renewing it). If the innovation is useful for another firm, the originator will
try to sell it, and trade will occur if the gains from replacing an old invention with the new one
are bigger than the transaction cost plus the option value of waiting for the arrival or acquisition
of future innovations. Otherwise it will be discontinued.
    Market interactions, characterized by the acquisition decisions of the diﬀerent firms, generate
a dynamic system where, in steady state, small and large firms hold portfolios of patented inno-
vations of diﬀerent qualities. We characterize the steady state of this model, which turns out to
have the implications we find in the data.
    The main predictions of the model are as follows. First, small firms are not only more likely
to sell their patents, but also disproportionately acquire more patents than large firms. Second,
among the traded patents, the likelihood of being acquired by either a small or large buyer depends
on the degree of the fit between the focal patent and the technology profile of potential buyers.
Third, among traded patents, the probability of being acquired by a large firm increases with the
patent’s quality. These implications are the result of demonstrating that scale economies in the
reallocation of new innovations facilitate large firms to retain the highest value patents in their
portfolio. Moreover, this mechanism induces large firms to be on average more selective than small
firms in their patent acquisitions, which ultimately accounts for why small firms disproportionately
acquire more patents than large firms.


3    Data

The facts we present are derived by merging two datasets. The first dataset contains information
about the firm size of the patent owners as of the patent’s application date and renewal dates.


                                                   7
We obtained this information using patent level application and maintenance fee records from the
USPTO. The second dataset provides the transfer records decisions over the lifetime of patents
(Serrano, 2010). The merged dataset is a panel of patents applied for and granted to corporations
that includes the history of trade and renewal decisions, and whether the patent owner is a small
or large entity at various dates during the patent’s lifetime.


3.1      Sample construction

Documenting the firm size of patent owners over the lifetime of a patent has been challenging.
While the NBER Patent Citations data set reports the name of a patentee as of the issue date of a
patent, but it does not keep track neither of patents sales nor of subsequent patent owners (Hall,
Jaﬀe, and Tratjenberg, 2001). Similarly, the USPTO Patent assignment data does keep track
of the registration of these sales, but neither the names of the buyers nor the sellers of patents
were standardized by the patent oﬃce, making it unfeasible to link these transactions to existing
datasets on business characteristics in a systematic manner.8
       To overcome this challenge, we pursue an alternative strategy, exploiting a provision in the
U.S. patent law that regulates the assertion of small and large entity status and the notification
of changes of entity status over the lifetime of patents. Under Section 41 of the U.S. Patent Act,
the standard application and maintenance fees amounts are subject to a 50% reduction for small
entities.9 Among businesses, patents are assigned a small entity status if the patent holder is a
business with less than 500 employees (including all subsidiaries); the rest are considered large.
Small entity status is established by a written assertion of entitlement to small entity status or
claimed with the payment of filing fees and maintenance fees over the life cycle of patents. After
an assertion of small entity status has been established, a second subsequent assertion is not
required when occurs an assignment of rights or an obligation to assign rights to other parties
that are small entities. On the contrary, the notification of loss of entitlement to small entity
status, such as upon the sale of a patent from a small entity to a large entity, is required when
issue and maintenance fees are due. In short, the regulation implies that the patent’s entity status
reflects the actual firm size of patent owners.
       The first dataset we develop combines information extracted from patent application and
   8
      To the best of our knowledge, there is no systematic dataset including the buyer and seller’s identify in patent
transactions, the owner’s firm size, or other business characteristics.
    9
      Under 35 U.S.C. 41(h)(1), fees "charged under 35 U.S.C. 41(a), (b), and (d)(1) shall be reduced by 50 percent
with respect to their application to any small business concern as defined under section 3 of the Small Business Act,
and to any independent inventor or nonprofit organization as defined in regulations issued by the Director." This
is a unique feature of the USPTO, all patentee pay the same fees at the European Patent Oﬃce and the Japanese
Patent Oﬃce.



                                                          8
maintenance fee records to document the firm size for patent owners over the lifetime of patents.
To document whether patents were initially owned by small or large businesses, we use the patent
application records of issued patents. We have obtained patent application records from January
1, 1980 to December 31, 2000. To identify the firm size of patent owners over a patent’s lifetime,
we make use of the patent maintenance fee records held at the Finance Division of the patent
oﬃce. Maintenance fees are due no later than the end of the 4th, 8th and 12th year after the grant
date of the patent.10 We obtained the patent maintenance fee records from January 1, 1992, to
December 31, 2001.11 By linking both data sources, we can identify the firm size for the patent
owners at the grant date and at each of the renewal events.
       The second dataset uses registrations of changes in patent ownership recorded at the USPTO
in order to identify the sale of patents. The source of the data is the Patent Assignment Database.
When a U.S. patent is transferred, an assignment is recorded at the patent oﬃce acknowledging
the change of ownership. Under Section 261 of the U.S. Patent Act, recording the assignment
protects the patent owner against previous unrecorded interests and subsequent assignments. If
the patentee does not record the assignment, subsequent recorded assignments will take priority.
For these reasons, patent owners have strong incentives to record assignments and patent attorneys
strongly recommend this practice (Dykeman and Kopko, 2004). A typical reassignment entry
indicates the patent number involved, the name of the buyer (i.e. assignee), the name of the seller
(i.e. assignor), the date at which the reassignment was recorded at the patent oﬃce and the date
at which the private agreement between the parties was signed. This information was collected
for the period 1983-2001.12
       A challenge in using reassignment data is to distinguish changes in patent ownership from other
events recorded at the USPTO assignment data. We use an algorithm developed in Serrano (2010)
that conservatively drops all the assignments that appear not to be associated with an actual
patent trade. The algorithm drops assignments that refer to a "name change" of the patentee, to
the patent being used as a collateral ("security interest"), to corrections ("corrections"), changes of
address ("change of address"), assignments from an inventor to the employer ("first assignments"),
and transactions between entities with the same name. In addition we drop assignments in which
the buyer is the assignee as of the grant date of the patent, assignments recorded at the patent
  10
      The failure to pay the fees by the due date will result in the patent’s immediate expiration.
  11
      An author obtained access from the USPTO to the maintenance fee records in exchanged for advice on their
cleaning, processing, and use. A task force at the patent oﬃce used the information on the patent entity status
in order to better forecast the patent oﬃce revenues from maintenance fees. While at the time that an author
was involved with the patent oﬃce, the data in bulk was not publicly available. The processed data can be freely
accessed nowadays at: http://www.google.com/googlebooks/uspto.html.
   12
      A summary of the patent assignment data as well as an detailed discussion of its advantages and disadvantages
can be found in Serrano (2006, 2010).


                                                        9
application date, and assignments to financial institutions.13 The details of the procedures we used
to deal with the assignment data are explained in Serrano (2010). The remaining, post-cleaning,
assignment records identify the sale of a patent between distinct entities and have information
about patent numbers.
       Patent numbers make possible to merge both datasets with classic data on patents that others
have used. In particular, we obtain data on patent citations received, patent citations made,
original assignee name and number, type of assignee, patent’s technology class, etc. using the
NBER Patent Citations Dataset (Hall, Jaﬀe, and Tratjenberg, 2001). Moreover, the assignee
number (a unique patentee identifier) allows us to construct patentee’s patent portfolios. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first time that data on the patent entity status indicating firm
size of patent holders over a patent’s lifetime has been linked to data on patent trading and other
patent characteristics.
       In our empirical analysis we focus on corporate patents, so we use patents that were applied
for and granted to businesses, which represent about 75 percent of all issued patents. In doing
so, we exclude patent applied for and issued to individual inventors or individually owned, federal
agencies, and universities. In addition, our analysis is restricted to patents granted in between
the years 1989 and 1996. For these patents, we not only observe their entity status as of their
application date, but also at the date the first maintenance fee is due (i.e., the end of the fourth
year after a patent’s issue date). The merged dataset has 590 873 patents, issued to 61 239
patentees.
       Table 1 presents summary statistics of the patents in our sample. Panel A shows that 11% of
these patents were owned by small firms as of their application date, and rest were owned by large
firms. The same panel reports that these rates across the issue years of the patents in the sample.
The proportion of small firm patents has been growing over the period of study, ranging from 9
percent in 1989-1990 to 12 percent in the years 1995-1996. In Panel B we report the proportion
of patents initially owned by small and large firms across six patent technology classes (Chemical,
Computer & Communications, Drugs & Medical, Electric & Electronics, Mechanical, and Other).
Small firms patenting is relatively more important in the technology classes of Drugs and Medical
(15.2%) and Other (20.6%). The lowest share of patenting for small firms is in the Computer and
Communications (5.9%) and Chemical (6.5%) patent classes.14
  13
     By dropping transactions to financial institution we eliminate transactions in which a patent may have been
used as collateral in a loan, or that the possibility that patent was transferred to the financial institution in case
the loan was not paid back.
  14
     We have followed Hall, Jaﬀe, and Tratjenberg (2001) to classify patents into technology categories or fields.




                                                         10
4         Patent trading flows of small and large firms

We begin our empirical analysis describing the sale, acquisition, and expiration of patents by
small and large firms. Our analysis of patent transactions will focus on patent sales made by
the original patentee and that took place within four years of each patent’s grant date. We do
this because we have detailed information on the patent portfolio only of the original patentee.
Moreover, all patents are active prior to their first renewal date.
         Table 2 reports information on patent sales and acquisitions. Column (1) present aggregate
statistics; the rest present six diﬀerent patent technology classes in our data. In Panel A, we
present the proportion of patents sold by small and large firms. Column (1) shows that while
small firms sell 9 percent of their patents, large firms sell only 55 percent. These rates are low
because in our analysis trade is truncated by the fourth year since a patent’s grant date. This
result is consistent with Serrano (2010). The remaining of the empirical findings presented are
new.15 In panel B, we report patent acquisitions. We compute the proportion of traded patents
that had been acquired by small firms and large firms and then compare it with their patenting
activity. Column (1) shows that the proportion of patents acquired by small firms is about 16
percent of all the traded patents, while large firms acquire the remaining 84 percent. The striking
fact from this table is that small firms disproportionately acquire more patents than large firms.
To show this, we compare the proportion of traded patents acquired by small and large firms
with the proportion of patents that were applied for and granted to small and large firms. Of
all the patents that were applied for and granted, small firms firms applied for and were granted
107 percent of them, but they acquired 16 percent of the traded patents in our sample (that
is, an acquisition rate about 50% higher than their patenting rate); large firms applied for and
were granted the rest, 892 percent, but acquired 84 percent (about 6% lower than their patenting
activity). Similar findings were found across patent technology classes.
         In Panel C of Table 2, we study the patent trading flows between small and large firms. To
do this, we focus on the subsample of traded patents by small firms and the one of patents traded
by large firms. Among patents sold by small firms, 67 percent were acquired by other small firms,
which is about six times times the proportion of patents granted to small firms in our sample; the
rest of the patents were acquired by large firms. Among patents sold by large firms, we see that
the proportion of these patents acquired by large firms is 942 percent, which is just 6 percent
higher than the proportion of patents granted to large firms in our sample. In short, these findings
indicate that small firms disproportionately acquire more small firm patents than large firms, but
    15
         The lifetime rate of transfer, albeit is a somewhat diﬀerent sample, is larger (see Serrano, 2010).



                                                              11
large firms do not especially rely on innovation from other large firms, they buy patents to what
would be suggested by an uniform buying pattern. The rest of the columns in Table 2 confirm
that these patterns are consistent across technology classes.
      Table 3 examines the implications of the patent trading on the concentration of patent rights
and the patent portfolios of firms. In Panel A, we show that patent sales have not lead to
a significant increase in the concentration of patent rights in the hands of large firms. To do
this, we present the proportion of patent rights held by small and large firms as of age five and
immediately after the renewal decision. We find no substantial diﬀerences between the proportion
of patents initially owned by large firms (10.7%) and the same proportion of patent as of age five
(10%). The findings are consistent across patent technology classes.16
      In Panel B, we examine the extent to which the market for patent rights is an important source
of patented innovations for firms. To do so, we calculate the proportion of patents previously
acquired relative to all the patents held by firms as of age five of these patents. We show that
the proportion of patents acquired in the patent portfolio of the typical small firm (9.3%) is
significantly higher than the same proportion in the patent portfolio of the larger firms (5.6%).
The result indicates that small firms tend to rely more on the market for patent rights than their
larger counterparts.
      The theory of the firm as applied to the division of innovative labor between small and large
firms guides us in how to interpret some of the previous findings. The fact that large firms are
less likely than small firms to sell their patents can be explained by their comparative advantage
in manufacturing and marketing. Nevertheless, the patterns concerning the acquisition of patents
contradict the predictions of this theory. Not only we find that small firms disproportionately
acquire more patents that large firms, but also the direction of some of the patent trading flows
is the opposite to the prediction of the theory: small firm patents are not disproportionately
acquired by large firms.
      The next section explores why is there such a discrepancy. We plan to test three possible
factors our model suggest that may aﬀect the patent trading flows of small and large firms.
Namely, the match between a patent and the downstream complementary assets of the patentee,
the technology linkages between the relevant technology in the patent and the potential buyers’
capacity to eﬀectively adopt it, and a patent’s value.
 16
      Similar qualitative results were obtained weighting traded patents by patent citations received.




                                                          12
5         Determinants of patent trading flows

5.1        Hypotheses development

Patentee fit
         The first focus of interest is to study the role of the match between new patented innovations
and the original patentee’s complementary assets. In particular, the role it plays in the success
of firms at generating value from their innovations; or possibly their sale (Teece, 1986; Gans
and Stern, 2003; Arora and Ceccagnoli, 2006; Cassiman and Ueda, 2006). However, the match
between a patentee’s new innovations and its downstream assets is hard to measure. The number
of patents embedded in a product and the form in which this product interacts with the rest of
the firm could provide some evidence about this, but there are no datasets providing such detailed
information.
         Because patented knowledge is prior art, that patent applicants and patent oﬃce examiners
are required to cite, we use patent citations to construct a variable designed to reflect to what
degree a patented innovation is a good match for the patentee.17 We define    as the
number of patent citations made in a patent to the patentee’s patent portfolio relative to the total
number of patent citations made to the rest of patentees (i.e., self-citation rate). This measure has
often been considered a proxy of the relevant degree of complementarity between new innovations
and their original patentee (see e.g., Lanjouw and Schankerman, 2004).
         There are two dimensions along which we can identify the importance of the match between
new innovations and the original patentee’s complementary assets: the decision to sell a patent
and the decision to extend its life. Our first hypothesis is that patents with a lower fit with the
patentee’s patent portfolio will be more likely to be sold; and the second hypothesis is that among
the patents that are not sold, the patentee will be more likely to let expire the ones with lower
fit.

H.1 Patents with lower fit with the patentee’s patent portfolio are more likely to be traded

H.2 Among the untraded patents, the patents with a lower fit with the patentee’s patent portfolio
           are more likely to be let to expire

         At the same time, recent work highlights the important role the flow of information within the
firm plays in the matching of innovations with complementary assets (Nelson, 1959; Henderson
    17
    Patent applicants and the lawyers representing them must include to the best of their knowledge all prior art in
the application. This may include non-patentable elements (e.g., journal publications), previous patents that relate
to the innovation they aim to patent and its claims, etc. These citations are then assessed by the patent examiner
who ultimately either confirms or discards them during the application process.


                                                        13
and Cockburn, 1996; Argote et al, 2000; Miller, Fern, and Cardinal, 2007; Hellmann and Perotti,
2011).18 We consider that bigger firm size, and thus a broader field of applications for new
innovations, provides superior ability to reallocate innovations to the best productive use within
the firm. This idea is closest to Nelson (1959)’s study in that we both associate broader research
activities with large firms. In light of this idea, we would expect that patents originated in
small firms will have a lower    than the ones originated in large firms. An immediate
corollary of this conjecture would be that small firms are more likely to sell their patents because
their patents have on average poorer fit with the patentee than the patents of large firms.
       Patent value
       A second dimension along which the direction of the patent trading flows of small and large
firms may be shaped is patent “value". If the market for patents works eﬃciently, we would
expect that firms buy patents that represent an improvements over their current patent portfolio.
Moreover, our model indicates that scale economies in the reallocation of new innovations can
provide large firms with superior ability to hold high value patents, making large firms to be on
average more selective than small firms in their patent acquisitions.
       Because we have neither data on acquisition prices nor information on expected patent values,
we can only rely on imperfect measures of patent value. A commonly used proxy for patent
value is the number of patent citations received (Trajtenberg, 1990). Additional support for this
measure can be found in Serrano (2010), who shows that patents with a higher number of patent
citations received by a given age are more likely to be both traded and renewed. Following this
line of work, we capture patent “value" using the cumulative number of patent citations received
as of age five.
       Our third hypothesis is that among the patents traded the ones acquired by large firms have
a higher mean number of patent citations received than the patents acquired by small firms.

H.3 Among the traded patents, the ones with higher number of patent citations received are more
         likely to be acquired by large firms, especially for the patents initially owned by small firms.

       Taken together, and according to our model of the patent trading flows, the three previous
hypotheses can account for why small firms disproportionately sell and acquire more patents than
large firms. Indeed, the hypothesis for which patents with the lowest match with the patentee’s
patent portfolio are the ones most likely to be traded can account for the reason why small firms
disproportionately sell more patents than large firms. Similarly, the superior advantage of large
  18
    Henderson and Cockburn (1996) associate the returns to the scope (or diversity) of the firm’s research eﬀort
with internal spillovers of knowledge between programs that enhance each other’s productivity. Henderson and
Cockburn, however, are agnostic as to whether these economies of scope should increase or decrease with firm size.


                                                       14
firms to reallocate innovations within the firm to their the best use allows them to hold a better
portfolio and are therefore more selective in their patent acquisitions. Nonetheless, the previous
hypotheses cannot explain why among traded patents, small firms acquire disproportionately
more small firm patents than large firm patents. To do this, we examine below whether patent
acquisitions respond to the buyer’s technological capabilities to adopt patented innovations.

    Technology linkages
    Another channel that may influence the transaction of patents is the existence of technology
linkages between the relevant patented technology and the potential buyers’s capacity to eﬀectively
adopt it (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990; Arora and Gambardella, 1994; Cassiman and Veugelers,
2006). Measuring this match is challenging and, to the best of our knowledge, there is no data
that formally links patented innovations with their best potential buyers.
    Since for each patent, and its corresponding cited patents, the patentee of the focal patent
is linked to the patentees of the cited patents, we can use patent citation data to capture the
degree of the match of the focal patent with potential buyers (i.e., technology linkages). Recall
that our empirical strategy to identify the firms’ size on both sides of the transactions implies
that we can only identify whether a patent was sold and the size of the subsequent patent owner,
but we cannot identify the names of patent owners other than the original patentee. We define
  as the number of patent citations made to firms with the same size that the patentee
relative to the total number of patent citations made to small and large firms (excluding self-
citations).19 Our hypothesis is that if research activities between small firms, or between small
and large firms, were interconnected in some non-random fashion (such as the complementarity
between own R&D and technology acquisition), we expect that part of the trading flows between
small and large firms could be accounted by this eﬀect, which would characterize the potential
buyers’ ability to eﬀectively adopt external technologies.20
    Following these ideas, the fourth hypothesis we want to assess is whether the smaller firms’
research activities are more linked with each other than the ones of their larger counterparts,
and whether the links in the research activities of small and large firms are associated with the
direction of the observed patent trading flows.
   19
      To construct  , we use the patent citations made to corporations (i.e., assigned to a corporation as
of their grant date) and that were identified as being made to a small and large entities. For a small firm patent,
  measures the proportion of citations made to small firms among all the patent citations made to small
and large firms. For a large firm patent,   is the proportion of citations made to large firms among all
patent citations made to small and large firms.
   20
      Given that all patents are subject to be cited independently of whether or not they are let to expire over their
lifetime, we consider that the small and large firm patents that could potentially be cited is equal to the proportion
of patents initially owned by small and large firms too.



                                                         15
H.4 The direction of the patent trading flows of small and large firms depend on the degree of the
        match of the focal patent with the best potential buyer.


5.2      Motivating evidence

We begin providing summary statistics of patentee fit, technology linkages, and patent value with
the objective to motivate the econometric analysis to follow in the next section.

      Patentee fit
      Table 4A reports descriptive statistics for    and the trade and expiration of patents.
We find that the mean    of the traded patents (0093) is lower than the patents that
were kept (0136) by the patentee. At the same time, the    of the renewed patents
that were not previously sold (0139) is higher than the fit of the patents that were let to expire
(0117) indicating that the patents with a lower fit with the patentee are indeed the most likely
to be let to expire. All the diﬀerences are significant at p-values  01. The findings suggest that
higher patentee fit is associated with lower likelihood that a patentee will sell the patent; and that
conditional on not selling the patent, higher patentee fit is also connected with lower likelihood of
expiration. All in all, the correlations suggest that the match between a patent and the patentee’s
patent portfolio may be an important determinant of the trading and the expiration of patents
(Hypotheses #1 and #2).
      In Panel B of Table 4, we present statistics of    for small and large firms. It shows
that the mean    for patents initially owned by large firms (0143) is higher than for
the patents issued to the small firms (0054). The diﬀerence is also statistically significant with
p-value  01. This finding provides support for the conjecture that larger size equips large firms
with superior ability to match new patents to the best use within the firm’s boundaries.

      Patent value
      Table 5 presents the number of patent citations received of the patents that the small and
the large firms acquire relative to the average patent not sold and the average patent granted.
Panel A reports a number of results. First, large firms acquire patents with higher mean of patent
citations received than the small firms. Looking at this more closely, the result does depend
on whether the original patentee was either a small or large firms. Among small firm patents,
large firms tend to purchase the patents with higher mean number of patent citations received
(585 (std. err. 0181)) vs. small firms (412 (std. err. 010)), and the diﬀerence is statistically
significant (p-value  001).21 Instead, among patents initially owned by large firms, there are
 21
      The number of patent citations received is equal to the cumulative number of patent citations received as of


                                                        16
no significant diﬀerences between the patent value acquisition patterns of small and large firms
(p-value = 044). The second result is that the mean number of patents citations received of
the acquired patents is higher than those not traded, as well as higher than those initially issued
to the firms. All in all, this table indicates that patentees buy improvements over their patent
portfolio, and that large firms acquire higher value patents than small firms, especially among
patents initially granted to small firms. Similar results were obtained using the patent’s renewal
decision as an alternative indicator of patent value (see Panel B of Table 5). These results provide
support for Hypothesis #3 and the model of patent trading flows of Section 2.

    Technology linkages
    Table 6 quantifies the match between the technology profile of patentees and potential buyers.
In Panels 6A and 6B, we compare the mean of   for small and large firms with their
patenting activity. We find that   of small firm patents (168%) is higher than the
proportion of patents initially owned by small firms (107%) (about 57 percent higher than the
rate of a random citation pattern.)22 In contrast, the proportion of all citations made to large
firms patents from large firms (945%) is marginally higher than the proportion of patents initially
owned by small firms (892%) (about 6 percent higher than random citation.) The findings indicate
that there is a strong aﬃnity in the research activities of small firms, and that large firms’ research
activities are broader than the one of small firms (at least in terms of their patent citation behavior
and patenting).
    Examining the data further we find that the results also hold across diﬀerent technology
fields. It is worth highlighting here that the rates of citations among small firms is highest in
the Computer & Communications and the Chemical patent categories ( over twice the rate of
random citation); in contrast, in the mechanical and the Drug & Medical patent citations among
small firms is much less common (only about 35 percent higher than the rate of random patent
citation). Incidentally, the ratio of the proportion of small firm traded patents acquired by other
small firms to the proportion of patents applied for and granted to small firms is also highest in
the Computer & Communication and the Chemical patent classes.
    Putting together the previous results suggest that the patent trading flows of small and large
firms are associated with technology linkages, and thus the ability that firms have to adopt external
technologies.
year five since the grant date of the patent.
  22
     The patent citations we use exclude self-citations; and the rate of random citations is the one where citations
made are based on the stock of small and/or large firm patents that may be potentially cited.




                                                        17
6     Econometric specification and results

6.1   Identification

Taking the previous results together, we may be tempted to conclude that small firms dispropor-
tionately sell more patents than large firms because small firms’ patents are more likely to have
a poor fit with their patentee’s patent portfolios. Similarly, we can also prematurely conclude
that the stronger technology linkages between small firms cause the strong patent trading flows
between small firms.
    But there may be other reasonable explanations for these facts. For example, firms that aim
to specialize both in the creation and the sale of patents, such as perhaps small firms, may also be
businesses with patents displaying low and persistent measures of fit with their patent portfolio,
i.e., patentee fit. Similarly, firms that are liquidity constrained may find it harder to be granted
patents with a high fit with their complementary assets and, at the same time, are less likely
to pay the maintenance fees to renew them. As for the technology linkages, some patentees,
especially among small firms, may be both buying and selling more patents in technology areas
where these firms’ research is more interconnected, independently of whether technology linkages
facilitate technology adoption. In other words, because patentee fit and technology linkages can
correlate with unobservable patentee characteristics that aﬀect the decision to trade a patent
and the direction of the trade, an endogeneity problem may emerge. A cross-section analysis of
observations of whether a patent was traded will not allow us to identify neither the eﬀect of
patentee fit nor the role of technology linkages on the trading and the direction of the patent
trading flows, respectively.
    For these reasons, we use a panel-level regression analysis with patentee fixed eﬀects. This
approach allows us to control for unobserved permanent heterogeneity that aﬀects the trading
decision of patentees and that may be correlated with the variables patentee fit and technology
linkages. There are 59 839 firms in our dataset, each firm holding on average approximately 10
patents. A patentee fixed eﬀect should capture the impact that these unobserved characteristics
may have on the decisions to trade and to whom to trade a patent that is not a consequence
of patentee fit or the technology linkages. At the same time, the patentee fixed eﬀects will
undoubtedly reduce the variation in the data to precisely estimate some coeﬃcients, especially in
specifications using the subsample of traded patents.
    In addition, our empirical analysis controls for the patent’s technology class. Patent technology
class dummies allow us to isolate the eﬀect of unobservable determinants of the trading decision
and the direction of the flows that are technology specific. For instance, the correlation between


                                                 18
the variable patentee fit and the small firm dummy may be the result of few but large technology
areas. Alternatively, the finding suggesting that large firms acquire higher value patents than
small firms may also be due to large firms acquiring patents from patent classes that typically
receive more patent citations on average.
   Our empirical analysis also considers alternative specifications to the patentee fixed eﬀect
model (e.g., non-fixed eﬀect linear probability model and a Probit model). In these regression
specifications, we control for the size of a patentee’s patent portfolio size and a dummy indicating
whether the patentee is a small firm. The variable size of the patent portfolio does influence
whether a patent is a good match for the patentee and at the same time may also be a determinant
of the direction of the patent trading flows (see e.g., Galasso, Schankerman, and Serrano, 2013).
In the absence of patentee fixed eﬀects, the small firm dummy accounts for the potential eﬀect of
small patentee unobserved heterogeneity in the direction of the patent trading flows that cannot
be explained by the rest of the covariates.


6.2   Model specification

The remaining of our empirical analysis consists of two parts. First, we study the eﬀect of patentee
fit on the patent trading and expiration decisions. Second, we examine the role of technology
linkages and patent value in the direction of the patent trading flows of small and large firms.
Previous literature on patent trading only looked at the eﬀect of firm size, patent citations, etc.
on whether a patent is traded or not (Serrano, 2010). Here we additionally consider the buyer’s
firm size and thus analyze the direction of the patent trading of small and large firms. Regarding
technology licensing, the extant studies examined whether the frequency of patent licensing was
lower for firms with specialized complementary assets (e.g., Arora and Ceccagnoli (2006)) only
using cross-sectional data. We have access to panel-level data that facilitates the identification of
the eﬀect of the match of the patent with the patentee’s patent portfolio on patent trading.
   To study the importance that the match between new patented innovations and the patentee’s
patent portfolio play in the trading and expiration decision, we consider whether a patent was
traded at least once during the first four years from the patent grant date and whether or not the
patent was let to expire at the first renewal event, respectively. The estimated model is:


                     =    +  +  +   +  +                      (1)


where the dependent variable (  or  ) is a binary-indicator,  is a patentee
fixed eﬀect, and   and  denote patent technology class eﬀects (  , i.e., 36 patent


                                                 19
sub-categories) and patent grant year eﬀects (1989 to 1996), respectively.23
       The main variable of interest is    (the match between new patented innovation
 and the patentee’s  patent portfolio), that is measured as the percentage of citations made to
the patent portfolio of the patentee. In both specifications, a negative and significant  implies
that patents with higher patentee fit are associated with lower trade rates and that among the
untraded patents the ones with higher patentee fit are associated with lower expiration rates,
respectively.
       The vector  has potentially two components. The first one is a proxy of the value of the
patent ( ), measured as the cumulative number of patent citations received by patent
 as of patent age five. The second component, the size of the patent portfolio of the patentee
(  ) is included in specifications without firm fixed eﬀects.24
       To study the direction of the patent trading flows, we consider the sample of patents that were
traded within four years after a patent’s grant date and estimate the following specification:


                = 1   ∗  + 2   ∗  + 
                                 + +   +  +                                                        (2)


where   is a dummy equal to 1 if a patent is traded to a small firm, and zero whenever
the patent was sold to a large firm.
       The variables of interest is   (technology linkages between the relevant patented
technology in innovation  and the potential buyers’s capacity to eﬀectively adopt it), measured
as the number of patent citations made to firms with the same size that the patentee relative to
the total number of patent citations made to all other firms.  and  are dummy
variables equal to 1 if the original patentee is a small or large firm, respectively, and zero otherwise.
A positive and significant coeﬃcient of the interaction   ∗ indicates that patents
that would be a better fit for small firms are associated with higher rates of acquisition by small
firms. Similarly, a negative and significant coeﬃcient for   ∗ implies that, among
large firm patents, a better fit with large firms is associated with a lower rate of acquisition by
small firms.
       In equation (2), the vector  includes the patent specific variables patent citations received
  23
     Because our interest is on the expiration decision of the intial patentees, the expiration specification uses the
sample of patents still owned by the initial patentee as of the renewal decision date. Note that we would not be
able to compute the subsequent owner’s patent portfolio and PatenteeFit measure because while we observe the size
of the patent buyer (small or large), the assignment data does not provide neither its name nor unique identifier
(which is needed to compute patent portfolios in a systematic manner).
  24
     Portfolio size is computed using the cumulative number of patents granted to a patentee either from 1975 (first
year in our data) or the first year a firm patented.


                                                         20
( )   and   Among the specifications that do not include the firm fixed eﬀect
  the vector  also contains the size of the patent portfolio of the patentee (   )
and a firm size dummy ( ). In particular, we add the variable  to control for
unobserved firm size heterogeneity in the direction of the patent trading flows.25
    To examine the degree to which higher value patents are more likely to be acquired by large
firms, we replace the variable  in equation (2) with two interactions ( ∗
and  ∗  ) A negative and significant coeﬃcient of  ∗  indicates
that, among patents initially owned by small firms, the probability of these patents being acquired
by a large firm increases with the number of patent citations received. Instead, a negative and
significant coeﬃcient of  ∗  shows that, among patents initially owned by large
firms, a higher number of citations received makes it less likely for a patent to be acquired by a
small firm (and thus more likely to be acquired by a large firm).


6.3    Additional econometric issues

There is still an econometric issue that requires further discussion. In specifications (1) and (2),
the patentee fit and technology linkages variables are potentially endogenous, in those cases in
which a patentee had developed a patented technology in advance with the sole intention to selling
it to other firms. In practice, the patentee may have arranged for the sale of a specific patent,
including the potential buyer, prior to the issuing of the patent. A firm fixed eﬀect, while useful
to account for patentee specific eﬀects in patent trading, cannot capture a strategic patent specific
decision of this nature.
    Unfortunately, it is challenging to find appropriate instrumental variables. Measuring the
degree of complementarity between a patent and a patentee, as well as the ability to adopt a
technology is hard with the available data. The previous literature, which has typically relied
on cross-sectional data, has not considered this possible caveat (see e.g., Arora and Ceccagnoli,
2006). To address the extent to which our estimates are aﬀected by this issue, we have checked
whether most of the patents were traded within a year of being granted. Our conjecture is that if
a large proportion of patents had been traded immediately after being granted, it would suggest
that these patents were expected to be sold to an already known buyer. Interestingly, we found
no evidence indicating that most patents are sold immediately. In particular, less than 15 percent
of the patents that are ever traded over their lifetime are traded within a year of being issued.
  25
     Another reason to add the variable  to our econometric specification is to control for the possibility
that the citations patterns of small firms towards other small firms (rather than to large firms) may be for reasons
other than their proximity in the technology space.




                                                        21
Moreover, these patents do not have statistically significant lower measures of patentee fit than
the rest of the patents. Nonetheless, below we present the estimates of panel regressions that
include firm fixed eﬀects, and patent technology class, patent calendar year eﬀects, and provide
both a causal and alternative interpretations.
   There is additional evidence suggesting that our measures of patentee fit and technology flows
are likely to be uncorrelated with the error terms in the regressions. Previous literature on the
economics of innovation has extensively recognized the high degree of uncertainty in the process
of R&D, especially for patented innovations (e.g., Pakes (1986) and Rosenberg (1996)). Moreover,
patent applicants and the lawyers representing them must include in the application all existing
prior art that relate to the innovation they aim to patent and its claims. These citations are
then assessed by a professional patent examiner from the U.S. patent oﬃce, who ultimately either
confirms, discards or includes additional citations during the application process.


6.4   Results

Table 7 presents a set of regressions of the decision that a patent will be traded on patentee fit.
Column (1) displays the estimates of the firm fixed eﬀects regression model in equation (1). We
control for technology, grant year eﬀects, and patent citations received. Consistent with Serrano
(2010), we find that more valuable patents and patents of firms with smaller patent portfolios
are more likely to be traded. The new result refers to the fit of the patent with the patentee’s
patent portfolio. The regression shows that patents with higher match with the patentee’s patent
portfolio are less likely to be traded. The marginal eﬀect of patentee fit (−00135) is negative and
statistically significant (p-value  001). In Columns (2) we present a Probit regression model
with grant year, technology eﬀects, and the firm’s patent portfolio size, and obtain similar results.
In Column (3), we present a Probit regression dropping the patent grant year and technology
class eﬀects. In this Table, as well as in the rest of the remaining Tables, Columns (4) and (5)
show the same estimated coeﬃcients using a simple linear probability model with and without
the grant and technology eﬀects, respectively. In column (6), we examine a random eﬀects Probit
specification. The results from all the regressions support Hypothesis #1, indicating that a patent
that is not a good fit to the patentee is more likely to be sold.
   Table 8 presents a set of regressions of the decision to let a patent expire on patentee fit.
Column 1 shows the estimates of the regression model in equation (1). We control for technology,
grant year eﬀects, and patent citations received. Patents with more patent citations received are
associated with lower expiration rates, confirming that patent citations received is an indicator of
patent value (Serrano, 2010). The new result we want to highlight here is the association between

                                                 22
patentee fit and the expiration decision. The marginal eﬀect of patentee fit (−00191) is negative
and statistically significant (p-value  001). The result is confirmed in a number of econometric
specifications, including a linear probability model without firm fixed eﬀects, Probit models, and
random eﬀects Probit models. The finding indicates that among patents that were not sold there
is a negative relationship of the match of the patent with the patentee’s patent portfolio and the
patentee’s decision to let the patent expire. The result is new and confirms Hypothesis #2, which
states that among the patents that were not sold, the ones with a higher fit with the patentee’s
portfolio are less likely to be let to expire.
       Table 9 examines the relationship of technology linkages and patent value with the patent
trading flows. Column (1) presents the regression model in equation (2). There are two main
results we want to highlight here. First, the marginal eﬀect of   ∗  is positive
(0075) and significant (p-value  001), indicating that small firm patents with higher proportion
of patent citations towards small firms are more likely to be acquired by small firms too. Second,
the marginal eﬀect of   ∗  is negative (−0077) and significant (p-value  001),
proving that large firm patents with higher proportion of patent citations made towards large
firms are more likely to be acquired by large firms. Because this specification includes firm fixed
eﬀects, the estimated coeﬃcients are identified from variation of technology linkages at the patent
level within a patentee. That is, independently of the original patentee and the technology class of
the patent, the patents that are a have technological fit with small (large) firms are more likely to
be acquired by small (large) firms too. The rest of the columns indicate that similar results were
also obtained using a simple linear probability model, a Probit model, and a random coeﬃcients
Probit model.26 These findings confirm Hypothesis #3, which states that the direction of the
trading flows between small firms may also be associated with the patent citations flows of small
and large firms.
       In Table 10, we study the role of patent value in the patent acquisitions by small and large
firms. To do so, we separate the total number of patent citations received (as seen in equation (2))
into two new regressors: the interactions between firm size (small and large) and patent citations
received. The two interactions allow us to ascertain the potentially distinct role that patent value
may have in acquired patents initially owned by small or large firms. Column (1) presents the
results from the patentee fixed eﬀects linear probability model. We find that the marginal eﬀect of
 ∗  is negative (−00027) and significant p-value  001, indicating that among
  26
    For the fixed eﬀects model, while the sign of the coeﬃcients is also consistent with results of the random
coeﬃcients model, the estimates are not statistically diﬀerent than zero. This is plausible because most firms
were granted only few patents and this sample only includes traded patents, implying that the fixed eﬀects reduce
significantly the variation in the data that allows us to precisely estimate the coeﬃcients.



                                                       23
patents initially owned by small firms, the probability that one of these patents is acquired by
a large firm increases with the number of patent citations received. As for the patents initially
owned by large firms, the marginal eﬀect of the interaction  ∗  is positive (0001)
but not highly significant (p-value = 0101) suggesting that there are no significant diﬀerences
in the patent acquisitions of large firm patents by small and large firms. Similar results were
obtained in a number of econometric specifications, including a simple linear probability model,
a Probit model, and a random coeﬃcient Probit model.27 The results confirm Hypothesis #4.


6.5    Discussion of results

The results in this section point to four important conclusions. First, we show that patents with
a lower patentee fit are in fact those with the highest predicted likelihood of changing ownership,
and that patents that changed ownership are more likely to be renewed. This accounts for the
fact that small firms will be more likely to sell their patents, since they typically own patents with
a lower fit.
    Second, we show that traded patents with a higher predicted likelihood of being acquired by
small firms (large firms) are those with the highest proportion of patent citations made to small
firms (large firms). This suggests that the patent trading flows also depend on the buyers’ ability to
adopt technologies (as captured by the technology linkages). This finding also accounts for the fact
that small firms acquire a higher proportion of small firm patents than of large firm patents. The
result also provides new evidence consistent with studies analyzing the degree of complementarity
between own R&D and technology acquisition strategies (Arora and Gambardella, 1994; and
Cassiman and Veugelers, 2006), and the role that specific complementary assets play in the
licensing of patents (Arora and Ceccagnoli, 2006).
    Finally, we show that large firms acquire patents with a higher number of citations, especially
among small firm patents. This provides evidence on the trade-oﬀ that small and large firms face
in creating their own innovations versus acquiring them in the market. Large firms, which have
better opportunities to find a productive use for their new innovations, find it optimal to obtain
patents through the market only when the patent to be acquired is of suﬃciently high value.
    These facts are consistent with an economy where firms do research “in the shadow of uncer-
tainty”, as we show in our model. Bigger firms, with broader research agendas and production
capacities, are more likely to find productive uses for their innovations inside the firm. Smaller
firms must rely more on innovations produced outside the firm, and will also sell their patents
  27
     Similarly to Table 9, for the fixed eﬀects model, while the sign of the coeﬃcients is consistent with results of
the random coeﬃcients model, the estimated coeﬃcient is not statistically diﬀerent than zero.



                                                         24
more often. Since transaction costs are non-negligible, smaller firms let some acquisition opportu-
nities go by, and in equilibrium hold worse patents than their bigger counterparts. This implies, in
turn, than larger firms are more selective in acquiring innovations, since they hold better patents.
All these results are formally proved in the appendix.


7    Conclusion

In this paper we study the patent trading flows of small and large firms, and the determinants of
firm’s patent selling and acquisition decisions. We also examine whether this patent trading has
lead to an excessive concentration of patent rights in the hands of large firms. We constructed a
new, comprehensive data set that matches information on patent trades and new data about the
identity of patent owners over a patent’s lifetime, involving patents initially owned by businesses
during the period 1988-2001. Using this data and exploiting the match between a patented
innovation and a patentee’s patent portfolio as well as the technology linkages between patentees
and potential buyers, we provide evidence consistent with the predictions of a theory of gains
from trade based on economies of scale in the reallocation of innovations within the firm.
    There are four key empirical findings in the paper. First, small firms are more likely to sell their
patents than large firms. We also find that small firms disproportionately acquire more patents
than large firms, especially patents initially owned by other small firms. Moreover, we show that
this patent trading has not lead to an excessive concentration of patent rights in the hands of
large firms. Second, patents with a lower match with the patent portfolio of the patentee are
more likely to be sold; and that among patents that were not sold, the ones with the lowest fit are
more likely to be discontinued. At the same time, we show that large firms’ patent portfolios are
typically characterized by a high fit between the new patents and the patentee’s patent portfolio
at the time the focal patent was issued. Third, we show that while large firms disproportionately
acquire fewer patents than small firms, the likelihood of a patent being acquired by a large firm
increases with the patent’s number citations received. Fourth, small firms disproportionately cite
patents from other small firms, and the higher the proportion of patent citations made to small
firms, the higher the probability that the focal patent will be acquired by a small firm. These
findings are consistent with our view of the determinants of patent transactions in the market for
patents.
    From a theoretical point of view, we present a simple model that formalizes the role of the
economies of scale in the utilization of innovations and is consistent with our empirical findings.
The model captures the distinctive features of innovations, as compared to traditional goods and


                                                  25
services. Namely, the uncertainty in the process of innovation, the complementarity of ideas and
the transaction costs generated by the risk of expropriation. We show how, even in the absence of
advantages of large firms in the development and commercialization of new products, these forces
can explain the patterns found in the data. We argue that the uncertain nature of innovation can
be seen in the third finding, highlighting that firms keep their innovations, and buy new ones,
if they are related to their area of expertise. We rationalize the first, second, and third findings
through the economies of scale in the utilization of innovations. Transaction costs imply that not
all useful patents created outside a firm are bought. Since bigger firms are more likely to create
patents that can be reallocated inside the firm, in steady state they hold better patent portfolios,
therefore selling less patents than small firms and buying fewer but higher value patents. Finally,
our fourth finding indicates that there is some specialization in research activities, with smaller
firms directing their R&D activity towards the same fields, and that this feature can account for
the fact that conditional on acquiring a patent, small firms are more likely to acquire a patent
originally created by a small firm than a large firm.
   Five important conclusions can be drawn. First, the fact that patents with a lower patentee
fit are those with a higher predicted likelihood of changing ownership, and that patents which
changed ownership are more likely to be renewed, suggests that the market for patents reallocates
patent eﬃciently (at least in this sense). Second, this also indicates that the market for patents
will likely be an important source of incentives to invest in R&D, especially for small firms being
typically at a disadvantage to match their newly created innovations with a productive use or
an old innovation to create synergies. At the same time, the relative disadvantage of small firms
to match the new innovations to a productive use within the firm can potentially discourage
their entry and growth opportunity, and also distort competition between small and large firms,
especially when market transaction costs are significant. Third, the result that traded patents
that are more likely to be acquired by small firms are also those with the highest proportion of
patent citations made to existing small firms, provides evidence on the complementarity between
own R&D and technology acquisition. Fourth, the finding that the patents with the highest value
are disproportionately acquired by large firms, suggests that at least for these patents (perhaps the
most valuable ones) the direction of the patent flows takes place in ways consistent with the theory
of the division of innovative labor between the small and the large firms. Fifth, our empirical
findings also echo theoretical results in Gans and Stern (2010) suggesting that the distinctive
nature of innovations can impact the degree up to which markets for “ideas” can be developed
into eﬃcient market structures, such as those suggested by the traditional theory of the firm.
   At the same time, this paper may have some limitations. Our data has no information on the


                                                 26
business characteristics of firms acquiring patents other than whether the new owner is a small
or large firm. This issue puts a limit on our ability to study the extent to which firms acquire
patents to "fill gaps" within their patent portfolios. Our data also exhibited some limitations
such as not reporting the sale prices or the contractual terms in patent transactions. Finally,
we have no information on the licensing of patents. In this respect, while the predictions of the
traditional theory of the division of innovative labor do not distinguish between the sale and the
licensing of patents, we cannot assure whether our conclusions would also apply to alternative
means of transactions in patent rights such as the licensing of patents. These limitations provide
opportunities for further research.


References
Anand, B., and T. Khanna (2000): “The Structure of Licensing Contracts,” Journal of Indus-
    trial Economics, 48, 103—135.
Anton, J., and D. A. Yao (1994): “Expropriation and Inventions: Appropriable Rents in the
    Absence of Property Rights,” American Economic Review, 84 (1), 190—209.
Argote, L., P. Ingram, J. M. Levine, and R. L. Moreland (2000): “Knowledge Transfer
    in Organizations: Learning from the Experience of Others,” Organizational Behavior and
    Human Decision Processes, 82 (1), 1—8.
Arora, A. (1995): “Licensing Tacit Knowledge: Intellectual Property Rights and the Market for
    Know-How,” Economics of Innovation & New Technology, 4, 41—59.
Arora, A., and M. Ceccagnoli (2006): “Patent Protection, Complementary Assets and
    Firms’Incentives for Technology Licensing,” Management Science, 52, 293—308.
Arora, A., A. Fosfuri, and A. Gambardella (2001): Market for Technology: The Economics
    of Innovation and Corporate Strategy. The MIT Press.
Arora, A., and A. Gambardella (1994): “Evaluating technological information and utilizing
    it: Scientific knowledge, technological capability and external linkages in biotechnology,”
    Journal of Economic Behavior and Organisation, 24 (1), 91—114.
Arrow, K. (1962): “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Invention,” in Rate
    and Direction of Inventive Activity. NBER and Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ.
         (1983): “Innovation in Large and Small Firms,” in Entrepreneurship, ed. by J. Ronen.
      Lexington Books, Lexington, MA.
Cassiman, B., and M. Ueda (2006): “Optimal project rejection and new firm start-ups,”
     Management Science, 52, 262—275.
Cassiman, B., and R. Veugelers (2006): “In Search of Complementarity in the Innovation
     Strategy: Internal R&D and External Knowledge Acquisition,” Management Science, 52
     (1), 68—82.
Cohen, W. M., and D. A. Levinthal (1990): “Absorptive Capacity: A New Perspective on
    Learning and Innovation,” Administrative Science Quarterly, 35 (1), 128—152.



                                               27
Dykeman, D., and D. Kopko (2004): “Recording Patent License Agreements in the USPTO,”
    Intellectual Property Today, August, 18—19.
FTC (2012): “Patent Assertion Entity Activities Workshop,” Washington DC.
Galasso, A., M. Schankerman, and C. J. Serrano (2013): “Trading and Enforcing of
    Patent Rights,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 44 (2), Forthcoming.
Gans, J., D. Hsu, and S. Stern (2002): “When Does Start-Up Innovation Spur the Gale of
    Creative Destruction?,” RAND Journal of Economics, 33, 571—586.
Gans, J., and S. Stern (2000): “Incumbency and R&D Incentives: Licensing The Gale of
    Creative Destruction,” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 9 (4), 485—511.
        (2003): “The Product Market and the Market for "Ideas": Commercialization Strategies
     for Technology Entrepreneurs,” Research Policy, 32, 333—350.
        (2010): “Is Their a Market for Ideas?,” Industrial and Corporate Change, 19 (3), 805—837.
Gans, J. S., D. Hsu, and S. Stern (2008): “The Impact of Uncertain Intellectual Property
    Rights on the Market for Ideas: Evidence from Patent Grant Delays,” Management Science,
    54, 982—997.
Hahn, R. W. (1984): “Market Power and Transferable Property Righ,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 99 (4), 753—765.
Hall, B. H., A. B. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2001): “The NBER Patent Citation Data
    File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools,” NBER Working Paper 8498.
Hellmann, T. F., and E. C. Perotti (2011): “The Circulation of Ideas in Firms and Markets,”
    Management Science, 57 (10), 1813—1826.
Henderson, R., and I. Cockburn (1996): “Scale, Scope, and Spillovers: The Determinants of
    Research Productivity in Drug Discovery,” RAND Journal of Economics, 27 (1), 32—59.
Holmstrom, B. (1989): “Agency Costs and Innovation,” Journal of Economic Behavior and
    Organization, 12 (3), 305—327.
Lamoreaux, N., and K. Sokoloff (1997): “Inventors, Firms, and the Market for Technology:
    U.S. Manufacturing in the Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries,” NBER Working
    Paper H0098.
        (1999): “Inventive Activity and the Market for Technology in the United States, 1840-
     1920,” NBER Working Paper 7107.
Lamoreaux, N. R., and K. L. Sokoloff (2001): “Market Trade in Patents and the Rise of
    a Class of Specialized Inventors in the 19th-Century United States,” American Economic
    Review P&P, 91 (2), 39—44.
Lanjouw, J. O., and M. Schankerman (2004): “Protecting intellectual property rights: are
    small firms handicapped?,” The Journal of Law and Economics, 47 (1), 45—74.
Lemley, M. A., and N. Myhrvold (2008): “How to Make a Patent Market,” Hofstra Law
    Review, 36, 257.
Lemley, M. A., and C. Shapiro (2005): “Probabilistic Patents,” Journal of Economic Per-
    spectives, 19 (2), 75—98.
Lerner, J., and R. P. Merges (1998): “The Control of Technology Alliances: An Empirical
    Analysis of the Biotechnology Industry,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 46 (2), 125—156.


                                              28
Miller, D. J., M. J. Fern, and L. B. Cardinal (2007): “The Use of Knowledge for Tech-
    nological Innovation Within Diversified Firms,” Academy of Management Journal, 50 (2),
    308—326.
Moser, P. (2013): “Patents and Innovation Ű Evidence from Economic History,” The Journal
    of Economic Perspectives, 27 (1), 23—44.
Nelson, R. R. (1959): “The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research,” Journal of Political
    Economy, 67, 297—306.
Rosenberg, N. (1996): “Uncertainty and Technological Change,” in The Mosaic of Economic
    Growth, ed. by R. Landau, T. Taylor, and G. Wright. Stanford University Press.
Serrano, C. J. (2006): “The Market for Intellectual Property: Evidence from the Transfer of
    Patents,” Ph.D. thesis, University of Minnesota.
        (2010): “The Dynamics of the Transfer and Renewal of Patents,” RAND Journal of
     Economics, 41, 686—708.
Teece, D. J. (1986): “Profiting from technological innovation: Implications for integration,
    collaboration, licensing and public policy,” Research Policy, 15, 285—305.
Trajtenberg, M. (1990): “A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the Value of Inno-
    vations,” The Rand Journal of Economics, 21 (1), 172—187.




                                              29
   Appendix: A model of patent trading flows between small and large firms
    We rationalize the empirical findings of the previous sections by building a simple model where
there is no specialization in research or productive activities. Big firms are, in almost every respect,
simply a scaled up version of their smaller counterparts. However, they have one advantage when
compared to their smaller counterparts: they are broader in their research activities. We consider
small firms that consist of only one research facility (lab), and big firms that consist of  ≥ 2.
The reason why a big firm is more than the aggregation of  small ones is that an innovation
generated in a big firm can be freely reallocated inside the boundaries of that firm if it is useful to
another research facility. If the trade occurs between research facilities owned by diﬀerent firms,
however, a transaction cost must be incurred. Therefore, big firms produce as much research
as  small ones, and are  times more likely to be oﬀered innovations that are useful for them.
However, they are better oﬀ than  small firms due to the reallocation possibilities arising from
their broader research agenda.
    In what follows we formalize this idea and show that in a steady state, big firms own better
patents due to the enhanced possibilities generated by their ability to internally reallocate innova-
tions. This leads them to be less likely to buy, but, conditional on buying, to buy better patents.
While we purposely choose a very simple formulation, with innovations that can be randomly
useful to any research facility, the results are robust. As long as in a steady state big firms own
a better distribution of patents, they will be less likely to buy innovations generated outside the
firm and will buy better patents. The assumption that new innovations are useful to a random
research facility implies that there are no technology linkages, so we do not try to explain the fact
that, conditional on a patent being bought by a small firm, it is disproportionately likely that
this patent was generated by another small firm.
    We consider an economy populated by  small firms and  big firms. Small firms own
one research lab while big firms own  ≥ 2. Each lab produces innovations at a rate , which is
independent of the owner’s size, and each lab allows the firm to put one innovation to a productive
use. We assume that each innovation is useful (has a good “fit”) for only one lab. To keep things
simple, we assume that the matching process is completely random, therefore an innovation is
                                              1
useful for a given lab with probability  +   
                                                   . While this assumption is somewhat extreme, it
captures the idea that firms conduct R&D “in the shadow of uncertainty”, and cannot control its
exact nature. This gives rise to possible gains from trade and generates a role for the market for
patents. With this specification, research labs receive internal innovations at a rate
                                                        1
                                         = 
                                                    + 
                                                          1
                                            = 
                                                      + 
   Also, the rate at which a new innovation that is useful for a lab is produced outside the
boundaries of the firm is given by:
                                                    − 1 + 2
                                        = 
                                                     + 
                                                    −  + 2
                                           = 
                                                     + 
    Note that  + =  + , that is to say labs in big and small firms receive innovations at
the same rate. The only diﬀerence is how many of them are from inside or outside the boundaries
of the firm.

                                                   30
    Innovations diﬀer in their quality. Formally, we say that an innovation has quality  ∈ N, and
a firm that uses an innovation of quality  receives an instantaneous profit of (). We assume
that  is increasing (therefore higher  stands for higher quality) and that the probability that
an innovation generated is of quality  is given by ().28 Since firms have a limited capacity
for putting innovations to a productive use (small firms may use one and big firms ), a new
innovation with a good fit for them is only useful if it is better than the quality of the innovation
it will replace. Once created, innovations only change their quality through obsolescence, that
occurs at a rate  and decreases quality to 0.
    There exists a transaction cost  when acquiring a new innovation that was generated outside
the firm. This cost captures market frictions such as expropriation risk, and the actual cost of
adapting a new technology (e.g. capital costs of adoption, organizational changes, and interme-
diaries such as patent lawyers and brokers). Moreover, we assume that the buyer makes a take it
or leave it oﬀer, eﬀectively capturing the whole surplus. Considering an instantaneous discount
factor , we can then write the value function of a small firm holding a patent of quality  as:
                                      X
               () = () +       ()[ () −  ()]
                                             
                                      X
                              +         () max{ () −  () −  0} −  ( () −  (0))               (3)
                                      

    Analogously, for a big firm with innovations of quality 1    we get that its value function
is  (1 ) +  +  ( ) where  () is given by:
                                           X
                  () = () +          ()[ () −  ()]
                                              
                                      X
                              +         () max{ () −  () −  0} −  ( () −  (0))               (4)
                                      

    In each of these value functions, the first term in the right hand side represents the present
stream of income generated by a patent of quality . The second, the potential improvements
from innovations produced inside the firm, the third the improvements from innovations produced
outside the firm, and the fourth the potential losses from obsolescence. Firms obviously always
take advantage of any internal innovation with a better quality than the patent they already
hold in their lab. However, when it comes to innovations produced outside the firm, they buy
them only if the transaction costs are oﬀset for the marginal flow of profits generated by the new
innovation. Then, given value functions  () and  () we can define the acceptance functions,
which indicate which external innovations will be bought, as:
                                         ½
                                             1 if  () −    ()
                               ( ) = 0 otherwise

   where  ( ) = 1 indicates that a lab in a firm of size  ∈ { } who owns an innovation of
quality  ∈ N will acquire an innovation of quality  ∈ N.
   These decisions, in turn, generate the instantaneous rate at which labs in small and big firms
  28
     Patent quality  is independent of the size of the firm that created it, and independent of the firm that can use
it. In particular, the average quality of a patent is the same for innovations created inside or outside the firm.




                                                          31
change states (i.e., their lowest quality patent in the firm’s           patent portfolio):
                                   (
                                      ()[ +   ( )]         if   
                      ( ) =                                        if  = 0
                                      0                                   if 0   ≤  − 1
                                   (
                                      ()[ +   ( )]         if   
                      ( ) =                                        if  = 0
                                      0                                   if 0   ≤  − 1

     Basically, a small firm will jump from having an innovation of quality  to having one of
quality  at a rate which is the sum two components. The first is the rate at which useful internal
innovations of quality  are generated (() ), the second is the rate at which useful external
innovations of quality  are generated (() ) Of course this second term exists only if a form
will decide to purchase such an external innovation (i.e.,  ( ) = 1) The same is true for big
firms.
     Market interactions, characterized by the acquisition decisions of the firms, generate a dynamic
system with small and big firms having patents of diﬀerent qualities. An equilibrium is given by a
steady state distribution of qualities for labs in small and big firms: { ()}∈N and { ()}∈N .
In aPsteady state the rate at which firms become holders of innovations of an innovation of quality
 (  () ( ) for  ∈ { }) must be equal to the rate at which firms stop being holders of
   6=                                       P
innovations of an innovation of quality  (  () ( ) for  ∈ { }). Moreover { ()}1≤̄
                                                   6=
and { ()}1≤≤̄ must be probability measures. This is summarized in the definition below.

Definition 1. An equilibrium is given by { ()}∈N and { ()}∈N that satisfy
                                     X                    X
                             0 =         () ( ) −    () ( )                       (5)
                                            6=                         6=
                                           X                            X
                                   0 =              () ( ) −             () ( )   (6)
                                            6=                         6=
                                           X                   X
                                   1 =              () =           ()                       (7)
                                           ∈N                 ∈N


Proposition 1. There exists and equilibrium.

Proof. See next appendix.
    The first fact, that follows directly under reasonable assumptions, is that a patent created in
a small firm is more likely to be sold than a patent created in a big firm. The basic observation
is that in a big firm, the probability that a new patent has a good fit with a research lab inside
the firm is bigger. Note, however, that the argument has some subtleties. When a patent from a
small firm does not have a good fit with the original firm, it might go to one of  − 1 labs from
another small firm or one of  labs from a big firm. When this happens with a patent from a
big firm, it might go to one of  labs from a small firm or one of ( − 1) labs from another
big firm. In aggregate, it is more likely that it has a fit outside the originator when it comes from
a small firm. However, the composition of small and big firms with which it can have a fit it
is diﬀerent, and the willingness to buy from a small and big forms can be diﬀerent. In general,
this last consideration is small, and the first order eﬀect, big firms having a higher probability of
having a good fit inside a firm, is more likely to dominate.


                                                          32
                                                                            P      P
Lemma 1. If the probability that a patent is bought by a small firm,          ()      () ( ) is
                                                                         ∈N     P       P
     smaller than  times the probability that a patent is bought by a big firm,     ()      () ( ),
                                                                                   ∈N      
     then the probability that a patent created in a small firm is sold is bigger than the probability
     that a patent created in a big firm is sold.

Proof. See next appendix.
    The next proposition characterizes the quality distribution of patents in big and small firms. It
is not diﬃcult to see that if small and big firms are willing to acquire the same patents conditional
on their worst innovation, then big firms hold better portfolios in equilibrium, due to their ability
to internally reallocate innovations. They are faced with new innovations that can be used without
transaction costs more often, and therefore are always incorporated, leading to better patents in
average.

Proposition 2. Suppose that  ( ) =  ( ) for any   ∈ {1  ̄}   . Then the dis-
    tribution  () first order stochastically dominates the distribution  (). That is, the
    distribution of quality in labs in big firms dominates the distribution of quality in labs in
    small firms. This dominance is strict unless  ( ) =  ( ) = 1 for all   .

Proof. See next appendix.
    Note that there is one case where both big and small firms hold patents of the same quality
in equilibrium. This is when they are willing to buy any external innovation that implies a
quality improvement. In that case, since the total rate at which small and big firms receive new
innovations is the same ( +  =  +  ), both types of labs acquire new innovations
at the same rate. Moreover, since the distribution of quality of the patents being generated
({()}∈  ) is independent of the owner’s size both types of firms acquire the same quality of
patents. In particular this is the case if transaction costs  are zero.
    The assumption in the previous proposition states that big and small firms behave in the same
way regarding the acquisition of new innovations. Basically, if a lab in a big firm has a patent
with the same quality than a small firm, both firms will take the same decision when it comes
to the acquisition of a new external innovation. This is not obvious, since big firms, facing a
higher probability of getting innovations “from inside” in a future period, could be more patient.
However, this is not a far-fetched assumption, and there are many environments where this holds.
In particular, we are interested in environments where the decisions of firms are regular, in the
sense that firms buy an external innovation if and only if the quality jump is big enough. This
leads us to the following definition.

Definition 2. We say that an environment is −regular if  ( ) =  ( ) = 1 if and only if
      +

    Obviously, any −regular environment satisfies the hypothesis of Proposition 2. Intuitively,
big and small firms behave in the same way: they buy patents coming form outside the firm if
quality jumps by more than  levels. We now give necessary and suﬃcient conditions, related to
the transaction costs , for the diﬀerent types of −regular environments to exist.

Lemma 2. Suppose that the sequence  is weakly decreasing. Then
 -If   + +1 + ≡ + +1 + then the environment is 0-regular (both firms acquire any
       external innovation that is better than the innovation they have,  ( ) =  ( ) = 1 for
       all   ).

                                                  33
       −1                      
 -If   +       + + + ( +)   then the environment is (m-1)-regular.

Proof. See next appendix.
    In regular environments, two results that are important for our explanation of the flow of
patents are true: small firms buy disproportionately more patents and in average worse quality
ones than large firms. To account for the fact that conditional on a patent being bought by a
small firm, it is disproportionately likely that this patent was generated by another small firm,
we would need to consider that the matching process depends on whether the patent was initially
created by a small or large firm rather than being independent of firm size.

Corollary 1. Under the hypothesis of Proposition 2 the following two are true:
                                                          P          P
 -In average, the number of patents bought by a big firm,      ()      () ( ) is smaller
                                                       P ∈N P 
      than  times the number bought by a small firm,      ()      () ( ).
                                                                          ∈N               
                                                                           P                P
 -The average quality of patents bought by big firms,                             ()           () ()    is higher than
                                                                                                     () ()
                                                                          ∈N             
                                                                 P              P
         the average quality bought by small firms,                     ()         () () .
                                                                                         () ()
                                                                 ∈N               


Proof. See next appendix.
   To sum up, this simple theory predicts that the determinants of the patent trading flows in
the market for innovations are firm size, technology linkages between small and big firms, and
innovation’s fit.
       Appendix: Proofs.
Proposition 1. There exists and equilibrium.

Proof. For a steady state to exist, it is enough that every state is positive recurrent. Since this
Markov chain is irreducible, it is enough to prove it for one state. Let’s consider state 0. It is
enough to prove that E(0 )  ∞ where 0 = inf{| = 0|0 = 0}. This is true since the process
goes to 0 at a constant rate  .
                                                                           P        P
Lemma 1. If the probability that a patent is bought by a small firm,           ()      () ( ) is
                                                                          ∈N     P       P
      smaller than  times the probability that a patent is bought by a big firm,     ()      () ( ),
                                                                                                            ∈N        
         then the probability that a patent created in a small firm is sold is bigger than the probability
         that a patent created in a big firm is sold.

Proof. The probability that a patent generated in a small firm is sold is given by
               X            X                          − 1     X      X                    
                     ()          () ( )[            ]+   ()    () ( )[          ]
                                                      +                                + 
               ∈N                                               ∈N         

       while the probability that a patent generated in a big firm is sold is given by
               X            X                                  X      X                  ( − 1)
                     ()          () ( )[            ]+   ()    () ( )[           ]
                                                      +                                + 
               ∈N                                               ∈N         

       The diﬀerence is then given by

                                                               34
                  X            X                           1        X      X                     
              −         ()          () ( )[            ]+   ()    () ( )[          ]
                                                         +                                + 
                  ∈N                                              ∈N    

       which is positive because of the assumption.

Proposition 2. Suppose that  ( ) =  ( ) for any   ∈ {1  ̄}   . Then the dis-
    tribution  () first order stochastically dominates the distribution  (). That is, the
    distribution of quality in labs in big firms dominates the distribution of quality in labs in
    small firms. This dominance is strict unless  ( ) =  ( ) = 1 for all   .

Proof. The proof can be done considering a big and a small firm that each own a patent of
quality , and a particular history of shocks  = (0  1  ) where  indicates either obsolescence
or the generation of a new invention useful for the research lab using the patent and generated in
some research lab in the economy. It is trivial to see that at any point in time the quality of the
patent being used in the small firm is worse or equal than the quality of the patent being used in
the big firm. The only diﬀerence is that sometimes the new innovation is generated in a lab that
is owned by the same big firm, and is used by the big firm, while the small firm prefers to let it
go away due to the transaction costs.

Lemma 2. Suppose that the sequence  is weakly decreasing. Then

 -If   + +1 + ≡ + +1 + then the environment is 0-regular (both firms acquire any
       external innovation that is better than the innovation they have,  ( ) =  ( ) = 1 for
       all   ).
       −1                      
 -If   +       + + + ( +)    then the environment is (m-1)-regular.

Proof. In an −regular solution, the value function of a firm is given by

                   =  +  [+1 (+1 −  ) + +2 (+2 −  ) + ]
                                + [+ (+ −  − ) + ++1 (++1 −  − ) + ]
                                − [ − 0 ]

   Therefore
   We omit the subindices  or  for the internal and external rates, denoting them simply by 
and  .
                           −  [+1 (+1 −  ) +  + +−1 (+−1 −  )]
+ −  =
                         +  +  [+ + ] +  [+ + +2 + +2+1 + ]
                           +  −  [++1 (++1 −  − ) +  + +2−1 (+2−1 −  − )]
                        +
                                     +  +  [+ + ] +  [+ + +2 + +2+1 + ]

       For this to be a solution, it must be the case that + −  ≥ . Noting that

                  +1 (+1 −  ) +  + +−1 (+−1 −  ) ≤ [+1 +  + +−1 ]




                                                                 35
   and

                      ++1 (++1 −  − ) +  + +2−1 (+2−1 −  − )
                 = ++1 (++1 − +−1 + +−1 −  − )
                      + +
                      ++2−1 (+2−1 − +−1 + +−1 −  − )
                 ≤ (++1 +  + +2−2 ) + +2−1 2

   we get that the following condition implies + −  ≥ :
                                                
                                                                              ≥
                     +  +  (+1 + ) +  (+−1 + ) +  +2−1

   which must hold for every . The most restrictive case is then:
                                                
                                                                                 ≥
                            +  +  +  (−1 + ) +  +2−1

   If we further assume that the sequence { } is decreasing, a more restrictive condition is:
                                                
                                                                 ≥
                                    +  +  +  (−2 + )

   Finally, note that this inequality is more restrictive for big firms, since  +  =  + 
but  ≤  .
   The other condition for  is simpler. Using the expression for  , we can get that
                                                 − 1 +  +−1 
      +−1 −  ≤
                         +  +  ( +  − 1 + ) +  (+−1 + +2−1 + +2 + )

   Therefore +−1 −  ≤  is implied by
                                             −1
                                                                               ≤
                    +  +  ( +  − 1 + ) +  (+2−1 + +2 + )

   and the most restrictive case is when
                                              −1
                                                     ≤
                                               + 



Corollary 1. Under the hypothesis of Proposition 2 the following two are true:
                                                          P          P
 -In average, the number of patents bought by a big firm,      ()      () ( ) is smaller
                                                       P ∈N P 
      than  times the number bought by a small firm,      ()      () ( ).
                                                             ∈N               
                                                              P                P
 -The average quality of patents bought by big firms,                ()           () ()    is higher than
                                                                                        () ()
                                                             ∈N             
                                                     P             P
      the average quality bought by small firms,           ()         () () .
                                                                            () ()
                                                    ∈N               




                                                  36
Proof. Note that because of Proposition 2, the distribution of the worst patent for a big firm
dominates the distribution of the worst patent for a small firm. This immediately implies that
small firms buy more patents. Moreover, the average quality of patents bought by a firm is
an increasing function of the worse patent. The result is then direct from first order stochastic
dominance.




                                               37
                                        Table 1: Summary Statistics

A. Proportions of Patents Initially Owned by Small and Large Firms by Grant Year

                                                       Patent Grant Year (in groups of two years)

                          All patents                1989-1990   1991-1992   1993-1994   1995-1996

Small firms                  0.107                     0.089       0.098       0.116        0.123
                             (.000)                    (.001)      (.001)      (.001)       (.001)
Large firms                  0.893                     0.910       0.902       0.884        0.877
                             (.000)                    (.001)      (.001)      (.001)       (.001)
Number of Patents           590,873                   135,507     144,224     151,839      159,303

B. Proportions of Patents Initially Owned by Small and Large Firms by Patent Technology Class

                                                             Patent technology classes
                                                     Computer Drugs &        Elec. &
                          All patents     Chemical   & comm      medical     Electro      Mechani    Other

Small firms                  0.107          0.065      0.059        0.152      0.080        0.121    0.206
                             (.000)         (.001)    (.001)       (.002)      (.001)       (.001)   (.001)
Large firms                  0.892          0.934      0.941        0.848      0.920        0.878    0.793
                             (.000)         (.001)    (.001)       (.002)      (.001)       (.001)   (.001)
Number of Patents           590,873        126,865    85,924       49,857     116,232      122,642   89,352

Note: Standard errors in parenthesis.




                                                     38
                 Table 2: Patent Sales and Acquisitions by Small and Large Firms

                                                        Patent Technology Classes
                                                  Computer Drugs & Elec. &
                   All patents     Chemical       & comm    medical Electro Mechanical                 Other
                       (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)       (5)      (6)                   (7)

    A. Proportion of patents sold
    Small firm      0.090        0.091             0.130        0.112        0.096        0.074        0.078
                      (.001)         (.003)        (.005)       (.004)       (.003)       (.002)       (.002)
    Large firm        0.055          0.058         0.050        0.073        0.044        0.049        0.068
                      (.000)         (.001)        (.001)       (.001)       (.001)       (.001)       (.001)
    All firms         0.059          0.061         0.055        0.079        0.049        0.052        0.070
                      (.000)         (.001)        (.001)       (.001)       (.001)       (.001)       (.001)

    B. Proportion of patent acquisitions by small firms
    Prop. of patents acquired by small firms
                      0.160          0.116         0.100        0.214        0.143        0.180        0.219
                      (.002)         (.004)        (.004)       (.006)       (.005)       (.005)       (.005)

    C. Patent trading flows between small and large firms
    Prop. of small firm patents acquired by small firms
                      0.673          0.669         0.531        0.611        0.649        0.745        0.738
                      (.006)         (.017)        (.019)       (.017)       (.016)       (.013)       (.012)
    Prop. of large firm patents acquired by small firms
                      0.058          0.056         0.030        0.103        0.048        0.061        0.064
                      (.001)         (.003)        (.003)       (.005)       (.003)       (.003)       (.003)

    Note: A patent is traded if it was sold within four year of its grant date. Stand. errors in parenthesis



                Table 3: Distribution of Patent Ownership of Small and Large Firms

                                                            Patent Technology Classes
                                                    Computer Drugs & Elec. &
                       All patents     Chemical     & comm     medical Electro Mechanical                   Other
                           (1)           (2)          (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)                    (7)

A. Proportions of Patents Owned at Age 5 by Small and Large Firms
Small firm              0.100      0.069      0.046       0.159                  0.072        0.113         0.188
                          (.000)         (.001)        (.001)       (.002)       (.001)       (.001)        (.001)
Large firm                0.900          0.931         0.954        0.841        0.928        0.887         0.811
                          (.000)         (.001)        (.001)       (.002)       (.001)       (.001)        (.001)

B. Proportion of patents acquired in the patent portfolios of small and large firms as of age 5

Small firms               0.093          0.107         0.110        0.114        0.093        0.081         0.081
                          (.001)         (.004)        (.005)       (.004)       (.003)       (.002)        (.002)
Large firms               0.056          0.060         0.052        0.080        0.045        0.049         0.071
                          (.000)         (.001)        (.001)       (.001)       (.001)       (.001)        (.001)

Number of patents        509,047        106,876       78,685       42,074       102,808      104,797        73,807

Note: Patent ownership at age 5 and the proportion of patents acquired in a patent portfolio as of age 5 are both
computed after maintenance fees are due and the renewal decision.



                                                       39
         Table 4: Firm’s Patentee Fit for Kept, Traded, and Expired Patents

                                                                  At least one
                                                PatenteeFit       self-citations

                     A. Patents Kept, Traded, and Expired
                     Kept patents               0.136                  0.370
                                                (.000)                 (.001)
                      Kept and renewed          0.139                  0.381
                                                (.000)                 (.001)
                      Kept and expired          0.117                  0.305
                                                (.001)                 (.002)

                     Traded patents                  0.093             0.304
                                                     (.001)            (.002)

                     All patents                     0.134             0.366
                                                     (.000)            (.001)

                     B. Patents initially owned by small and large firms
                     Small firms                  0.054         0.194
                                                 (.001)         (.002)
                     Large firms                  0.143         0.387
                                                 (.000)         (.001)

                     Note: Standard errors in parenthesis.




                       Table 5: Patent Quality of Acquired Patents

A. Mean number of patent citations received

  Initially owned      All patents                      Acquired by                    Not Traded
                                         Small firms     Large firms       All firms
  Small firms              3.44              4.12              5.85          4.68         3.31
                          (.021)            (.100)            (.181)        (.090)       (.021)
  Large firms              3.48              3.59              3.70          3.69         3.47
                          (.007)            (.129)            (.033)        (.032)       (.007)

B. Patent expiration rates at age five

  Initially owned      All patents                      Acquired by                    Not Traded
                                         Small firms     Large firms       All firms
  Small firms             0.192             0.186             0.017         0.131        0.198
                          (.002)            (.006)            (.003)        (.004)       (.002)
  Large firms             0.132             0.057             0.119         0.115        0.133
                          (.000)            (.006)            (.002)        (.002)       (.000)

  Note: standard errors in parenthesis




                                               40
                     Table 6: Patent Trading Flows and Technology Linkages

                                                        Patent technology classes
                                                  Computer Drugs & Elec. &
                    All patents     Chemical      & comm      medical Electro Mechani                Other
                        (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)    (6)                 (7)

     A. Proportion of patents initially owned by small and large firms
     Small firms      0.107         0.065      0.059       0.152       0.080               0.121     0.206
                        (.000)        (.001)       (.001)        (.002)       (.001)       (.001)    (.001)
     Large firms        0.892         0.934        0.941         0.848        0.920        0.879     0.793
                        (.000)        (.001)       (.001)        (.002)       (.001)       (.001)    (.001)

     B. Average proportion of citations made to firms of same size (excluding self-cites)
     Small firms     0.168         0.134      0.122        0.195      0.119      0.172               0.213
                        (.001)        (.003)       (.003)        (.004)       (.003)       (.003)    (.003)
     Large firms        0.945         0.966        0.951         0.915        0.952        0.944     0.908
                        (.000)        (.000)       (.000)        (.001)       (.000)       (.001)    (.001)

     Note: standard errors in parenthesis.



    Table 7: Marginal Eﬀects of Patentee Fit on the Probability that a Patent is Traded

                          (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)                 (5)              (6)
Estimation
method                   OLS           OLS            OLS            Probit              Probit        Probit
                        Fixed                                                                         Random
                        Eﬀects                                                                         Eﬀects
Dependent
variable                Traded        Traded        Traded          Traded              Traded         Traded

                      Coef.×102     Coef.×102      Coef.×102     Mar.Eﬀ.×102       Mar.Eﬀ.×102       Coef.×102

Patentee fit           -1.35***      -3.13***       -3.13***        -3.56***            -3.61***      -22.15***
                         (0.12)        (0.37)         (0.41)          (0.50)              (0.56)         (1.80)
Citations               0.03***       0.09***        0.10***         0.07***             0.09***       0.65***
                        (0.006)        (0.02)         (0.02)          (0.01)              (0.02)         (0.07)
Patent Portfolio                    -0.0002***     -0.0003***      -0.0003**           -0.0003**       0.002***
                                     (0.0000)       (0.0000)        (0.0000)            (0.0000)        (0.001)

Controls
Grant Year                Yes           Yes            No             Yes                  No            Yes
Technology                Yes           Yes            No             Yes                  No            Yes
Firm fixed eﬀects         Yes           No             No             No                   No            No

Sample                All patents   All patents    All patents    All patents          All patents   All patents

Firms                    61,239        61,239       61,239          61,239              61,239         61,239
Observations            590,873       590,873       590,873         590,873             590,873        590,873

Note: Standard errors are clustered at the firm in columns 1-5. Statistical significance: *** 1 percent,
** 5 percent, and * 10 percent. Traded=1 if the patent is sold. Patent citations: number of forward
cites by age 5 Technology Dummies are generated using the 36 technology subcategories defined in
Hall et al. (2001). Patent Portfolio Size: total number of patents granted to the patentee from 1975
or the year the patentee first patented.



                                                      41
Table 8: Marginal Eﬀects of Patentee Fit on the Probability that a Patent is Let to Expire

                          (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)               (5)            (6)#
Estimation
method                   OLS            OLS           OLS            Probit            Probit          Probit
                        Fixed                                                                         Random
                        Eﬀects                                                                         Eﬀects
Dependent
variable               Expired        Expired        Expired         Expired          Expired         Expired

                      Coef.×102      Coef.×102     Coef.×102      Mar.Eﬀ.×102      Mar.Eﬀ.×102       Coef.×102

Patentee fit           -1.91***       -4.65***       -3.25***        -4.67***         -3.39***            -
                        (0.20)          (0.72)        (0.88)           (0.77)           (0.72)
Citations              -0.36***       -0.56***       -0.71***        -0.95***         -1.14***            -
                        (0.01)          (0.03)        (0.05)           (0.01)           (0.03)
Patent Portfolio                       -0.0001       -0.0003*         -0.0001          -0.0003            -
                                      (0.0001)       (0.0002)        (0.0000)         (0.0000)

Controls
Grant Year                Yes            Yes            No             Yes               No              Yes
Technology                Yes            Yes            No             Yes               No              Yes
Firm fixed eﬀects         Yes            No             No             No                No              No

Sample                 Untraded       Untraded      Untraded        Untraded          Untraded        Untraded
                        Patents        Patents       Patents         Patents           Patents         Patents

Firms                    57,009        57,009        57,009          57,009            57,009          57,009
Observations            556,273       556,273        556,273         556,273           556,273         556,273

Note: Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Statistical significance: *** 1 percent, ** 5 percent,
and * 10 percent. Expired=1 if the patent expired at the first renewal date. Patent citations: number of
forward cites by age 5. Technology Dummies are generated using the 36 technology subcategories
defined in Hall et al. (2001). Patent Portfolio Size: number of patents granted to the patentee since
1975 or the year the patentee first patented. Grant year is the calendar year a patent was issued.
Model convergence: # indicates that the model did not converge due to a problem of initial values.




                                                       42
Table 9: Marginal Eﬀects of Technology Linkages on the Probability that a Traded Patent is Sold
to Small Firms

                           (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)
  Estimation
  method                  OLS           OLS           OLS           Probit           Probit         Probit
                         Fixed                                                                     Random
                         Eﬀects                                                                     Eﬀects

  Dependent              Traded        Traded        Traded         Traded           Traded         Traded
  variable              to Small      to Small      to Small       to Small         to Small       to Small

                       Coef.×102     Coef.×102     Coef.×102     Mar.Eﬀ.×102     Mar.Eﬀ.×102      Coef.×102

  TechLink*Small         7.47***       6.09**        6.10**          2.64**           2.83**         24.29**
                          (1.90)        (2.73)        (2.75)          (1.29)           (1.39)        (12.24)
  TechLink*Large        -7.71***      -6.73***      -7.16***        -7.49***         -8.13***      -51.92***
                          (0.66)        (1.19)        (1.18)          (1.11)           (1.14)         (9.68)
  Citations                0.02        -0.09**      -0.18***          -0.07*         -0.16***        -0.62**
                          (0.02)        (0.04)        (0.04)          (0.04)           (0.05)         (0.32)
  Patent Portfolio                   -0.0004***    -0.0004***      -0.001***        -0.001***       -0.01***
                                      (0.0000)      (0.0000)         (0.000)          (0.000)        (0.003)
  Small                               51.55***      51.47***        39.99***         39.43***       227.5***
                                        (1.58)        (1.59)          (2.93)           (2.93)         (9.06)

  Controls
  Grant year               Yes           Yes           No             Yes              No             Yes
  Technology               Yes           Yes           No             Yes              No             Yes
  Firm fixed eﬀects        Yes           No            No             No               No             No

  Sample                 Traded        Traded        Traded         Traded           Traded         Traded
                         Patents       Patents       Patents        Patents          Patents        Patents

  Firms                   9,179         9,179        9,179          9,179            9,179          9,179
  Observations           34,599        34,599        34,599         34,599           34,599         34,599

  Note: Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Statistical significance: *** 1 percent,
  ** 5 percent, and* 10 percent. Traded to Small=1 if a traded patent was sold to a small firm. Small=1 if
  patent was initially owned by a small patentee; it is zero othewise. Large=1 if patent owned by a large
   patentee; it is zero othewise.Patent citations: number of forward cites by age 5. Technology Dummies
  are generated using 36 technology subcategories as defined in Hall et al. (2001). Patent Portfolio Size:
  number of patents granted to the patentee since 1975 or the year the patentee first patented. Grant
  year is the calendar year a patent was issued.




                                                      43
Table 10: Marginal Eﬀects of Patent Citations on the Probability that a Traded Patent is Acquired
by Small Firms


                          (1)          (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
  Estimation
  method                OLS            OLS           OLS           Probit           Probit         Probit
                       Fixed                                                                      Random
                       Eﬀects                                                                     Eﬀects

  Dependent             Traded        Traded        Traded         Traded           Traded         Traded
  variable             to Small      to Small      to Small       to Small         to Small       to Small

                      Coef.×102     Coef.×102    Coef.×102     Mar.Eﬀ.×102      Mar.Eﬀ.×102      Coef.×102

  TechLink*Small        6.57***       6.09**        6.10**          2.70**          2.87**          25.14**
                         (1.92)        (2.71)        (2.73)          (1.30)          (1.33)         (12.25)
  TechLink*Large       -7.12***      -6.61***      -7.02***        -7.46***        -8.07***       -51.66***
                         (0.68)        (1.19)        (1.18)          (1.12)          (1.15)          (9.69)
  Citations*Small      -0.27***      -0.67***      -0.74***        -0.23***        -0.33***        -2.01***
                         (0.07)        (0.13)        (0.14)          (0.06)          (0.07)          (0.45)
  Citations*Large         0.01        0.09**         -0.002          0.08*            -0.01           0.58
                         (0.03)        (0.04)        (0.04)          (0.05)          (0.06)          (0.40)
  Patent Portfolio                  -0.0004***    -0.0005***      -0.001***       -0.001***        -0.01***
                                     (0.0000)      (0.0000)         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.003)
  Small                              55.28***      55.14***        43.31***        42.64***        239.1***
                                       (1.67)        (1.67)          (2.97)          (3.01)         (11.13)

  Controls
  Grant year             Yes           Yes            No             Yes              No             Yes
  Technology             Yes           Yes            No             Yes              No             Yes

  Sample               Traded        Traded        Traded          Traded          Traded          Traded
                       Patents       Patents       Patents         Patents         Patents         Patents

  Firms                 9,179         9,179          9,179         9,179             9,179         9,179
  Observations          34,599        34,599        34,599         34,599           34,599         34,599

  Note: Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. Statistical significance: *** 1 percent,
  ** 5 percent, and * 10 percent. Traded to Small=1 if a traded patent was sold to a small firm. Small=1
  if patent was initially owned by a small patentee; it is zero othewise. Large=1 if patent was initially
  owned by a large patentee; it is zero othewise. Patent citations: number of forward cites by age 5.
  Technology Dummies are generated using 36 technology subcategories as defined in Hall et al. (2001).
  Patent Portfolio Size: number of patents granted to the patentee since 1975 or the year the patentee
  first patented. Grant year is the calendar year a patent was issued.




                                                     44
